THE TWO FIRST COMEDIES OF Terence called Andria, and the Eunuch newly
Englished by THOMAS NEWMAN.

FITTED FOR SCHOLAR Private action in their Schools.

Nec verbum verbo curabis reddere fidus Interpres.

Horace. LONDON, Printed by G. M. and are to be sold at the house of M.
Fenricus next to the Grayhound Tavern in the Blackfriars. 1627.

Author ad Librum
OLd wives and fools have faith, the Cricquets song
In the warmed chimney portends deathere long
My creed holds no such thing. If Cricquets sing,
I rather doubt the'oreheated brickes may bring
Some danger to my house when these I hear,
(If any thing) I only fire do fear:
But many things (poor Book) I justly fear,
When Critiques descants on thy lines I hear.
Libri ad Authorem responsio.
Fear no true Critique; all that know you, know
What love and honor to such men you owe:
And men of that high name, will never throw
Their censures on an argument so low.
These I not fear; but I do doubt them though,
Who would from fools Censorious Critiques grow.
T. N

TO THE SCHOLARS of PAVLES School, T. N. wishes increase in grace and
learning.
WHat I at first intended for mine own employment to pass away spare time,
and afterward purposed for your private exercise only, is now made public
not by my free and voluntary election; but by an accident of near nature to
constraint. For having hastily finished the translation of these two first
comedies of Terence, and ended the four first acts of the third, I missed my
book one alone day, and then found it again gelded of the three Latter Acts
of the third Comedy. Shortly after I met the Copy thereof in the hands of a
Stationer: whence I coniectured that my book had been copied out by character
for sale; and that done by some lame and ignorant Author, who was not able to
be his own discipherer. I had neglected this thief, this plagiarie; and had
suffered him to make use of my labor, but that one honest and learned
gentleman had seen my doings in Andria, and who also knew I was about the
residue. You apprehend the just reason of this publication. As touching my
Dedication, I do not so much doubt the imputation of carelessness of my credit
in seeking Patronage from raw and green youth, as I fear the challenge of
ambitiousnesse in providing Patrons, who are to stand up in all succession of
times so long as your Schools foundation shall continue: and some of you being
likely very shortly to become of most full ability to defend your unknown
Client. But till you arrive at such maturitie, give me leave to maintain my
self, and to prepare you.

I have already heard somewhat, whereby I further suspect how I may be further
quarelled. There will perhaps some be found who on their good faiths will
protest that this general licentiousness of turning Latin books into
English, caries with it much inconvenience. I hope in the general looseness
they include not those extant translations of Liuy, Pliny, Plutarch,
Suetonius, Tacitus, and the like Authors: if they mean onley such versions as
was that of Ouids Art of love, and the like books tending to corruption of
youth, I will join with them; and add, that such translations are not only
inconvenient but impious also. But in Terence is no such danger. In those few
passages where his matter bears any rank sent or sense, you shall find it
hushed by some modest close Eclipsie, or stopping Aposiopesis; or else couched
under such dark and mystical terms, as the young scholar cannot apprehend
to any danger of defiling: which course I have also pursued. Besides Terence
(as I heard) has formerly been Englished and published: so that this way I
might decline the crime, of first turning him into our tongues, but because I
never saw that English Author, and therefore know not how he has carried it, I
dare not shelter my self under such precedent: but I dare venture to share
with Theod. Beza in any hazard of this imputation; and let such Cauillers know,
that they by this aspersion shall be found to wound that learned Frenchman
through my sides: for his translation is extant, imprinted in French on one
side and in Latin on the other side of every leaf: and is now in the hands
of all young scholars, throughout the whole French Kingdom. From the matter
of the translation I come to the manner, and therein do foresee, that it may be
objected, that where Terence many times uses general terms, I do so rashly
perticularlize him, places that in many places I retain not the purpose and
meaning of my Author; and again, that in some my English does not render the
Latin truly: by the first they would enforce, that I conceive not the drift
and scope of my Author; by the later that I understand not his words. I will
only give you two or three instances, the better to prepare you to apprehend
the rest. An. Act. 1. Sc. 1. ver. 3. Curentur haec that these things be well
ordered or looked too, I in special terms thus restrain, that these things
be well cooked; having relation to Isthaec intro auferte going before, where I
understand Isthaec to be meant of provision for a dissembled wedding supper.
Here it may be opposed by some, not out of their own brains or conceit, but
by arguments filched out of blind and ignorant Authors, that I am beside the
cushion. I am not ignorant of three reasons used above a hundred years ago
against this interpretation. First it is said that Auferre is a word denoting
things contemptible, and therefore cannot be meant of Cates or dainties of
diet. Secondly, it is affirmed that here was no such provision made as would
require these servants to carry in: and this they ground on the words of Dauus
Act. 2. Scen. 2. Paululum obsonij. And again, Act. 2. Scen. 6. Vix drachmis
inquit obsonatus est december. Thirdly, they urge the old French printed books,
where by the pictures expressing the arguments of every Scene certain logges
or billets are sigured, and not baskets with provision from the market. Whence
they would infer that by Isthaec no feasting stuff is intended but matter of
fuel only. Perceive you not the blockish conceit of these loggerhead
arguers? stay a while; and perhaps I shall afford you means, better to
understand the matter. First, therefore I confess and avoid the argument of
contempt: for though Auferre (according to Donat) be commonly used of things
spoken of with disdain, yet not always so; for that which Terence meant by
Auferte isthaec in the first line, is named Curentur haec in the third: Now
Curatio in its proper notion is Medicinae, aut (quae est eius famula) coquinae;
and cannot be said of any thing whereof we speak with disdain or loathing.
Dauus words prove nothing: they only extenuate, do not deny the provision. And
for the French pictures. Painters and Poets (you know) take much liberty: but
for answer I say, that Ascensius a learned Critique, great Grammarian and
famous Printer above 100. years ago in France, and so best able to determine,
the doubt, taking upon him to argue the question, has left the matter
indifferent: yet inclines rather to Edulia then ligna. And me thinks such
interpretation may be euinced by evidence of reasons; for besides that a
wedding was strongly to be borne up (this could not handsomely be carried
without a feast) it is manifest that Simo came from the market: for so
Pamphilus, Act. 1. Scen. 5. Pater praeteriens modo apud forum. Did these
sernants attend Simo thence with billets or bauins on their shoulders? this
construction were as ridiculous, as improbable that a man of Simo's estate
whose son was worthy to receive ten talents in portion with a wife, Act. 5.
Scen. 4. should be unfurnished of such ordinary provision. Or came these
servants empty home after Simo? and were appointed to carry in logges and
fagots then lying before their Masters door? this conjecture is as absurd; for
how came the wood there? why did it trouble the stage? or which way might it
concern the Argument? Especially why should Sosia formerly made free, now
suspect that his Master Simo would Mutare factu^; and recall him to a second
bondage, by imposing upon him such slavish drudgerie as Curare focum; a
scullions no freed man's office? what art needed hereto? and Sosia tenders
employment of art in the words immediately following Quid est, quod ars mea
tibi efficere possit amplius? Indeed to steward a feast had in it some art, and
seems to have been a part of freed men's employments, Eunuch, Act. 3. Scen. 5.
ver. 60. Thus I hope I have given you some reason of this interpretation.
Besides Guido has long ago so construed it, viz. Anno Dom. 1497. and Ascensius
reuiewing Guido and in many places correcting him, has yet herein against his
own french printed copies allowed him, at lest left it indifferent. I told you
before I had heard somewhat: it was of him in whose hands I met with my
adulterate copy. This man charged the book with many foul errors, and that
justly: One thing he taxed which was mine own; yet which I durst not
maintain, for fear of giving suspicion that I was father of the rest. Ander.
Act. 2. Scen. 2. The words were Olera and pisciculos portantem in coenam seni,
Which I render with herbs and small sprots for the old man's supper: The
challenge was, that the doer took Pisciculus to be Latin for the sprot;
beside (said he) it would be considered whether this fish were to be found in
the Attick seas. I would not have vouchsafed answer hereunto, but that many
coincident passages in the book will directly fall under the same frivolous
cavil. In this respect therefore I thought good to satisfy you herein; that
by the same reason you may be the better armed to defend the residue. I know
Pisciculus to be a general word including every species of small fishes, and
not the sprot only, as well as Cetus does comprehend Quamuis belluam marinam,
and not the whale alone: yet should I translate Immania cete hideous or
dreadful whales, I think the sharpest sighted Gra^marian would wink at it.
Whither the sprot has ever bin eaten in Athens, I neither know nor care: I
writ in London, and would speak to be understood: And being to set down a
poor and homly fish supper thought by sprots it might be well expressed. Master
Gascoigne long since translated a Comedy of Ariostoes, which he Englished
Supposes: this was presented in Grayes Inn. He therein thus describes an
homely and scanty supper -- One small shottrell a peniworth of cheese, and ten
spurlings. I think no wise man would press that translator to instance in the
very fishes in kind by Ariosto named: I could indeed have wished he had named
some other course fish better known to his audience: which he might have done
if he had said, One shotten herring, and some half score of red sprots: For
my part, I do not understand what a Shottrellor a Spurling means. Yea Terence
himself in the Eunuch Act. 2. sc. 2. brings in Gnato reckoning up a number of
several kinds of Victualers, Cetarij, lanij, coqui, fartores, piscatores etc.
It shall be hard for the best Critique to prove all these professions to be had
in Athens in Menanders time. This is (...) Comicu^ as pardonable as usual
among translators. Furcifer I call pillorie rogue: the pillorie being with us
a punishment of reproach, nearest to that which they underwent, who thence were
called Furciferi amongst the ancient Romans. Grammarians divide themselves into
two parties about the word Riscus, Eunuch A. 4.1.6. I incline to the one side,
and imagine it some such thing as is our hampar of Wicker covered with leather.
Peniculus is a word of large extent, and manifold signification, I render it a
moppe wherewith our servants use to cleanse wet floores; if another shall call
it the Cooks maukin wherewith they clear ouens, I will not challenge it. Many
things were in Athens in Menanders time, which Terence had never seen, there
were as many in Rome in Terence his time, which no English man knows. Shall I
be driven to give names of things not extant? If I put in things now in being
to supply the place of other things long since lost, to the understanding of my
Reader and sufficient expression of my Author, I hope I can be no further
required. These and the like are the maine things which I doubt to hear of;
for the rest I leave to your free and courteous censure; which yet I desire you
to spare, till a few years more be over your heads; and then also to use this
method. Let the original and the English copy be laid together; consult for
evidence with the old expositors: if they chance to wrangle (as they do almost
every where) then if you please hearken to Donat and Ascensius; if these at any
time be silent, or else vary (this happens seldom) then make use of your own
judgment. After this course taken you may with pleasure stuff your book with
marginall castigations; to me it shall be no disparagement, to you it will prove
much aduantagious; there being no book of this kind, to the studious and often
turning over whereof I would more willingly excite you. The hope of this your
diligence shall encourage me to let slip no vacant time til I have sent the
other four Comedies among you. Now the Father of lights and giver of all good
gifts enlighten your understandings; strengthen your memories; rectisie your
wills; and furnish you with all needful graces, that you may become a comfort
to your parents and governors, a credit to your Schoolmasters, and Tutors, an
ornament to the Church and state wherein you are to live. In the mean time.
committing you to your studies, I bid you heartily farewell.

Your very hearty well wisher T. N.

The Andrian Woman.
The ARGUMENT according to Muretus collection.
THere were two brethren Citizens of Athens, the one called Chremes the other
Phania. Chremes being to travel into Asia left the charge of his then only
daughter Basibula an infant with his brother Phania. Shortly after his
departure out of Attica, Phania also to avoid the rage of war growing hot in
Greece, shipped himself thence with his little niece, directing his course
toward the place where he supposed Chremes abode: but suffering shipwreck was
cast with the little one, upon the shore of the Isle of Andros, where getting
entertainment of a poor Islander he shortly after died. His host after his
decease, changes the child's name from Pasibula into Glycerium; and having bred
her up for some years in equal education with his own natural child called
Chrysis, himself also dies. Chremes in the Interim had returned to Athens,
and there had another daughter named Philumena: And all this while supposed his
brother and his other daughter to have long since perished at sea. Chrisis
being left fatherless and poor leaves Andros, and taking Glycerium with her
sails to Athens; where they dwell together as reputed sisters. Chrisis turns
harlot: her lovers draw along with them to her house one Pamphilus son of
Simo an ancient Athenian Citizen. Pamphilus falling in love with Glycerium gets
her with child, and affianceth himself to her. Chremes upon a public fame of
Pamphilus his virtues treates with Simo for a match between their children
Pamphilus and Philumena: and a marriage is agreed upon between the two old
fathers, Pamphilus being not made acquainted. Chrysis soon after dies, at
whose funerals Pamphilus occasionally discovered signs of very ardent
affection to Glycerium; which Chremes hearing of, renounceth him for son in
law as one apparently besotted and entangled with extraordinary love to a
straggling strumpet (so ignorantly he styled the issue of his proper loins)
Pamphilus (now first hearing of the determined match) is glad such marriage is
disappointed. Simo frets at it. And now is the prefixed day of marriage come,
being the day containing the argument of this Coinedie. Simo makes show to all
the people of his family, as if the marriage were on this day to be
solemnized, and this he did out of a foxlike subtlety to feel his sons
inclination to marriage, and upon his refusal to have just occasion of
complaint against him, which hitherto he had not. And if his son should
declare readiness to entertain the match, he then thought it would prove no
such difficult matter to cuerrule Chremes; and so the business to go on as it
was first determined. Simo having thus proiected matters, meets his son; and
wills him to pray to the gods for success upon his marriage instantly to be
acomplished. The son at his fathers salutation stands thunderstrucken,
ignorant what course to take for prevention. Dauus comes to him in this
distraction, at what time one Charinus was with him. This Charinus was a young
man inflamed with the love of Philumena, the intended bride; and was now in a
manner desperate, when he understood that Pamphilus was that day to marry her:
Pamphilus assuers him of his purposed resolution to the contrary. This was the
theme of their discourse when Dauus came upon them. Dauus (now) was Simoes
servant, a fellow of good reach: and he upon grounds reasonable had conceived
his old masters fetch in this pretended marriage, which (having sent away
Charinus) he opens to Pamphilus: resolving him that in all likelihood the old
man did but cast out a hook to catch at his inclination to Glycerium: wishing
him therefore without all scruple to promise his father all obedience and
readiness in embracing this faced marriage; he further intimates, that no
hazard was likely hereby to ensue: for that Chremes having once openly refused
him, would not (at least so suddenly) intertaine him for a son in law.
Pamphilus puts the advice in execution. Simo and Dauus venture either of them
upon the hazard, but Simo his luck carries it. For Chremes is won to a new
consent, and now is Pamphilus in danger to be cast upon a present marriage,
where he never intended. What may Dauus how do? author of a counsel not so
unlikely as unlucky? Chance presents him occasion, and he has good brain to
make use of the least offered occasion: what is that? Glycerium is brought to
bed: the newborn child is by her maid, but by Dauus direction) laid at Simo's
door: and this is done just when Chremes must of necessity see it: Dauus
further so carries the matter, that Chremes understands who is father, who is
mother to the child. These things instly moan Chremes to a second renunciation:
Hence great stirie arises: Crito a man of Andros (arrived at Athens upon news
of Crysis her death, being next heir to her estate) ends all; by discovering
Glyceriums freedom and parentage. Pamphilus marries Glycerium now again
known by her first name Pasibula; Charinus marries the other sister Philumena.

The Actors and their Characters.
SImo An old man careful of his son, whom he loved at first for his
reported virtues: and after he once doubted his carriage, showed his greater
love in his care of him. In the first Seen he carries himself mild in
discourse and behavior: and still after increases in angry mood, till at
length he grows to rage and passion.

Pamphilus. Son to Simo, a well qualified young man and faithful lover.

Dauus Servant of the family, subtle wife, consident.

Dromo. Another servant, only used for Dauus punishment.

Sosia. Snno's freed-man, a protaticke person brought in only, to whom the
ground of the argument might be opened.

Chremes. an old man of a quiet and tranquil spirit.

Glycerium. Daughter of Chremes not presented on the Stage; neither speaks but
within doors in labor of childbirth:

Lesbia. Her midwife.

Misis. Hermaid-seruant.

Charinus. A young man, simple and ignorant.

Byrrhia. His man for wit above his master. Discreet.

Crito. A stranger of Andros, poor yet honest, wise and of a good spirit and
stomach.

The Prologue.
Our Poet first setting his mind to write,
Deemd this the sole maine charge upon him laid,
To please the people with the plays he made:
But now he finds that he misreckond quite.
For, that he cannot (Prologue wise) now lay
The argument of this his play aright,
Is causd by an old rank'rous Poets spite;
Who drutes him to clear faults, leave the meant way.
Now pray observe their cauellings: those plays
Andria and Perinthia, which Menander wrote,
(Know one, know both) not much unlike in plot,
Are different yet both in their style and phrase.
He not denies that from Perinthia
Those things which seemd convenient in the same,
He (as his own) has drawn into the frame,
And course of this presented Andria.
This is the thing they challenge: and they braule
That in such sort a cleanely Comedy
Should not be hotch-potchd. These men verily
While much they seem, show they know naught at all:
Who him accusing draw his presidents
Nauius, Plautus, Ennius, in like crime,
To whose mistakings he would rather climb,
Then follow these men's obscure diligence.
I further wish'hem hence soorth keepe'hem still;
And cease with evil language him to sting;
Lest their ill doing in their ears do ring.
Spectators kind, of you we crave good will;
In silence shown and kind attention;
That without prejudice our play y'ould hear:
Thence you may fully know, if it rest clear,
That all our future purposd action
Of new made plays be to be banished quite;
Without aduentring your hereafter sight:
THE ANDRIAN WOMAN.
Act. 1.
Scen. 1.
Enter Simo and Sosia with two or three seruanes more bearing provision from
the Market. Simo. YOu sirs have those things in: away I say.

Exeunt the servants.
Sosia draw near; I am to speak with you.


Sos. I think th'errand given;
your meaning is
I look to those things careful cookery.

Sim. No: it is another matter.


Sos. Pray say on
What it is, my art may further do for you.

Sim. Here Is need of no such art, in what I purpose;
But of those parts which I have ever noted
To dwell in thee; trust, and true secrecy.

Sos. I wait your pleasure.


Sim. Since I bought thee first
Being then a yongling, in what gentle sort,
In what due course, thou ledst thy service with me,
Thy self well know: and for I found thee careful
In thy employments, the best good I had
To answer it, I gave thee; liberty.

Sos. I ^^^re it sir in mind.


Sim. And I repent nor.


Sos. (...) is my hearts joy Master, if I did
Or (...) can do, ought to your satisfaction;
And further owe you thanks that you acknowledge
I well accepted: yet it troubles me,
For this remembrancing your benefit,
Seems to vpbraid me, as forgetting it.
Pray in one word acquaint me with your pleasure.

Sim. I will; but first I tell thee of this thing,
This which thou think is no meant marriage.

Sos. Why make you as it were then?


Sim. Thou shall hear
From the beginning all: and by that means
Shall better know my Sons forepassed life,
My present purpose, and thy future charge.
My Son having past his childhood Sosia
Has now more scope allowed him; before
How could one know or fist his disposition,
While tender age, sear, tutors awed him?

Sos. Sir, you say right.


Sim. What almost all youth do,
To set their mind on one some chosen course;
That to breed Hearse, this Hounds, and both to hunt,
A third to study of Phylosophie:
He none of these followed professedly,
Above the rest: but yet all moderately.
I ioyd at it.

Sos. Sir, not without good cause:
"For to oredoe no one thing, in my sense
"To man's life is of chiefest consequence.

Sim. Such his behavior; all those gently
To bear and forbear, that he kept withal;
Apply himself to please and humor all;
Cross none, nor proudly seek to ouertop
His young companions: so that easily
He got him friends and praise; yet without envy.

Sos. He bare him wisely: for in this times state
Sweet yielding procures friends; blunt truth gets hate.

Sim. Mean while a certain woman three years since
Drawn by her wants and kindreds negligence,
From Anaros Isle came to our neighborhood;
Of passing beauty, flouring womanhood.

Sos. I sear this Andrian woman bodes no good.


Sim. She at the first a sparing chaste life led;
At Rock and Loome, hard labord to get bread:
But when a first, a second, a third came;
Tendering their loves, gifts promised with the same,
(As all our natures are prone commonly
From labor unto wanton liberty)
She stooped to lure, began the gainful trade.
By those that then chief love unto her made,
My Son was drawn along occasionally
To banquet with 'hem; keep 'hem company.
I to my self -- Sure the young fry is taken:
H'as caught the poisoned bait; with it, his bane.
These lovers servants passing to and fro
I every morning watch; and calling to
One that I spied, thus question; Prithee lad,
Who yesterday yond Chrysis company had?
So was the Andrian called.

Sos. Sir. I conceive you.


Sim. The answer was, Phoedrus, or Nicerate,
Or Clinias (for at that time those three
Her jointly loved.) I reply presently,
And what did Pamphilus? what? (answers he.)
He staked his share, and supped: this gladded me.
At other times I cast more news to learn;
Still nothing found that did my Son concern.
I thought him now proofe-temper'd against excess,
Great pattern of a settled staidness.
For he that deals with natures of this kind,
Yet thereby grows not slagg'ring in his mind;
To such a man's own hands thou may be bold
To leave the free reigns of his life in hold.
As this gave me most satisfying pleasure,
So all tongues talked my good, proclaimed my treasure,
In having such a qualified Son.
What should I make further relation?
Chremes our neighbor drawn by this same bruit,
Freely comes to me; and makes earnest suit
To place his daughter, yea his only one
With a large dowre as wife unto my Son:
I agreed the marriage, on his motion;
And this the day, it is appointed on.

Sos. What barie now stops? why in very deed
According to the show, it not proceed?

Sim. I Will tell thee: few days after this befell,
Our neighbor Chrysis died.

Sos. That Is chanced well.
You have reuin'd me; I much doubted her.

Sim. With Chrysis lovers still my Son comes there
Alike her funeral looks to; alike cheer
Sometimes of sadness shows, sometimes alike
Weeps with 'hem: I his carriage well did like
Thus argued I; Her death how tenderly
For very small acquaintance does he take?
What, if himself had loved her? what for me,
What will he do for me, his Fathers sake?
All this I thought in my simplcitie,
Merely the functions of humility,
And of kind heart. Why leng then I my tale?
My self for his sake tend the funeral.
Dreaming as yet no evil.

Sos. Ha! what means this?


Sim. I Will cause thee know. The dead corpse is brought out;
Along we go; now there amidst the throng
Of wonten, I a maiden very young
Perchance espied; of person --

Sos. Perhaps handsome.


Sim. I, and of countenance Sosia so delightsome,
So modest, fair, that nothing might her stain:
Who for she seemed to me, in all the train
Most to lament; and was above the rest
Of sweet and comely personage and face.
I pressed near to the Maids, asked what she was:
They told me Chrysis sister. Instantly
It struck me cold at heart. Oh God! thought I,
Hence grew his tears: his tenderness she breeds.

Sos. How I do fear whither your tale proceeds.


Sim. The Funeral goes on: we attend the same
To th'Sepulchre she is come: into the flame
She Is put: all weep. The maid I named late
Approacht the fire, as careless, desperate;
To her evident danger: here my frighted Son
Well showed his long concealed affection
So close dissembled: to her hies he fast,
And both his arms folding about her wast,
My dear Glycerium says he, how do? say,
What cause have thou to make thy self away?
Then she (that all their indeard love might spy)
Cast her self on him, weeping tenderly.

Sos. How? what do you say?


Sim. Home I get me straight,
Enraged and fretting; yet no cause of weight
Appeard to me to chide him: he might plead,
What foul fact have I done? what merited?
Or wherein faulted, Father? one that sought
To burn her self, I hindered (as I ought)
And saved her life. It were a fair reply.

Sos. You weigh things well; for if deservedly
He may be chidden which helped life to save,
Who hurts or spoils one, what should that man have?

Sim. Next day comes Chremes to me, urging thus,
Oh case to be lamented! Pamphilus
(I find clear) holds yond stranger harlotrie
In place of a just wife: this earnestly
I do deny, he stiffly holds. In fine,
I so part with him, as one utterly
Denies to give his Daughter to my Son.

Sos. Chid you not Pamphilus yet?


Sim. Nor yet I saw
A grounded cause to build a chiding on.

Sos. Why I pray?


Sim. Thus my Son might urge his law:
Your self sir set a limitation
To this my course: the time is coming on,
I must my self to another will apply:
Let mead interim mine own satisfy.

Sos. For what cause then of blaming will you (...)


Sim. If for loose love he shall dome to marry
That is the first occasion that I seek
Against him; and the present way I make
By this self marriage, if he show mislike
Is hereby true pretense of blame to take.
Besides, if wicked Dauus have a foot
Any contriuement, that he now consume
His stock of knauerie whilst it cannot hurt
Who (I imagine) tooth and nail will practice,
And that with purpose rather to cross me
Then please my Son.

Sos. Why should you so conceive?


Sim. Make thou a question? evil minds, ill manners.
Whom if in any thing I shall discover --
But what need talk? if happily it fall
(As I do wish) my Son be nothing backward,
It only rests, that I persuade with Chremes:
Which I hope may be wrought. Now, be it your charge
Well to bear up this seeming marriage;
Fright Dauus; observe my Sons carriage;
And note their consultations.

Sos. It Is enough; I Will see to 't: shall we in.


Sim. Go before, I follow.
Exit Sosia. There is no question, my Son would decline
This marriage; that I marked in Dauus sear,
When he had heard tht wedding did go forward.
But he himself comes forth.

Scen. 2.
Enter Dauus. Dau. I Marld if this would end so, and still doubted
Whereto my Masters caline remissness tended:
Who when he saw his Son could have no wife,
Never made word to us on it; nor gave sign
Of being troubled at it.

Sim. Now he will
Talk to you on it; and as I do suppose
To your no little cost.

Dau. This was his cunning,
To lead us on in saire fools paradise;
And in our secure dreaming take us napping,
Having no time to cast prevention.
A fox in faith.

Sim. What is it the knave talks on?


Dau. My Master, and vnheeded!


Sim. Dauus --


Dau. Ha, what is the affair?


Sim. Come you hither to me.


Dau. What now trow is in working?


Sim. What faist thou?


Dau. What sir the business?


Sim. Do thou demand that?
Folk talk my Sonne's in love.

Dau. That birladie
Concerns the world to think on.

Sim. Do mark me
In what I say or not?

Dau. Oh, yes sir well.


Sim. But now of this for me to make inquiry
Were no kind Fathers part. What hitherto
H'as done, I pass not: while the time permitted
I gave him way to take his course and pleasures:
His years now call for a new life, new manners.
Henceforward Dauus I require, or rather
(If the word may befit me) I request thee,
Retriue my Son from this loose liberty.

Dau. What may this mean?


Sim. All these loose libertines
That wantonly do love, cannot endure
To hear of wiuing.

Dau. So indeed they say


Sim. Beside, if such one chance to light upon
Some patron of his inclination,
His raw green sickly mind he commonly
Wonts to the worser part still to apply.

Dau. Troth sir I understand you not.


Sim. How, not?


Dau. No verily: I am your plain man Dauus;
No riddle-teller, cunning Oedipus.

Sim. Thould'st then in plain terms have me speak my mind?


Dau. Yes, pray at any hand sir.


Sim. If I find
That thou to day use any cunning crotchet,
Whereby to hinder this intended wedding;
Or feign would show thy wits sine nimblenesse:
When I have first well whipped thee, in the Mill
I Will thrust thee, to thy very dying day:
With this prouiso and condition,
If ever I thence free thee, I Will grind for thee.
What, vnderstand'st me yet, or not yet neither?

Dau. Yes clearly now; y'haue used no round-abouts,
But come to the matter roundly.

Sim. In ought else
Save this, I better could endure a slighting.

Dau. Pray sir good words yet.


Sim. Make thou a jest on it?
I know thee to a hair: but I do tell thee,
Least thou should rashly venture. Do not say
But thou have had fair warning given thee: look to it.
Exit Simo.
Scen. 3.
Dau. Upon my faith now Dauus here is no leisure
Left thee, to rest or dream upon the matter;
For ought I gather of the old man's purpose
Touching this wedding. which not wisely helped
Me or young Master undoes utterly.
Not can I judge my best course, him to succor,
Or lean to the old man's counsel: forsake him?
I doubt his life; assist him? the others threats;
Whom to over reach it is hard. First h'as discouerd
All of their love: then keeps hard watch over me,
Least I should lead some trumping card in the way:
Which if he find, I Am lost: or else at pleasure
Heel take occasion, be it right, be it wrong;
And to the Mill I shall be tumbled headlong.
To all these hazards comes another mischief:
This Andrian woman, be she his wise, or lemman,
Is great with child by him. Now, it is worth nothing
To hear their bold adventure: none can judge it
Fond lovers fancy, but mere frenzy rather:
For whether boy or girl she shall bring forth,
They have resolved to keep and nourish it.
Besides they coin a pretty cunning fable,
Among themselves, that she is free Atticke borne.
There was long since (say they) an ancient Merchant
Shipwrackt on Andros Island; who there died;
And that with him then saved, Chrysis Father
Took up a little girl. Conceited fiction!
To me it seems unlikely: yet they sooth
Themselves in the tale. But see Mysis coming Enter Mysis.
From out Glyceriums house. I Will to the Market
To seek out Pamphilus: for fear his Father
Vnwates do press him with this business. Exit Dauus.

Scen. 4.
Mys. GOod God Archillis, I do hear you woman:
You would have Lesbia fetched; upon my word
She is a drunken gossip, and vnheedie:
And one scarce fit to whom you may commit
A woman in first childbirth: Yet He fetch her.
Note you the old ones importunity!
None but her pot companion will serve turn.
But I pray God grant this a good delivery:
Enter Pamphilus. And that the Midwife rather may elsewhere
Neglect, then here. But what may be the cause
I Pamph' us see so much disquieted?
I fear what it may be. I Will stay a while
To know the reason of his troubled gesture.

Scen. 5.
Pam. IS this kind dealing? courteous attempt?
Is this a Fathers carriage?

Mys. What is that?


Pam. Oh gods and men your faith! what can be said,
Neglect, disgrace, or scorn, if this be none?
Say he had meant to marry me to day;
Ought I not have foreknowne it? ought I not
Have bin made privy to it?

Mys. Out alas,
Wretch that I am, what do I hear him talk of?

Pam. What should I think of Chremes? who denied
To trust me as a husband with his daughter?
Changes he mind, because I rest unchanged?
That he should still thus obstinately indeauor
Me most accursed to divorce and sever
From my Glycertam? which, if it fall out,
I am undone for ever. Amongst men
Was ever yet found out one more disgraceful?
More every way unhappy then my self?
Men, gods assist me! is there left no way
For me to shun Chremes affinity?
How many ways have I bin scorned? refused?
(All done, all ended) the other day cast of
Ain now again required: and why so?
Unless (I guess) h'has some deformed piece,
Which when he cannot fasten upon any,
He seeks to (...) on me?

Mys. This talk of his
Kills me poor wretch with sear.

Pam. For what should I
Now of my Father speak? Oh God! that he
So weighty a thing should do so carelessly.
Passing now by me in the Marketplace,
Go, get you home, says he; and fit your self:
This day you must be married Pamphilus.
To m^ his words seemed of such sound and sense,
As he had said, get home and hang thy self.
I stood confounded at it. Do you think
I had a word to utter? any excuse?
Though foolish, false, unsitting? I stood dumb.
Yet had I known't before, what could I do?
If any now should ask me, I would surely
Use other course, then (as I did) keep silence.
But now what first thing shall I enter on?
So many cares, several distraction,
Puzzles my mind: love, pity of her, fear
About this marriage so loathed, so near:
Then the respect I owe my Father, who
So mildely has me suffied hitherto
Without restraint to run my own free race,
In every course I listed: with what face
May I now cross his pleasure? wretched me!
I know not what to rest on.

Mys. I poor woman
Doubt the end of this irresolution.
But now it is very needful that I draw him
To speak with her; or else of her
Find some discourse to him. Whilst yet his mind
Hangs wavering, every little moment turns it.

Pam. Who is it talks hereabout? Mysis well met.

Mys. Pamphilus and you.


Pam. How does my dearest?


Mys. How does she? marie sir in pangs of travail:
And many troublous thoughts come in her mind
About this day, once purposed for your wedding.
She further doubts, least you may mind to leave her.

Pam. May I be thought to mind a thing so foul?
And through my fault suffer mine own dear soul
To be abused? trusting her heart, her life
To me? whom I have made my dearest wife?
May I permit her chaste well trained mind
Enforced by foul want to change it kind?
No, I will never do it.

Mys. If it lay
In you, I need not fear: but how you may
Be forced by your Father, is the doubt.

Pam. What Mysis do thou think me such a love?
So ungrateful further? so inhumane, bestiall?
That nor acquaintance, love, or shame, at all
May move or prompt me to keep plighted faith?

Mys. One thing I know, that she deserved has
That you should mind her.

Pam. Should mind her Mysis?
Even now the very latest words of Chrysis
Touching Glycerium, rest imprinted here;
Here at my heart. Her last hour drawing near,
She called for me: I came to her: all you
Voided the room: being alone we two
She thus began. Kind Pamphilus you see
Glyceriums youth and beauty; verily
Two weak unsafe guards (as your self perceive)
To keep her ch^ste, guard the small stock I leave.
Wherefore by this right hand I crave of thee,
By thy good nature, thy fidelity:
I adjure thee by her here vnfriendednesse
Thou would not leave her: do not part from her.
If as a brother I thee still respected,
If she of all men has thee best affected,
As she in all things sought thy full contentment
In true observance, due obedience.
I leave thee as a friend, a guardian, Father,
A husband to her. All the little wealth
I leave behind, I trust to thy disposing.
Then her hand taking, in my hand she clasped it;
And forthwith died. I then there recein'd her;
Received will keep.

Mys. Indeed sir I hope so.


Pam. But why do now come from her?


Mys. I am sent
To fetch the Midwife.

Pam. Oh, I prithee hasten.
And hear you? see you mention not a word
About the marriage: least it may perhaps
Add to her weakness.

Mys. I do mind it sir.

Exeunt Pamphilus and Mysis several ways.
Act. 2.
Scen. 1.
Enter Charinus and Byrrhia his man. Cha What say thou Byrrhia? must she
then to day
Be married unto Pamphilus?

Byrr. Yes sir.


Chae. How do thou know it?


Byr. But ene very now
Dauus so told me in the Marketplace.

Cha. Accursed, wretched me! how hitherto
My thoughts have waited upon hope and fear?
But hope now being fled, my fainting spirits
Wasted with care, yield to confusion.

Byr. Pray, for Gods love Charinus, since that things
Cannot be as you would, seek to desire
What you may compass.

Cha. There is nothing else
In all the world I wish, but Philumen.

Byr. But how much better were it, to endeavor
To vnlodge this idle love out of your heart,
Then thus to talk of that which adds more fuel
To this your bootlesse vain affection?
Enter Pamphilus walking in a dumpe.
Cha. All men in health can easily prescribe
To the sick patient good directions.
If thou were in my case thy mind would alter.

Byr. Well sir then do your pleasure.


Cha. But lo yonder
Where Pamphilus is. I do mean to venture
All trials yet, ere I do fully perish.

Byr. What means he now to do?


Cha. I will request,
Beseech him, open to him all my love.
I hope I may obtain of him at least,
For some few days to put the wedding of.
I trust in th'Interim somewhat may be done.

Byr. That somewhat is just nothing.


Cha. Byrrhia,
What think thou of it? shall I go to him?

Byr. What else? if he will yield to nothing, yet
Let him suspect, you have good mind to horn him
If he shall marry her.

Cha. Away lience varlet,
With this thy lewd suspicion.

Pam. Charinus,
God save you.

Cha. And you also Pamphilus.
I was a coming to you, with desire
To crave hope, help, health, counsel at your hands.

Pam. Troth I have neither place for counsel left,
Nor means to help. but what is the matter man?

Cha. Are you to day to marry?


Pam. So they say.


Cha. If you do Pamphilus, I can assure you,
This is the last day you shall ever see me.

Pam. How so?


Cha. I shame to tell it, Birrhia prithee
Declare the matter to him.

Byr. Yes, I will.


Pam. What is it?


Byr. Sir, he loves your wise that shall be.


Pam. Troth he and I are of two several minds:
I can assure thee. Prithee hearken hither
Charinus; have not had to do with her
More, then thy man here talks of.

Cha. Pamphilus,
No of my troth. I am. Oh, how I wish thou had.

Cha. Now I entreat thee by our friendship, love;
First that you would not marry her at all.

Pam. I Will (what I can) avoid it.


Cha. If It full so,
You cannot shun it, or do else affect it --

Pam. Affect it?


Cha. Yet defer it of awhile,
That I may void hence somewhere, and not see it.

Pam. Charinus, now hear me. I do not think it
At any time a part of honesty,
When one deserves naught, to expect for thanks.
I Would rather shun this match then thou obtain't.

Cha. You put new life into me.


Pam. If thou can now,
Or this this thy man here; work, invent, fashion,
Take all the course you can to make her thine:
I will find means, that mine she shall not be.
Enter Dauus.
Cha. I have enough.


Pam. And in good time I see
Danus, whose counsel I rely upon.

Cha. But thou dull head can nothing cast about
Worth knowing. Can you leave us?

Byr. Yes, and gladly.

Exit Byrrhia.
Scen. 2.
Dau. GOod God! what good news bring I?
But where^row may I find Pamphilus out?
To ^^d his fears, and sill his heart with comfort.

Cha. He is iocund, at what I know not.

Pam. Tut, man, it is, nothing.
The mischief now afoot, he yet not hears of.

Dau. Who if he have heard of this prepared wedding --


Cha. Do you not hear him?


Dau. I guess verily
Hunts all the town ore for me, like a madman.
But where shall I look for him? to what place
First bend my course?

Cha Why speak you not unto him?


Dau. I Will get me hence, and seek him.


Pam. Dauus, stay:
Come hither.

Dau. Who is it calls? Oh Pamphilus,
I sought you: you here too Charinus? brave.
Both in the nicke. You Are the men, I looked for.

Pam. Oh Dauus I me undone.


Dau. Tut, list to me.


Cha. I am for ever lost.


Dau. Your fear I know.


Pam. My life now lies at stake.


Dau. Yours I know too.


Pam. I must be married.


Dau. That I also know.


Pam. I, but this very day.


Dau. You weary me
With news, that I am perfect in already.
You fear to have her; you to miss her.

Cha. Thou Have it.


Pam. I that is the point.


Dau. Well, and I say the point
Has then no danger in it. Observe me.

Pam. For Gods sake rid me quickly of this fear.


Dau. Lo, I fice thee. Chremis now is not minded
To trouble you with a wife.

Pam. How do know it?


Dau. Your Father took me by the sleeue even now,
And told me this day he would marry you:
Adding much more, which now is no time to talk on.
Presently hastening to acquaint you with it,
I ran to the Marketplace: there missing you
I got to a high raised ground, and round about
Looked to epsy you; could not. Then by ch^^ce
I saw Charinus servant, Birrhia:
Of him I asked, he said he had not seen you:
It vexed me: still I cast what I should do.
Returning thence, a certain realousie
By circumstances bred came in my mind.
V^ph! here is small roast; the old man sad, a wedding?
It scarce hangs well together.

Pam. Whereto this?


Dau. I bie me straight to hremes; thither come,
I note a silent stillness at the door.
Now, this gave me good heart.

Cha. Well said, go on.


Dau. Somewhile I there continue: all that while
I saw no creature passing out or in;
No matron there; no decking of the house;
No stir; I nearer came, and peeped in.

Pam. I know they are good conjectures.


Dau. Do such things
Think you agree unto a nuptial day?

Pam. In troth I think not Dauus.


Dau. Do you say, think?
You construe things not well: the case is plain.
Besides, thence going I met Chremes servant
With herbs and small sprots for the old man's supper.

Cha. Dauus, through thee I am now rid of care.


Dau. Nay of my faith not so.


Cha. Why man prithee?
For thou conclud'st, he will not give her him.

Dau. Conceited pate! as if it therefore followed,
If he not have her, you must marry her.
Unless you looked toot, make your suit, and means
T'her fathers friends, you may hap hop wiuelesse.

Cha. Thou promptst me well; I Will go about it straight.
Though ought this hope have faild me: fare ye well.
Exit Charinus.
Scen. 3.
Pam. What means my father then?
Why doubles he?

Dau. I Will tell you. If he now should chafe at you,
Cause Chremes will not let you have his daughter,
Himself may see he plainly injured you:
If he should press you on, before he knew
How your mind stood inclined to the match.
But if you shall stiffely deny to wed her;
Then he will justly lay the blame on you:
Then shall we have a coil on it.

Pam. What would have me
To undergo this marriage?

Dau. Pamphilus,
He is your Father: and it will be hard
To Oppose him: this your sweet heart too (you know)
Is friendlesse here. Heel find cause easily
To thrust her out o'th'towne.

Pam. Out o'th town man?


Dau. And speedily too.


Pam. Counsel me then Dauus.
What I should do.

Dau. Tell him you will marry her.


Pam. How?


Dau. What Is the matter?


Pam. Should I tell him so?


Dau. Why not?


Pam. I nere will deo't.


Dau. Deny me not.


Pam. Persuade me not.


Dau. Note, what hence will follow.


Pam. To be shut out from her, mewed up to this.


Dau. No, no such thing. I guess your father thus
Will say to you: my purpose Pamphilus
Is that this day you wed: then answer you,
Sir, I am ready: pray you tell me now
For what cause can he chide you? by this means
His settled plots you shall disorder clean:
Your self yet run no hazard; for the thought
Is groundless, vain, that Chremes may be wrought
To give his daughter: nor do you let fall
Your course, least he his purpose should recall.
Tell you your Father that you like the Bride:
That, when he would, he have no cause to chide.
And for the dangerous passage that you fear;
I Will steare your course, and waft you over clear.
No man will give his daughter as a wife
To one discouerd of your wanton life.
Heel with some poor man rather seek to place her,
Then suffer you to iniure or disgrace her.
But if your father see you quiet take
This his command, you shall him retchlesse make.
At leisure heel seek out some other wife,
Mean time your fathers death may end the strife
Or some like good chance happen.

Pam. Think thou so?


Dau. There is no doubt in the world on it.


Pam. Take you heed to what you lead me.


Dau. Will you sir be quiet?


Pam. I Will tell my father as thou bidst me: but
There must be care had, he by no means know
she is with child by me; for I have promised
To give it breeding.

Dau. Oh bold enterprise!


Pam. She begged this promise of me, as assurance
That I would not forsake her.
Enter Simo.
Dau. I Will look toot.
Your Father's here: let him not note you sad.

Scen. 4.
Sim. I Come to observe their carriage, note their plots.


Dau. He thinks now surely, you will refuse to marry:
And comes from some lone place premeditate,
Thinking to puzzle you with a set speech:
Therefore collect your self.

Pam. Well, as I can.


Dau. In this thing Pamphilus you shall take my word,
You shall not now change two cross sillables,
If you but say, you ready are to marry.

Scen. 5.
Enter Byrrhia listening the encounter between Simo and his Son. Byr. MY
Master willed me (all things else set of)
Pamphilus watch: and learn what course he takes
About the Bride. This caused me dog him hither:
And lo, where he is with Dauus. To my task.

Sim. I see 'hem both together.


Dau. Now sir look toot.


Sim. Pamphilus.


Dau. Look you back as on the sudden.


Pam. Oh, you my father?


Dau. I, that is well carried.


Sim. As I late told thee, it is my purpose Son
That thou this day be married.

Dau. Now I fear
His answer on our side.

Pam. Sir, or in this
Or in what else I wait upon your pleasure.

Byr. Ha!


Dau. Mute.


Byr. What said he?


Sim. Thou do now my Son
As well becomes thee, when so graciously
Thou yeeldst to what I crave.

Dau. Was I not right?


Byr. My Master (as I hear) has lost his wife.


Sim. Get you now in that when the time requires,
We be not driu'n to stay for you.

Pam. Yes sir.

Exit Pamphilus.
Byr. That in nothing one man may trust another!
It is an old said saying, and as common,
All to themselves wish best. My self have seen
The maiden, and remember her a fair one.
Which makes me better bear with Pamphilus,
If he himself had rather nightly bed her,
Then let my Master. I Will bear back this news:
That he may pay me well, for my ill tidings.
Exit Byrrhia.
Scen. 6.
Dau. MY Master thinks now I have some device
A foot: and that, for that end I stay here.

Sim. What is it, thou talkest Dauus?


Dau. Eene just sir.


Sim. What, nothing? ha?


Dau. Indeed sir nothing, I.


Sim. I sure did look to hear some news from thee.


Dau. I know it is chanced quite besides his aim:
That Is it which nettles him.

Sim. Is It possible
I get thee tell me a truth?

Dau. Most readily.


Sim. Doos this same wedding grieve him any thing,
By reason of the acquaintance that he holds
With yonder stranger?

Dau. Truly I think not.
Or if it do, the matter of his trouble
Will be at most two or three days disquiet:
(Conceive you sir?) then it will clearly vanish.
For with himself h'as taken a due account,
And set all clear that way.

Sim. I do commend him.


Dau. Whilst he had leave, and his green youth did suffer'r
He wencht a little; but yet privately:
He ever had a care to keep his name
Untouched; as did become a wise young man.
Now marriage fits, he frames his mind that way.

Sim. And yet me thought he appeared somewhat sad.


Dau. Nothing about this business; but there is cause
That makes him somewhat angry with you.

Sim. What?


Dau. A trifle.


Sim. What is it?


Dau. Nothing.


Sim. Tell me what?


Dau. He says you are ouerniggardish in Cost.


Sim. Who, I?


Dau. That you have scarce disbusd ten groats
In your provision for his wedding supper:
What (says he) is this like a Sons nuptials
Whom chiefly of my fellow batchelors
May I inuit (quoth he) to such a banquet?
And to speak that which may be said herein;
Intruth you are too too sparing, I liked not.

Sim. Hold your tongue.


Dau. I have gald him.


Sim. I will see
That all shall be well carried. What means this?
What is it this old fox-hunt does hammer on?
If there be any knauerie, his pare forged it.
Exeunt Simo and Dauus.
Act. 3.
Scen. 1.
Enter Lesbia, the Midwise and Mysis Glyceriums ma^de at onedsore, Simo and
Dauus at another. Mys. I, Indeed Lesbia you have said aright:
A woman hardly finds a faithful lover.

Sim. Belongs this maid to the Andrian here?


Dau. Yes sir.


Mys. But this kind Pamphilus


Sim. What is it she says?


Mys. Has given her full assurance --


Sim. Out alas!


Dau. Would either he were dease now or she dumb.


Mys. That son or daughter, he will foster it.


Sim. Oh Jupiter! what news is this I hear?
All is lost utterly; if she speak truth.

Lesb. You do describe a young man honest natured.


Mys. Oh, the best natured gentleman -- but pray,
Follow me in, for fear she stay for you.

Les. Yes I follow.


Dau. What help for this now, trow?

Exet Lesbya and Mysis.
Sim. What, is he mad? a loose land loping strumpet?
Oh! I have it: old dulhead (as I was)
I fearce at length could hit on it.

Dau. What has he hit on, says he?


Sim. This first knauish practice
Of my man here is now thus put upon me:
She is to be in child birth, to flight Chremes.
Glycerium within doors. Juno, Lucina help; save me, I pray thee.

Sim. Horda such speed? ha, ha, ridiculous
As soon as are she heard me at the door,
The throws come on: scarce fitly a'my word,
You rank and place your times scarce sitly Dauus.

Dau. I sir?


Sim. Or have your Actors mist their Cues?


Dau. I know not what you mean, sir.


Sim. If this fellow
Had set upon me, being unprovided
In a true marriage oh, what pageants
Would he have played me? Let him now make sure
His own adventure; ^m^ith port secure.

Scen. 2.
Enter Lesbia speaking to the Nurse within doors. Lesb. AS yet Archillis I do
note in her
All usual matters, and good signs of health
First see her cleansd, and then deliver her
That drink, in measure as I gave in charge:
I Will be here straight again: as God shall help me.
She has brought Pamphilus a goodly boy.
If it please God, may it live to be a man:
Seeing the father is of disposition
So honest; and makes conscience to wrong
This good young woman.
Exit Lesbia.
Sim. Who did ever know thee
That would not swear, this thy contriuing now?

Dau. Pray, what?


Sim. She cannot in the house give order,
For what is needful to the childebed woman:
But coming forth a doors, proclaims ith'strect
Her mind to them within: what? what sir Dauus
Slight you me so? or deem'st me now at length
Such a fine easy property, thou may
So plainly pass thy iugling tricks upon me?
At least yet, it was circumspectly carried;
And showed your awe, if'twere discovered.

Dau. Troth his own cunning cheats him now; not I.


Sim. Did I not forewarne thee? threaten further
If thou should dare attempt this? have thou yet
Stood in fear often? has it in ought prevailed?
Think thou I do believe this woman here
Has had a child now by my Pamphilus?

Dau. I now find his mistaking, know my course.


Sim. Why speak thou not?


Dau. What talk you of your thinking?
As if you had had no notice of the matter?

Sim. I notice?


Dau. Why good sir, tell me I pray
Found you of your self that this was counter faited?

Sim. I Am flouted.


Dau. Come, come, it has bin told you:
How else a Gods name could you dream of it?

Sim. How? cause I well did know thy qualities.


Dau. You think it then a thing of my direction.


Sim. I, and I know it is.


Dau. Truly sir I see
You thoroughly do not know me.

Sim. Not I, thee?


Dau. But when I seek to tell you any thing,
You straight suppose, I put some trick upon you.

Sim. It Is false.


Dau. So that I dare scarce speak to you.


Sim. This one thing I am sure on; here is no child born.


Dau. Are you so sure? yet sir notwithstanding
They straight will lay a child before your door.
I tell you on it aforehand, for your knowledge:
Least you should say hereafter, Dauus plots
And cunning managed all. I very feign
Would work my self out of your jealousy.

Sim. How know it?


Dau. I have heard so and believe it.


Sim. They are many and those grounded circumstances,
Which my conjectures build on. Nere before
Named she her self with child by Pamphilus;
And that is false, unless my judgment err:
But seeing now a wedding is preparing,
A midwife straight is sent for, by the maid,
Who was to bring a young borne child with her.

Dau. Unless you see a child, the wedding still
Stands fairly.

Sim. I but, sir tell me this,
When thou had found they plotted this among them, her?
Why told you not it straight to Pamphilus?

Dau. Pray, but my self then who has drawn him from
We know how fondly he did dote upon her:
Now he desires a wife to live withal.
In fine, trust me with this whole business:
Yet pursue you, to make the marriage up;
And I do hope the Gods will further it.

Sim. Nay, get you in; there see you stay my coming:
And have such things as need in readiness.
Exit Dauus He has not drawn me yet to give full credit
To this he says; nor to conclude all true.
But I regard it little: the maine thing
I rest on, is the promise of my Son.
I Will now go speak with Chremes, and desire
He would bestow his daughter: that obtaind,
Why should I linger? and not now this day
Finish the match a foot? doubtless my Son
Will stand to his word: if not, what hinders me
Enter Chremes. But I may force him? and in good time see
Where Chremes is, Chremes good time of day.

Scen. 3.
Chr. OH! you are the man I sought for.


Sim. And I you.


Chr. You Are come as I would wish: a many men
Have pressed unto me; who report as heard
From you, that on this very day your Son
Should wed my daughter. Now I come to see
Whether or you or they be from their wits?

Sim. Pray list a while, and I will satisfy
This doubt: and withal acquaint you further
What suit I have unto you.

Chr. I attend.
Say what you please.

Sim. Chremes I request you
For love of God; and for the unfeigned friendship
Which in our youth begun along together
Has grown up with our years; by the respect
You bear your only child; for my Sons cause
Chief power of whose preserving lies in you,
Lend me your furtherance in this business,
That the match this day meant may so go on.

Chr. Oh! I pray crave it not, as if 't were fit
I should in this thing listen to your suit?
Think you me alterd from the man I was,
When late I made you promise? if 't may be
For both our welsares, take my daughter to you
But if hereby more harm then good will follow
To either of us by it, then I pray
Cast for the common good: as if my daughter
Were yours, I father to your Pamphilus.

Sim. Nay, that is my meaning Chremes: and I do
Crave nothing of you but upon such terms:
Nor would I ask it of you, if the case
It felse did not require it.

Chr. Why, how is it?


Sim. There Is jar between Glycerium and my son.


Chr. I hear.


Sim. So great, I hope't will sunder them.


Chr. A tale.


Sim. In very deed it is so


Chr. Indeed
It will just so (as I shall tell thee) prove;
The iarres of lovers give fresh life to love.

Sim. I, but I pray you let us prevent that,
Whilst his loves flame is smotherd by abuse:
Before this harlots leaud designs, false tears
Reduce his sickly mind to passion,
Lets marry 'hem.

Chremes I have good hope,
Fair wedlock and a wives experienced love
Will easily pluck him out of these feared ils.

Chr. You think so: but I deeme't impossible
That either they will always live together,
Or I may endure their iarring.

Sim. How do you know,
Unless you make a trial?

Chr. But 'twere hard
For me to make such trial in my child.

Sim. Why, all the inconvenience which can happen
Should the worst fall (which I pray God forbid)
Were at the most a separation.
In counterpoise now weigh the benefits
That will ensue, if my son prove reclaimed:
First you restore to your friend his son: your self
Gain a fast son in law: your child a husband.

Chr. Why, if you think it so commodious,
For my part I will be no hindrance to it.

Sim. I justly always held you my best friend.


Chr. But as to that you said.


Sim. What?


Chr. Marry how know you
There Is now debate between 'hem.

Sim. Dauus self
(who is their Counsels inward secretary)
So told me; and withal aduisd me further
To haste the marriage with all speed I could.
Think you he would do thus, but that he knows.
My son desires it likewise? you your self
Shall heat him. Ho there, one call Dauus forth.
Enter Dauus. But lo, I see him coming out a doors.

Scen. 4.
Dau. I Was a coming to you.


Sim. What Is the matter?


Dau. Why is the bride not sent for? it grows late.


Sim. Do you now hear him? I will tell thee Dauus,
I lately had thee in some jealousy;
That thou did take the course most servants hold,
By seeking to delude me in the matter.
Of Pamphilus wanton loving.

Dau. Who, I sit?


Sim. I thought so: and for that I kept from you
A secret, I Will now utter.

Dau. What was that?


Sim. I Will tell thee; for I almost now do trust thee.


Dau. At length you find what servant you have of me.


Sim. This was not to have bin a marriage


Dau. What, no.


Sim. But I therefore counterfaited,
That I might feel your minds.

Dau. What is it you say?


Sim. Just as thou hear'st.


Dau. La ye; I could never,
Think such a matter: oh fine cunning plot?

Sim. List this; when hence I bad thee get thee in,
Chremes came fitly to me.

Dau. Are we troe
Not lost for ever?

Sim. I told all to him
Thou late toldst me.

Dau. What hear I?


Sim. Begged of him,
And scarce at length won him to give his daughter.

Dau. I am undone.


Sim. What say?


Dau. Excellently done.


Sim. Now he is not backward.


Chre. I Will straight get me home,
And leave word all be had in readiness!
Thence give you notice.

Sim. Now I prechee Dauus,
Exit Chremes Since thou alone have wrought this marriage for us --

Dau. Yes sure, I was the only worker.


Sim. Do now
Endeavor further to reclaim my son.

Dau. Yes truly, I will look toot carefully.


Sim. Thou may now do it, whilst his mind is vexed.


Dau. Pray take no Care.


Sim. Look toot then:
But where now is he himself?

Dau. It Is marle but he is at home.


Sim. I Will too him then, and to himself deliver
All I told thee.

Dau. I am now just nothing. Exit Simo.
What hinders, but I fairly take my way
Directly to the mill, and fall a grinding?
Entreaty may do nothing; I have drawn
All things to such confusion: first deceived
My Master: then have headlong thrust his son
Upon a marriage, that he looked not for:
And clean against his will: and this to day
To be made up, by my alone procurement.
Pray mark the end of cunning: had I sat still,
No evil in the world had happened.
Enter Pamphilus. And see where he is. I am a mere dead man.
Would I had any means to break my neck now.

Scen. 5.
Pam. Where is the villain has undone me?


Dau. I Am a plain castaway.


Pam. But I confess
It Is justly fallen upon me; since I am
So idle, vain, and inconsiderate:
Ought I to trust my whole state to a slave;
A prating slave? I have my follies hire:
But unrevenged he nere shall escape with it.

Dau. I Will nere doubt tempest, if I escape this storm.


Pam. But now what answer shall I make my father?
Shall I deny to marry, who but now
Consented to it? with what impudence
May I dare do it? neither with my self
Know I what course to take.

Dau. Troth nor I, neither
But I am canuassing my brains about it.
I Will tell him I Will forthwith find out some means
A little to put off his threatened vengeance.

Pam. Oh --


Dau. I Am spide.


Pam. Oh, you sir, honest fellow
Come nearer: what say to me? do you see now
How I am puzzled through your goodly counsel?

Dau. I Will presently make all clear.


Pam. Thou make clear?


Dau. Pamphilus indeed I will.


Pam. I, as erewhile.


Dau. Nay, I hope better


Pam. Trust thee pillorie?
Or thou make good a case perplexed, lost?
See what a suresby I have trusted too;
Who from a quiet state I late stood in,
This day have thrust me on a marriage:
Did I not tell thee it would thus fall out?

Dau. You did.


Pam. What have then deserved


Dau. Hanging.
A little yet let me collect my self.
I Will straight find out some help.

Pam. Oh me accursed:
Why want I time to plague thee as I would?
This scarce will serve my danger to prevent,
Permits me not pursue thy punishment.
Exeunt Pamphilus and Dauus.
Act. 4.
Scen. 1.
Enter Charinus at one door; Pamphilus and Dauus at another. Cha. MAy't be
believed? or may it once be talked on?
That any should be so selfe-wild perverse,
As to take pleasure in another harms?
Or think his own gain sweeter, if procured
By others disadvantage? oh good God!
Is this a brood of men? Men let them be;
Worst are they of the generation.
They show a little tricksey modesty,
Not to deny a craved courtesy:
But when performance comes, they then declare
(Nature will show it self) what men they are.
They are ashamed a little, but in trial
Their temper bursteth forth to flat denial.
Then shall you hear their shameless Oratorie --
Pray who are you? are what at least to me.
Why yield my love to you? good sir attend,
I am unto my self the nearest friend.
Touch them with faith and troth, they blush no whit:
So that when no constraint inforceth it,
They make some scruple; when it comes to the pinch,
Then at the proof your hollow friend does flinch.
But what is my best course? shall I to him straight,
And with him this his wrong expostulate?
And ply him with harsh terms? but some may say,
What good shall I procure my self that way?
Yes much: I shall both chafe him, and give ease
To my grieved heart.

Pam. Charinus, less God please
To succor us, I have both thee and me
Against my will undone unwarily.

Cha. Unwarily: is that word now thought on?
Y'haue broke your promisd faith.

Pam. As how, I pray?


Cha. Seek you again with fair words to abuse me?


Pam. What means this?


Cha. After I said I loved her,
You must needs like her too. Oh me accursed,
That scantled out your dealing by mine own!

Pam. You are mistaken.


Cha. Seemed your content not full,
Unless you fooled, and with false hope traind on
A wretched lover? much good do ye; take her.

Pam. I take her? oh I perceive thou know not
In what a gulf of misery I am plunged:
What pecke of troubles this my torturer
Has brought me to, by harkning to his counsel.

Cha. No marle: he takes his president from you.


Pam. You would not say this, if you fully knew
Or me, or her I Have set my fancy on.

Cha. Yes, I do know; you were at hot high words
Late with your father; and have angered him,
Because he cannot make you marry her.

Pam. Nay, which discouers thou less know my grief,
This marriage never was prepared for me:
Nor did now any force me to a wife.

Cha. I know it your own will forced you.


Pam. Tarry, yet thou know not all.


Cha. I know thou'st marry her.


Pam. Why do you thus torment me? hear but this
He never ceased to be urgent on me,
That I should tell my father I would marry:
To entreat, persuade, till he had drawn me to it.

Cha. What man did this.


Pam. This Dauus.


Cha. Dauus?


Pam. Dauus brings all things out of square.


Cha. What the inducement?


Pam. I nothing know, except this one thing only,
That I well see the Gods are much displeased
With me, for listening to him.

Cha Did you thus Dauus?


Dau. I did.


Cha. Ha, what faist thou caitife?
The gods give thee a death futing thy doings.
Sir tha, but tell me; say that all his foes
Had laid their heads together for a plot
To yoke him to a wife, what stratagem
Could they have framed more speeding then this was?

Dau. I am deceived, but faint not.


Cha. I, I know it.


Dau. It thriu'd not this way, we will attempt some other.
Unless you judge because at first we sped not,
There Is no means jest us to salve up the mischief.

Pam. Nay more, I well believe if thou watch for it,
Of one thoult make me out a double marriage.

Dau. I (Pamphilus) by reason of my bondage
Owe you thus much: to do, go, night and day
To endeavor all I may, with my lives hazard,
For your advantage: it is yet your part
To bear with me, if things come cross my hopes:
My plots fail; yet I use all carfulness:
Your self else frame things wiseher, discharge me.

Pam. I crave thou leave me in that state thou fou^dst me;


Dau. I will.


Pam. But't must be straight.


Dau. How now! hist, stay.
Glyceriums door did creake.

Pam. That Is naught to thee.


Dau. I am a forging.


Pam. How, is it now to forge.


Dau. But I will giu't you fashioned presently.


Scen. 2.
Enter Mysis. Mys. Where ere he be, I Will find your Pamphilus
And bring him with me straight;
Mean while good heart vex not your self.

Pam. Mysis?


Mys. What Is the matter?
Oh, was it you Pamphilus? you are well met.

Pam. What news?


Mys. My Mistress prays you of all love
To come to her: she longs to speak with you.

Pam. I am a sorlorne wretch: the mischief spreads.
That she and I should both be thus perplexed
By means of thee? for I am therefore sent for
Because she hears my wedding is prepared.

Cha. From which how easily had you now bin quiet,
Had he bin quiet?

Dau. Yes, so, go on:
If of himself he be not vexd enough,
Urge him on further.

Mys. I indeed it is that
Does now afflict her.

Pam. Mysis, I do swear
By all the Gods unto thee, I will never
Forsake her: no, though I were sure thereby
To undergo the whole worlds enmity.
I did desire her; have obtaind her; see
That we both iumpe in minds, and quality.
Farewell to all that seek us two to sever:
But death none takes her from me.

Cha. I recover


Pam. I do desire (if it may be so borne up)
My father should not think I am the cause
The marriage holds not: if that cannot be,
I Will take the next course: that he may perceive
I cross it. What kind of man do think me.

Cha. Faith every way as wretched as my self.


Dau. I cast for help.


Cha. I, thou have a good heart.


Dau. And will effect it for you.


Pam. 'T must be now.


Dau. Why, I have it now.


Cha. What is it?


Dau. You mistake;
It is for him, not you.

Cha. I am content.


Pam. Say, what wilt do?


Dau. I have scarce day enough
To finish it I fear: and think me not
At leisure therefore now, to tell you it.
But get y'hence both; you, now but hinder me.

Pam. I Will visit her here.


Dau. And you, whither you? Exit Pamphilus.


Cha. Will thou I tell thee truth?


Dau. Nay see, he makes a prologue to a tale.


Cha. What do for me?


Dau. Oh impudent! is it not enough I give thee
Some hours; by putting off his marriage?

Cha. Yet Dauus --


Dau. Well, what?


Cha. That I may have her. --


Dau. Ridiculous!


Cha. Yet if thou can do ought --
Come home to me.

Dau. To what end should I come?
I nothing have to help thee.

Cha. I but if --


Dau. Well, I will come.


Cha. If thou can think of ought
I Will be at home.
Exit Charinus.
Dau. Mysis, while I go hence
Stay here a little for me.

Mys. To what end?


Dau. It Is needful now, thou do so.


Mys. Make have then.


Dau. I will be here straightway again with thee.

Exit Dauus.
Scen. 3.
Mys. THat no one holds any thing in certain?
Your help good Gods! I thought this Pamphilus
Had bin my Mistresses firm, chiefest good;
Took him to be her friend, her lover, husband;
Ready at all essaies to stand to her:
And yet what grief sustaines she now through him?
Hence sure more ill she reapes then good from him.
But here comes Dauus.
Enter Dauus. What Is that prithee friend? the child?
Whither do bear it?

Scen. 4.
Dau. MYsis, now I
need thy readrest memory and wit
In this I go about.

Mys. What art to do?


Dau. Take the child from me straight, and lay it down
Before our door.

Mys. What on the bare ground pray?


Dau. Take a few strewings from the altar there --
And lay 'hem under.

Mys. Why do not thou thy self?


Dau. That if perchance my Master urge my oath
It Was not my doing, I may safely swear it.

Mys. I understand you: but pray tell me whence
This now new tender conscience comes upon thee?

Dau. Stir you more quick; that you may further know
What it is I have in hand. Oh Jupiter!
Enter Chremes.
Mys. What?


Dau. The father of the bride is come on us. leave the course which I at first
intended.


Mys. I know not what you talk on?


Dau. My self too
Will make as if I came from the right hand.
Have you a care now as occasion serves
You mark my talk, and suit your words to mine.

Mys. I understand nothing you go about:
But if in any thing you need my help
Or see more then my self, I here will stay,
That I may be no hindrance in your way.
Exit Dauus.
Scen. 5.
Chr. Having prepared all in readiness
Was needful to my Daughters marriage,
I now return to will 'hem send for her.
But what is here? so help me God, a child!
Weman, laid you this child here?

Mys. Where is he?


Chr. Do not answer me?


Mys. Woes me, out of sight.
Alas, Dauus has left me: and is gone. Enter Dauus.

Dau. Faith of the Gods!
What coile's yond'at the Market?
What throng of wranglers braule there? and beside
Corn bears excessive price. I know not now
What other words to use.

Mys. For Gods sake man
Why left you me alone here?

Dau. Hoida what
Denice is this? you Mysis, whence this child?
Or who here laid it?

Mys. Are you in your wits,
To ask me that?

Dau. Of whom else should I ask,
That see none else here?

Chr. I marle whence it is.


Dau. Wo^^ tell me.


Mys. Au!


Dau. Come here, of my right side.


Mys. Thou Art mad did not your self?


Dau. Look thou beware
Thou utter not a word, but what I ask thee.

Mys. Do You threaten me?


Dau. From whence is it? speak out.


Mys. From you.


Dau. Ha, ha, he, is it news, if women
Of your condition do grow impudent?

Chr. This maid belongs to the Andrian, as I think.


Dau. Seem we such fitting persons to you, troe
That you should play on us?

Chr. I came in time.


Dau. Therefore with speed take you the child away
Ilence from our door: yet stay, see thou stir not
One inch out of this place.

Mys. The Gods confound thee
That me poor woman frightst thus.

Dau. Do I speak to thee, or not?


Mys. What would you?


Dau. Asked thou still?
Say, tell me whose child it is thou have laid here?

Mys. Do not you know?


Dau. Talk not of what I know,
But tell me that I ask.

Mys. It Is of your house


Dau. Whose, of us?


Mys. Pamphilus.


Dau. Ha, what, Pamphilus?


Mys. Is It not?


Chr. I always rightly shunned this match.


Dau. Oh notable vile practice!


Mys. Why exclaimst thou?


Dau. Which child did not my self see yesternight
Brought late to you?

Mys. Oh most audacious fellow


Dau. It Is truth, I saw Canthara thick stuffed out.


Mys. I thank the Gods yet, that some City wives
Were present at the labor.

Dau. She not knows
Him (I assure thee) for whose cause she plots this.
She thinks if Chremes see a child laid here,
Heel'e not bestow his daughter: yes of truth,
For this the rather.

Chr. Faith but he will not though.


Dau. Now therefore, for thy knowledge, take it hence
Or I will tumble it in the high way;
And further lay thee by it in the kennell.

Mys. Thou certainly art drunk.


Dau. One cunning pranke
Treads on another heel. I hear it whisperd
She Is a freeborn Athenian.

Chre. Ha!


Dau. And that
He shall be fore'd by law to marry her.

Mys. Why sir I pray you, i^ she not freeborn?


Chr. I had almost unawares iested my self
Into a dangerous mischief.

Dau. Who talks here?
Oh Chremes you are come in happy time.
Pray listen sir --

Chr. I have heard all already.


Dau. How all say you?


Chr. I, from the beginning all.


Dau. Have you pray heard it? see their villainies!
It Is fit she were hence hurried to the rack.
This is the man I talked of: do not think
You play your tricks on Dauus.

Mys. Oh wretched me!
Indeed (good old Sir) I have spoke no falsehood.

Chr. I know all to the full: but is your Master
Simo within?

Dau. Yes Sir.

Exit Chremes.
Mys. Rogue hand me not.
Troth if Glycerium know not of all this --

Dau. Attend you fool, thou know not what is done:
This the brides father: by no other means
Could he be made to know what we would have him.

Mys. Why then you should have told me on it.


Dau. Do think
There no great difference, when a thing is carried
The natural way, and when premeditate.

Scen. 6.
Enter Crits. Crit. It Is told me Chrysis dwelt in this same street:
Who rather chose here leaudly to grow rich,
Then in her Country honestly live poor:
She dead, the Law has cast her state on me.
But now I see some I may question:
God save you.

Mys. Oh good God whom do I see?
Is not this Crito, Chrisis Cozen German?
It Is he.

Crit. Oh Mysis! you are well met.


Mys. The Gods
Prosper you Crito.

Crit. Chrysis then is -- well?


Mys. Yes truly she has left us, to th'wide world.


Crit. And you, what shift do you make? any thing well?


Mys. We? faith even according to the proverb;
Live as we can, since cannot as we would.

Crit. Glycerium -- what, has she yet sound her parents?


Mys. I would she had.


Crit. What not yet? I came hither
In an unlucky hour: for had I known it
I sure would never have stirred a soot this way.
She always was both said and deemed her sister
And holds all that was hers: now for me their
To follow law suits being here a stranger,
How easy and commodious 'tmay be
Rife precedents of other men do warn me.
Besides, I judge by this she has got her self
Some friend and patron: for when she came thence
She had well-neere attained to ripe years
Men will cry out I am a sycophant,
A beggar laying claim to others right:
Withal, my self list not impouerish her:

Mys. Good Crito, you still hood your ancient course.


Crit. Bring me unto her, since I am come hither,
I may at least yet see her.

Mys. Yes I will.


Dau I Will follow yet the old man shall not see me.


Mysis and Crito enter Glyceriums house and Dauus follows them.

Act. 5.
Scen. 1.
Enter Chremes and Simo out of Simoes house. Chr. SImo enough, I have enough
tried your friend ship:
Venturd sufficient hazard, pray now leave
Entreating. Whilst I seek to pleasure you
I almost trisled my childs lise away.

Sim. Nay, but I earnestly beg and crave Chremes,
This your good turn now late begun in words
You would in deeds make up.

Chr Note how unjust
You grow, through earnestness to work your aims:
You nor consider bounds in courtesies,
Nor yet what it is you crame: for if you did,
Yould cease to load me with these injuries.

Sim. What iniuties?


Chr. Oh, do you question them?
You wrought me to bestow my only child
To one entangled in a strangers love:
A wild young youth abhorring marriage:
To most sure discord, marriage as insure;
That by her grief and sorrow I might physic
Your riotous son: this y'obtain'd: I went on,
Whilst things permitted: now that the case not brooks it,
You must brook my denial. It Is affirmd
This stranger is fice borne; has a child by him:
Leave troubling us.

Sim. By all the Gods I beg
You would not bend your mind to trust these people,
Whose best advantage it is, to make him worst.
These things are only seign'd and fashioned
To dash the wedding: take away the cause
Moves them to this, they will straight way leave contrining.

Chr. You Are wide: My self saw a maid scolding here
With Dauus.

Sim. I know it.


Chr. I but this was done
In good sad earnest; neither of them both
Knowing that I was near.

Sim. I do believe it
And Dauus late told me it would be so.
I know not how I did forget to tell you,
As I had meant.

Scen. 2.
Enter. Dauus out of Glyceriums house. Dau. I Will you now rest quiet --


Chr. See, here is Dauus.


Sim. Whence comes he?


Dau. Through my furthrance and this guests.


Sim. What new mischief?


Dau. Man, time, coming fitter, I never saw.


Sim. Who is it, the rogue so praises?


Dau. All Is now secure.


Sim. Cease I to speak to him?


Dau My Master! what is my course?


Dau. Oh Simo, oh our Chremes,
All things are now in readiness within.

Sim. Thou Have looked too 't well.


Dau. When you please, send for her.


Sim. It Is very well; but that course now here fails us.
But may I know, what thou had there to do?

Dau. I Sir.


Sim. I, Sir.


Dau. Me mean you?


Sim. Yes, mean thee.


Dau. I went in but now --


Sim. As if I ask 't thee, when?


Dau. Together with your son.


Sim. Is my son there?
I wretch am set o'th rack. Diddst not hangman
Tell me, they were at deadly odds together?

Dau. They are.


Sim. What does he there then?


Chr. He? what think?
I warrant railing at her.

Dau. Nay but Chremes
I Will tell you now of a strange accident.
I know not what old man is newly come,
Note him, a man both confident and wise,
When you shall see him, you will much value him.
A grave austerity rests on his face;
And in his words dwell faith.

Sim. What news bring'st thou?


Dau. No other, then I heard that man report.


Sim. And what doo's he report?


Dau. That he doo's know
Glycerium here, a free Athenian borne.

Sim. Hoe Dromo, Dromo.

Enter Dromo. Sim. Dromo.
Dro. What Is the matter?


Dau. Hear me.


Sim. If thou speak one word more -- Dromo.


Dau. I do beseech you hear me.


Dro. What would y'haue?


Sim. Hoist in this fellow here, hence speedily.


Dro. Whom?


Sim. Dauus.


Dau. Why?


Sim. For it is my pleasure.
Away with him I say.

Dau. What have I done?


Sim. In with him.


Dau. If you shall find I have ly'de
In any thing, then kill me.

Sim. I Will hear nothing.
I Will streightway put thee into motion.

Dau. Though that I said the truth?


Sim. Though -- see you
I Will be kept bound; and hear you, bound all four.
I Will show thee, what it is to abuse a Master,
If I but live this day: and teach the other
What it is to cross a father.
Exit Dromo with Dauus.
Chr. Oh, I pray you rage not so much.


Sim. Chremes do not, seeing
How unkindly he deals with me, pity me?
That I should toil and care for such a son?
But Pamphitus you, come you out Pamphilus:
Does any shame possess thee?

Scen. 3.
Enter Pamphilus. Pam. Who called me?
I am lost, it is my father.

Sim. What say now?
Thou of all --

Chr. Oh, rather go to th'point man:
And spare ill speaking.

Sim. As if any thing
Can be spoke ill enough of such a one?
But Sirrah say, is your Glycerium now
Free borne of Athens?

Pam. So they say of her.


Sim. Do they say so? Monstrous audaciousnesse!
Considers he his words? grieves at his deeds?
Or shows his color any note of shame?
That he should be of such deboshed manners,
That clear beyond all precedent of freemen,
Against the form of law, in opposition
Of me his father, he should bend to have her
Though 't reach to the highest pitch of infamy?

Pam. Oh me most wretched!


Sim. Do thou now at length
Perceive that Pamphilus? that word of old
Of old that word then truly sitted thee,
When first thou setst thy heart to please thy self;
Though at what rate soever compassed.
But wherefore do I thus? why yex my soul?
Why waste my self away? why do I grieve
My old and fainting age with his youths follies?
Shall I endure the penance of his faultings?
No, let him have her; I, God speed him well;
Yes, let him keep with her.

Pam Oh my father --


Sim. Why call'st me father? as if thou had need
Of me to be thy father? a house, wise,
Children are had maugre thy fathers will:
Fellows are hired shall bear her up freeborne.
Y'haue got the mast'tie.

Pam. I beseech you father,
May I have leave to utter a few words.

Sim. What wilt say to me?


Chr. Vet hear him Simo.


Sim. I hear him: what is it Chremes I should hear him.


Chr. Permit him tell you.


Sim. Well, tell he: I permit


Pam I do confess I love this woman here
If it be faulty, I confess that too.
Further I yield me up to your full pleasure,
Lay any task, any command upon me.
Will you I marry that, leave this? I will
Endure it as I may. But this one thing
I beg of you, that you would not imagine
That this old man is by my means brought in
Suffer me clear my self, and fetch him hither
Into your presence

Sim. Fetch him.


Pam. Let me pray.


Chr. He craves but reason, grant it.


Pam. I pray sir.

Exit Pamphilus.
Sim. Well, I do: I wish Chremes ought be proved,
So that I find he doos not iuggle with me.

Chr. Slight accusation in a sons offense
Suffices for a father.

Scen. 4.
Enter Crito and Pamphilus. Crit. CEase to entreat.
Each of the reasons you have used, persuade me
To your request? either your own self cause,
Or for it is a truth, or cause I wish
All furtherance unto Gl ceriuns.

Chr. Do I not see Crito of Andros there?
It Is he. Crito you are here well met:
You have bin long a stranger here: what chance
Has brought you now to Athens.

Crit. An occasion.
But is this Simo?

Chr. Yes.


Sim Ask you for me?
Do You hear sir, is it you that do affirm
Clycerium to be free borne of Athens?

Crit. Are you one, do deny it?


Sim. Is 't eene so?
Come you so well prepared too?

Crit. Wherefore?


Sim. Do thou use question? think thou to escape
Fairly thus of with 't? seek thou to work on
The easy natures of unguided youth,
Perverting our well nurtured children?
Winning their hearts with fawning promises.
And this, in Athens.

Crit. Are you in your wits?


Sim. And harlot-loues knit'st up in marriage?


Chr. If you knew this man Simo thoroughly,
You would not judge so: he is an honest man.

Sim. An honest man; to come iumpe in the instant
Of dosing hands, and nere seen here before?
Chremes, may such a man be credited?

Pam. If I not doubted to displease my father
I easily could prompt him to that point.

Sim. Cauelling sycophant --


Crit. How?


Chr. Forbear Crito;
It is his temper.

Crit. Let him regard his temper:
If he will vent his pleasure upon me
He shall be forced to hear what will displease him.
Trouble I his matters? or yet care for'hem?
Cannot you bear your own ils patiently?
For my part, it may instantly be known
Whether 't be false or true, you heard me say
A certain man of Athens, now long since
Shiprackt at sea, was cast on Andros Isle;
And with him this Glycerium, then a child:
He being poor had harbor at the house
Of Chr si, father.

Sim. He begins a tale.


Chr. Pray give him leave.


Crit. Does he disturb me thus?
He that entertaind him was my kinsman:
Of him I then heard, that this shipwrack'd man
Was an Ithenian.

Chr Pray, what was his name?


Crit. His name so suddenly? Pha -- Pha-nia.


Chr. Oh, my heart!


Crit. Yes sure, I think it was Phania.
This I well know, he named himself of Ramnes.

Chr. O Jupiter!


Crit. A many more in Andros
Then heard it.

Chr. I beseech the Gods, it prove
According to my hopes: but pray you Crito,
What said he of the child, that it was his own?

Crit. No.


Chr. Whose then?


Crit. The daughter of his brother.


Chr. It Is certainly mine own.


Crit. What do you say?


Sim. What say you?


Pam. Pamphilus give heed to this.


Sim. Why think you so?


Chr. That Phania was my brother.


Sim. I knew him well, and know that he was so.


Chr. He flying hence to avoid the rage of war,
Trauaild toward Asia in pursuit of me;
And feared withal to leave the child behind:
Since whence, now I hear the first news of him.

Pam. I scarcely feel my self: my mind's so tossed
Twixt fear, and hope, and joy, and wondering,
At this so great, so sudden happiness.

Sim. In truth I much rejoice, she is found yours.


Pam. I do believe you father.

Chr. But there rests
One scruple yet, which somewhat troubles me.

Pa. You are worthy now of hate, with these your scruples


Crit. What is 't?


Chr. The name agrees not.


Crit. She had sure
Another being young.

Chr. What was it Crito?
Can thou remember?

Crit. I am thinking on 't.


Pam. Shall I permit his tardie memory
To slacken my joys current, being able
Herein to give my self a remedy?
No, I will not: hark you hither Chremes;
The name you doubt of is Pasibula.

Crit. That Is it.


Chr. It Is right.


Pam. I heard it of her self
At least a thousand times.

Sim. I believe Chremes,
You think we all joy at it.

Chr. As may the Gods
Assist me, I do think so.

Pam. What rests father?


Sim. The case it self now reconcileth us.


Pam. Oh my most loving father and you Chromes
Change nothing in the wife I now possess?

Chr. The cause is just, your father so agreeing.


Pam. Thus much --


Sim. Yea marry --


Chr. Her dowre Pamphilus I make ten talents.


Pam. I accept of it.


Chr. I Will forthwith see my daughter: Crito, pray
Go with me; for I think she knows me not.

Sim. Why cause you not your wife be brought to us?


Pam. You warn me well, I Will eene give Dauus charg out.


Sim. He cannot now effect it.


Pam. Pray why so?


Sim. Has more and greater charge upon himself.


Pam. What?


Sim. He Is bound.


Pam He Is not bound rightly father.


Sim. No; I did will him be bound otherwise.


Pam. Pray order he be loosd.


Sim. Well, be it so.


Pam. But good sir, haste.


Sim. I Will in and see it done.

Exit Simo.
Pam. Oh happy, oh this prosperous blessed day.


Scen. 5.
Enter Charinus. Cha. I Come to see how Pampirlus speeds, and lo.


Pam. Some man perhaps may think I feed on dreams:
But now I please to think all real truth.
I on this ground judge the Gods lives eternal,
Because heir pleasure's certainly their own
For I my self have gaind immortal state,
If with this joy no grief ere intermeddle
But who might I now wish especially
Here at this time, to tell the tidings to?
Enter Dauus.
Chae. What joy is that he talks of?


Pam. I now see
Dauus our man: there is no living one,
I rather would have had. I know he will?
Full truly joy in the true joy I feel.

Scen. 6.
Dau. Where is this Pamphilus trow?


Pam. Dauus Dau. Who Is that?


Pam. It Is I.


Dau. Oh Pamphilus!


Pam. Thou know not what has befallen me?


Dau. True: yet know, what has chanced me.


Pam. And so do I.


Dau. Why this happes just oth'fashion,
That you my ill luck learn, ere I your good.

Pam. Glycerium has found out her parents.


Dau. Good.


Cha. How Is that?


Pam. Her father our chief friend.


Dau. Who is it?


Pam. Chremes.


Dau. Oh brave!


Pam. Nor now is any stay,
But that I take her home forthwith to wife.

Cha. Dreams he trow, of things he desires waking?


Pam. Now Dauus, for the child?


Dau. Leave of I pray:
The gods sure purpose him their minion.

Cha. I am a made man, if these things be true
I Will speak to'hem.

Pam. O Charinus,
Thou come in a fit time.

Cha. Oh happy news.


Pam. Have heard ont then?


Cha. Yes all: pray think on me,
Now in the height of your felicity.
Chremes is now your own, and I do know
Hele yield to any thing you motion.

Pam. I mind it. But 't would now be ouer-long
Here to attend, till he come forth to us.
Follow me in; he is with Glycerium.
Get you home Dauus, hasten; and procure
Some that may bear her hence: why stand'st thou so?
Why staiest thou still?

Dau. Sir I Will go presently.

Exeunt Pamphilus, and Charinus. Epilogue.
Epilogue by Dauus. Addition, by way of paraphrase on Dauus last words in the
Scene.
I Note you sit with kind attention bent,
As pleased with what has passed; and expect
The further issue of our argument;
And on the marrage now your minds reflect.
We pray you cease such expectation;
For we have done: the bride you do conceive
But newly brought to bed; night coming on
Women shall bear her hence, at Sionoes leave.
Chremes hs younger daughter Philumen
Charinus gets, at sure of Pamphilus.
Crito of Andros, who has been the mean
The long lost child should be discouerd thus,
What course he now shall take to obtain his right
In Chrysis goods, I here not mention will;
Nor in leede can I: I have no insight
In law points, triable at Mars his hill.
Yet knowing Chremes nature tractable,
Seeing withal he has dealt liberally
In portion, so that amph lus is able
To bear the loss, though-common honestic
Did not exact it I not doubt they will
Use the poor stranger well. Me you have scene heis
Venture to binding, grinding in the Mill:
That fell on me, this was approaching near.
I purpose further in their joy to sue
My present freedom: Pamphilus love I have,
Glyceriums also; both I think of due:
My Masters chase is off I only crave
Your furtherance in the matter; which if gaind,
I have good hope: for I have heard it sed
By men in the Periclaean laws well read,
If I make you my friends, my sute's obtaind:
For they have told me my discharge now stands
not upon whispering voices; but clapped hands.
Finis Andriae.
THE EVNVCH.
The ARGUMENT.
A Citizen of Athens dwelling at Sunium a port-towne of Attica having two
children, Chremes a Son, and Pamphila a daughter, had his daughter stolen
away by Pirates when she was of such tender age that she could only tell her
own and parents names. After this the Athenian died. The Pirates sold the child
to a Merchant of Rhodes, who gave her to a Strumpet which he loved. This Harlot
had a daughter called Thais, somewhat elder then Pamphila: Which children she
so brought up together, that all men of Rhodes did repute them for Sisters.
Thais in process of time took to her mothers trade of life; and yielding up
her self to a strangers devotion, was by him carried to Athens; where he dying
left her good means. He thus dead, she was taken up by one Thraso asouldier: he
also having a while accompanied her, had occasion of travail into Caria. Mean
while the mother of Thais died at Rhodes: Her goods fell to a brother, who
(with them) exposed to sale the abouenamed Pamphila, just upon the time wherein
the soldier passed that way. Her youth and beauty induced the soldier
(ignorant of all passages) to buy her, as a fit gift to bestow on Thais at his
return to Athens. But she before that time (whores do not live in expectation,
nor upon the means of one man only) had intertaind the love of one Phaedria a
young gentleman, son of an ancient Athenian Citizen. She also had by this
time gained some inkling of the parentage of Pamphila, and that one Chremes a
genteleman of Athens was in good likelihood uaturall brother to the maiden: for
better discovery whereof, she had had conference with him (a loofe off)
touching the matter. The soldier returns to Athens bringing Pamphila along
with him, (her maidenhead is questiond by Terence, Act. 1. Sen. 2. in these
words etiamne amplius? To avoid matter unfitting for the grace of the Comedy,
but she was (beyond any contrary supposable conjecture) a maiden: for a child
might sillip this soldier out of his courage; and foolerie was all the
allurement he could use to her) and being thus returned, he finds Phaedria
entered into Thais her books: out of which if he be not clean wiped, Pamphila
is not for her, as the soldier affirms. Terence has set out this Thais as
none of the worst of that course of life; and withal of good discretion in her
carriage. A Dilemma is now put upon her; love and consideration are the two
horns: she must venture the goring by one of them. Love pleades first, and
this is natural to her blood; and Phaedria besides deserves it. I but he may
be tendered a wife; his appetite cloyd his father workeher displeasure.
Resolute love in spite of these premises has down the co^^lusion On the
other side a reputed sister, that sister has good friends, those friends able
to strengthen her unsettled fortunes; if by her means the one be restored to
the other: Thus pleades Consideration. Wisely therefore she keeps the middle
way for barring Phaedria her company for abrace of days (telling him why) she
aims to gull the soldier of the wench by this courtesy; and then to recall
Phaedria to his former contentment. Phaedria assents, leaves the City. gives
withal charge to Parmeno his fathers man, for bringing an Eunuch to Thais in
his absence: Phaedria gone, Thraso also sends Pamphila to her by Gnato a
Parasite. In the passing of the maiden thither, Chaerea a younger brother of
Phaedria spies her, falls in love with her, dogs her, by accident loses
her, chafes with himself at it: then to Parmeno coming upon him, discouers his
mind and whereto carried. Parmeno informs him of an Eunuch by his brother
Phaedria sent, and by him forthwith to be conveyed to the very house where the
maid abides. So that by shifting clothes with the Eunuch he may undiscovered
be brought to her; the Eunuch nor he having ever before been seen by Thais
or any of her family Chaerea follows the advice, is brought thither, rauisheth
the maiden. Much coil hence arises, Pamphila at length being found to be
freeborne, Chaerea marries her; Thais is taken into protection by the father of
the two brothers. The Soldier for mirth and cost sparing is admitted among
them, by Gnatoes persuasion, with the consent of Phaedria.

The Actors and their Characters.
SEnex, an old man not named by Terence; father of two sons: himself being
retired to his Country Grange, at his return to the City finds that either
of his sons have played Rex in his absence: his nature sudden and fiery.

Phaedria one of his sons, a young man entangled with the love of a harlot:
well qualified and straggling with his faulty inclination.

Chaerea. Another of the old man's sons, an early Cock of the game: the heat
of his youthful blood violently caries him on to a rape: either he was passed
an Ephebus, or Grammarians mistaken in the word, or else Terence has been
very bold in the part of Chaerea lustful, heady, headstrong.

Parmeno, Scruant of the family, wise and discreat while he gives advise; when
he undertakes employment diligent and faithful.

Thais, A strumpet of a sweet and pleasing disposition: graceful in language,
in manners free and indifferently modest. Terence (in a word) has striued in
her person to set out a tolerable harlot.

Pythias maid to Thais. A busy prattling house-wife.

Dorias another of her maids, of clean contrary temper: an idle meacocke.

Chremes, A young country gentleman. Clownish of manners, very timorous and
fearful.

Sophrona an old nurse, she hardly huddles over the stage: And all the news I
hear from her, is this one word, Moueo.

Amipho a young gentleman of good demeanor, familiar.

Thraso. Gnato. These I couple: for what good Mus^que makes a trumpet without
its ecco. The first a Parat, the other a fellow clawing his poll. The soldier a
bragging sot, of necessity therefore a Cowheard; the other a Clawbacke rubbing
his proud itch. The Parasite thus far wise, that he can make use of his
foolish Master: for he pickes matter of mirth and means out of him.

Sanga a Cook, by consequence inclining to sauciness. Malepert.

The Prologue.
IF there be any who their studies frame
To give good men contentment, displease none;
In their fair rank our Poet files his name:
If any further hold opinion,
That harsh uncivil terms to procure shame
To any man, be here ungently sown;
Let him think so a Gods name: but with all
He lets them know, what ever words do pass,
Do not on such as free inuectiues fall;
But forced replies of him first wronged was:
To utter the man's name not need I shall:
One, shrewdly tossed, leaudly glossed has
Many Greek comedies: and by that mean
In that tongue good, in Latin marred clean.
'Twas he who but ere-while presented you
Menanders Phas^^. to name it is enough:
But in the Treasure, there you saw him show
rare work emanship, exceeding his rich stuff.
One man another for found gold did sue:
(Our Orators are but a glimmering snuff
To this bright Poets shining Oratory.)
Now in that case iudiciously he wrought
The per^^e at the bar, then defensorie,
To plead first, for the gold inquestion brought;
Before the plaintiff vrgd his injury;
or reason showed why he by action sought
Recovery of that gold: or how the same
into the comb of his dead father came.
I wish him henceforth, he himself not flatter;
Or think (his plays being passd) he stands secure
This will be unsafe refuge for the matter
I have against him: which (I him assure)
Is kept in store: and (cease he not to scatter
His tales abroad our scandal to procure;
As he begins; and leave to urge us on)
Yet hull t shall be produced to public view.
This Eunuch now a foot for action
Being by the Aediles bought, he hard did sue.
To be at sight of the relation.
The Overseers come, the Actors drew
To the rehearsal. I beseech you now,
But hear, what he has challenged and how,
My man baules out in roar, a pilferer
No Poet has now tenderd you a play:
And yet in all the same, no one word neither
Of's own, for's money tenderd. Why, I pray?
Why out of Nauius, Plautus, (choose you whether)
All is purloind that you shall hear to day.
And going on, the envious point he plies;
That this is stale stuff in each author named:
That either of them in their Comedies
The soldier and flatterers part have framed:
And that both thence are hither brought he cries.
Which, if 't be such a fault as must be blamed;
Our Author says disknowing led him on:
No purposed filching practice thought upon.
That this is so, may by you straight be tried:
Menanders Flatterer has a Parasite,
Which Colax called is; there is beside
A braggart Soldier: that he did indite
Those personages thence is not denide,
To fill his Eunuch: but that he did wit The Eunuch was never before produced
in Latin.

That this had ever been the argument
Of Latin plays before he utterly
Denies. If this now be so insolent,
To assume the persons used formerly
By other Poets; why is suffrance lent
To frame a servant running hastily?
To fashion harlots wonton? matrons chaste?
Soldiers to vant? parasites cramming fast?
Why of false children are drabbes brought to bed?
Why the old Master cheated by his slave?
Why are not love, hate, jealousy yet dead?
There is no sentence (to conclude) we have,
Which has not formerly been uttered.
It is but reason therefore, if we crave
Notice be taken; and our course pardoned:
If what in precedent the ancients gave,
New Poets modestly have followed.
Pray lend your favor, and attentive ear;
That you our Eunuchs news may fully hear.
Act. 1.
Scen. 1.
Enter Phaedria and Parmeno. Phae. What should I then resolve on rot to go?
Not now at least, being so kindly sent to?
Or rather this way bend, my settled course,
Not to endure these scornful tricks of Whores?
She shut me out of doors; now sends for me.
Go? never I, should she sue earnestly.

Par. Sir, surely if you can do as you say,
Twere your most worthy, your most manly way.
But if beginning, you so go not one,
And faintly bearing loves assliction,
When you are not sought to, when you are at square
Shall then come creeping to her; and declare
Your ardent love, whose flames you cannot bear;
You are gone: shall be her pipe to play upon,
When you are sound at her devotion.
And therefore master timely yet consider,
That such a thing as holds in it neither
Reason, nor measure; such vniuly thing
Cannot be brought to reasons governing.
In love these vicious humors settled are;
Suspicious, wrongs, enmities, truces, war,
New league again: Now this uncertainty
To draw to certain, were like mystery,
As if one should a project venture on
To make a man mad with discretion.
And what you now here to your self in passion
Do utter, shall I brook this base queanes fashion?
Who hugges you would soldier? bars her door on me?
Not caring? I Will die first: she it shall see
What manner man she has to do withal.
These your high words, these hot terms tragical
With one false tear shall allay easily;
Which (rubbing of her eyes most pitifully)
She hardly shall force from'hem: and anon
You Will tender your own accusation,
And stoop to her set penance.

Phae. Oh my hard fate!
I clearly find my self unfortunate;
And her a wicked strumpet. I do fry
In flames of love to one I loathing fly:
Knowing and seeing fall; alive, awake:
Nor see my course.

Par. To what course should you take,
But seek to gain your liberty now lost,
At what low rate you may? if little cost
Will not procure it, then at the utmost price;
And do not vex your self.

Phae. That thy advise?


Par. If you be wise, and to loves misery
Ad not: what'thas, strive to bear moderately.
Enter Thais. But she comes forth; our householdes known decay.
For what we ought to have, she sweepes away.

Scen. 2.
Tha. VVoes me, I fear Phaedria has taken it hard
And worse then I did mean it, he was bard
His entrance here last day.

Phae. Oh Parmeno,
How I do shake and shudder every part
At sight of her.

Par. I pray Sir take good heart.
Approach that fire, you will be warmd thoroughly.

Tha. Who Is that? oh, were you my Phaedria so nigh?
Why staid you here? why entered not straight way?

Par. But nere a word of's shutting out last day.


Tha. Why art silent?


Phae. Yes indeed I confess
Your house is still open to my free access:
And I the fan'rite.

Tha. Pray no more of this.


Phae. Why no more of it? o, o, Thais, Thais,
I would our loves were like; that this might thee
equally trouble, as it troubles me;
Or that I could not weigh thy injury.

Tha. I prithee sweet heart Phaedria do not grieve
Troth it was not that I love any alive
More then thy self, I did it: but the case
(As things fell out) so to be carried was.

Par. Why, I believe her; as things came about,
The poor kind soul for mere love shut him out.

Tha. Say you so Parmeno? Leave that: and hear
Wherefore I now sent for you.

Phae. Well. I hear.


Tha. But pray say first, can this your man keep counsel?


Par. Who, I? exceeding well. But hear you Thais?
I pass my word to you, with this prouiso,
All truth I hear I hold in exlently:
If lie, or toy, or fable, out it goes:
I Am full of chinckes then, I leake every where:
If therefore you will have counsel kept, speak truth.

Tha. My mother borne at Samos, dwelt at Rhodes.


Par. This may be well conceald.


Tha. There a merchant
Bestowed a little girl upon my mother,
Stolen hence from Athens.

Phae. Was the child freeborne?


Tha. I think so; do not know the certainty.
Her self did tell father and mothers name;
Country or other signs to be known by.
She knew not; nor indeed was it possible
By reason of her tender age she should.
The Merchant thus much added, that he heard
The Pirates say of whom he bought the child,
That it was brought from Sunium. My mother
Having received it, bred it, taught it so
In every thing, as if it had been her own:
And indeed most reputed her my Sister.
Long after I left Rhodes, in company
Of a then stranger, whom alone I kept to,
And hither came. That stranger dying, gave
All the now goods unto me, which I have.

Par. Either of these is false, twill out.


Tha. Why so?


Par. Because that neither were you satisfied
With him alone, nor yet had all from him:
Good and great part of it, my Master brought you.

Tha. I grant thee but permit me to go on
Whither I aim. Since that, a soldier
Who had begun to love me, travailed
To Caria: after which I grew into
Acquaintance with your self. And you well know.
That I since then have held you inwardly:
Made you my bosoms only Secretary.

Phae. Neither will this be hushed by Parmeno.


Par. o do you make a doubt ont?


Tha. Pray attend.
My mother there at Rhodes deceased late;
Her covetous brother, heir to her estate,
Nothing the wench was fair, and skilled well
In Music; hoped her at good rate to sell:
So forth he brought her, sold her to my friend
Who then there was; and fully did intend
To give the maid to me: Yet nothing knew
Of all the passage I have told to you.
He coming home, and understanding too,
That in my love you likewise have to do,
He frames excuses to keep back the maid.
For (says he to me) could he get belief
That he in my account should be held chief,
And you put by? or stood he not afraid
I having got her from him, presently
Would then forsake him; he would give her me?
But this he doubts. Yet I do rather guess
He fancies her.

Phae. Has he yet done no more?


Tha. No surely: for my self have (Phaedria)
Upon that point sisted her narrowly.
For many reasons I desire to get her;
First for she is deemd my sister: then beside
That to her friends I may the maid deliver.
My self do here a lovely woman bide,
Having nor kinsemen here nor yet fast friend;
Wherefore I seek to win some Phaedria,
By this good turn, I to the wench intend.
For my more ready working, I do pray
Thy help dear heart. The manner of my plot
Is, by your free consent for some few days
He may enjoy my love. Answer you not?

Phae Oh woman wickedst of all thy race!
Should I reply ought to thy filthy doings?

Par. o our brave young Master! I commend him.
He'es vexed at length: now sir you are a man.

Phae. The issue of the tale I could not find:
Small girl stolen hence; my mammy as her own
Bred it; deemd sister; have a childing mind
To hea't; and to put it where it is known.
Whereto does this your tale now wheel about?
But that thou loust me less then yonder loute,
And jealous art thy sweet pigsme doos toute
On her, thee of his greazie grace cast out?

Tha. I jealous of it?


Phae. What else troubles thee?
Is he alone a giver? did ere see
My bounty slight or slack? when late you said
You had a great mind to an Aethiop maid;
Did not I, laying all else care aside,
Cast out for one? and Eunuch too beside
Thou wishedst; cause great Ladies have
Such creatures; I found one; yesterday gave
Twenty pounds for'hem. Now despised by thee,
I yet retain this in my memory:
For these my kindenesses thou slightes me.

Tha. Why speak you Phaedria in this angry manner?
Though I desire her, and think may obtain her
Best this way: rather yet then have a foe
Of you, I Will do as you will have me do.

Phae Would that word truly from thy heart were brought;
Rather then me thy foe if I but thought
That this was spoke without dissembling,
I could my self frame to bear any thing.

Par. How quickly one poor word has tamed him?


Tha. do I poor soul speak it dissemblingly?
What thing did you ere crave though reastingly
At my hand, but you had it? I of you
Cannot obtain leave for a day or two.

Phae If only two, and that if they prove not twenty.


Tha. Indeed but two, or --


Phae. Or I wait nothing.


Tha. Tshall be no more: pray yield this liberty.


Phae. Well: Thais I must do as you will have me.


Tha. Deservedly I love you.


Phae. It Is well done
I Will to the country, and there pine a lone
For these two tedious days: I am resolved so.
Thais must be obayd. You Parmeno
See those brought hither straight.

Par. Yes sir.


Phae. Thais
Farewell for two days.

Tha. And you Phaedria.
Command you all else?

Phae. What else should I say
With this same soldier present absent be:
Days nights thy love, fix thy desire on me:
Thy longings, dreams, thy hopes, delights, and mi^.
Fix upon me: be all with me: in fine
Be thy soul mine, as mine is truly thine.
Exeunt Phaedria and Parmeno.
Tha. Woes me; perhaps he hardly credits me,
But judges me by other wantons trade:
But I that best know my own priuitie,
Know I have now no kind of leazing made:
And that I love, no man more heartily
Then Phaedria here: and that what I have said
Or done, is only for to help the maid:
I hope I have well nigh discovered
Who is her brother: a young man well bred.
He promised to visit me this day.
I Will get me in, and for his coming stay:
Exit Thait
Acts. 2.
Scen. 1.
Enter Phaedria and Parmeno. Phae. AS I late bad, see those be hither brought.


Par. I will.


Phae. But carefully.


Par. It shall be done.


Phae, And speedily.


Par. I Warrant you.


Phae. Is this Sufficient?

Par. Good God* What need you ask so?
Would you could find some good commodity,
As easily as all this will be lost.

Phae. My self, to my self dearer, am lost too.
Do not so thwartly intertaine the charge.

Par. No: but will see it done. Would you ought else?


Phae. Grace this my present with what words thou can
And what thou can, disgrace my rival from her.

Par. I had thought o'that, though you had not
Mentiond it.

Phae. I Will to the country, and there keep.


Par. I Judge so.


Phae. But hear'st?


Par. What say y'?


Phae. Do judge I may fettle
There to abide without returning back,
For all the time of my enjoined penance?

Par. You? troth I think not: either I imagine
You Will pace again back to her presently;
Or want of sleepeith' night will force you hither,

Phae. I Will work to weariness, that I may force sleep.


Par. Put this into your task you will watch weary.


Phae. A way fool, thou talk idly Parmeno:
I sure must weed this my effeminate mind;
My self Louercoker. Can I not
(If need should be) for bear her company,
Yea, for three days together.

Par. Wonderful!
For three whole days? advise sir what you do.

Phae. The word shall stand.


Par. Oh you good gracious gods!
Exit Phaedria. What disease call you this? is it not strange
That none should know him the same thing to be,
That erst he was? who late more stayed then he?
More temperate? less vain? but who comes here?
Enter Gnato with Pamphila, and a waiting wends. How! troth us the soldiers
Parasite
Gnato; who with him brings the maid along.
As present unto Thais. Oh rare sight!
Sweet countenance! it is marle but I shall have
Course entertainment of her here to day
With my decrepit Eunuch. Why her face
Puts down the Mistress; Thais self does pass.

Scen. 2.
Gna. OH you immortal gods! how far one man
Outstrips another? and what difference is
Twixt men of brain, and fools? this argument
Comes to my mind on this occasion.
To day I met one, of my rank and place;
No niggard pinch-gut: but one, took delight
To havoc out his state in dainty morsels.
I note him rugged, nastie, drooping grown;
Beset with rags and age. Why how now fellow,
Say I to him, what does this dressing mean?
Marry, says he, poor creature having lost
All I enjoyed, see to what state I am driven?
Acquaintance, friends, all do abandon me.
Here I began (measuring my own estate)
To hold him in contempt; and school him thus:
What, idle drone, have thou so framed thy course
That no hope's left thee? have thou sent thy wits
After thy wealth? do not observe me
One of thine own rank and condition?
What clothing, coulor, neatness,, plight of body
Have I? have every thing though nothing have:
And naught possessing, yet do nothing want.
I but (sighs out my fellow) I poor caitise
Cannot endure to be a ieasting stock,
Nor suffer stripes for money. What, I prithe
(Reply I) should be gotten that way, think?
Thou art clean wide: in former times, of old,
Such kind of fellows, shifted out a living:
This a new way of birding found by me.
There are a sort of men that feign would show
To have rare parts; and yet are nothing so.
I follow these; to these my self apply;
Not to make them sport by my foolerie,
But my own sport of them I smile on these,
Withal admire their wits: what ere they please
To say I do commend it: if straight way
They do the very selfsame thing unsay,
I praise that too: ought say they, ought deny?
The same I say, deny for company.
In fine, I on my self impose this law:
Their humors at all hands to sooth and claw:
And this is now found the most thriuing way.

Par. Troth a fine fellow: he of fools mintes madmen.


Gna. While thus we talk, we reach to the market place:
The joyful Victlers haste to meet me there;
Fish-mungers, Butchers, Saulsagemakers, Cooks,
And Fishermen: people to whom I had been
both beneficial, while my state stood good;
And since it was sunk: and still advantage them.
These me salute, inuit me home to dine:
Do welcome me. The Hungerstarued fellow
I named, seeing the account men made of me,
And that I fared so well, so easily;
Humbly besought me he might learn the trade.
I bade him follow that if 't may be wrought,
Lake as professed Philosophers have sought
To keep their names up in their sectaries,
According to their doctrines qualities:
Epicures, Cynickes, Stoickes, Platonickes:
So these my followers be styled Gnatonickes.

Par. Do you not note what ease and trusting to
Other men's roast, may work a man to do?

Gna. Yet why thus loyter I, and not convey
This maid to Thais; and her further pray
To come to supper? but see Parmeno
The soldiers Riuals servant, at her door.
He Is melancholy: all is well. Sure the folk here
Are frostie witted: I am now determind.
To play upon the fool.

Par. By this their gift
They think that Thais now 's their own cocke-sure.

Gnat. Gnato does greet his chief friend Parmeno.
With wishes of much health. What do man?

Par. Stand.


Gna. I see it, but feast ought here does trouble thee?


Par. Yes, thee.


Gna. I do believe it; but ought else?


Par. Why askst?


Gna. Because y' are sad.


Par. Not I truly.


Gna. No, be not. But what thinks thou of this maid?


Par. Thus you now mean, that we are cashierd hence,
Las, all things fusser intercourse of change.

Gna. Parm'no: for these six whole months together.
I Will set thee at rest from trudging up and down
Or watching to day break: make I thee happy?

Par. Me? wounder sully!


Gna. So I use my friends.


Par. I do commend you for it.


Gna. I detain you:
Perhaps you were to go some whither else.

Par. No whither, I.


Gna. Then I pray a little
Lend me your furtherance: work my entrance here.

Par. Well sir go on. Your passage now lies saire
By reason of this maid you bring with you.

Gna. Would ye have any called to you out of the house?

Exit Gnato and Pamphila.
Par. Let but two days be passed over once;
And you that have the happy readiness
With your least singer now to open the doors,
I Will make you many a time hereafter knock
And kick your heels against'hem to no purpose
Enter Gnato.
Gna. What do you still attend here Parmeno?
Pray, are you placed there sentinel, to watch
Least any private messenger should run
Between the soldier and Thais hither.
Exit Gnato again.
Par. Conceitedly! but indeed they must be
Things extraordinary, that may please Enter Chaerea.
The soldier. But my Masters younger son
I spy a coming hither: I do marvel
What it is has drawn him out of the Pyreum:
For there at this time he is public Custos.
It Is not for nothing. And he com's in haste:
And (why God knows) his eyes about doos cast.

Scen. 3.
Chae. I Am undone she is no where to be seen:
And I that lost sight of her am lost too.
Where may I search? where hunt? whom ask? what way
Take? I have no direction; but I have this hope left
Where ere she be, she cannot be long hid.
Beautiful face! hence forward I do blot
Out of the table of my fantasy
All other women: and do fall to loath
These common beauties.

Par. Mark this yonker too?
I know not what he talks to himself of love.
Oh my most unfortunate old master!
Why this is such a hotspurre, if he take
To wenching once, you will think his brothers course
mere tricks and gambads in comparison
Of what his furious rage will venture on.

Chae. Oh all you gods and goddesses confound
That same old dotaid stayed me on my way.
Lee them plague me too, that did deigne to stay:
And further would not slight him. But behold
Here Is Parmeno: well met.

Par. Why are you sad?
Or about what so earnest? whither going?

Chae. Troth I not know, nor whither, nor bout what;
I am so utterly beside my self.

Par. Why how comes this?


Chae. I am in love man.


Par. How?


Chae. Now Parmeno make proof, what dwells in thee.
Thou know thou oftentimes have promised me,
Bidding me think of something I desired;
And thou would show how thou could pleasure me.
And this thou offerdst, when I secretly
Brought to the seller all our victuals to thee.

Par. Peace idlesbee


Chae. Now on my part it is found
What I desire: let me thy promise find.
Besides it is an action of that value,
Whereon thou may spend thy best sweat and labor.
This wench is nothing like our City Mammats,
Whom their mothers strive to make low shoulderd;
And lace hard in, to make 'hem appear slender;
If any grow a little fleshlier
Sh's termed a champion; straightway dieted:
That be they of natural temper ere so good,
They tanner 'hem to form of reeds or rushes:
And therefore they are made much on.

Par. What on yours?


Chae. Face af a rare proportion.


Par. Excellent!


Chae. Color her own plumpe body; full of mettle.


Par. Her years?


Chae. About sixteen.


Par. The very prime.


Chae. Procure her me by force stelth, or entreaty;
I weigh not which way, so I may ento, her.

Par. Of what condition is she?


Chae. Troth I know not.


Par Of whence.


Cha Nor that.


Par. Where dwells she?


Chae. As little, that.


Par. Where saw you her?


Chae. Passing a long the street.


Par. How lost?


Chae. That was chafing with my self
Tust now as I came hither: neither think
There Is any living on, to whom good happes
Offering well at first, do end more thwartly.

Par. What mischief has falue out?


Chae. Oh me accursed!


Par. Why, what is the matter?


Chae. Ask thou? know thou not.
My fathers kinsman, Archidemides?
A man much of his years?

Par. What else?


Chae. Whilst I
Follow the maiden, he comes just upon me.

Par. Unseasonably of my word.


Chae. Nay verily
Vnluckely. The word unseasonable
Fits other chances better Parmeno.
I may swear safe, this six or seven months
last past, I nere happend to see the man;
But now when least I would, or had less need.
Seems it not strange, how think thou?

Par. Yes, y' faith.


Chae. As distant as he was he huddled to me,
Bow-bent, palsey-handed, blabber-lipt, cough-strangled:
Ho, ho, stay, Chaerea (says he) Chaerea stay;
Chaerea to thee I speak: knows thou my errand?
What is it, say I to him? marry -- marry --
And half an hour after grunties to me
I have a trial to be heard to morrow --
And what of that, say I? he answers me
see that thou tell thy father carefully,
That he remember to be early ready
To plead my cause. This our dialogisme
Took up an hour of time, I asked what else?
No more sares he. I left him; looking backward
To spy the maid, she ith mean time had turned
down this way to our street.

Par. It Is ten to one
But he means her, that was now brought to Thais.

Chae. When I come hither, she is not to be seen.


Par. Did any company attend the wench?


Chae. Yes, a Parasite and a maid servant.


Par. It Is she Cast of your care: all now is quiet.


Chae. Thou talkest from the purpose.


Par. Nay, but mind the business now in hand:


Chae. Say do know her? or saw her?


Par. Saw, know her, know where she is?


Chae. Oh my sweet Parmeno know her?


Par. I do know her.


Chae. And where she is?


Par. Here, brought to the harlot Thais,
And given her for a gift.

Chae. Who is so potent
To give such gifts?

Par. Thraso the soldier,
Your brother Phaedria's rival.

Chae. Thou declar'st
But a hard case my brother stands in then.

Par. Yould say so indeed, if you had seen the present Which he prouides to
send in counterpoise.


Chae. Prithe, what is it?


Par. An Eunuch.


Chae. What, that driule,
That filthy fellow he brought yesterday?
The old man-woman?

Par. I, the very same.


Chae. Hele be coited out of doors with his present.
But I nere knew, this Thais was our neighbor

Par. She has not long been.


Chae. I Am a fellow of nothing.
Strange, I should nere have seen her? but do hear?
Is she so fair, as she is reported for?

Par. Yes sine.


Chae. But not to be compared to mine?


Par. It Is otherwise.


Chae. I prithe Parmeno
Work that I may obtain her.

Par. I Will see toot:
I Will study for your furtherance and help. Command you me ought else?

Chae. Whether now go thou?


Par. Home; to convey those servants unto Thais.
As late your brother chargd me.

Chae. Oh blessed Eunuch!
Who is to be there placed in that house.

Par. Wherein so blessed


Chae. Wherein, demandest thou?
That ever has so fair a fellow servant
To look on; talk to: under the same roof
Be still with her; sometimes take meals with her?
Sometimes sleep nigh her?

Par. What if now your self
May be made happy?

Chae. Wherein Parmeno?


Par. Say. Tak's clothes

Chae. His clothes? what thence Will follow?


Par. I Will lead y' in 's stead.


Chae. I note.


Par. I Will say y' are he.


Chae. I apprehend thee


Par. You may then enjoy
The benefits, which now you said he should;
be present, eat, touch, play, and lie close by her:
Seeing (...) 'hem do know you, what you are.
Beside your face and years are such, you may
Pass easily for an Eunuch.

Chae. Excellent.
I never in my lise heard better counsel.
Let Us in; and help to dress me presently.
Lead me, carry me, with all speed thou can.

Par. What mean? troth I but reasted.


Chae. Thou wast's time in prating.


Par. I have cast my self away.
What have I done wretch? whither thrust you me?
Will you now force me? Sir I warn you stay.

Chae. Let Us go.


Par. Persist you?


Chae. I am fully bent toot.


Par. Foresee, if th'course be not to hot for us.


Chae. It Is not I warrant thee, let us on.


Par. I, but
This bean will sure be threshed on my shoulders.
Oh it is a heinous practice we attempt.

Chae. A hamous sigge: is that a heinous practice,
If I be brought in a baudie house,
And there return their own upon these gibets
And plagues of men? which always hold om youth
In such contempt, and always work our torment?
If I do now put a like trick upon 'hem,
As we by them are still guld? or else rather
Is It fit, we still take their wrongs patiently?
I say it is fit I put the jest upon her.
Who Will blame me that shall hear on it? every man
Will say, I fitted 'hem a peniworth

Par. What means all this? If you be so resolved
You may go on. But pray you sir hereafter
Lay not the fault on me.

Chae. I will not.


Par. You Command me then?


Chae. Command, charge and compel.


Par. I Will nere (decline then) your authority.
Exeunt Parmeno and Chaerea. Follow.

Chae The powers divine prosper our course.


Act. 3.
Scen. 1.
Enter Thraso, and Gnato. Thr. DId Thais (say thou) give me such great
thanks?


Gna. Huge thanks sir.


Thr. And glad say? ha?


Gna. Not so much for the gifts worth, as that it came From you: that is her
hearts pride sir.

Enter Parmeno and keep aloof.
Par. I come forth to see
How time serves for conueiance of my present.
But lo the soldier.

Thr. My kind destenie
Sure of a child bestowed this gift upon me,
That all I do becomes most acceptable.

Gna. Truly I note so much.


Thr. The King himself
Still used to give me singular great thanks
For all I did; to other men not so.

Gna. The man that has brain in him does derive
Often times the glory earned by others sweat
Upon himself: a thing that is rife in you.

Thr. Thou have it.


Gna. Therefore the King still wore you --


Thra. I,


Gna. In his eye.


Thra. True: gave the oversight
Of all his forces, all his plots to me.

Gna. Rare!


Thr. Then, if weariness at any time
Of men, or tediousness of business
Possessed him; when he minded to be private,
Would -- as it were -- thou feelst me?

Gna. Yes when he would
Unload his mind -- as twere -- of care.

Thr. Yes, then
He would retire with me alone to banquet.

Gna. o strange! you do describe a rare choice King.


Thr. I, he is a man of very few men's stamp.


Gna. Rather of none's if he converse with you.


Thra. All men envied me; closely snapt at me;
I thus regard'hem; all (I say) bare me ill:
But one most deadly, whom the King had made
Orescer of his Indian Elephants.
He at a time being over sawsie with me,
What said I to him, take you boldness Strato,
Because you have command over the beasts?

Gna. So help me God, an exlent witty jest:
Oh singular! this was a wipe unto him.
Ah! and what he?

Thr. Struck dumb.


Gna. How could he choose?


Par. Your faith good gods! desperate fellow, caitife,
Churchrobber.

Thr. I but what think thou Gnato.
Of that same jest, wherewith I girded once
A youth of Rhodes being at dinner with me?
Did I nere tell't thee?

Gna. Never: I pray tell it.
I have heard it told above a thousand times.

Thr. This Rhodian I speak of, a raw young strippling
Sat once at banquet with me: when by chance
I had my harlot with me: This green nouice
Began to speak broad: how now impudence,
Say I to him, art thou thy self hare-haunched
And hunt'st for ven'son.

Gna. ha, ha, he.


Thra. How is it?


Gna. Conceited, clearly, smooth, not to be mended
For Gods love was it your jest? I thought it old.

Thr. Have heard it?


Gna. Often, abroad it bears the bell
For a prime witty one.

Thr. It Was mine.


Gna. Alas,
Rash headless youth.

Par. Now the gods confound thee.


Gna. For Gods sake what did he?


Thr. Blasted. All there
Were ready every man to burst with laughter:
And in conclusion all began now fear me.

Gna. I could not blame'hem.


Thr. But do hear were
Best I cleard my self to Thais, of this maid:
For that she stands in jealousy I love her?

Gna. At no hand: rather strive to increase her doubt.


Thr. Why?


Gna. Ask you? find you not, if any time
She do commend or mention Phaedria,
How it does vex you?

Thr. Yes.


Gna. To prevent that
This is your only remedy. When she
Names Phaedria to you, do you presently
Name Pamphila: if she at any time
Say, let us have home Phaedria to banquet,
Reply you, call in Pamphila to sing:
In fine, give like for like, to nettle her

Thr. I, if she loved me, this might further Gnato.


Gna. Seeing she expects and loves what you do give her,
She long since loves you; you have long since
Easily got the starte how you may grieve her.
She Will always stand in aw, least any time
Upon offense taken you will bestow elsewhere
That benefit, she now doos reap from you

Thr. It Is right thou say. Strange, 't came not to my Mind?


Gna. That is a jest indeed; because you bent not
Your mind out or else Thraso what rare strain
Had it produced, if minted in your brain.
Enter Thais and Pythias her maid, with other wenches attending.
Scen. 2.
Tha. ME thought, I ene now heard the soldiers tongue
See where he is: Thraso my friend, well met.

Thr. Oh my dear Thais, my delight, how do thou?
Do you a little love me for your Ministrell?

Par. What a sweet proper handsell has he given her
At the first onset.

Tha. Much for your deserving:


Gna. Then let us to supper. Why here stay you?


Par. Mark the other Wiseacre too. A man may judge
He was of a man's getting.

Tha. When you please,
I am in readiness.

Par. I Will go toward 'hem,
And make as if I now but new came forth.
Are you to go forth any whither Thais?

Par. o Parmeno, well done: yes indeed to day.
I am to go abroad.

Par. Pray whither?


Tha. See thou not
The man There?

Par. Yes, withal his presence irkes me.
Those presents from my Master Phaedria
Are ready when you please.

Thr. What stay we for?
Why ^et not hence?

Par. Pray sir grant truce a while,
I may surrender up some trifling presents, I also may
Imparle and treat with her.

Thr. Some goodly present
Sure: nothing like mine.

Par. The matter self will
Show that. Ho there, bid those two I gave in charge,
Come quickly forth. Enter Blackemore Wench and Eunuch.
Come you here forward. This same wench was brought
From Aethiopia.

Thr. Some three half penie purchase,


Gna. Scarce that.


Par. Where are you Dorus.
Come you hither. Here is an Eunuch for you: mark
How sweet faced, of what a blooming age.

Tha. Now
As God help me a handsome youth.

Par. What say
You to him Gnato? What fault find thou? or what
Objects thou Thraso? hushed both: sufficient
Commendation. Prove him in learning, song or
Wrestling: such knowledge fitteth free-horne youth to
Have, I Will make it clear appear he is perfect in.

Thr. For need, vnwarm'd with wine I could that Eunuch


Par. And he that sends you these, doos not require
That you should only live to pleasure him;
For his sake, bar all else your company;
Nor bragges his battles, nor shows forth his scarres;
Nor stands betwixt you and your benefit
As one doos, I could name: but at such times
When he may be injurious to none,
Your self disposed, and time convenient;
If then admitted, he rest's satisfied.

Thr. This shows he serves some poor and forlorn Master.


Gna. For no man sure that could procure another
Would endure this.

Par. Sir., hold thou thy peace,
Whom I do judge under all names of baseness:
For thou that fram'st thy self to claw that thing,
I think may feed on fire.

Thr. Do we yet go?


Tha. I Will have but in these first; and leave some charge
Among my servants, what I would have done;
And come out to you straight.

Thr. I Will depart hence.

Exit Thais with the Eunuch and blackmore Gnato do you stay for her.

Par. I, for it fits not
A general walk with his mistress in the streets.

Thr. What should I use a many words to thee?
Exit Parmeno Thou art much like thy Master.

Gna. Ha, Ha, he.


Thr. What is it thou laughst at?


Gna. That which now you said,
And the other jest broke on the Rhodian
Enter Thais Came to my mind: But Thais is come forth.

Thr. Run you before and get at home all ready.


Gna. Content.


Tha. You Pythias have a special care,
Exit Gnato. If Chremes chance to call here, you entreat him
To stay; if that he cannot fitly do,
That he would come again some other time:
If neither that he can, bring him to me.

Pyt. I will forsooth.


Tha. But what, what was it else
I was about to say? Oh, have a care
Unto the maiden, see you? and keep home.
Exit Pytheas into her Mistresses house.
Thr. Let Us go.


Tha. Wenches attend and follow me.

Exeunt Thraso, Thais and her train.
Scen. 3.
Enter Chremes. Chr. The more I do reuolue things in ^y mind
Still the more likely arguments, find
That Thais here aims some shrewd trick against me;
I see she works on me so cunningly.
When first she sent for me (if any one
should then have asked me the occasion
Of business twixt us twain, I knew not^^ng
To Answer) being come, with hammerit
She fashiond out pretenses of my stay^
She had performd religious rites that day
Unto the gods, and would communicate
A Weighty secret to me: (I then straight
Grew jealous, all this was some cunning strain^,
She fits down by me; cause of talk does frame
I seeming cold, her speech to this point came,
How long 'twas since my Parents had been dead
Long since I told her: then she questioned
If I had land at Sunium? and how far
It lay from sea? this (I think) likes her:
She hopes to work it from me. at the last
She drew to this, if I had no young sister
From that place stolen a many years now past?
Who then was with her at the time we mist her?
What things she had about her? or if any
Could know her? why should she these questions move
unless (as is the impudence of many)
She feign her self would that my sister prove,
Of old so young hence lost? should she survive,
Her years at most reach not above sixteen;
Thais is elder then my self, I ween.
She craved me again come to her: let her drive
The matter, and her business to some head;
Or leave this sending: i will not be troubled,
To listen her third errand. Ho, within --
Enter Pythias to her Misteresses door.
Pyth. Who Is that?


Chr. One Chremes.


Pyth. Oh fine little pleasant pa^e.


Chr. I still affirm, I am laid for to be caught.


Pyth. Thais did earnestly request you would
Return to morrow.

Chr. I go into the Country.


Pyth. Pray y'


Chr. I say I cannot.


Pyth. Then remain here
A while till she come back.

Chr. No by no means.


Pyth. Why my kind Chremes?


Chr. Hence you harlotrie


Pyth. If such be your determination,
I pray step over to her where she is.

Chre. I care not if I do.


Pyth. Darias go straight
And leads is gentleman to his soldiers.
Pythias ^^turnes into her Mistresses house. Dorias enters and go away with
Chremes.
Scen. 4.
Enter Antipho. Ant. SOme youths of us agreed on yesterday
A feast in Common among us (...) Chaerea
We made our Steward, rings were given, time, place
Set down; time's past, where it appointed was
Nothing is ready, he not to be seen,
I know not what to say out, what to ween.
Now all the rest have laid the task on me
To seek him; therefore now I Will first go see
If he be gotten home. But who is that
Comes out of Thais house? is it he or not?
Enter Char. in the Eunuchs clothes! It Is he. What creature's he become? what
means
This his attire? what evil bodes his staring?
I cannot enough wonder, or conjecture.
But what so ere it be, I Will aloof stand;
And angle for the secret now in hand.

Scen. 5.
Chae. IS none about the doors? Not one. Doos none
come yet behind me neither? No not one.
May I not now at pleasure vent my joy?
Oh Jupiter! now truly is the time
I easily could brook to part with life:
Least some ensuing wretchedness thereof
Should hap to sour my present happiness.
No curious inquisitor now meet me?
That up and down would hant me, weary me,
Kill me with tedious questions, why I skippe thus?
Why am so iocund? Whither I am going?
Or whence do come? in what place got these clothes?
What is my aim? whither I Am mad or sober?

Ant. I Will to him, and obtain the thanks of him
He so desires to part with. Chaerea,
Why in such rapture man! whence this attire?
Why art so pleasant? or what aymst thou at?
Art in thy wits? Why starest thou so upon me?
Why speak not?

Chae. Oh happy day? o friend well met.
There Is no man living, I would rather see
At this time then thy self.

Ant. I prithee, say
What is the matter!

Chae. Nay truly I pray thee
Give me the hearing. Know thou not her here
My brother is in love withal?

Ant. Yes Thais:
As I do guess.

Chae. The same.


Ant. So I remember.


Chae. A certain maid was given her to day.
What need I blazon or set out to thee
This maidens matchelesse beauty, Anripho?
Thou know me choice in such disciphering.
She did inflame my heart.

Ant. What say?


Chae. thou wilt say
She from the whole sex bears the Bell away,
If ever thou shall see her. What need words?
I began to love her: by good chance there was
At home an Eunuch which my brother had
bought for this Thais, not then sent to her.
Here our man Parmeno an odd inckling gave me
Of a device, which quickly I laid hold on.

Ant. What


Chae. If you would silent keep, you would
Know sooner.
First to change clothes with him, then cause my self
To be conveyed for him.

Ant. What for the Eunuch?


Chae. Yes.


Ant. What advantage should you win thereby?


Chae. Make then a question? I should see, should hear,
Should be with her I loved, Antipho.
Was it a slight cause, or a trifling reason?
I was brought to her; when she had received me
She gladly led me home: commits the maid --

Ant. To whom? To thee?


Chae. To me.


Ant. a fine safeguard.


Chae. She charge me that no man come to her;
Commands me further, I not start from her;
But that alone I keep with her alone,
In a close chamber: I say, yes forsooth;
Upon the ground looking demurely.

Ant. Gaitise.


Chae. I am to go now forth (says she) to banquet,
And with her leads along her maiden servants;
(A few young nouice wenches left behind
To attend upon the maid) these presently
Prepare for her to Bathe. I wish them haste
While they make things in readiness, the maid
Sits in a closet, looking on a table:
Wherein was painted, how that Jupiter
Once ray'nd in Danaes lap a golden showie.
I looked upon the piece too: and because
He had in former times played the like prankt,
My spirits were the more encouraged:
In that a God had taken human shape,
And in gold dew dropping himself through tiles
Had closely, finely, wantond with his lemman
And which of th'Gods had done't? matie the same
Who shakes with thunder heavens high arched frame
Should I wormeling (then) make scruple of it?
I did not, but embraced it willingly.
When this I cast in mind, the maid mean while
Is called for in, to wash: goes, bathes, returns;
And afterward they lay her in her bed:
I waiting stand if they'ld bid me do ought.
One comes to me, and says, you sir Dorus
Take you this fan; and thus fan wind upon her^
When we have washed, you (if you will) wash too.
I take it with sad countenance.

Ant. At that time
I would have seen that bashful face of thine
How thou great Ass did stand holding a fan

Chae She had scarce spoken it, when all together
I surring out of the room, depart to Bathe;
And make such noise, as servants commonly
Are went to do, when Masters are from home
Mean while a flumber seases on the maid.
I privily (thus) on the fannes side do leere,
And look about too, if all else be clear:
I saw all safe, and hoited fast the door.

Ant. What then?


Chae. What then fool?


Ant. I confess it.


Chae. Should I let slip such opportunity,
So profferd, short, wished and not hoped for?
I had been then indeed such as I showed for.

Ant. It Is true thou say. But in the mean while what is done
Cconcerning our repast?

Chae why all is ready.


Ant. Thou art careful: where? at your house?


Chae. No at Discus
Our free-mans.

Ant. It Is far hence, let us make more haste
Go shift your clothes.

Chae. Where should I go to shift?
I Am lost; from whom I stand as banished;
I doubt my brother may be now within:
Fear also, least my father be returned
Out of the country.

Ant. Go we to our house,
That Is the next place, where you may shift your self.

Chae. The advice is good, lets go: withal I mind
To take thy counsel, how I may my love
Further enjoy.

Ant. Content, our wits will prove.

Exeunt Chae. and Antipho.
Act. 4.
Scen. 1.
Enter Dorias. Dor. SO help me God, I somewhat doubt poor creature
By things I saw, least the enraged soldier
Should raise some broile; and do my Mistress wrong.
For presently as soon as Chremes came
The late given young maids brother; she requests
The soldier, he would cause him be called in:
He grew in sum, but yet durst not deny her.
She further moves his inuitation
Unto their banquet: (this my Mistress did
To keep him there; because as yet the time
Served not to tell him things concerned his sister.
The soldier willd him sit; yet grumblingly.
He placed, my mistress frames discourse to him:
The soldier thought a rival had been brought
Under his nose, and minding to cry quittance
Called out, ho, one of you fetch Pamphila
To sing to us; Thais cries out, at no hand:
What her to a banquet? He would have it so.
Hence grew the matter to a down right braule:
My mistress privily took of her jewels,
And gave 'hem me in secret to bring thence.
This is a certain sign, whereby I know
Shee'^ slip thence, when she spies fit time thereto
Manet Dorias.
Scen. 2.
Enter Phadria. Phae. AS I upon my journey passing was,
A thronging troop of busy thoughts do press
Into my mind; as ought it comes to pass
To men whose souls some trouble seized has:
And every thing in the worse sense I guess.
What need much talk? while these dumpes me possess
Vnheeded I was passed the town I meant to,
And was gonne far beyond it; when at last
Perceauing it I back returned fast:
And being scarce come unto the torn which went to
The town, there staid; and in my mind thus cast,
Two whole days must I this place be pent to
Alone without her? Why is that such a matter?
It Is nothing: Nothing? What, if not come at her
To touch her? must I yet be barred her sight?
If that be crossed, is this to be lost quite?
To climb the lowest, first step of loves lather
Were somewhat yet. But why in such affright
Enter Pythias. Comes Pythias forth? and why so hastily?
Manet Phaedria.
Scen. 3.
Pyth. Wretch that I am, where shall I find this fellow?
Where this ungodly wicked fellow find?
That he should dare attempt a piece of work
So monstrous, so audacious!

Phae I am lost,
And doubt what this may mean.

Pyth. Besides, yet further
The vilaine not alone defiled the maid;
But rent the poor souls linen, tore her hair.

Phae. How Is this?


Pyth. Whom if I now could light upon,
How I would fly upon the eyes of the witch?

Phae. I cannot guess what coile has here besalne
Since my departure. I Will go to her. How now?
What is the matter? why such haste? Who is it
Pythias, thou lookst for thus.

Pyth. Oh Phaedria,
Whom seek I? Sir I pray you get you hence
Where you deserve, with your conceited presents.

Phae. What may this mean?


Pyth. Ask you? what fine Eunuch
Was that you sent? what stir has he here made us?
H'has ravished the young maid, the soldier
Bestowed upon my Mistress.

Phae. Ha! what this?


Pyth. I am undone.


Phae. Thou art drunk.


Pyth. I would
To God that all that hate me, were as drunk as I am.
Dorias. For Gods love Pythias what strange hap was this?

Phae. Thou Art mad. How could an Eunuch do such things?


Pyth. I know not what he was, but what h'has done
The case it self does show. The wench she weeps.
And when one asks her, dare not utter why.
The honest fellow too's not to be found.
Beside I fear, he is run away with somewhat.

Phae. You make me wonder, where the lazy bones
Should have conueid himself: unless penhaps
He be retired back to our house again.

Pyth. Pray, see if he be there.


Phae. You shall know straight.


Dorias. I am to seek, good God sweet Pythias
I have not heard so strange and accident.

Pyth. Yes, I had heard that they loved woman
Dearly, but could do nothing. And forgetful beast
I never thought ont: else I had mewd him up,
And nere h'trusted her unto his keeping.

Scen. 4.
Enter Phaedria haling out of doors Dorus the Eunuch in Chaereas apparel.
Phae. COme out o'doores mischieuos rogue; come out.
what draw you backward? come forth runaway
Ill purchased commodity come forth.

Dorus. For Gods sake sir.


Phae. Mark how the Hangman
Wries his choppes a'toneside? sir, what is the scope
Of this your coming back? the mystery
Of this your changing clothes? your answer sirrah?
If I had stayed nere so little Pithias,
I had not found him there: he had prepared
Ready for packing.

Pyth. Have you got him then?


Phae. Got him? what else?


Pyth. Upon my faith that is well.


Doras. I troth that is passing well.


Pyth. Where is he?
Phae ask?
See him not?

Pyth. See pray? whom?


Phae. Why this.


Pyth. Wha'ts he?


Phae. He that this day was brought you.


Pyth. None of us
Ere saw this fellow, till now Phadria.

Phae. Nere saw?


Pyth. for Gods love. (Phaedria) did you
Think,
That this was brought.

Phae. Yes for I had no other.


Pyth. Fie, there is between 'hem no comparison.
That was a fair and comely vizadgd youth.

Phae. You thought so then cause he had other clothes on:
Those off, you think him now ill favored.

Pyth. Au! pray sir cease: as if the difference.
Were small between 'hem? here to day was brought
(Phaedria) a youth you would ha'longd to look on:
This an old, creping, dreaming, dropsy, dotard;
Complexiond like a Weazell.

Phae. How, how this?
Chrochets? you make me searse know what I do.
Sirrah come near me did not I buy you?

Dorus. Yes forsooth.


Pyth. Now command him answer me.


Phae. Put forth your question.

Pyth. came thou here to day?
You see he does deny it: but the other
Came to us, hither brought by Parmeno,
Some sixteen years of age.

Phae. Resolve me this;
First, by what means got you the clothes you wear?
Silent? monster of men, speakst not? Dorus. Chaerea
Came home.

Pyth. My brother?


Dorus. Yes.


Phae. When?


Dor. But this day.


Phae. How long since?


Dorus. Even now.


Phae And
Who was with him?

Dorus. Parmeno


Phae. Had thou ever before seen him?


Dorus. No, nor yet ere before had heard him named.


Phae. How then did know him to have bin my brother
Dorus. Parmeno said so. He gave me these clothes.

Phae. I Am lost.


Dorus. himself withal straight put on
Mine.

Pyth. You think me now not drunk; nor that I have li'd.
It Is now most clear the poor Wench is deflour'd.

Phae. Fie beast, beleeu'st him?


Pyth. What need I
Believe him?
The matter self proclaims it.

Phae. sirrah you,
Come hither (here you) yet a little nearer:
So, It Is well. Tell me again, did Chaerea
Take your clothes.

Dorus. Yes.


Phae. And put 'hem on himself?


Dorus. Yes


Phae. And was brought for you to Thais?


Dorus. Yes sir.


Phae. Great Jupiter! oh wicked shameless fellow


Pyth. Woes me; you scarce believe yet we a^^ abu'sd.


Phae. It Is marle now, but thou credit's what he says?
I Am at my wits end -- Sirrah do thou hear?
(Deni't being askd again) can I no way
Work a truth from thee? ha? did see my brother?

Dorus. Not I intruth.


Phae. No truth, I see, vnforc'd
Can be got from him. Come, come in with me.
Now say things straight deny 'hem? (beg of me.)

Dorus. For Gods sake sit


Phae. Will you get in? Dorus
Hoy hey.

Phae I know no means else how to shift away.
I stand in a fair case, if such a knave
As thou, may thus befoole me at his pleasure.
(Exit. Phaedria and Dorus.
Pyth. I know sure as I lieue, 't was Parmeno.
Complotted this.

Dorias. Yes doubtless.


Pyth Ere I sleep
I Will find a mean how to cry quittance with him.
But what think best we should do, Dorias?

Dorias. Touching the wenchd'ye mean.


Pyth. Yes, it't be best
To utter or conceal't. Dorias If you be wise,
Know ought, know naught, touching the Eunuch self,
Or her abuse: so shall you keep from blame;
And do her a good turn. You may say only,
Dorus is run away.

Pyth. I Will eene do so.

Enter Chremes.
Dorus. But see I not Chremes vonder? Thais straight
Will be here with us.

Pyth. Wherefore think you so?


Dorias. Because when I came thence, they grew to brall.


Pyth. Bear in the jewels: I Will of him learn all.

Exit Dorias.
Chr. I, I, assure as heaven, I was but played on.
The wine ore wrought me: yet while I was sitting
Me thought I was excedingly well temperd,
but rising found both feet and brains to sail

Pyth. Chremes. Chr. Who Is that? Oh Pythias how much
Fairer
Now seemst thou then crewhile.

Pyth. You in good sooth
Are pleasanter by saire.

Chr. It Is true and old,
Spare wine and dainties, sportfull lusts grows cold.
Is It long, since Thais came?

Pyth. Has she already
Then left the soldier?

Chr. oh yes long age.
And there has been great falling out between 'hem.

Pyth. Did she say nothing, you should follow her?


Chr. Nothing, but at her parting winkd on me.


Pyth. What, was not that sufficient Item man.


Chr. I knew not that the meant so much, but that
The soldier helpd my dull conceiving her;
Enter Thais. For out o'doores he thrust me: see where she is
I marvel where it was, I over went her.

Scen. 6.
Thais I guess he will be here straight, with intent
To take her from me; let him come on then:
But if he lay on little singer on her,
I Will claw his eyes out. I can so far bear
His fopperies, and swollen bumbasted words
Whilst that they be but words: come they to deeds once,
I Will ferrit him.

Chr. I was here long since Thais.


Thais. Oh Chremes, I lookd for you. Know you not
That all this brabble has been about you?

Chr. Me? how? as if I broacht it?


Tha. Yes because
While I do seek to render to your hands
Your long lost sister, this insued thereon.

Chr. Where Is that my sister?


Tha. Here at home with ^e.


Chr. Ha!


Tha. Why what is the matter? Shee'has been
Brought up
As fits her self and you.

Chr. What is it you say?


Thais. That which is truth: freely give her you.
Demanding nothing at your hands for her.

Chr. I give and owe you Thais many thanks
As you have well deserved.

Tha. But beware
Chremes, you lose her not, ere you receive her:
For this is she the soldier comes to get
By maine force from me. Pythias get you in,
And fetch the little cofer with the tokens^

Chr. Do you see him coming Thais?


Pyth. Mistress
Where is it?

Tha. Ith'leatherne hamper: Makst thou no more haste queen?


Chr. What forces dooes he bring with him? oh me.

Exit Pythias.
Tha. Are you afraid friend?


Chr A way, I afraid?
No man a live less.

Tha. I it is fit you be not.


Chr. T'sh, I do doubt what man you take me for.


Tha. No, but consider, he you are to deal with
Is a mere stranger, of less means, less known,
Less friended here then you.

Chr. All this I know:
But yet it is folly to admit an evil
Which may be well prevented. I had rather,
We seek aforehand to prevent a wrong,
Then to return a suffered injury.
Do you get in; and then make fast your doors;
Whilst I haste over to the market place.
I will have some assistants by, in the tumult.

Tha. Stay.


Chr. It Is the safest course.


Tha. Pray stay.


Chr. Pray leave.
I Will be here straight again.

Tha. Chremes this needs not,
Acquaint him only that she is your sister,
Enter Pythias with a Coffer. Which you a small girl lost; and now do know her:
Show him the proving tokens.

Pyth. Here they are.


Tha. Here take 'hem, if he offer violence,
Summon him to the law: conceive you me?

Chr. Yes very well.


Tha. See you utter it with courage.


Chr. I warrant you.


Tha. Pull up your cloak there, to you.
I Am in a fair case: why, this man I make
My Champion, needs another him to back.

Scen. 7.
Enter Traso, Gnato, Sanga, with three others. Thra. Brook such a base
assront? I Will die first, Gnato.
Simatio, Donax, and Syriscus follow:
The house I Will first dismantle --

Gna. Aright course.


Thra. Take thence the maid my hostage --


Gna. Very Good.


Thra. Make Thais feel my vengeance --


Gna. Excellent.


Thra. Donax come you here hither with your leauer,
Into the heart of my battalion:
Simatio fall you there on the left winge.
Wheel you about Syriscus to the right.
Draw out some more: where is Sanga the Centurion
With His band of the black guard.

Sang. Here ready Captain.


Thra. Where are thy arms drone? will thou enter fight
With thy moppe there? that thou have brought it hither?

Sang. sir I but know the courage of my Chiestaine,
Or soldiers fury, that the day would cost
Much blood shed, brought it here to cleanse the gore.

Thra. Where are the rest there?


San. what (a murraine) rest?
Samnio alone keeps home, to look to the house.

Thra. Do you rank these; I Will march behind the Van.


Gna. Note sirs his wisdom! having ranked the rest,
Himself retireth to safe place for shelter.

Thr. 'Twas Pyrthus usual practice.


Chr. Thais, see you
What he intends? that sure's the safest way,
To lock up doors.

Tha. This fellow (lassure thee)
Thou deem'st a man of spirit is a gull;
A pure great goosecappe: nere make doubt of him.

Thra. What thinks thou Gnato.


Gna. I could wish you had
A sling stone here, to gall 'hem a loose off:
They'ld straight forsake their Castle.

Thra But I see
Thais her self.

Gna. Let Us straight rush in upon them.


Thra. Forbear: A discreet general should cast
To win his aims by treaty, ere he put
The hazard unto battle. How do know
But she may do my biddings, vncompell'd?

Gna. Oh you good Gods! what it is to be distreeter
I nere come to you, but I do depart
Much betterd in my judgment.

Thra. Thais, first
Answer me this, when I bestowd on you,
The maid, assure you not your company
To me for certain days.

Tha. Well, what o'that?


Thra. Ask thou what? that broughst before mine eyes
Thy lover? (what have thou to do with him?)
And with him sneak'st from me?

Tha. It was my pleasure.


Thra. Restore now therefore Pamphila, unless
You Will have me force her from you.

Chr. How, to thee
Restore her? or dare thou lay hands on her?
Thou? of all --

Gna. Have care good sir, you know not
What kind of man you speak so grossly to.

Chr. Will you get hence? know you how stands your case?
If you disturb us here, I Will give you cause
To think upon this time, this place, and me:
Whilst you have day to live;

Gna. I pity you,
That seek to make so great a man your so.

Chr. I Will crack your crown sir if you get not hence.


Gna. How whelpe, what say?


Thr. Why what art thou?
What mean?
What business have thou with her?

Chr. Thou shall know
First I affirm the maiden is free borne.

Thr. How?


Chr. Free of Athens.


Thra. Hoida!


Chr. And my sister.
I therefore now forwarne thee soldier,
Thou use no force against her. Thais, He go
And fetch her Nurse Sophrona hither straight;
And show her these remembrances.

Thra. Do thou
Forewarne me that I should not touch my own?

Chr. I say I do forewarne thee.


Gna. Here you sir,
You have good action of deceit against him.

Chr. Said I enough?


Thra. Say you so Thais too?

Exit Chremes.
Tha. Seek one to answer.


Thra. What Is our course
Now Gnato?
Exit Thais.
Gna. Why let us retreat: she will straight come after you,
Crouching and kneeling.

Thra. Think so?


Gna. Nay
That Is sure.
I am acquainted with these women's humors:
Sue, they are squeamish; if you keep off, they sue.

Thra. Thou deem'st aright.


Gna. Shall I dismiss the
Army?

Thra. I, when thou please.


Gna. Sanga, as fits good soldiers,
Cast now your eyes back on the household chimnels

Sang. My mind was long ago among the platters


Gna. Thou Art careful,


Thra. All follow me this way in.

Exeunt all.
Act. 5.
Scen. 1.
Enter Thais and Pythias. Tha. COntinuest drabbe to talk in riddles to me?
I know, I know not, heard so, he is gone,
I was not by --. Will thou not in plain terms
Tell me the matter? the maids clothes are torn,
She weeps and silent keeps, the Eunuch gone.
Why this? what is chanced? speak not?

Pyth. Woes me
Poor soul!
What should I say? they say he was no Eunuch.

Tha. who then?


Pyth. This Chaerea here.


Tha. which Chaerea?


Pyth. This younger brother unto Phaedria.


Tha. What say witch?


Pyth. I have found it certain so.


Tha. Why what a gods name had he here to do?
Or why was hither brought?

Pyth. I cannot tell,
But that I guess he loved Pamphila.

Tha. I find my self accursed wretch undone,
If this be true thou vtterst. Is It for that,
The wench so weeps?

Pyth. I think so.


Tha. Think so hegge?
Was this the charge I left you at my parting?

Pyth. What should I do? I left 'him both alone
As you did bid.

Tha. Unlucky queen, thou left's
A lamb to the woolfe: oh I am ashamed,
Enter Chaerea in the Eunuchs clothes. So to be played on. What man have we
here?

Pyth. Mistress, for Gods love peace; we are well
W'haue caught
The man.

Tha. Where is he?


Pyth. Look to your left hand.
Do you not see him?

Tha. Yes.


Pyth. Call out for help;
To lay hold on him with all speed you can.

Tha. What shall's do with him fool?


Pyth. What do, ^'you ask?
Pray mark if when you wistly eye the fellow,
Has not a ashamelesse leere?

Tha. No, has he not.


Pyth. Note with what confidence my man struts too.


Scen. 2.
Chae. AS I but now to Antiphoes did come,
His father and his mother were at home;
As if it had been so plotted so that in
I could not enter butt I must be seen.
Whilst here about the door a while I stay,
One that I knew came but into my way:
I him espying hastily betook
Me to my heels; and fled into a nooke
Was unfrequented: so from place to place
Posted, till I to death nigh wearied was:
And this I did, least any should me know.
But is not this Thais, I see? it is she:
I stick ith'mire; nor know I what to do.
But what care I? what dare she do to me?

Tha. Let Us to him. O, you are well met honest Dorus.
Tell me, did run away?

Chae. Mistress I did.


Tha. And was it well done, think thou?


Chae. no forsooth.


Tha. Think to go with it scot free so away?


Chae. Forgive me but this one fault, if I ever
Commit the like again, then kill me for it.

Tha. Did fear my curstness?


Chae. No.


Tha. What Feardst thou then?


Chae. I feared your maid here would tell tales of me.


Tha. What had thou done?


Chae. A (...).


Pyth. Impudence
A trifle? is it a trifle in thine eye
To take a freeborne maid, and ravish her?

Chae. I took her for my fellow servant.


Pyth. Fellow?
I searse can hold my singers from his ears.
Monster art come again, to flout us too?

Tha. Get you hence Bedlam.


Pyth. Pray forsooth, why so?
I think I ow't the gallows, if I do
As I do threaten; and the rather too,
Because he does confess he is slave to you.

Tha. No more of this. Chaerea, you have committed

An act fair unbeseeming that fair port
Your self and friends here bear; say the scorn fitted
And to my course of life did rustly sort:
Yet for your own worth you should have forborne.
Nor truly know I now what course to frame
Touching the maid; you have disorderd so
All my proceedings, I cannot return
Her to her friends, as I desird the same;
And as was fitting for the maid to go:
So that both maid and friends I might have made
Beholding to me, by the course I laid.

Chae. Thais, but now I hope henceforth will grow
Fast love between us: oftentimes you know
From bad beginnings, slight occasion,
Great love has had its deriuation.
What, if some higher powers did thus decree?

Tha. In such sense I do take it verily;
And so do wished.

Chae. Pray one thing reckon right
No purposd scorn, but loves imperial mihght
Then swayd my passions.

Tha. I believe 'twas so;
And truly therefore pardon you the rather:
I am not (Chaerea) of such stubborn nature,
Nor so vnskild as loves power not to know.

Chae. So help me God as I now grow in love
With you to Thais.

Pyth. Then mistress I perceive
You ought to watch him.

Chae. O, I dare not prove.


Pyth. In Troth le trust thee for just nothing.


Tha. Leave.


Chae. Thais, I do commend, commit my self
To your protection; beg your help herein;
Desire, beseech you will stand my Patroness.
I cannot live if I not marry her.

Tha. But if your father --


Chae Tsh, what? I know he will --
So she be known freeborne.

Chae. If you please stay
A little, the maids brother will be here;
He went to call the nurse that nur'st her young:
You may be by at her acknowledging.

Chae. Yes, I will stay.


Tha. And in the mean time will You.
(Till he do come) we go into my house?
It Is better then at door here waiting stand.

Cha. With all my heart.


Pyth. Pray what do you mean to do?


Tha. In what?


Pyth. Do You ask? mean you for all this yet
To let him come again into the house?

Tha. Why not?


Pyth. Take my word for it, h'le adventure
Some second battrie.

Tha. Prithee hold'thy chat.


Pyth. Ha'you not had sufficient trial of him?


Chae. I will not, Pythias.


Pyth. I Will not trust you, Chaerea.
Unless you be kept out.

Chae. But (Pythias)
Thy self shall be my keeper

Pyth. Troth not I:
I Will neither trust thee with the custody
Of any thing, not keep thee yet my self.
Enter Chremes and Sophrona, So get you hence.

Tha. Her brother's fitly come.


Chae. I Am lost, pray let us in, I would not (Thais)
He see me in this habit in the street.

Tha. Why, art ashamed?


Chae. Yes truth.


Pyth. Yes truth? alack!
A maiden bachelor I warrant you.

Tha. Go in before, I follow. Pythias
Tarrte you here, to bring in Chremes with you.
Exeunt Chaerea and Thais.
Scen. 3.
Pyth. WHat, can I think of no plot, no device,
No trick to erie quittance with this rascal?
That foisted in this counterfeit among us?

Chae. Pray move your joints a little nimbler ruise.


Soph. I moan sir.


Chae. I, I see it; but nothing forward.


Pyth. Have you yet shown the tokens to her sir?


Chae. Yes, all.


Pyth. What says she, pray? remembers them?


Chae. Yes perfectly.


Pyth. In troth you bring good news,
For Ido wish the maid well. Pray go in;
Exit Chremes and Sophrona My mistress long since did expect your coming.
Enter Parmeno. But see the honest fellow Parmeno,
I think I have found a trick to nettle him,
As I would wish. I Will first go in and hear
The maids acknowledgement; and again come forth
To fright the rogue with a fine penny worth.
Exit Pythias.
Scen. 4.
Par. I Now scout out, to see what Chaerea has done:
Who if he have the business cleanely handled,
Good gods! What glorious palm have I then won?
For to omit, that I a cafeintangled
Have wound out fairly to his hand; have wrought,
Have compassed his love, his wench, a maid
He so did dote on: and yet cost him naught,
(No purse expense, no trouble, hazard made;)
And from a greedy harlot. Then again
Enter Pythias. (Which I indeed account my Masters prise)
That I have found him out a ready mean,
To learn these strumpets manners and full guise:
Which ripely understood, he may for ever
Detest their courses: when abroad they git,
None are more neat and sweet in their behavior,
They mince and pick upon each dainty bit;
(With their friend eating such is their demeanor.)
And then to note their greedy ravening,
Their sluttishnesse, their penury at home;
What nastie Cormorants they are alone;
Out of stale porrage musty bread devouring:
These things are youths true cordialls being known.

Scen. 5.
Pyth. Rogue for thy deeds and words I Will plague thee so.
Thou shall not for our wrongs hece scot-free go.
Your mercy oh good gods' oh cruel practice!
Alas poor youth! but o that cursed vilaine!
That vilaine Parmeno, that brought him hither!

Par. What may the matter be?


Pyth. It pitties me;
Therefore I hasted out of doors, poor woman:
Because I would not see it. Oh, what example
(Say the) they do intend to make of him?

Par. o God! What strange stirre's this? am not I lost, trow?
I Will to her. What means this flight, Pythias?

Pyth. Do ask audacious fellow? whilst thou soughtst
To put a trick upon us, thou have undone,
Have vterly undone that pretty youth,
Thou broughtest us for an Eunuch.

Par. why, what is cha^c'd?


Pyth. Do know the maid was sent us is free borne?
And has a brother here of great account?

Par. I know it not.


Pyth. But she is proved so: this poor youth
Has ravished her; which when her brother heard of.
Coming in furious heat --

Par. What did he do?


Pyth. First piteously has bound him.


Par. Ha, has Bound him?


Pyth. I, although Thais beggd the contrary.


Par. What say


Pyth. And now he further threatens
To use him in such sort, as is the wont
To be performed upon adulterers.

Par. Upon what confidence dare he venture
So heinous an attempt?

Pyth. Why, is 't so heinous?


Par. Is It not the heynousest that can be thought on?
Who ever saw any one apprehended
For an adulterer in a bawdie house?

Pyth. I know not that.


Par. But that thou may know it
I tell thee (Pythias) it is my Masters son.

Prth. What, is it I pray?


Par. Therefore let Thais look then,
She suffer him sustain no injury.
But why do I my self not reseue him?

Pyth. Parmeno consider what you go about.
Lest you not help him, and yet cast away
Your self forever. For they do imagine
That all is done is of your practicing.
Enter the all man, Lacher.
Par. What shall I do then wretch? or what contriue.
But lo, I see my old Master newly come
Out of the country: were I best acquaint him
What is befalne or not? I Will tell him, sure;
Though I do know, I shall pay soundly for it.
But I must doot, that he may help his son.

Pyth. I, thou do wisely. I Will go in. Deline.
Every thing to him, as it chanced in order.

Scen. 6.
Lach. MY Country grange yields this commodity,
I find no irk somnesse in field, or city:
I can shift place, being of either weary.
But is not yond our Parmeno? it is he.
Who wait you here for before Thais door?

Par. Who Is that's oh Master' you are welcome home.


Lach. Who wait'st thou here for?


Par. I Am undone, my Tongue
Falters for scare.

Lach. How Is this? why shakst thou so?
Tell me, 's all well here?

Par. Master first I crave
You would conceive the matter as it stands:
That what so ere has happend, has not come
Through any fault of mine.

Lach. Say, what it is?


Par. Indeed you urge the question orderly:
I should have first opend the cause to you.
Phaedria bought an Eunuch to bestow
upon her here

Lach. Upon whom here?


Par. Thais.


Lach. Bought say thou? I am certainly undone.
What cost he?

Par. Twenty pound.


Lach. All Is lost.


Par. Chaerea doos love a minstrell wench here.


Lach. Ha! Besides
What, loves say thou? doos he already know
What a whore means? is he got to town too?
One mischief broodes another.

Par. Pray you sir
Do not so eye me. This he dooes not do
upon my setting on.

Lach. Sirtha, leave talk
Touching thy self. If I live (pillorie)
Ile-but unfold first the whole business to me.

Par. Chaerea was brought to Thais for that Eunuch.


Lach. How! for an Eunuch?


Par. Yes sir, afterward
They have taken him for an adulterer;
And bound him.

Lach. Oh, I Am undone for ever.


Par. Pray note (good sir) these strumpets insolence.


Lach. Is there yet any further mischief left,
Or ill vnutterd.

Par. This is all.


Lach. Why stay I
From breaking in upon 'hem?

Par. There Is no doubt
But I incur some famous punishment:
But since I must do it of necessity,
I joy yet I shall work these queanes some mischief.
For the old man long has sought occasion
To plague'hem soundly: now at last has found one.
Enter Pythias.
Scen. 7.
Pyth. TRroth for this many aday there has not chanced
An accident more pleasant then this now;
To see the old man come in so mistaken:
'T was sport to me alone of all the rest,
Who knew the ground of the error. ha, ha, he.

Par. What is it she laughes at?


Pyth. I Am come forth to
With Parmeno, but where a Gods name is he?

Par. Doos she seek me?


Pyth. See where he is, I Will to him meet


Par What news with thee now Giglet?


Pyth. Ha, ha, he.


Par. What meanst thou? why this laughter? go thou on?


Pyth. Ha, ha, ha, he. Oh-oh-I burst, I faint
With laughing at thee.

Par. Wherefore?


Pyth. do thou ask?
Upon my troth I never in my life
Knew a more errand fool, nor ever shall.
Ha, ha, ha, he -- it cannot be expressed
What pastime thou have made us yond' within:
And yet (good truth) at first I took thee for
A very wise and cunning pated fellow.

Par. Why what is the matter?


Pyth. What at the first dash
Oughtst thou to credit every thing I said?
What did thou think the brane exploit too little,
The rash youth ventred through thy setting on;
unless thou further diddst discover him
unto his father? prithe, tell me one thing;
What think thou Cherea thought, when now his father
Found him so fine dressed in an Eunuchs habit?
How is it? see thou yet, thou art ripe for hanging?

Par. How? what say thou pestilent queen, diddst lie then?


Pyth. Ha, ha, ha, he.


Par. And keep'st a laughing still too?
Think thou it is such fine pastime (harlotrie)
To make a scorn of me?

Pyth. o yes; sport a life.


Par I, if perchance thou carry't away, scotfree.


Pyth Indeed la?


Par. I Will cry quittance of my credit.


Pyth. Yes sure. We shall have, time yet, Parmeno:
For thee, thou art to be trussed up presently;
Who fleshest heedlesse youth in vilanie
And then betraist him to discovery.
Father and son will both make thee an example.

Par. I am a dead man.


Pyth. Look you' this y'haue got
For the Eunuch you late vsherd home to us.
Exit Pythias. Farewell.

Par. Unlucky I am caught just like a rat,
Traced by my noise, mine own vnheedie chart
Enter thraso and Gnato.
Scen. 8.
Gna. What do we now? on what hopes? or with what Purpose
Do we come hither? what intend you Traso?

Thr. Who, I to yield my self to Thais mercy,
Do all she shall inioyne.

Gna. What is it you say?


Thr. Why Hesse, then the valiant Hercuies,
Who condiscended to serve (...)?

Gna. I like the precedent Wo^ld I yet might see
Her crack your crown once with her pantefle.
Enter Chaerea. What news? her door opes.

Thr. what new mischief's this?
I nere saw this man yet: what may it mean,
That he comes forth so hastily and iocond?

Scen. 9.
Chae. OH loving countriemen, lives any man
More happy then my self? troth, I think none
The Gods have shown all their full might on me,
On whom so suddenly so many chances,
So many prosperous chances meet in one.

Par. Why is he grown so merry?


Gnae. Oh my dearest,
My kindest Parmeno' first fashioner,
Contriuer, finisher, of all my fortunes;
All my contentments. Know thou Parmeno
What joy I am in? hear thou my Pamphila
Is found to be free borne?

Par. Yes; I have heard so.


Chae. Made sure to me?


Par. As God shall help me, I Am Glad ont.


Gna. do y' hear him what he says?


Chae. I joy beside
My brother Chedria's love is now fair settled:
We Are made one house; Thais has given up her self
Unto my fathers kindness and protection:
She Is now our own.

Par. Then she is all your brothers.


Chae. That Is most certain.


Par. Then (that is other cause
The sculdier is cashierd hence.

Chae. now I prithee (of joy)
Give thou my brother notice of this news,
Where ere he may be found; and speedily.

Par. I Will seek for him at home.


Thr. Do thou now Gnato
Make any doubt, but I am lost for ever?

Gna. Sure I judge so


Chae. What should I first count on?
Whom chiefly praise? or him that counseld me
Or yet my self that venturd the performance?
Or shall I not yield fortune share of praise,
Which guided these things thus? Which in one day
Has closed up so many, so great things,
And all so timely orderd? or the easy
And pleasant disposition of my father?
Oh I beseech thee, gracious Iu^^ter.
Continue to us this our happiness
Enter Phaedria.
Phae. Your faith good Gods! What things above belief
Has our man told me? but where is my brother?

Cha. Here.


Pha. I am lad --


Chae. I well believe you, brother
There is none living more deserving love
Then this your Thais: she is a furtherer
To all our family

Pha. Why, how now brother,
Commendst thou her to me?

Thr. I am undone:
The lesser hope I have, the more I love.
Help Gnato at a pinch; my trust's in thee.

Gna. What would you have me do?


Thr. Win by entreaty,
By money. I may hold some place near Thais.

Gna. It Is a hard task.


Thr. Come, I know thee Gnato.
If once thou vndertak'st a thing -- work this,
And name but what reward or gift thoult have
And thou shall hau't.

Gna. Say you so?


Thr. I, and will Perform it.


Gna. If I perform it, I require your house
Do ever open rest at my command,
Be you within or not: that though unbidden
I still have room and welcome given me

Thra Here is my hand thou shall.


Gna. Then I will settle
To the attempt.

Phae. Whom hear I here? o Thraso!


Thra. God save you.


Phae. Thou perhaps hear'st not the News?


Thra Yes, I know all.


Phae. Why do I see you then
Here in these quarters?

Thr. Sir as resting only
Upon your love.

Phae. Know thou not, what to rest on?
I tell thee soldier, if I here hence forward
Do take thee in this street; thou art a dead man:
It will avail you little then to say
You sought some man, or were to pass this way.

Gna. Nay good sir this not fitteth.


Phae. I have said it.


Gna. I know you are not of such boistrous temper.


Phae. It shall so stand.


Gna. Pray yet first give me hearing
Of a few words; which when I shall have said
As you do like it, grant it.

Phae. Well, let us hear.


Gna. Thraso remove your self a little of.
First I most earnestly request you both
Thus far to credit me; that what herein
I do, is chiefly for my own sake meant:
But if the same may likewise further you,
Twere simpleness in you not to admit it.

Phae. What is it?


Gna. I think fit, you take unto you
This rival soldier.

Phae. How say? take him to us?


Gna. Pray but consider this; you Phaedria
Do surely love your Thais company,
And to fare well: little you have to give her,
And she of force must be supplied largely.
Now then to serve her turn, and spare your cost,
There Is none can be more fitting, or more useful
Then is this soldier: first has where withal,
And then there is none more lavish the's a fool
A prating babbling fool, a dolt, a block,
will snore you out whole days, and nights together.
And for the fear that she may hap to love him,
That Is needelesse: you may pelt him out at pleasure:

Phae. What were we best to do?


Gna. Then add this too;
(Which I account a thing of greatest moment.)
None fares more richly, none more daintily.

Phae. Its mar'le but we have need at any hand
Of this same fellow.

Chae. That Is my judgment too.


Gna. You take the right course. One thing more I beg,
I may be made one of your company:
I have been long now rolling of this stone.

Phae. We admit thee.


Chae. Yes, and freely.


Gna. Phaedria,
And haeria in requital, twixt you both
I tender him to slout, and feed upon.

Chae. We like it.


Phae. He deserves it^


Gna. Thraso, now
You may draw near at pleasure.

Thra. Gnato, say
How stands my case?

Gna. How? these men knew you not
After I told, hem your conditions,
Praised you according to your deeds and virtues;
I won my suit.

Thra. It was well done, I thank thee
I never yet could come in any place
But all men doated on me.

Gna. Said I not:
How graceful was his tongue for eloquence?

Phae. Thou left'st out nothing. Pass we this way hence.

Exeunt all but Gnato.
Addition. Epilogue by Gnato.
AThens and Rome full many ages hence
Have through Menanders, Plautus, Lerence Art
(In several names but sounding to one sense)
Seen this our Eunuch, graced the slatterers part.
Those Greek and Latin plays had their desert,
Earning loud plaudits from their audience.
Our English Author (h'has no Poets name,
Nor (says he) may he dare such style to take)
Puts me upon the brunt to stand the blame:
Himself not venturing his approach to make,
Nor to your censure his raw skill to stake.
He thinks me now wrought, past all fear and shame.
But I the name and nature here cast off:
I see amongst you no proud soldier,
No self blown bladder, I may prick or scoff.
Our Nation is not guilty of the former,
Nor could I well play the flatterer:
No maile if I the name now seek to dosse
Yet though I dosse the fawn; still bend I low,
Craving your gentle pardon for us all,
And thank you for your patience hitherto
So kindly shown to us in general.
Oh, would you deigne some further grace withal
Upon our swouning writer to bestow;
He dies in fear least you mislike his pain,
Your well clapped hands call him to life again.
FINIS
Faults escaped in Andria.

PAge 1. l 3. I think, r. Sir think. p. 2. l. 20. one some, 1. some one. p. 8
l. 23. round abouts, r. windeabouts. p. 9. l. 25. nothing, r. noting. p, 36. l.
1. now I, r. I. l. 16. leave the course, r. I leave. p. 39 l. 6. this the, r.
it is the p. 17. l. 22. ought, r. often. p. 49. O Charinus, r. who is that Oh
Charinus.

Eunuch.

Argument l. 56 has down, r. has set down. Char. of Au. l. 7 straggling, r.
struggling. Pro. l. 64. plays, r. play. Ac. 1. S. 1. l. 10. not one, r. one.
between 14 and 15 line, put in this verse, You are cast in Law, you may go
shake the care. l. 29 she it. r. she yet. l 32. shall allay, r. she will allay,
S. 2. l. 87 lovely woman, r. lonely woman. l. 88. kinsmen, 1. kinsman. l. 112.
and Eu. an Eu. l. 113. great Ladies have, r. great Ladies only have. Act. 2.
Sc. 3. l. vlt. his soldiers, r. the soldiers Sc. 5. l. 70. I wormeling, r. I
a wormeling l. 99 whom, r. home. Ac 4 Sc. 2 l 3 ought, r. often. l. 10. torn, r.
turn. l. 12. be pent, r. here be pent. Sc. 3. l. 35. and accident, r. an
accident l. 68. i^ be, r. if 't be. l. 7. Simatio and Sannto, r. Simatio and
Sannto l. 14. but, r. that. l. 15. or Soldiers, r. our Soldiers l. 27.
thinks, r. Think l. 39. assure, r. assured. Act. 5. sc. 1. l. 19. lest 'him.
read, left 'hem. page 104. l. 6. he cause. read, case, l. 18. Ile-but, r. I Will
--, But.


