ANDRIA The first Comoedie of Terence, in English.

A furtherance for the attainment unto the right knowledge, and true
propriety, of the Latin Tongue. And also a commodious mean of help, to such as
^ue forgotten Latin, for their speedy recovering of ability, to understand,
write, and speak the same.

Carefully translated out of Latin, by Maurice Kyffin.

Haud frustra Spero. Comoedia, Imitatio Vitae: Speculum Consuetudinis: Imago
Veritatis.

Cic. Printed at London by T.E. for Thomas Woodcocke, at the Sign of the black
Bear in Paul's Churchyard. 1588.

Plura Posthac. author's device HAVD FRVSTRA SPERO. M Kyffin

INVITA INVIDIA

In M. Kyffini Andriam.
CAute sectatus quondam, sapiensque Menandrum,
Aeternum nomen Publius est meritus.
Consimiles lauds puto te Kyffine mereri,
Afri quod Vatis stricte imitere pedem.
Namque aliena sequi, quam sit vestigia magnum
Noui. Qui nescit, carpere solus auet.
Andria multarum fuit illi prima sororum:
Andria sit caueas vltima scena tibi.
W. Morgan.

In Andriam a M. Kyffino Angl. donatam.
Art laborata prodit vetus Andria, vest
Cultior: and nostris nunc magis apta scholis.
Restat, vt Eunuchum, reliquosque annectere libros
Pergas: nam facilis iam labor omnis erit.
Th. Lloid.

Eiusdem in Zoylum.
INuide quid turges? quid non laudabile cernis?
Dic, si displiceat, quis meliora dedit?
In Andriam Anglice a M. Kyffino conuersam. G. Camdeni Tetrastichon.
DVm lauds cumulare tuas Kyffine parabam,
Andria quod studiis facta sit Angla tuis:
Adstitit en statim, ridensque Terentius inquit,
Quid vis? quid laudas? carpere nemo potest.
In amiciss, sui, M. Kyffini Andriam, Petri Bizari Carmen.
VT nemo ex Comicis, Latina lingua
Quos effert, potuit Terentianum
Stylum vincere, candidum, and nitentem,
Purumque, ac sine fuco, and art mira
Constructum, ac salibus facetijsque
Conditum vndique, et omnibus placentem:
Sic nemo tua scripta, quae Terentii
Sensus, verbaque in Anglicum relata
Sermonem, enucleant, venusta and apta,
Verborum serie, optimisque verbis
Vincet. Perge itaque, vt facis, iuuare
Et dulcem patriam, and simul perennem
Aeternamque tibi parare laudem.
Petrus Bizarus.

R. Cook to the Readers of Mr. Kyffins Translation.
THE perfect pattern of pure Latin speech,
In English phrase most fitly here expressed,
Yelds Pleasure, Profit, Ease, and Aid, to each,
That would of Latin language be possessed.
Thank Kyffin then, whose pen has purchased praise:
His pain (your gain) deserves the same always.
TO THE RIGHT WOORSHIPFVLL, AND worthy gentleman, Master William Sackeuille,
son to the Right honorable (my very good L. and Master) The Lord Buckhurst,
one of her Majesty's most honorable privy Council.
SIR, by intermission of your noble exercises in feats of Arms, and your
studious endeavor employed in foreign tongs: I must needs crave at your hands,
to vouchsafe some spare time (for your recreation) in the interteinment of your
old acquaintance Pub. Tere^tius: whom I here present unto you, in such and so
much, English attire, as my poor judgment found fittest for him to be clad
withal.

While he lived at Rome, his most company, and conversation, was among the
Nobility, and most of al other, with those two noble and learned gentlemen,
Laelius, and Scipio Africane: In like sort, after his death, his woorks were
right currantly accounted of, and highly commended, by the two Princes of
eloquence, even Caesar, and Cicero: as their own vvritings do witness the same
unto us. Therefore, since Terence, neither alive, nor dead, did ever want a
noble Moecenas to protect him: I hope that now, being partly put into english,
and having chiefly chosen you for his Patron in England: you likewise, in
regard of your noble birth, and virtues, will grant him like courteous and
friendly favor, as by these noble men in Rome, was heretofore affoorded unto
him. I trust also he shall be never the vvoorse vvelcome unto you, in that he is
diligently attended on, with my poor name: and like as my first attempt to
translate him, proceeded chiefly from you, so look I that my labor spent on
him, shall be favorably protected by your which to me will be a thing much
comfortable, and to you nothing cu^bersome. And so, fully resting, and relying
my self on your wonted courtesies, I here make an end: and beseech the
almighty, still to increase and accomplish, those his good gifts and graces,
which he has placed in you most shining and apparent.

At London. December. 3. 1587. By your worcester, always to be commanded Maurice
Kyffin.

TO THE RIGHT WOORSHIPFVL GENTLEmen, master Henry, and master Thomas
Sackeuille, sons to the Right Honorable the Lord Buckhurst (one of her
Majesty's most honorable Privy Council,) Maurice Kyffin wishes all health,
and happiness.
IT is now full. 7. years (as you can well remember) since I first attempted
the translation of Andria into English verse, being thereto partly incited by
your means: But afterward perceiving what difficulty it was, to enforce the
pithie and prouerbiall sayings of Terence into Rhyme, and withal what
inconvenience grew, by reason of diverse several Speakers, sometime severally
happening, within the length of one line or less: I plainly saw, that such
manner of forced translation, must needs be both harsh and vnpleasa^t to the
Reader, and also not half seemly besitting the sweet style and eloquence of
the Author. So as having thus translated the whole Comoedie in verse (saving
the two last leaves) my pains bestowed therein did so much mislike me, as that
ever since yt lay by me, utterly neglectted, and never fully finished: Till
that now of late, being by some, much requested to make common the same, for
the benefit of such as study the latin: I have thereupon somewhat altered my
course, and endeavored to turn it into prose, as a thing of less labor in
show, and more liberty in substance, seeming withal, most accordant, with
this Comicall kind of writing. And because I am not ignorant, with what ardent
love, and liking, you have always, most studiously embraced all good Authors:
(being of your selves, even naturally inclined, to all learning and knowledge:)
I cannot therefore, but recome^d to your favor, this piece of Terence, bearing
the frame of my poor workmanship: which I desire you, at idle, and vacant
times, to vouchsafe to peruse, both for Terence sake, whom I am sure you love:
And also at my request, whom I know you do not hate. And so I commit you to the
most gracious Protection of the Highest.

A Preface to the courteous Reader.
AMONG all the Roman writers, there is none (by the judgment of the learned)
so much auailable to be read and studied, for the true knowledge and purity
of the Latin tongue, as Pub. Terentius: for, since the cheifest matter in speech,
is to speak properly and aptly, and that we have not a more cunning
Crafts-master of apt and proper speech than Terence, well worthy is he then,
even with all care and diligence, to be both taught and learned before any
other. And surely, great is the pity, that Terence were not more used of
masters in teaching, and made more familiar to scholars in learning, than
commonly it is: being (as I have known my self) by diverse men, in diverse
sentences, diversely misunderstood: for, the Author in many places, using
abbreuiations, and figurative speeches, as well in regard of his verse, as also
that such manner of writing, was very eloquent and familiar in his time: does
thereby cause the sense seem very doubtful, to such Readers as are not fully
acquainted with him: which comes to pass, by means that this book, is not so
frequented in schools, nor labored in study, according to the woorthines of
it: but other base and inferior books, commonly preferred before it, to the
utter marring, and maiming of Scholars both in style and judgment.

Though this Comoedie, now englished, perhaps seem not altogether so pleasant,
as could be wished, neither in matter, nor manner of handling: Yet is it to be
considered (besides that it leeseth his natural grace, being turned into another
language) that the time when, and the place where, it was first published in
Latin, affoorded no other sort of Comoedies than this is. And therefore, it was
no part of my meaning, to translate the same, as a thing either pleasant to be
played, or very delightful to be read: (Notwithstanding that this Author was
most excellent, and most learned, of any that wrote in this kind:) but
especially, for that the Latin is pure and eloquent, much commended by Tullie
himself, and right requisite to be studied, and understood of all such, as
would attain to the knowledge of right speaking, and readiness of well writing,
in the Latin tongue: for whose only sakes (and also at the earnest request of
some, whom I was desirous to satisfy) I have adventured the englishing hereof:
wishing, that as I have thus boldly begoon with the first, so some other having
more leisure, and learning, would go thorough with the rest of the Comedies. I
have used (as near as I could) the most known, usual, and familiar phrases
in common speech, to express the authors meaning, as (to my thinking) best
agreeing therewithal. Nevertheless, I make account my doing herein, shall be
carpt and caueld at by some, from whose malicious censure, even the best
writers can not escape untouched, and therefore no marvel if they spurn at
me. Of which kind of men, I have known by experience, and noted for memory,
two sorts: One sort pretending a show of learning, and being indeed but very
dunses, love to be speaking they wot not what, to disgrace they care not whom,
and yet not rendering any reason why, but only to feed their own bad humors:
In whom, true judgment, being altogether suppressed, what with affection, or
ignorance, or both: as either moved by fond lyking, to commend that is bad: or
stird with foul hatred to dispraise that is good: are thus commonly carried
along, with the vain tide and wind of their wills, without any regard of
right, or due respect of wrong. An other sort (whereof I knew some good
scholars, the more the pity) blinded with ouerweening of themselves, and
mislyking al other men's doings (how well soever they deserve:) like only of
their own, be they never so mean: never giving any man his due, fearing, by
like, whatsoever commendation is attributed to others, that the same must needs
be a derogation from themselves: wherein they are far unlike Tullie, the
welspring of wit and learning: who always praised, all men of desert, even in
those things, wherein he both desired, and deserved, most praise himself: This
is read of Tullie, to his great praise, and remembered of others to their just
reproach. And here, least perchance I be mistaken more than I would, and
misconstrued otherwise than I mean, though my words before do sufficiently
declare my meaning: yet (to avoid all dowt) it shall not be amiss, if I ad a
few more in this place. To disalow the judgment of such, as by learning can,
and by reason know, where, when, and how, to find fault, as just cause and
matter shall lead them: were to be wilfully blind, and obstinately foolish:
God forbid I should be so unreasonable, or that men should judge of me so
unrightly.

Of the curious Carper I look not to be favored, and yet if my labor may be
equally compared with my Authors words and meaning, I doubt not but it will
appear unto him, an easier matter to find fault with part, than to amend the
whole.

Only, I submit this poor translation unto the view and judgment of the
learned: who lyking the Truth, and loving to speak Truth, will both allow what
is well don, and amend that is amiss: As for others, I see not but that they
ought first to learn, before they take upon them to Control:

Farewell.
To all young Students OF THE LATIN TONGUE (for whose only help and benifit this
Comoedie is published) Maurice Kyffin, wishes increase of knowledge, and
final perfection.
HOw necessary, the use and familiarity of Terence, is for all such, as would
attain, unto ripenes in understanding, readynes in speaking, and right
judgment in writing Latin: is a thing, so commonly known and confessed of all
men, as I shall not need any reasons to prove the same. Therefore, for the
better furthering of those, that as yet are unacquainted with him, I was the
rather persuaded, to publish this my Translation of Andria: wherein, whither my
labor meriteth, ought, or naught, Aliorum sit Iudicium.

My cheifest care has bin, to lay open the meaning of the Author, especially,
in all hard and difficult places of this Comoedie, and to utter the same, in
such apt, plain, and familiar words, as are most meet, for this low style and
Argument: for, to handle a mean matter, with high and lofty phrase, were as
great oversight, and lack of judgment as could be.

Touching the interpretation of some places in Andria. I was forced to dissent,
from some of no small Authority, and specially from one very learned man, who
occasioned (in a work that he wrote) to english certain dispersed phrases of
Terence, has (without offense be it spoken) so englished some, and namely in
Andria, as I am feign to forsake the same, and give other quite contrary
english unto them.

One of those places in Andria, has these words: Aliquid monstri alunt. Act.
1. Scen. 5.
By him thus englished: They bring some monstrous creature: And by me in this
sort: They cloak some secret fault in her: which may be seen, interpreted to
that effect, by Eras. Roterod. handling that place in his Chiliads.

An other place, is this, (containing the answer of Pamphilus unto Carinus:)
Neque pol consilij locum habeo, neque auxilij copiam: Act. 2. Scen. 1.
which he has thus englished: I neither have place to take counsel, nor
help of any man: and by me contrariwise, as thus: In good faith, I am neither
a meet man to give counsel, nor yet have wherewith to help another. Now to
prove that I have given it a right English: read that page in Terence, and you
shall soon find, that of necessity the sense must so be meant and taken. Some
other like places I could recite, but these shall suffice for a Say: whereof I
thought good to advertise you, to thend you may see, that my dissenting (in
these points) from a man of so great learning and authority, has not bin
without urgent occasion.

One thing more I must note unto you, that commonly in all books of Terence,
this place of Andria, [Num quod tuisperas propulsabo facile] Act. 2. Scene. 3.
is noted thus in the margin: Speras.j. times: which, put the case, Speras
were here so to be understood (as I see no reason why it should) yet
nevertheless, the sense remains still very lame and imperfect: understand you
therefore, that as Dauus in that Scene, counsels Pamphilus to make answer
to his father that he will marry: so Pamphilus on the other side, (fearing that
would be a mean to induce marriage betwixt him and Philumena) will not in a
good while give consent thereunto: thinking (as it seems) that by not
assenting to his fathers will therein, he shall be quite freed from marrying
either her, or any other: for he hoped that no man would give him his daughter
in marryage, since his state and condition was so to be rejected: wherefore
Dauus perceiving whereupon he most insisted: seeks to dissuade him from the
same, and among other reasons uses this: Nam quod tu speras, propulsabo facile,
Vxorem his moribus
Dabit nemo: Iuueniet inopem potius quam te corrumpi sinat.
Which (for your better understanding) I have thus translated by way of
Paraphrase:

For as for that vain hope of yours (imagining thus with your self, tush it
is no danger for me to withstand my father: No man will marry his daughter
unto a man of my manners) I shall easily put you out of that hope: he will
find out a poor and mean marriage for you, rather than he will suffer you to
be sp^t by Harlots. In the interpretation of this place. I have wholly relied
upon the judgment of that learned man Muretus, who expounds the same to this
effect.
By this you may see, that it much better besitteth the word Speras, here in
this place, to have his own natural signification of Hope, than that wrested
signification of Fear. I know by experience, that some Scholemasters are to
seek in these matters themselves, and therefore no maruayll though their
Scholars be ignorant. And here I remember one Scholemaister above the rest:
who (notwithstanding he were master of Art,) was yet so blunt and unskillful
in Terence, as (among other errors) he taught his Scholars to understand this
place of Andria [Non tu ibi gnatum] in this sort. Non tu ibi gnatum supple
Negasti: Act 1. Scen. 1.
whereas it manifestly appears by the next line following, that the word
Obiurgasti is there to be understood, and not Negasti. Moreover, for that the
not well understanding of the Argument of this comoedie, has in diverse, bred
errors and mistakings: I have therefore bin careful herein to explane the
Argument at large unto you: and withal, to set down each particular Argument
before every Scene. Likewise, by my notes in the margin, you shall be
instructed (as occasion is offered) touching any dowtfull speeches of the
speakers: as whether they speak unto him that spoke last before, or else to
the audience, or to themselves.

Thus, have I for your sakes, bin careful to dissolve all dowts, and
difficulties, in this part of Terence: which, if I may perceive, that you do
as courteously accept from me, as it is friendly meant for you: I shall be more
willing (if God spare me life and health) to pleasure you hereafter in a
greater matter: In the mean time, I commit you to God, and my self into your
good love and friendship.

Your faithful wellwiller M. K.

The Argument of the COMOEDIE.
CHremes and Phania (two brethren) were citizens of Athens: which Chremes,
taking his journey into Asia, left Passibula (as then his only daughter) to
the charge and safe keeping of his brother Phania: but not long after his
departure, there ensued in Greece so great stir and tumult of war, as that
Phania determining to follow his brother into Asia, did therefore embarke
himself (and his little Niece Passibula) for that voyage: But, a sore tempest
arising, he sustained shipwreck in such sort, as both he and his forenamed
Niece, were cast on shore at the I Will of Andros, where he chanced into the
house of a certain dweller in that country, by whom he was gently received
and relieved, and in whose house shortly after he died. After whose death, the
good man of the house changed the name of the young child, calling her by the
name of Glycerie: and when he had by the space of certain years, brought her
up with like care, and in like knowledge, as he did bring up his own daughter
Chrysis, he likewise ended his life. Chrysis (perceiving her self bereft of
Father and friends, and being also pinched with poverty) took Glycerie with
her, and sailed to Athens. In which City, during a small season, she earned
her living by Wool and making Cloth: but afterward, being haunted by certain
youths, who fed her with gifts and fair promises, she (overcome by those men,
and by these means) yielded the use of her body for gain. Among other
younkers, Pamphilus the son of Simo, a well minded young man, did oftentimes
resort to the house, not for her sake, but only for the great love and liking
he bare unto Glycerie: by whom Glycerie, (within a while,) proouing to be with
child, he made faithful promis unto her, that he would make her his wife. By
this time, Chremes (having long since returned home to Athens,) had an other
daughter become marriageable, named Philumena, whom he much desired to match
in marriage with Pamphilus, in respect of the good report that generally went
of him: Whereupon, by his own seeking unto Simo for the same, the match with
consent of both parents, is made up, and utterly unawares unto Pamphilus, a day
is appointed for the marriage.

In the mean season Chrysis dies, by which means Simo came first to
knowledge that his son is in love. For at the burial of Chrysis, Glycerie
for pure grief and sorrow being about to have thrown her self into the fire
with the coars, was so speedely stayed, and so lovingly recomforted by
Pamphilus, as thereby their wonted love and familiarity was manifestly
bewrayed. Hereupon Chremes revoked his former offer, declaring how he had
certain intelligence that Pamphilus used this strange minion for his wife:
little thinking that she whom he termed by so vile a name, was his own
daughter.

Pamphilus (at length) perceiving that Chremes brake of the marriage, was very
joyful: Simo on the other side was exceeding sorry. The day once appointed for
the wedding, is come. Simo therefore of mere craft and policy (determining to
feel the mind of his son Pamphilus) pretends notwithstanding all this,
that the marriage shall be made out of hand: with intent that if his son
should refuse to marrye, that thereby he might have good occasion to reprehend
him, which till then he could not well do. But contrariwise, if his son
should consent to marry, than he hoped to obtain his desire at Chremes hands,
and so to make up the marriage presently. Therefore meeting with his son,
(who little minded any such matter) he spoke thus unto him: Pamphilus, go home
and make thee ready, thou must be married to day.

Pamphilus soddeinly amassed with these words, knew neither what to say, nor
what to do: But Dauus (a crafty knauish servant) smelling out the drift and
devise of the old man, comes to Pamphilus and shows by circumstance of time,
place, and persons, the great vnlikelyhood of the marriage.

In this very time Carinus (a young man of Athens) exceedingly enamoured on
Philumena, and heareing she should be furthwith married unto Pamphilus, did
therefore come to him and prayed him for Gods sake, as he tendered his life,
that either he would not marry her at all, or at least wise, that he would put
of the marriage for a few days longer.

Pamphilus on the other side being wonderfully in love with Glycerie, desires
nothing more than that he might have quite and clean ryddance of this same
marriage pretended for him, and so made answer unto Carinus accordingly. To
this end therefore, Dauus advises Pamphilus to say unto his father, that he
is willing to marry (though he meant nothing less) hoping thereby both to
satisfy the mind of Simo, and withal to continue still love and familiarity
with Glycerie, having no mistrust in the world that Chremes would ever be
induced to match his daughter Philumena unto Pamphilus, whom he had once
before rejected for his son in law. But Pamphilus following this devise of
Dauus, is notably overtaken, when and where he least thought of: for Simo so
much prevailed with Chremes by earnest entreaty, as that contrary to all
expectation, the marriage matter is brought to that pass, even to have been
made out of hand: so as Dauus, having no other mean to shift of this marriage,
causes the child, whereof Glycerie the same day was delivered, to be laid
before Simoes door: which, when Chremes saw, and understood to be the child
of Pamphilus, he straight way falls of again from performance of the marriage.
Heerevpon ensues great stir and hurleburly, till that by the coming of
Crito from Andros to Athens, (by mere chance) even the whole difficulty of
the Comoedie is dissolved: for thorough him, Chremes comes to certain
knowledge that Glycerie is his own daughter, sometime called by the name of
Passibula: And so with great joy and contentation of all parts, he gives
Glycerie in marriage unto Pamphilus, and Philumena to Carinus.

Some will have it consist of 4. and the^ the Prologue is ye first.
The Comoedie consists of three parts: to wit: (...), (...), (...) Which in
Latin are signified by these three words: Propositio, Intentio, Conuersio.

(...). Propositio.
The first, is Proposition, containing the first Act and the beginning of
variety of Speakers, some entering, some remaining on the Stage, and some
departing away.

(...). Intentio.
The second is Intention or Full Sway, containing the growing on and continuance
of all the hot stir, trouble and difficult state of the Comoedie.

(...). Conuersio.
The third and last part, is Conversion, in the which all is turned to a joyful
end, and the whole matter made known.

By heedfull reading, and diligent marking, the due Decorum observed by Terence
in his Comoedies, the scholar shall gather very much pleasure and profit, as
for example, in this Comoedie of Andria, he opposes several speakers, of
several natures, and contrary conditions, one to another: as, Simo being hot
and testy, is opposed unto Chremes, a mild and moderate man. Pamphilus, a
stayed and shamefast young man, is opposed unto Carinus, a harebraind fellow
void of discretion. Dauus, a slye and subtle servant, is opposed unto Byrria,
a slothful and rechles fellow. Mysis, a sober maid, is opposed unto Lesbia,
a drunken Gossip. Crito, honest and poor, is opposed unto Chrysis, dishonest
and rich.

These persons, are of set purpose thus placed by Terence, to the end that the
undue demeanor in the one, may the sooner be seen by the contrary in the other.

Very singular also is the eloquence of the Author, in setting down the moan
and complaint of Pamphilus, The Narration, Consultation, and Reprehension of
Simo: From which places, are to be learned choice words, apt figures, and
right order of speaking Latin.

The speakers in this Comoedie.
Simo, the old man. Sosia, the late Bondsman. Dauus, the servant. Mysis, the
maid. Pamphilus, a young man. Byrria, the servant. Lesbia, the Midwife.
Glycerie, Lover unto Pamphilus. Chremes, the old man. Crito, the stranger.
Dromo, the whipping Bedle.
Act. 1. Scen. 1.
The Argument.
Simo discourses unto his late Bondsman, first of the honest life of his son:
And afterward of his falling in love: Lastly he discloseth for what cause he
faineth a marriage for him.

Simo, the old man. Sosia, the servant.
SIrs, have in these things: dispatch. Sosia stay thou here. I will speak a
word or two with thee.


Sosia. I know your mind alredie, you would have these things well handled.


Simo. Nay, it is an other manner of matter.


So. What is it sir? that my science can stand you in more stead than this
comes to?


Si. There is no need of that science, for this matter which I am now about:
But faithfulness and secrecy, which I always noted to be in thee, are the
sciences I have need of now.


So. I long to know what is your will with me.


Si. Thou wotst how reasonable and easy a bondage thou had with me, ever
since the time I bought thee of a little one: and by cause thou did thy
service honestly, and with good will, lo, of a Bondslaue I made thee my free
man, so as I rewarded thee with the very best thing I had.


So. I remember it well.


Si. I repent me not of that I did.


So. Master, I am glad if I have done, or do, any service that may please you,
and I thank you with all my heart that you take it in good worth: But yet
this speech of yours troubles me: for this manner of ripping up things past,
is as it were an vpbrayding to one unmindful of a good turn done him: but
speak at a word what is your will with me.


Si. So will I do, only this I tell thee first and foremost: This marriage
which thou weenest to be certain, is but a fained marriage.


So. For what cause do you pretend it than?


Si. Thou shall hear all the matter from the beginning, so shall thou
understand both my sons life, and my purpose, and also what I would have thee
do in this behalf. When my son grew to man's estate, it lay in his power to
live more at randon, for till than, how could a man know his nature, or
discern his disposition, while as tender years, fearefullnesse, and his
Master, kept him under.


So. It is true Sir.


Si. That which all young men for the most parts do applying their minds to
some kind of study or other, as either to horses, and horsmanship: or to
keep hounds for hunting, or to study Philosophy: he gave himself
specially, to none of these things more than other, and yet was reasonably
well seen in them all: I was glad of it.


So. And good cause why, for I hold it a very commodious matter in a man's
life, Not to go too far in any thing.


Si. In this sort was the manner of his life, even gently to bear, and take
all in good worth, at all men's hands that he kept company with: betaking
himself to do as they did, and to follow their studies and exercises: Not
thwarting any man, nor at any time putting forth himself before his
companions, so as a man might full easily purchase praise, and not be envied,
and also furnish himself with friends.


So. He took him to a wise course of living, for now a days, Flatry gaynes
Friends, and Truth gets Foes.


Si. In the mean time, a certain woman of excellent beauty, and in the
flower of age, came from Andros, (now three years since) to dwell here, in
our neighborhod, being thereto driven thorough very poverty, and the small
reckning that was made of her among her own kindred.


So. Alas I fear me, that this woman of Andros, might be cause of some evil.


Si. At the first, she lived chastely, sparingly, and hardly, earning her
living by wool and web. But afterward resorted, now one lover, and then an
other, promising reward unto her, and as all are naturally given full soon to
leave of labor and follow lust, even so this woman accepted the offers, and
then she began the gain.

They which then loved her (as it fell out) carried my son thither, in
company with them. I straight way imagined with my self: without doubt he is
caught for a bird: he has his errand: I watched their Pages betimes in the
morning, as they were wont to come thence, or go thither: I oftimes asked, ho
Sir boy, tell me if thou be a good fellow, who yesterday had his pleasure of
Chrysis, (for so was the name of her of Andros.)


So. I perceive you.


Si. They would say, either Phedria, or Clinia, or Niceratus: for these three
than loved her all at once. But what did Pamphilus, hah? (What, said they) Mary
he supt and paid his share. I was well apaid of this. In like sort, I made
inquiry at an other time, and could not find, that Pamphilus was any way
touched with dishonesty. Therefore I thought I had sufficient trial of him, and
that he was a notable Pattern of Chastity: for he that has to do with men of
such conditions, and yet is not moved in mind that way, one would think he
might full well have the rule and ^uyding of his own life. Now over and besides
that this lyked my self well, lo all other men also, even with one censent,
gave all the commendations that might be, and praised my happy state, in that I
(...) a son, endued with so good wit and government. What need I make many
words? Chremes stird up by this good report, came of him self unto me, to
the end to match his only daughter in marryage to my son, and that with a
^ry large dowry: I was well pleased withal: promysd him my son: and this
very day was appointed for the marryage.


So. Why than what lets, that it is not made accordingly?


Si. That shall thou hear: shortly after within few days that these things
were a doing, this Chrysis our neighbor dyed.


So. O happy chance, you have now made me glad, for still I doubted the
woorst of that Chrysis.


Si. Than specially my son used thither, ever and anon in company with those
which loved Chrysis: he was as busy as the best, in setting forth the buryal:
being all this while very sad: and now and than, would even shead tears with
them for company: well, this also lyked me welinough: for thus thought I: he
that upon small acquaintance and familiarity, takes this woman's death so
grievously at the heart? what if he had loved her himself? or how would he
take on for me his father? so as I took all this to have proceeded of a good
nature, and gentle heart. To be brefe, I my self likewise for his sake go
forth to the burial, mistrusting no ill in the world.


So. O what followed?


Si. Thou shall know by and by. The Coars is brought forth: we pass along
with it: Anon I chuance to cast mine eye (among the women there) upon an od
young damsel, of such favor.


So. What, so good?


Si. Yea Sosia, of such modest and sober countenance and so passing beautiful
to look too, as there could not possibly be more in a woman: who than to my
seeming, made greater sorrow than any of the rest: And for that she excelled
all the other women, bearing a face worthy an honest woman and well borne, I
get me to the waiting maids and ask what she might be: They tell me that
she is sister unto Chrys^ That went by and by, to the very heart of me. Out
alas, this is it I wist not of: hence grew those tears of his: here is she
whom he pitied so.


So. O how greatly I fear whereto your tale tends.


Si. Well, on goes the coars still: we follow after: we are come to the place
of burial: it is put into the fire: They weep. In the mean space, this
sister whom I told you of, rusht headlong to the flame with no small ieopardy:
whereat my son Pamphilus being sore frighted, did than lo, bewray his love
which he had cunningly cloked and kept secret all this while: he runs unto
her, and takes her about the middle: My sweet heart Glycerie (quoth he) what
do you? why go you about to cast away your self? with that, she cast her
self weeping, and leaning upon him so familiarly, as a man might easily
perceive their old accustomed love.


So. What, say you so?


Si. I return thence angry and disquieted in mind, and yet had I not cause
sufficient to chide him: for he might have said: father what have I done? What
punishment have I deserved? or wherein have I offended? The maid which wilfully
would have thrown her self into the fire, I stayed and saved her life: This
were an honest excuse.


So. It is well considered of you: for if you would chide him which helped to
save ones life, what would you do to him that wrought ones harm or mischief?


Si. The next day following, Chremes came to me exclaming what a shameful Act
it was, that Pamphilus (as he had found out for certenty) used this strange
noughtie pack even as his wife: I straight way denied that there was any such
matter, he earnestly affirms that it was so: well, in the end I parted from
him, as one then utterly refusing to match his Daughter to my son.


So. Did you not then rebuke your Son for it?


Si. No, nor this was not cause great enough to rebuke him.


So. How so I pray you?


Si. He inought have answered thus: Father you your self have set a time
when these things shall cease: ywis it is not long hence that I must live after
an others pleasure: suffer me than, now in the mean while to live as I list my
self.


So. What occasion then is left to rebuke him?


Si. Mary, if for cause of this love he shall refuse to take a wife, Than lo,
for that offense will I first correct him to begin with all. And now my
endeavor is this, that by means of this fained marriage, I may have unfeigned
cause to rebuke him, if he do not agree to it: And with all that the naughty
knave Dauus, if he have any subtle device, may spend it now, while his craft
can do no harm: whom I verily believe will labor with tooth and nayl, to the
uttermost that in him lies, and so much the rather that he may work me a
displeasure, than for any care he has to follow my sons fancy.


So. Why so?


Si. Ask you why so? An ill mind, an ill meaning: whom if I shall perciue,
But what need I use many words, and if so be it, all do fall out as I would,
that there be no let or delay in my son Pamphilus: Than rests that I
entreat Chremes for his Daughter, and that I hope to bring to pass well
enough. Now is it thy part to set on a good face in faining this same
marriage: to make Dauus thoroughly afraid, and to be a watch over my son,
espying what he does, and whereof Dauus and he do consult together.


So. You have said enough. I will see to it: we may now go in.


Si. Go thou first, I will come anon.


Act. 1. Scen. 2.
The Argument.
The father having found out that his Son is in love, pretends a marriage
for him, he threatens Dauus with punishment if he shall go about any deceyt to
hinder the marriage.

Simo, the old man. Dauus, the servant.
THere is no doubt of this, but that my Son will refuse to have a wife: I
noted such fear er while in Dauus, as soon as he hard that there was a
marriage toward: but lo where he comes forth himself.


Dauus. I meruailed if this matter should pass away so, and still I feared
whereto my Masters long gentleness would grow at length: who after he heard that
she whom he thought of, should not be given in marriage to his son, did,
(notwithstanding) never speak word to an^ of us, nor yet was any thing
moved at it.


Si. Simo speaks this out of the hearing of Dauus.
But now he will, and that, as I ween to thy cost.


Da. His purpose was to have us brought under hand into fools paradise, to
the end that now hoping the best, and having cast of all fear, we should
suddeinly be taken napping, in such sort, as we might not have time to
bethink us how to prevent the marryage. A subtle fox I warrant him.


Si. What prates this Gallowelapper?


Da. Good Lord my master is here, and I saw him not till now.


Si. Dauus?


Da. Now, what is the matter?


Si Come your way hither to me.


Da. What a Devil will he have?


Si. What is that thou talkest of?


Da. Whereof should I talk?


Si. Ask thou whereof? Sir, the report is that my son is in love.


Da. Yea no doubt the world cares much for that.


Si. Nay, but do thou mind what I speak to thee or not?


Da. Yes truly I mind it well enough.


Si. Well, for me now to go search and fifth out that matter, were but the part
of a hard father: for what he did heretofore, pertaynes nothing at all to me:
so long as he took time convenient for it, I suffered him to fulfill his
desire. Now it is high time for him to lead an other life, and change his
manners. And therefore I require, or if it be reason I desire thee Dauos, that
now at length he do return into the right way.


Da. What mean you by this?


Si. All men that be in love, can ill away to have wives appointed them by
others.


Da. So they say.


Si. Then if one take a knave for his scholmaister in that behalf, The love
sick mind of the scholar is by him commonly applied to all naughtines.


Da. Truly I understand you not.


Si. No, do thou not?


Da. No, I am plain Dauus, and not Oedipus [the reader of Riddels.]


Si. Will thou then that I speak the rest of my mind plainly.


Da. Yea a Gods name.


Si. If I shall perceive that thou go about to work any deceyte this day, to
the end to break of this marriage, or that thou will therein show how sly
and crafty a companion thou art: I will kudgill thee well and thriftely, and
then cast thee into the grinding house to grind till thou die: with this
covenant and condition, that if I take thee out thence, then I my self to
grind in thy place. What, have thou understood me now? or do thou not yet
understand this neither?


Da. Yes full well, you went now very plainly to the matter, and nothing about
the bush.


Si. I could rather bear any abuse at thy hands, than be deluded in this
matter.


Da. Yet good words I pray you sir.


Si. What, do thou laugh me to scorn? I see I am not a whit deceived in
thee: But I tell thee this, that thou be not over rash, and that thou may not
hereafter say but thou had a fair warning.


Act. 1. Scen. 3.
The Argument.
In this scene Dauus deliberateth whether it be best for him to aid Pamphilus,
or to obey the old man.

Dauus alone.
IN good earnest Dauus it is no time now to be flow and fluggish, so far as I
perceived of late by the old man's speech touching the marriage: which if it be
not cunningly provided for and prevented, will cast either me or my master
clean under foot: And yet I wot not in the world what to do: whether I shall
help Pamphilus, or else listen after the old man. If I leave him helples, I
fear me yt will cost him his life: Contrariwise, if I aid and further him,
than stand I in fear of the old man's threatening, whom yt is a hard matter to
beguyle: for first and foremost, he knows certeynlie of this same love, and
being at deadly fewd with me, he watches least I go about some guile to hinder
the marriage: if he shall see any such matter by me, I am utterly undone: or
if the Toy take him in the head, he will find some cause or other, and so be
it right or wrong, he will tumble me headlong into the grinding house: Now over
and besides these mischeeues, this comes also in the very ^icke: This same
woman an of Andros whether she be wife to Pamphilus, or but his love, I know
not, but great with child she is by him: And it is a world to hear their
presumption: They fare as they were lunaticke, and not love sick, for be it
boy or gyrle that she shall be delivered of, they are determined to bring it It
was not Lawful in Athens to bring up the children begotten out of wedlock upon
strange women, but rather to do them away.
up. And now they feign betwixt themselves an od piece of craft, that this
Glycerie is a free borne woman of Athens: There was a good while since (say
they) a certain old Merchant which suffered shipwreck at the I Will of Andros,
who afterward died there: and that she being then a small succourles child
cast on the shore, should (forsooth) be fostred by Chrysis father: A trim
fable. In good faith me thinks it soundes nothing like troth, and yet this
feigned devise pleases them well. But lo where Mysis comes forth from her. Now
will I go get me hence to the market place to meet with Pamphilus, least his
father come upon him unawares with this marriage matter.


Act. 1. Scen. 4.
The Argument.
MYSIS declares the cause of her coming forth from Glycerie: And here Terence
g^ues a lesson, That such especially as have charge of weighty business, ought
to eschew immoderate drinking of wine, concluding that a drunkard can do
nothing rightly.

Mysys, the maid.
ARchillis, I heard you a pretty while since, bid that Lesbia should be brought
hither: In very truth she is a drunken harebraynd woman, and far unfit to take
charge of a woman in travail of her first child: yet nevertheless I will
bring her: See how ernest the old Trot is, to have her here, and all because
she is a drinking Gossip of hers. God grant my Mistres safe and speedy
deliverance, and that any other miscarry under the hands of the Tipsie
Midwiefe, rather than she: But what is the matter that I see Pamphilus so much
out of quiet, I fear me all is not well: I will stay, and know whither this
his trooble of mind, bring not some heavy news.


Act. 1. Scen. 5.
The Argument.
This scene conteynes the grief of Pamphilus as touching the marriages where
likewise he promises to keep faithful touch with Glycerie, yea, whether his
father will or no, if cause so require.

Pamphilus, the young man. Mysis the, Maid.
IS this a point of good nature, or a kindly deed? Is this the part of a
Father?


My. Mysis speaks this to her self, out of the hearing of Pamphilus.
What might that be?


Pamph. O the faith of God and man, what can be greater spite than this? he had
purposed with himself to marry me to a wife to day: ought not I have known so
much before hand? had it not bin meet to have made me privy to it long ere
this?


My. This also is spoken by Mysis, out of the hearing of Pamphilus.
Woe is me (silly wench that I am,) what news do I hear?


Pamph. What means Chremes, who having once denied to give me his daughter to
wife, does he now change his mind in that, because he sees me still one
manner of man? Does he deal so ouerthwartly, to thend to part me from
Glycerie, forlorn man that I am? which, if it come to pass, I am clean cast
away. Alas, alas, is there any man living so rest of all grace and good fortune
as my self? O Lord God, shall I by no means be able to avoid the Aliance of
Chremes? How many ways am I despised and set at naught? All things were done
and past, and so, I that was refused am sought for again, and wherefore,
without it be as I suspect, they cloak some secret fault in her, and because
she cannot be shifted to any other, they would thrust her on me.


My. This likewise she speaks to her self.
These words do astony me for fear, (silly wench that I am)


Pamph. But what should I now say of my father? is it fit he go so carelessly
to woork about so great a matter? who passing by me crewhile at the market
place, spoke to me in this sort: Pamphilus; thou must be married to day: Get
the home and make thee ready. It seemed to me he said, Get thee away quickly
and hang thy self. I was utterly amazed: Think ye that I could bring forth
one word, or make any excuse for my self, were it wrong, falls, or never so
foolish? I became quite dumb. But had I wist so much before, if one should now
ask me, what would I then have don, surely somewhat I would have don, rather
than do as I did. But now whereto shall I first betake me? I am cumbred with
so many cares, which diversely hale my mind to and fro, what with love and
pity toward this woman, The grief I conceive of this marriage, and the shame
I incur with my father, who hitherto so gently suffered me to do what I would,
(and shall I now gainesay him?) That woe is me, I wot not what to do.


My. This speech of Mysis is ouerheard by Pamphilus.
I fear me wretch whereto this doubtful pang will break in the end, so as now
it is very needful that either he come and speak with my Mistres himself, or
else that I say somewhat to him as touching her. For while his mind hangs thus
in doubt, it is carried here, and there, with the least thing in the world.


Pamph. Who talks here? O Mysis, welcome.


My. God save you master Pamphilus.


Pamph. How does thy mistres?


My. Do you not know? she is in labor with child: And for this the silly
woman takes care and thought, because heretofore your marriage was appointed to
be made as this day: Moreover she is in great fear least you will forsake her.


Pamph. O Lord, should I find in my heart to do so? Alas poor soul, should I
suffer her to be deceived thorough me, which committed her whole trust unto
me, and even put her life in my hands? Shall I deal so by her (whom I have
entirely loved as my wife) that through need and necessity her chaste behavior
and well ordered life should be corrupted and changed? No, I will never do it.


My. I would not fear at all, if it lay only in you, but I fear how you will
be able to hide the brunt of your father.


Pamph. What, do thou think me so faint hearted, or moreover, so unkind, or
discourteous, or so cruel, as that neither our daily familiarity, nor love, nor
yet very shame, can move me nor put me in mind to keep promise with her?


My. This one thing I wot well: she has deserved that you should be mindful
of her.


Pamph. That I should be mindful of her? O Mysis Mysis, those words of
Chrysis remain yet printed in my mind, which she spoke unto me, as touching
Glycerie: Being near the point of Death, she calls me to her: I came, and
after you were gone aside and no body left but we two: thus she began: Friend
Pamphilus, you see of what beauty and years this same maiden is: neither are
you to be told, what inconvenience these two things are unto her, both for
saving her honesty and her stock: And therefore I pray you by this right hand
of yours, and your honesty: I beseech you also on your faith and troth, and in
respect of the solitary state of this maiden, that you will neither part her
from you, nor forsake her: even as I have loved you as mine own brother, and
as she always esteemed you alone above all men living, and was in all things
ready at your commandment. I bequeath you to her, as husband, friend, tutor,
and father. These our goods I commit unto you, and charge you with them of
trust. Hereupon she delivered Glycerie unto me in way of marriage, and by and
by gave up the Ghost: I received Glycerie of her, and having once received her,
I will keep her still.


My. Truly I hope no less.


Pamph. But why art thou come from her?


My. I go for the midwife.


Pamph. Hye thee apace: and hearst thou me? beware thou speak not one word
of the marriage, least that also increase her grief.


My. O, I understand you.


Act 2. Scen. 1.
The Argument.
CARINVS understanding that Philumena shall be married to Pamphilus: entreats
Pamphilus that he do not marry her. Here Carinus and Byrria are purposely
brought in, least that Philumena should not be esteemed of at all.

Carinus, a young man. Byrria, the servant. Pamphilus.
BYrria, what say thou? shall she be married this day to Pamphilus?


Byr. Yea, even so.


Ca. How know thou?


Byr. I heard it of Dauus but a little while since, at the market place.


Car. Woe is me unhappy man, for as my mind was held between hope and fear
ever till now: so now that all hope is past, even worn and wearied with care,
it is utterly dismayed.


Byr. I pray you Sir for Gods sake, since you cannot have what you would, that
you will have what you may.


Car. There is nothing that I will have but Philumena.


Byr. Alas how much better were it for you, to seek to wear this love out of
your mind, than to utter forth such speeches, whereby your desire is kindled
more and more in vain.


Car. We can all lightly when we are in health, give good counsel to such
as are sick: But if thou were in my case, thou would sing me a new song.


Byr. Well, go too then, do as you list.


Car. But to where I see Pamphilus, I am determined to prove all manner of
ways before I dye.


Byr. What will he now do?


Car. This same man will I entreat, him will I earnestly beseech, to him will I
discover my love: I believe I shall get him to put of the marriage, at least,
for a few days longer: and in the mean space I hope somewhat may be done.


Byr. That somewhat, will prove just nothing.


Car. But how think thou Byrria, were I best go to him or not?


Byr. Yes, what else? though you obtain nothing at his hands, that yet he may
think you ready to make him cuckold, if he do marry her.


Car. Go get thee hence knave, with a mischief to thee for thy peevish
suspicion.


Pamph. I see Carinus: God speed sir.


Car, O Pamphilus, God save you: I come to you requesting at your hands, hope,
health, help, and counsel.


Pamph. In good faith I am neither a meet man to give counsel, nor yet have
wherewith to help an other: but what is your matter?


Car. Do you marry to day?


Pamph. So the talk goes.


Car. Pamphilus if you do so, then shall you never see me alive after this day.


Pamph. Why, how so?


Car. Alas I fear to utter it: I pray thee Byrria do thou tell it him.


Byr. I will.


Pamph. What is it?


Byr. He is in love with your Bride.


Pamph. Now in good faith he is not of my mind: but come near and tell me
Carinus, has there been any further matter between you and her?


Car. O, Alas Pamphilus, no.


Pamph. Mary sir I would there had.


Car. Now I heartily beseech you, even for the love and friendship betwixt you
and me: first and foremost, that you do not marry her at all.


Pamph. Truly I will do my best endeavor.


Car. But if you may not otherwise choose, or that this marriage be according
to your own heart:


Pamph. According to my heart?


Car Yet at least wise, prolong it for a day or two, while I get me away
somewhither, that I may not behold it.


Pamph. Nay but listen to me now Carinus, I hold it in no wise the part of an
honest man, to pike a thank where none is due unto him: God wot I am more
desirous to be rid of this marriage, than you are to obtain it.


Car. You have revived my spirits.


Pamph. Now if either your self, or Byrria here, can do ought in the matter,
be doing, feign, find out and procure the means that you may have her: I for
my part will so handle the matter, as she may not be married to me.


Car. I have my desire.


Pamph. Oh, in very good time do I see Dauus, whose advise I use altogether.


Car. He speaks to his servant Byrria.
But in good sooth thou will tell me nothing, except such things as are not
worth the knowing: do thou not get thee hence.


Byr. Yes truly, and that with a very good will.


Act. 2. Scen. 2.
The Argument.
DAVVS having gathered by sundry signs and conjectures the unlikelihood of the
marriage, seeks all the town over for Pamphilus, and reioiceth out of measure.

Dauus. Charinus. Pamphilus.
O Good God, what good news do I bring with me, But where shall I now find
Pamphilus, that I may release him from that fear he is in, and fill his heart
with joy.


Car. This talk of Carinus and Pamphilus must be supposed to be betwixt
themselves, Dauus neither hearing nor seeing the^, and therefore he goes on
still with his speech
He is very meery, what the matter is I know not.


Pamph. It is nothing to any purpos, he has not yet understood of this
mischief.


Da: Whom I verily believe, if he have yet hard of the marriage prepared for
him.


Car. He speaks still to Pamphilus.
Do you not hear what he says?


Da: That he is beside himself, seeking for me all the Town over. But where
shall I seek for him, or whither shall I now first go?


Car. And this also he speaks to Pamphilus.
What, do you linger to speak to him?


Da: Well, I go my ways.


Pamph. Dauus, come hither, stay.


Da. Who calls me? O my Master Pamphilus, you are the man I look for. Well
met Carinus: I find you both in good time, even you two I would speaks with
all.


Pamph. Dauus, I am a forlorn man.


Da: But yet listen to me a little.


Pamph. I am cast away.


Da: I wot what you fear.


Car. Truly and my liefe is in hazard in very deed.


Da: I wot also what you fear.


Pamph. I must be married.


Da: And that I know too.


Pamph. Yea but too day.


Da. You dull me with too many words, and yet I know the matter already. You
fear least you must marry Philumena: And you (Carinus) take care how you may
marry her.


Car. Thou have hit the nail on the head.


Pamph. That same is it.


Da. And in that, is there no danger at all: I warrant you.


Pamph. I pray thee for Gods sake, ryd me presently out of this fear, poor
wretch that I am.


Da: Lo, I put you out of fear, Chremes will not at this time give you his
daughter to wife.


Pamph. How know thou so much?


Da: I know it full well: your father met me erewhile and told me that he would
marry you this day to a wiefe, besides many things else, which now is no time
to rehers. By and by I hasted me and ran every foot to the market place, to
tell you of this: and when I could not find you there, I got me up, on a high
standing, and looked round about me, you were no where to be seen. By chance
I spied Byrria this man's servant, I ask him for you, he said he saw you not.
This troubled me: Then I bethink me what to do: and as I was returning thence,
I fell to mistrust whether there were any marriage toward or no, I remembered
there was very small provision of meat: he himself was very sad: The
marriage was to be made on the soddeyn, This did not hang well together.


Pamph. What of all this?


Da: I presently got me to Chremes house, and being come thither, there was no
body sturring about the door, I was glad of that.


Car. You say well.


Pamph. Tell on.


Da: I stay there a while, and could see no body either going in, or coming
out, I went my ways in, and looked narrowly, there was never an elderly woman,
no tryming up of the house, no stur or preparacion.


Pamph. I grant you, it is great likelihood.


Da: Nay but do these things seem to agree with a marriage matter?


Pamph. No Dauus, as I guess.


Da: Guess say you? you take your mark amiss: The matter is out of al doubt:
Moreover, as I was coming thence, I met with Chremes boy, carrying potherbs
and a halpwoorth of small fish for the old man's supper.


Car. Dauus, I am ryd out of danger this day by thy means.


Da: Truly but you are never the nearer.


Car: How can that be? for surely Chremes will not give his daughter in
marriage to him.


Da: O wise woodcok, as though it must needs follow, if he give not his
Daughter to him, that therefore you shall marry her: unless you see better unto
it, and unless you make suit to the old man's friends, you do but throw your
cap in the wind.


Car. You advise me well, I will go thither, although in good faith, this hope
has deceived me already more than once or twice. Farewell.


Act. 2. Scen. 3.
The Argument.
DAVVS earnestly prays and persuades Phamphilus, to say unto his father that
he will marry.

Phamphilus. Dauus.
WHat means my father then? why does he dissemble with us?


Da: Mary I shall tell you, if so be it he be now in a chafe because Chremes will
not marry his daughter unto you: Then lo, may he think with himself that he
does you wrong: But yet he will think it no wrong at all, before such time as
he shall perceive how your mind is settled toward marriage. But if you shall
refuse to marry, then will he lay all the fault upon you, and then will be old
stir and hurleburly.


Pamph. What would thou have me to do? that I should yield to marry?


Da: O master consider, he is your father, it is hard to withstand him:
Moreover this Glycerie is a love woman, he will quickly pick a quarrel against
her, and so turn her packing out of town:


Pamph. May he turn her away?


Da. Yes, out of hand.


Pamph. Then I pray thee Dauus what shall I do?


Da. Say to your father that you will marry.


Pamph. Alas.


Da. Why, what is the matter?


Pamph. Should I say so?


Da. Why not?


Pamph. I will never do it.


Da: Never deny it.


Pamph. Never do thou persuade me to it.


Da: Do but consider what will follow of this.


Pamph. This will follow, that I shall be shut from Glycerie, and tied up to
this woman.


Da: Not so: Mary I wene your father will say thus much to you: I will have you
to marry a wife to day. You shall say, I will: And then I pray you what cause
shall he have to chide you? By this means you shall make all his devises which
now are of force, to be then altogether frivolous: and that without any danger
to your self: for this is without all question, that Chremes will not marry
his daughter unto you: And for more surety, you shall not cease to use
Glyceries company still as you have done, least happily he should alter his
mind. Tell your father that you are willing to marry, so as when he would be
angry with you, he may have no cause: for as for that vain hope of yours
(imagining thus with your self: Tush, it is no danger for me to withstand my
father, No man will marry his daughter unto a man of my manners) I shall
easily put you out of that hope: he will find out a poor and mean marriage
for you, rather than he will suffer you to be spilt by harlots. But if he shall
perceive that you are well content with this marriage, you shall make him
reckles of the matter, he will seek an other wife for you at leisure, and in
the mean space some good fortune will fall.


Pamph. Do thou think so?


Da: Nay surely there is no doubt of that.


Pamph. Yea, but take heed whereto thou perswadest me.


Da: What, are you not yet resolved?


Pamph. Well, I will say so to my father: but we must take heed, that he
understand not of the child I have by Glycerie, for I have promised to bring
it up.


Da. O notable hold deed.


Pamph. She earnestly besought me to give her my faith and troth on this,
that so she might be sure I would not forsake her.


Da. Well, it shall be cared for. But your father is here hard by, beware that
he do not find you sad.


Act 2. Scen 4.
The Argument.
In this scene be devises practiced of both sides: Dauus puts Pamphilus in
mind that he do not fear or faint, but that he be provided what to say to
his father.

Simo. Dauus. Pamphilus.
I Come again to see what they are a doing or consulting.


Da. This he says softly to Pamphilus: Simo neither hearing nor seeing them.
He makes sure account that you will refuse to marry: he has studied by
himself, and is now come out of some solitary corner, hoping he has devised
talk wherewith he may bring you beside your self: Therefore see that your
wits be your own.


Pamph. I will do as well as I may.


Da. Master, credit me in this: I say unto you that your father will not
give you one evil word to day, if you do but say that you will marry.


Act. 2. Scen. 5.
The Argument.
BYRRIA watches Pamphilus: Pamphilus answeareth his father that he is ready
in all things at his commandment. Byrria makes report thereof to Carmus.

Byrria. Simo. Dauus. Pamphilus.
MY master gave me commandment, that setting all business aside, I should
watch Pamphilus this day, to thend I might learn what he did as touching the
marriage: and that is the matter I am now come after him hither: but lo where
he is with Dauus, here hard at hand. I will do that, that I come for.


Si. Simo says this to himself, having Dauus and Pamphilus in sight.
I see them both present before my face.


Da. Dauus speaks this to Paphilus, because Simo draws nigh.
Hem, look to your self.


Si. Pamphilus.


Da. All the spech of Dauus in this Scene, is only unto Pa^philus, and out of
the hearing of Simo.
Turn suddenly toward him as though you were not aware of his coming.


Pamph. Oh father.


Da. Well handled of you.


Si. I will have thee to be married to day, as I told thee before.


Byr. Byrria says this to himself out of their hearing.
Now fear I of our side, how this man will answer.


Pamph. Neither in this thing, nor in any thing else, shall you find any let or
delay, in me.


Byr. All the speech of Byrria in this Scene, is either to himself, or to the
Audiens: and not to any of the speakers.
Out alas.


Da. He has never a word more to say.


Byr. What did he answer?


Si. Thou do as becomes thee, in that I obtain with thy good will, ye thing
which I require at thy hands.


Da: did not I say true?


Byr. As far as I here, my master is like to leap beside his wife.


Si. Now go thy ways in, that there be no tarrying for thee when need is.


Pamph. I go.


Byr. Is there no trust to be put in any man, for any thing in the world? Every
man for himself and God for us all.
That same is a true saying which is commonly used: Every man wishes more good
to himself than to an other. I my self have seen that same maiden, and I
remember she was of a good lovely favor: Therefore I blame not Pamphilus so
much though he had leauer, lie colling of her himself a nights, than that my
Master should: well, I will go show all to my Master, that for these ill
news he may give me ill language.


Act. 2. Scen. 6.
The Argument.
IN this scene Dauus and Simo deceive one an other: which is worth the noting.

Dauus. Simo.
This he speaks to the audiens.
NOw thinks the old man verily, that I bring some fly shift to beguyle him,
and that I stayed here therefore of purpos.


Si. What says Dauus?


Da: Truly even as much now as before.


Si. What, is it nothing thou say?


Da: Nothing at all.


Si. But I had hoped to hear somewhat.


Da. Dauus speaks this to the Audience, out of the hearing of Simo.
I perceive the matter fell out otherwise than he thought for, and that troubles
the man.


Si. Can thou tell me truth?


Da. Why, nothing readier.


Si. Is my son any thing grieved at this marriage, in respect of the love and
familiarity betwixt him and this strange harlatry?


Da. No certainly, or if he be, his grief is but for two or three days
(perceive you me?) and than it is don: for he will take a right course with
himself, as touching that matter.


Si. I commend him for it.


Da. While he might, and while it stood with his youthful years, he gave
himself to love: nor then neither, but secretly: for he took heed that it
should not at any time bring him to ill name, even as became a manly man to do.
Now it is meet for him to have a wife, he has settled his mind on marriage.


Si. Me thought that he was somewhat sad.


Da. Not a whit for this matter, but there is some cause why he is not well
pleased with you.


Si. What is that?


Da. A trifling matter.


Si. What is it, I say?


Da. Nothing in effect.


Si. But yet tell me what it is?


Da. He says that there is too much niggardnes used in this matter.


Si. What, by me?


Da. Yea by you. He scarcely (quoth he) bestowed forty pence in cates, and
does he seem to marry his son to a wife: what man of calling (of my
friends and equalles) shall I bid to my wedding feast, as the case now stands?
And you likewise, here be it spoken, are too much sparing indeed, which I do
not commend in you.


Si. Sir hold you your peace.


Da. I have moved his patience.


Si. I will see those things cared for well enough: but what is the meaning of
this? what is it that this deceitful knave goes about? surely if any thing
happen otherwise than well, even that same varlet is the chief woorker of it.


Act. 3. Scen. 1.
The Argument.
SIMO, thorough his overmuch wilines, is notably deceived, thinking the birth
of the child to be a fained matter: which indeed was nothing less.

Mysis. Simo. Dauus. Lesbia, the Midwife. Glycerie, lying in childbed.
This talk between Mysis and the midwife is ouerheard by Simo, whom they see
not.
IN good sooth Lesbia, it is very true as you say: one shall hardly find a man
that is faithful and true of his word to a woman.


Si. This maid belongs to her of Andros, how say thou?


Da. She does so.


My. And yet this young man Pamphilus.


Si. He speaks still to Dauus, and Mysis goes on with her speech, not
hearing him.
What says she?


My. Was as good as his word.


Si. What?


Da. Dauus speaks to the audience out of Simoes hearing.
I would to God that either the old man were deaf, or that prattling wench
dumb.


My. For were it man child or woman child that my mistres were delivered of,
he took order for the nursing of it.


Si. O the king of heaven, what is this I hear? Why, all is past help, at
least if it be true that this maid tells.


Lesb. Lesbia and Mysis go on still with their talk and these interspeeches of
Simo and Dauus, must be supposed to be uttered by themselves, out of the women's
sight and hearing.
He is a good natured young man, by your saying.


My. Yea of an excellent good nature: But do you follow me in presently, that
she need not to stay for you.


Lesb. I come after you.


Da. Dauus speaks this to the audience, out of Simoes hearing
What remedy now may I find for this mischief?


Si. What means this? does he dote so much on this strange harlat indeed? Now
I perceive how this gear cottens: I scarce found it out now at last, foolish
man that I am.


Da. He speaks (as it were) to the audience.
What does he say that he has found out?


Si. That knave seeks to abuse me with this falsehood first and foremost. They
feign that this queen is brought a bed, to thend that so they may drive Chremes
from giving his daughter.


Glycer. This is uttered within by Glycerie, being in travail with child.
Oh lady Juno Lucina, help and save me I beseech thee.


Si. Whup hoyda: what in all the have? see a foolish devise: as soon as she
heard me at the door, she straight falls in labor: Dauus, this was not half
cunningly contrived of thee, each thing in his due time.


Da. What, by me?


Si. Why make you it so strange, have you forgot your scholar?


Da. I wot not what you say.


Si. If this knave had set his craft a broche against me unawares, and in a
marriage meant in good earnest: what prancks would he than have played me,
trow you? But now, be it upon his peril: as for me I am safe.


Act. 3. Scen. 2.
The Argument.
LESBIA coming forth, shows the state of Glycery lying in childbed: and
withal appointes a drink to be given her, thereby imitating the Physicians,
which are wont to prescribe unto the sick, what they shall eat and drink.
Lastly, Simo and Dauus are at variance about the birth of the child.

Lesbia, Simo, Dauus.
HItherto Archillis I see all good signs of health in her, that are usual and
ought to be in a woman in her case: Now first and foremost, cause you those
things to be washed, and then give her that drink, and the same quantity that I
apappointed for her. I will come back again hither by and by. Before god
there is a jolly bouncing boy borne unto Pamphilus: Now I pray God send him
long to live, because he has so honest a man to his father, who had care and
conscience not to deal amiss with this kind hearted young woman.


Si. And who that knew thee, would not judge this also to be a craft of thy
budget.


Da. And what is that, I pray you?


Si. So as Simo thinks that Glycerie is not brought a bed, but that all this is
fained to bleare his eyes with all.
She did not will them while she was in the house, to do what was needful
for the woman that lies in, but after she was come forth, she kept a prattling
out of the street, unto them which were within doors. Why Dauus, am I so
little set by of thee? Or I pray thee, do I seem so fit a man, for thee to
seek to beguile, with such manifest fraud and falsehood? At least wise thou
do thy diligence, so as I may well seem to be put in fear by thee: Surely
if I had known it before.


Da. Dauus says this to the Audience.
Now in good faith this man beguiles himself, I do not.


Si. Why, did I not give thee straight charge to the contrary? did I not
threaten thee with punishment, that thou should not do it? did it fear thee
a whit? what has it booted? Shall I now give thee credit in this: that she
there, is brought a bed of child by Pamphilus?


Da. This he speaks to himself.
O, ho, I see now wherein he is deceived: I wot well what I will do.


Si Do thou not answer me?


Da. What should you give me credit? as though it was not told you before,
that these things would come so to pass.


Si. Did any body tell me so?


Da. Why than, did you of your self, find that this is a fained matter?


Si. He laughes me to scorn.


Da. No doubt it was told you before, for how else should it come upon you to
suspect it?


Si. How? marry because I knew thee.


Da. As who should say, it was done by my devise.


Si. Yea I am well assured of that.


Da. Well sir, you do not yet thoroughly know what manner of man I am.


Si. Do not I know thee knave?


Da. But when I begin to tell you any thing, you straight way think that I go
about to beguyle you.


Si. That is a lie.


Da. So as in good faith, now a days, I dare not scarce open my lips to you.


Si. This one thing I am sure of, that here is no woman delivered of child.


Da. Have you understood so? But nevertheless ere it be long, the child
shall be brought here and laid before the door: Master, I tell you of it now
before hand, that you may certainly know what will follow: least hereafter you
should say, that this was don by the counsel or craft of Dauus: And I would
in any wise, that this evil opinion which you have of me, were clean out of
your mind.


Si. How came thou to know this?


Da. I heard it, and I believe it be true.


Si. There be many things mo than one, which cause me to conjecture as I do:
Even now, is the first time that this queen declared her self to be with
child by Pamphilus, which is but a false devise. Moreover, now that she sees
preparation at home for the wedding, the maid forsooth, in all have is sent for
the midwife to come to her, and withal to bring also a child with her.


Da. Well, without that it come so to pass that you do see the child with
your own eyes, nothing will hinder the course of this marriage.


Si. What say thou? when thou once vnderstoodest that they purposed such a
matter, why did thou not than presently tell it unto Pamphilus?


Da. Why than, who else has withdrawn him from these harlots but my self? for
certeynly we all know how exceedingly he loved this woman. Now he is desirous
to have a wife, and as for that matter, let me alone withal: yet
nevertheless go you on forward still with this marriage as you do: and I hope
God will prosper it.


Si. Very well, go thy ways in, stay there till I come: and provide what is
needful. Dauus being gone in, Simo turn his tale to the audiens.
He could not drive it into my head, to make me believe all this, neither am I
certain whether all that he told me be true or no: But I pass not greatly
for that. Marry the matter I stand most upon, is the promise which my son
himself made unto me: Now will I go meet with Chremes: I will entreat him
for his daughter to my son in marryage, and if I do obtain her, why should
I make any more daying for the matter, but marry them out of the way? for as
touching my sons promise, I have no doubt at all, if he shall refuse to
perform it, but I may full rightly compel him to it. But lo yonder where
Chremes himself comes toward me, even in as good time as may be.


Act. 3. Scen. 3.
The Argument.
In this scene, by means of Chremes and Simo meeting together, the fained
marriage is become a marriage in good earnest.

Simo, and Chremes,
the old men. GOD save you neighbor Chremes.


Chr. O sir, you are the only man I sought.


Si. And I you.


Chapter You com as well as I could wish: There have some bin with me, which told me
they heard you say that my daughter should this day be married to your son:
Now the matter I come for, is to see, whether you, or they, do dote.


Si. Hear me a word, or two, and you shall soon know both what I desire of
you, and also what you require of me.


Chapter I hear you, go too, speak your mind.


Si. Chremes I beseech you for Gods sake, and for our frendships sake begun
betwixt us from our childehood, and grown together with our years: I beseech
you as you love your only daughter, and as you tender my son, whom it lies
in you cheefely to save or to spill, yt you will help me now in this matter,
and like as the marriage should have bin, that so now, it may be made up
betwixt them.


Chre. Tush, never pray me so much, as though you could not obtain this at my
hands but by much praying: Do you think me now an other manner of man, than I
was then, when I promised my daughter unto you? If it be a matter profitable
for both parts, that this marriage be made, then cause her furthwith to be sent
for. But if there grow of this, more harm than good, as well to the one as to
the other: Then my desire is, that you will consider of the matter
indifferently for both parts, even no otherwise than if she were your daughter,
and that I were father unto Pamphilus.


Si. Yea Chremes, even so is my meaning, and therefore do I request that it may
be effected. Neither would I request it at your hands, if the matter if self
did not give me good occasion.


Chr. What may that be?


Si. Mary sir, my son and Glycerie are fallen out.


Chr. I hear you.


Si. Nay, but so far fallen out, as I hope they may be quite set a sunder.


Chr. Tush, it is but a Tale.


Si. Nay, without dowt it is as I say.


Chr. Yea forsooth, thus, as I shall tell you, The falling out of Lovers, is a
Renewing of Love.


Si. Alas, I pray you then, let us now prevent that, while time is, and while
his hot love is alaid with bitter words: Let us couple him to a wife, before
that this naughty parks shrewd crafts, and fained tears, do woork again his
louesick mind, unto pity and compassion: I hope (Chremes) that being once
reclaimed, by means of good company and honest wedlock, he will afterward, with
cas, wind himself out of these mischeefs.


Chr. It seems so to you, but I think it neither possible for him to continue
with this wife, nor yet for me to be able to endure it.


Si. How can you know that, until you have made trial of it?


Chr. Yea mary, but it is a shrewd matter to make that Trial upon my daughter.


Si. Well yet, the very worst and uttermost of all, can be but a divorce or
separation, if any such matter should happen, as God forbid it should: But
contrariwise, if by this means he do amend and become a new man, see than how
many commodities ensue: First and foremost, you shall restore to your friend his
son: next, you shall find a sure son in law to your self, and lastly, a
stayed husband to your daughter.


Chr. What? say you so? If you be persuaded that this is expedient, I for my
part, will not have you hindered of any good turn that I may afford you.


Si. Chremes, not without good cause have I always set most store by you of
any man.


Chr. But what said you erewhile?


Si. What?


Chr. How came you to know, that they be at jar between themselves?


Si. Even Dauus himself, the chief of their privy Council, did tell it me.
And he likewise persuades me to hasten this marriage, as much as I may: Think
you he would have done this, unless he were sure that my son desires the
same? You shall hear him your self, by and by. Holo sirs, call me out Dauus
hither. But see yonder where he comes forth of him self.


Act. 3. Scen. 4.
The Argument.
Dauus fawning upon the old man, does persuade him to make up the marriage,
little thinking that it should come to pass in deed: But when he perceives
that Simo deals in good earnest with Chremes as touching his daughter: he is
then much perplexed, and clean beside himself.

Dauus. Simo. Chremes.
I was coming to you.


Si. well, what is the matter?


Da. Why is not the bryde sent for? it waxes now very late.


Si. Simo says this softly to Chremes.
Do you not here him. Well Dauus, I stood somewhat in fear of thee erewhile,
least thou (as the common sort of servants are wont) should by craft and
knavery have deceived me, in respect that my son is in love.


Da. Alas sir, should I have don such a deed?


Si. I was of that belief, and therefore fearing such a matter, I kept secret
from my son and thee, that which now I will tell thee.


Da. What is it?


Si. Thou shall know, for now in a manner, I begin to have some trust in thee.


Da. At last then, you know what manner of man I am.


Si. This marriage, was not meant to have bin made indeed.


Da. What, was it not?


Si. No, but I feigned it of purpose, that I might thoroughlie try you.


Da. What, is it true sir?


Si. It is even so as I tell thee.


Da. See, I could never perceive so much. O notable policy.


Si. Nay but listen to me, as soon as I bade thee go hence in, this man met me
in excellent good time.


Da. Dauus says this softly to himself.
Out alas, are we not clean cast a way?


Si. I show him all that thou toldst me erewhile.


Da. And this like wise to himself.
What is this I here?


Si. I entreat him for his daughter, and with much a do I obtain her.


Da. I am utterly undone.


Si. Hah, what say thou?


Da. I say it is excellently well don.


Si. Now is there no let or delay on this man's behalf.


Chr. I will straight go hence to bid every thing be made ready, and so bring
word hither again.


Si. Now Dauus I pray thee, since thou alone have brought this marriage for me
to pass:


( Da. Yea truly, I, and none else.)


Si. That thou will yet moreover labor my sons amendment.


Da. In deed I will do what I can.


Si. Thou may now well do it, especially while he is netteled at the heart.


Da. Well, set your mind at rest.


Si. Go to then, But where is he now?


Da. It is marvel if he be not at home.


Si. Simo departs and Dauus stays still.
I will go to him, and tell him my mind in the same sort, as I told it thee.


Da. I am a forlorn creature, what shall keep me but that I must go hence
straight into the grinding house to prison? No prayer or entreaty will serve, I
have now brought all out of frame: I have deceived my master: I have forced a
marriage on my Masters son: I was the cause yt the marriage shall be made to
day, even quite unhoped for of ye old man, and clean contrary to the mind of
Pamphilus. See these goodly crafts of mine: had I not busied my self, there
had happened no harm at all: Dauus espieth Pamphilus coming.
But lo yonder I see him himself, I am but a dead man: I would to God here
were some place, where I ^ight throw my self down headlong.


Act. 3. Scen. 5.
The Argument.
PAMPHILVS takes on very much, that by following the deceitful devise of
Dauus, he made answer to his father that he would marry.

Pamphilus, Dauus.
WHere is that same mischeeuous varlet, which has clean undone me?


Da. Now Lord have mercy upon me.


Pamph. And yet I confess, this that has happened, is even good enough for me,
when I would be so sottish, and so very a dolt, as to commit my whole estate
and welfare unto a prating villain. Therefore I reap a just reward for my
folly. But he shall never escape scotfree with it.


Da. This he says out of Pamphilus hearing.
I am sure to be safe enough for ever hereafter, if I may but now avoid this
mischief.


Pamph. But what may I now say to my father? shall I now refuse marriage, and
yet promised erewhile that I would marry? with what face dare I do that? I wot
not what to do with my self.


Da. Dauus speaks all this out of Pamphilus hearing.
Truly nor I neither, what to do with my self: yet this is it I am fully
resolved upon, I will tell him that I shall presently find out some remedy,
and so put of my punishment yet a little while.


Pamph. Oh.


Da. Now he sees me.


Pamph. Come hither you honest man: how say you sir, see you not how I (poor
soul) am bestad by means of your devises?


Da. But I will remedy it by and by.


Pamph. Will thou remedy it?


Da. Yes certainly master Pamphilus.


Pamph. Yes, even as thou did of late.


Da. Nay rather better, I hope.


Pamph. O, should I credit thee vile hangman? can thou recover a matter full
of trouble, and past all hope of help? Out alas, what a sure stay had I of
thee, who this day, out of my greatest quietness, have forced me into a
marriage spite of my teeth? did I not tell thee it would come thus to pass?


Da. You did so.


Pamph. What then art thou worthy of?


Da. Hanging. But yet suffer me a little to come to my self, I will straight
way seek out some help.


Pamph. Alas that I have not leisure to punish thee as I would: it is now time
for me to see to my self, and not to be avenged of thee.


Act 4. Scen. 1.
The Argument.
This scene does chiefly contain the angry speeches of Carinus against
Pamphilus.

Carinus. Pamphilus. Dauus.
IS this a thing credible, or worthy to be spoken of, that there should be
so much perverseness in any man, as to delight in evil, and to seek his own
commodity, even by the discommodity of an other? Is this kind of people to be
trusted? Nay certainly, those are the very worst kind of people, who are
somewhat shamefast in denying a Request, but afterward, when time requires
performance of their promises, Then of necessity, they bewray themselves and
faulter, and yet the matter it self drives them then to a flat denial: Then
is their speech void of all shame and honesty, as thus: who are you sir? What
friend of mine are you? why should you desire my sweet heart? O sir, hear you
me, I love you well, but my self better. Nevertheless, if you ask where is
truth and trustines of promis, they are never a whit ashamed. Now they are not
a frayd to deny, when as they ought to perform: And yet are they then afraid,
when they should not. But what shall I do? Is it best that I go to him, to
taunt and take him up for this injury? I shall give him shrewd words his
fill: But one may say to me, thou shall be never the near: yes very much:
without doubt I shall anger every vain in his heart, and withal shall ease
mine own mind.


Pamph. Carinus, I have unawares (without God help us) even clean cast away
both you and my self.


Car. Yea, unawares: is it so indeed? Now at last you have got an excuse:
Tush, thou have broken thy faith and promis.


Pamph. Why, what excuse now at last?


Car. What, woldst thou yet again deceive me now, with those subtle speeches
of thine?


Pamph. Why, what is the matter with you now?


Car. Mary after I had told you that I was in love with Philumena, forsooth it
pleased you to like her well for your self: Woe is me woeful wretch, who
esteemed the honesty of thy mind by mine own.


Pamph. You mistake the matter.


Car. Why, and do thou not think this yet a joy perfect enough for thee,
unless thou may make a tame fool of me that am in love, and feed me with
vain hope? well, take her to thee.


Pamph. Should I take her? Alack, full little do you know, in how great troobles
I am wrapped, unhappy man that I am: and what care and anguish, this my
Tormentor has put me to, with his devises.


Car. Why, is that such a marueill? he takes ensample by you.


Pamph. Well, you would not say this, if you knew either me, or my love.


Car. I know you were at words with your father of late, and that is the matter
he is now displeased with you, but yet he could not co^pel you to marry her to
day.


Pamph. Yea and by how much the more you are ignorant of my heaviness: This same
marriage was not meant or intended for me, neither did any man motion, now at
this time, to procure a wife for me.


Car. I wot well, you are compeld to it even of your own free will.


Pamph. Abide, you wot not yet how the case stands.


Car. Yes certainly, I wot full well that you will marry her.


Pamph. Why do you thus kill my heart? hear me what I shall say to you: he never
ceased, preassing, persuading, and praying me so long, till at last he
enforced me to say unto my father, that I would marry her.


Car. What man did this?


Pamph. Dauus.


Car. What, Dauus?


Pamph. Yea, he brought all out of square.


Car. Wherefore did he so?


Pamph. I wot not in the world, without that God were highly offended with me,
in that I followed his counsel.


Car. Dauus, Did thou do this?


Da. Yes.


Car. Hah, what say thou villayne? Now I pray God give thee a mischeeuous
end as thou have deserved. Why I pray thee tell me, if all the enemies he has
in the world would have wished to force a marryage upon him, what other
counsel could they have given him than this?


Da. Well, I am deceived, but not discouraged.


Car. Ironice.
I know it well.


Da. The matter came not well to pass this way, now we will take an other
course, unless you be of opinion, that because it had ill success at the
first: that therefore this evil may not now be remedied at the last.


Pamph. Yes mary may it, for I verily believe if thou do bend thy whole
endeavor unto it, thou will make for me two marriages of one.


Da. Master Pamphilus, this I owe unto you of duty, as being your servant:
even day and night to labors to my uttermost with might and maine, and to
hazard my life to do you good withal: it is your part, if ought has happened
otherwise than was looked for, to pardon me. Be it that my doings prosper not:
Why yet I do my true intent: Or find you some better remedy your self, and
let not me either make or meddle withal.


Pamph. That is it I desire: set me again in the same state thou foundest me.


Da. I will.


Pamph. But it must be don by and by.


Da. Alas, but yet stay a little, Glyceries door creaks.


Pamph. That is nothing to thee.


Da. Yet I would know.


Pamph. What, still more staying?


Da. Well, I will presently find you out a devise for this.


Act. 4. Scen. 2.
The Argument.
HERE Pamphilus makes promis unto Mysis that he will never forsake Glycerie:
yea though he shall procure all men to be his enemies for it.

Mysis. Pamph. Carinus. Dauus.
Wheresoever your friend Pamphilus be, I will furthwith seek him out, and bring
him with me: In the mean time (dear heart) do not you vex your self with
thought.


Pamph. Mysis?


My. Who is there? O master Pamphilus, you meet me in very good time.


Pamph. What is the matter with thee?


My. My mistres bad me pray you for Gods sake, if you love her, that you will
come to her, now out of hand. She says that she longs much to see you.


Pamph. Out alas, I am a forlorn man? This mischief begins now again a
fresh: Is it meet that both I and she (silly souls) should be thus vexed and
disquieted thorough thy means? for dowtles that is the cause she now sends for
me, having understood of the marriage I am toward.


Car. Concerning which matter truly, full easily might we have bin at quiet,
if this knave had not busted himself.


Da. Go too, if he be not mad enough of himself, do thou prick him forward.


My. Truly forsooth, and even that is the cause that the woeful woman is in
sorrow for.


Pamph. Mysis I swear to thee by all the Gods, that I will never forsake her,
no not if I wist, I should have all men living mine enemies for it. I have
desired this woman in my heart: She is fallen to my lot: we are alike in
manners and condition: farewell they, that would set us two a sunder. There
shall none part her from me, but only death.


Car. I am now come to my self.


Pam. No not the answer of God Apollo can be truer than this. Mary I would
feign (if it may be) that my father shall not think, that I withstood the
going forward of this marriage: But if it may not be, then will I go the
plain way to woork, that he may think that I did withstand it. What manner of
man do I seem?


Car. Even as forlorn a creature as my self.


Pamph. I seek for counsel.


Car. Thou art a valiant man.


Pamph. Dauus I know whereabout thou go.


Da. Well, certainly I will bring this to pass for you.


Pamph. It is more than time it were don.


Da. I have it but even now to do.


Car. What is it?


Da. That thou deceive not thy self, I have it for this man's behoof, and not
for thine.


Car. That is sufficient for me.


Pam. Tell me I pray thee, what is that thou will do?


Da. I fear me, this day will skant serve me to do my business: Think not
than, that I am now at leisure to discourse: Therefore get ye both away hence,
for ye do but trouble me.


Pamph. I will go see Glycerie.


Da. And what will you? whither away hence?


Car. Will thou have me say the truth?


Da. Nay, now he begins to tell me some long tale.


Car. But what shall become of me?


Da. Why thou shameless man, is it not well for thee, that I gain thee one
little days respite, in that I do prolong his marriage?


Car. O Dauus, yet notwithstanding.


Da. What then?


Car. That I may attain to marry her.


Da. See a fool.


Car. Well, look thou come hither to me, if so he thou may do any good in
the matter.


Da. To what end shall I come? I can do nothing.


Car. But yet if thou may do ought.


Da. Well, go too, I will come.


Car. If thou may do any thing, thou shall find me at home.


Da. Now he speaks to Mysis.
Mysis do thou stay here a little for me, till I come forth again.


My. Wherefore?


Da. For a thing that must needs be don.


My. Hye thee apace.


Da. I tell thee, I will be here again by and by.


Act. 4 Scen. 3.
The Argument.
DAVVS brings the child before Simoes door, to thend to drive Chremes back
from accomplishing the marriage. And this scene consists more in gesture, then
in utterance.

Mysis. Dauus.
WHat, can one be sure of nothing in this world? O Lord God, I still thought,
that this Pamphilus was my mistres cheifest joy, as being her friend, her lover,
her husband, and one ready to serve her turn in all assayes. But now (alack
forlorn woman,) what grief takes she for his sake? without doubt there is
more harm in this, than there was good in the other. But lo, Dauus comes
forth. Abide fellow, what is that, I pray thee? whither away carriest thou the
child?


Da. Mysis, now must I needs have thee show thy ready wit and cunning in this
matter.


My. Where about go thou?


Da. Take this same child of me quickly, and lay it down before our door.


My. What I pray thee, on the bare ground?


Da. Take thee some herbs of this alter, and straw under it.


My. And why do not thou do it thy self?


Da. Because if perhaps I shall be driven to swear to my master, that I laid
it not there: That then I may swear with a safe conscience.


My. I perceive you. But yet tell me, I pray thee, how is it come upon thee to
be so holy now of late?


Da. Go too, bestir thee, that thou may know further of my mind, what I
will do. O good Lord.


My. Why, what now?


Da. The Brides father is come, and has prevented me. Now I leave of my
purpose which I first intended.


My. I wot not what thou say.


Da. I will now make as though I came this other way on the right hand: See
that thou be ready to answer and uphold my talk, in every point as shall
be needful.


My. I perceive not at all, what thou intendest to do. But if there be any
thing that my help may stand you in stead, or that thou see further into the
matter than I do: I will stay here, least you should be hindered of any
benefit by my default.


Act. 4. Scen. 4.
The Argument.
CHREMES hears that Glycerie has a child by Pamphilus, and withal that
she is a free borne woman of Athens: by which means, he is quite withdrawn
from the marriage.

Chremes. Mysis. Dauus.
NOw that I have made all things in a readiness for my daughters marriage, I am
come again that I may cause her to be sent for. But what have we here? In good
faith it is a child: woman did thou lay this same child here?


My. She looks after Dauus.
Whether is this fellow gone?


Chr. What, will thou not answer me?


My. Alack he is no where in sight, woe is me (poor wench) the fellow is gone
his ways, and left me here.


Da. Now Dauus comes a long.
Good Lord of heaven, what hurleburley is yonder at the market? how much people
is there at strife? without it be that corn be at a high price, I wot not in
the world what to make of it.


My. I pray you sir, why did you leave me here all alone?


Da. How now, what tale is this of a roasted horse? Nay but hear thou me
Mysis, whose child is this? or who brought it hither?


My. Art thou well in thy wits, that ask me this question?


Da. Whom then should I ask, seeing here is no body else?


Chr. This he says to himself. Chremes must be supposed to stand a loof
listening unto all the talk between Dauus and Mysis, and yet not showing
himself unto them, but upon occasion of their talk he oftimes utters
speeches as to himself.
I marueil whence it should be?


Da. Will thou not tell me what I ask?


My. Ahlas.


Da. Come thy way hither on my right hand.


My. Thou rauest, dydst not thou thy self? --


Da. Hushed, be not so hard for thy ears as to speak one word more than I
shall ask thee.


My. Thou raylest.


Da. Whence is this child? speak out aloud.


My. From among you.


Da. Ha ha ha, it is a wonder no doubt, if a hoore play a shameless part.


Chr. He speaks this to himself
This maid belongs to her of Andros for ought I can perceive.


Da. Do we seem such fit copesmates for you to mock and dally withal?


Chr. To himself.
I came in time.


Da. Bestur thee quickly, and take a way the child hence from the door. This,
Dauus speaks in a lower voice, that Chremes may not here him.
Abide still, see thou stur not a foot out of the place thou standst in.


My. I pray God a very vengeance light on thee, that so do terrify me, poor
wretch that I am.


Da. Do I speak to thee or not?


My. What would thou?


Da. And do thou yet ask me what? I pray the whose child have thou laid
here? Tell me.


My. Do not thou know?


Da. This he speaks softly unto her.
Let pass what I know, and tell me what I ask.


My. It is yours among you.


Da. Which of us owes it?


My. Pamphilus.


Da. This he repeats alowd because Chremes may hear him.
Hah, what saydst thou? Is it Pamphilus child?


My. Why I pray thee and is it not?


Chr. To him self.
I see I did well always to shun this same marriage.


Da. O notable prank worthy of punishment.


My. What exclaming make thou?


Da. Why, did not I see this same child brought unto you yesterday in the
evening?


My. O thou brazen faast fellow.


Da. Dauus urges Mysis to prove plainly that the child is borne of Glycerie,
least otherwise Chremes should imagine it to be a feigned matter, as Simo does.
Act. 3. Scen. 1.
At least I saw Gammar Canthara with her clothes tuckt about her, carrying
somewhat in her lap.


My. In good faith yet I thank GOD with all my heart, that there were some free
women of the city, at my mistres deliverance.


Da. Without doubt she knew not him, for whose cause she takes this matter in
hand. If Chremes shall see this same child, laid here before the door, then
will he not give his daughter in marriage: Ah, in good sooth he will give her
so much the sooner.


Chr. Meaning by him self.
But in good sooth he will not.


Da. Now be thou well assured of this, that if thou do not take away the
child, I will by and by spurn it into the midst of the street, where I will
trample thee also in the dirt.


My. In good sadness fellow, thou art not well in thy wits.


Da. One deceitful devise bringes an other to light: I hear now such
whispering among them, that this same Glycerie is free borne of Athens.


Chr. Chremes speaks still to himself.
What is this?


Da. So as he shall be driven by law to marry her.


My. Why I pray thee, and is she not free of this City indeed?


Chr. I see I was well nigh fallen into a shrewd sporting game unawares.


Da. Who talks here? O Chremes, you come, in as good time as may be: hear me
what I shall say.


Chr. I have heard every word already.


Da. What, have you hard all this talk?


Chr. I tell thee I hard all from the beginning.


Da. I pray you and have you hard it in deed? fie, out upon these lewd
pranks: Now should this same queen be had hence into Bridewell. This same is
the man thou do mock: think not then, that thou mockest Dauus.


My. Alas for me unhappy wench that I am: In good sooth, old father, I have
told nothing but truth.


Chr. I know the whole matter already: but is Simo within.


Da. Yes.


My. It seems that Dauus offers to d^ly and play with Mysis, seeking thereby
to please her: and she will not abide him.
Touch me not thou varlet. By God if I tell not all this unto Glicerie, [neuer
credit me.]


Da. Why thou foolish wench, thou perceiuest not what is don.


My. What should I perceive?


Da. This man is the brides father: it might not otherwise be compassed, to
make him understand these things that we would have him.


My. Why then, thou should have told me so before.


Da. I pray thee now, and do thou think but small difference between that,
that one does in good earnest, and that which is done for the nones.


Act. 4. Scen. 5.
The Argument.
CRITO coming from Andres to Athens, enquireth whether Glycerie have found out
who be her parents or no: and understanding that she has not yet found them,
he is therewith much grieved, because that matter does hinder his enjoying of
the goods fallen unto him by Glyceries death.

Crito, the stranger. Mysis. Dauus.
IT was told me, that here in this street, dwelt Chrysis, who chose rather
in this town to gather goods with dishonesty, than to lead an honest poor
life, in her own country. By whose death, those same goods, by right of law,
are come to me. But I see now of whom I may enquire. God speed you.


My. I pray you whom do I see? Is not this Crito, cousin germain to Chrysis? it
is even he.


Cr. O Mysis, God save you.


My. And you too good Crito.


Cr. Alack for pity, and is Chrysis dead indeed?


My. Yea truly forsooth, we poor souls are undone by her death.


Cr. Why, what do you? how goes the world with you here, all well?


My. What we? Truly (as the proverb goes) We do as we may, since we may not
as we would.


Cr. How fares Glycerie, has she found out yet who be her parents here?


My. Would God she had.


Cr. Why than, and has she not yet? Than in an il hour am I come hither. For
in good faith if I had known this, I would never have set foot forward in this
journey. For she has ever bin held and reputed for Chrysis own sister. She is
in present possession of all that ye other had. And now, for me a stranger to go
follow suits and brables in law, how easy and profitable a matter were that for
me here to do, even the examples of others do foreshew me. Besides that, I
cannot but think, that she has now some friend and defender, for she was of
meetely good age and stature, when she went from us. I should be exclaimed upon
to be a beggarly fogger, greedily hunting after heritage. And moreover, it
were no reason to spoil her of that she has.


My. O Gaffar Crito, in good sooth full well do thou keep thy old wont still.


Cr. Well, since I am come hither, bring me to her, that I may yet see her.


My. With a very-good will.


Da. I will follow these, but I would not for any thing, that the old man
should now see me.


Act. 5. Scen. 1.
The Argument.
SIMO earnestly desires to effect the marriage: Chremes on the other side
utterly renounceth Pamphilus for his son in law, because he has a child by
Glycerie.

Chremes. Simo.
WELL neighbor Simo, you have now had trial enough and enough again, of my
love and friendship toward you. I began to enter into danger far enough for
you. Now at length cease your entreating: for while I bent my self to follow
your fancy, I had well nigh cast away my daughter.


Si. Nay rather (neighbor Chremes) I most instantly request and beseech you,
that you will now perform in deed, the good turn that ere while you promised
me on your word.


Chr. See how unreasonable you are, respecting your own desire: so you may
bring to pass what you would have, you neither regard a mean in courtesy,
nor yet consider what you request at my hands: for if you did, you would (now
at last) give over to surcharge me with your unreasonableness.


Si. With what unreasonableness?


Chr. Why, and do you ask me with what? mary sir, you enforced me thus far,
that to a loose young man entangled in love with a strange harlot, and utterly
misliking marriage, I should give my daughter to wife, to be in daily discord,
and uncertain state of wedlock, to thend that with her trauail, and trooble, I
might heal your sons diseas. You obtained this at my hands, and I went about
it while there was any boot: now it boots not, you must therefore bear with
me. They say, that same woman is free born of this City. She is delivered of
a child. Seek to us no further.


Si. I beseech you for Gods sake, not to give your mind to credit those, whose
greatest profit grows by my sons lewdest living: All this, is but forged
and framed for the nones, by reason of this marriage: when the cause why they
do this, is once taken away, Then they will cease.


Chr. You are diceyued, for I my self saw her maid chiding and brawling with
Dauus.


Si. I grant you.


Chr. Nay but in right good earnest, when as neither of them both was aware of
my being there.


Si. I believe it well, and that they would do so, Dauus fortolde me a pretty
while since, but I wot not how, otherwise than I meant, I forgot to tell you
so much.


Act. 5. Scen. 2.
The Argument.
SIMo hearing by Dauus, that there was one come, which affirmed Glycerie to be
free borne of Athens: in a great rage, causes Dauus to be had into prison fast
bound. And herein, Terence does lively express the usual manner both of an
angry father, and also of an angry master.

Dauus. Chremes. Simo. Dromo, the whipping Bedle.
AT my word, now (at length) set your heart at rest:


Chr. Thus Simo and Chremes do talk betwixt themselves, and Dauus goes on
still in his speech.
See where Dauus is.


Si. Thus Simo and Chremes do talk betwixt themselves, and Dauus goes on still
in his speech.
Whence comes he?


Da. What thorough my help, and yonder stranger.


Si. He speaks out of Dauus hearing.
What knavery is that?


Da. I have not seen a meeter man, a more seasonable coming, nor a fitter
time.


Si. And so here likewise.
Whom does this varlet prays thus?


Da. Now all is out of danger.


Si. Why do I linger to speak to him?


Da. Now at last he espyeth Simo.
My master is here, what shall I do.


Si. O, all haill to you honest man.


Da. Now master, and master Chremes, all things be in a redines within.


Si. O it is trimly don of you.


Da. Now send for him when you will.


Si. Very well surely: that is the cause forsooth he is now absent: Nay but
answer me to this, what business have thou there? That is in Glyceries house



Da. Who, I?


Si. Yea.


Da. What, I?


Si. Yea, you sir.


Da. I went in but even now.


Si. As though I asked how long ago it was.


Da. Your son and I went in together.


Si. Why than, and is Pamphilus within? I am still vexed unhappy man that I am.
Why thou hangman thou, did not thou tell me that they are fallen at debate.


Da. So they are.


Si. What makes he there than?


Chr. This is spoken in derision.
What think you that he is a doing? he is sure chiding with her.


Da. Nay but master Chremes, you shall here me tell you of a notable strange
matter: I wot not what old man is come yonder even now, but to look to, he is
a substantial and wary man: if you saw his face, you would take him for a
right honest man. In his countenance is sad gravity, and his words do sound
of truth.


Si. What tidings bringst thou?


Da. Nothing forsooth but what I hard him say.


Si. And what says he, I pray you?


Da. Mary that he knows Glycerie to be a free born woman of Athens.


Si. Simo calls for him that whips the slaves.
Hola howh, Dromo, Dromo.


Dro. What is the matter?


Si. Dromo.


Da. Why, here me sir.


Si. If thou speak one word more -- Dromo.


Da. I beseech you here me.


Dro. What would you have sir?


Si. Hoyse up this knave on thy back, and carry him in as fast as thou can.


Dr. Whom?


Si. Dauus.


Da. Wherefore?


Si. Because I will have it so, take him away I say.


Da. What have I don sir?


Si. Away with him.


Da. If you do find that I told you any lie, kill me forth right.


Si. I will not here one word: I shall set thee in a beat by and by, I warrant
thee.


Da. What, notwithstanding I say nothing but Troth?


Si. He speaks to Dromo.
Yea nevertheless, sir see thou that he be kept fast fetterd: and hear
thou me? bind his hands and feet together, He turns his speech to Dauus and
Pamphilus.
Now sir go to: By God if I live this day to an end, I will teach thee and him
both, what danger it is for the one of you to beguile his master, and for the
other to deceive his father.


Chr. Tush man, be not in so great a rage.


Si. O Chremes, do you not pity me, to see what reverend regard my son has
toward me? and that I should take so much trauaill for such a son? Well go to
Pamphilus: Come out here Pamphilus, Is there no shame in thee?


Act. 5. Scen. 3.
The Argument.
SIMO sharply rebukes his son: who confessing his fault, submits himself
wholly unto his fathers pleasure, Chremes endeuoreth to appease thextreame Rage
of Simo.

Pamphilus. Simo. Chremes.
WHo calls me? O I am undone, it is my father.


Si. What say thou? thou arrand --


Chr. Fie, go to the matter, and cease your evil language.


Si. Yea as though there could be any name to ill for this fellow. Now sir,
do you say the same too? Is Glycerie free bone of this City?


Pamph. So it is reported.


Si. So it is reported? O wonderful impudency, does he consider what he
says, think you? is he any thing sorry for his misdeede? Nay but see, does
his color any whit change, or show any sign of shamefastnes? is it meet he
should be so unruly, as that contrary to the custom of his cuntrimen, contrary
to law, and contrary to the mind of his father, he do labor to have that
same naughty pack, even to his utter infamy and reproach?


Pam. Woe is me, forlorn man that I am.


Si. O Pamphilus, Pamphilus, do thou now perceive that, and never before?
Long since ywis, long since, when thou gave thy mind so lewdly, as that by
one mean or other thou must fulfill thy lust: lo, even that very first day,
had this bin truly said of thee. But what mean I? why do I vex and disquiet
my self? why do I consume my self with care? why do I wear my old age,
with sorrowing for his madness? is it, that I should suffer punishment for his
faults? Nay rather, let him have her: and farewell he: let him live with her
and spare not.


Pam. My good father.


Si. What my good father? as who should say, you have any need of this father:
why, you have got you house, and wife, and children, and all maugre your
fathers heart. There be also those brought, which affirm that same queen to be
free borne of this city: well, you shall have the victory.


Pam. Father, may I speak a word or two?


Si. What will thou say to me?


Chr. O Simo, yet hear him.


Si. I hear him Chremes? what should I hear him?


Chr. Why man, yet give him leave to speak.


Si. Well go too, he may speak, I let hm not.


Pamph. Father, I confess I love that same woman: and if that be an offense, I
confess that also. I submit my self into your hands father, lay upon me
what charge you will: command me. Is it your pleasure I should marry a wife?
will you have me forgo this woman? well, I will bear all as I may. Only this
I beseech you, not to believe that this old man is come hither by my
appointment. Give me leave to clear my self, and that I may bring the man
here before your face.


Si. That thou may bring him here?


Pam. Yea Father, suffer. me.


Chr. He craves but reason, give him leave.


Pam. Let me obtain this much at your hands.


Si. I am content. Chremes, I yield to any thing, so that I find not my self
to be deceived by this fellow.


Chr. Small punishment contents a father, for a great offense in his son.


Act. 5. Scen. 4.
The Argument.
In this scene Crito of Athens meets both with Simo and Chremes, whereby the
whole error of the comoedy is laid open: for here, Glycerie is manifested to be
the daughter of Chremes.

Crito, the stranger. Chremes. Simo. Pamphilus.
CEas to pray me, any one of these respects, shall cause me to do it: as
either for your own sake, or for that the matter is truth, or in respect that
I wish well to Glycerie.


Chr. What, is it Crito of Andros that I do see? Truly it is he indeed.
Welcome Crito: what make you at Athens, being here such a stranger?


Cr. It is so fallen out. But is this Simo?


Chr. This same is he.


Si. What, is it for me thou ask? why sir, do thou say that Glycerie is
free borne of this City?


Cr. Do thou deny it?


Si. What, and art thou come so well provided indeed.


Cr. Why so?


Si. Ask thou why? shall thou do this, and escape unpunished? do thou toll
here into thy snare, young men void of experience, and honestly brought up? Art
thou he that feedest forth their minds with intysing and fair promising?


Cr. Abide, art thou well in thy wits?


Si. And do thou make marriages betwixt them and the harlots that they are in
love withal?


Pamph. This to himself.
Alas I am undone, I fear me the stranger will have never a word to say.


Chr. Simo, if you knew this man thoroughly, you would not think so of him: this
is an honest man.


Si. May this fellow be an honest man? comes he this day so iump in the very
time of this marriage: and could he come never before now? why Chremes, is this
a man to be believed?


Pam. Were I not afeard of my father, I could tell him that which would
satisfy him in this point well enough.


Si. Hah fogging knave.


Cr. What?


Chr. O Crito bear with him, this is his fashon.


Cr. Nay let him consider what he is: As for me, if he proceed to call me at
his pleasure, he shall hear that, that shall be little to his lyking. Do I
let that same marriage? or do I ought at all pass for it? He turns his
speech to Simo.
Thou do not bear thy grief patiently: for as touching what I spoke, whether
it be true or false that you heard, may soon be known.

Here is recited the argument of the Comoedie.
A certain man of Athens, a good while since, suffering Shipwreck, was cast on
shore at Andros, together with that same Glycerie, as than a little child.
This man being than in need and necessity: by chance first arrived at the
house of Chrysis father.


Si. Now he begins a fable.


Chr. Suffer him to go on.


Cr. What, even so indeed? he interrupts me.


Chr. Go on with your tale.


Cr. Moreover, he which received him into his house, was my Cousin: there did I
hear the man himself say, that he was of Athens: and in that house he died.


Chr. What was his name?


Cr. would you know his name so quickly? Phania.


Chr. Out alas to day.


Cr. In good sooth, I take it, his name was Phania. This I am well assured of,
that he said he was a Rhamnus was a famous village by Athens. And Rhamnusius,
(...) is a man of that village.
Rhamnusian.


Chr. O the King of heaven.


Cr. Yea Chremes, there were than many other in Andros, which hard him say the
same.


Chr. Would to God it were no otherwise than I hope for. But tell me this
Crito, what said he than as touching the girl? did he say that she was his
daughter?


Cr. No.


Chr. Whose than?


Cr. His brothers daughter.


Chr. Without dowt she is mine.


Cr. What say you?


Si. Nay what say thou?


Pamph. Listen to this gear Pamphilus.


Si. What think you of this?


Chr. That same Phania was my brother.


Si. I knew the man, and I wot well he was your brother.


Chr. He flying hence, for fear of the war, takes his way after me into
Asia, and than he was afraid to leave her here behind him. Since which time, I
never hard what became of him till now.


Pam. I am well nigh beside my self, my mind is so whelmed, with fear, hope,
Joy, and with wondering at so great, and so sodeyn good hap.


Si. Now in good faith, I am glad that by many proofs she is found to be your
daughter.


Pamph. Father I believe it well.


Chr. But there remains yet one doubt, which sore troubles me.


Pamph. You are well worthy to be hated for your peevish precisenes: you make
a doubt where all is as plain as a pack staf.


Cr. What is that you doubt of?


Chr. Her name falls not out right.


Cr. Truly she had an other name, when she was a child.


Chr. What name? Cannot you remember it Crito?


Cr. I am calling it to mind.


Pamph. Shall I suffer this man's memory to be a hinderance unto my wished joy,
when as I may help my self in this point? no, I will not suffer it. Lo you
hear Cremes, the name you seek for, is Passibula.


Cr. That same is she.


Chr. Is it even she.


Pamp. she has told it me her own self a thousand times.


Si. Chremes, I wene you believe that we all rejoice at this.


Chr. Yea so God me help, do I believe it.


Pamph. Father, what remains now to be don?


Si. The matter it self has reconciled me a good while since.


Pamph. O an excellent father. Chremes alters nothing as touching my wife,
but that I may still enjoy her, as I have don.


Chr. Mary and good cause why. Unless your father say otherwise.


Pamph. Only, as touching the dowry.


Si. Yea marry, that.


Chr. Pamphilus her dowry is five hundred pound.


Pamph. I accept it.


Chr. I will now hye me to my daughter, and you Crito, go with me: for I believe
she never knew me.


Si. And why do you not rather cause her to be brought hither to you?


Pamph. You put us well in mind, I will presently cause Dauus to go about that
matter.


Si. He cannot.


Pamph. How so?


Si. Mary because he has a great matter of his own, which touches him nearer.


Pamph. What is that?


Si. He lies bound in prison.


Pamph. Father, then is he wrongfully bound.


Si. Not so, I commanded it.


Pamph. I beseech you, command that he be let loose.


Si. Go to, be it so.


Pamph. But make have than.


Si. I go in straight way.


Pamph. O Blisfull and happy day that this is.


Act. 5. Scen. 5.
The Argument.
PAMPHILVS declares unto Dauus, how that Glycerie is found to be free borne of
Athens, and that he shall marry her Likewise Carinus shows unto Pamphilus,
that by his means, he also may obtain Philumena at Chremes hands. This Scene
brings an other son in law to Chremes: least that either Carinus should
depart away sorrowful, or that Philumena should be left unprovided for.

Carinus. Pamphilus. Dauus.
I I am come forth, to see what Pamphilus is a doing: but lo where he is.


Pamph. Perhaps some body would think that I skant believe this to be true, but
I will have it to be true, as it is in deed. I suppose that therefore the life
of the Gods is everlasting, because pleasures do properly belong unto them: for
mine own part, I am in heaven al ready, if so be it, no grief of mind do
intermingle with this joy. But now what man should I most specially desire to
meet withal, to whom I might show all that has happened.


Car. This to himself.
What great joy is that?


Pamph. Lo, I see Dauus: There is no man living that I would fayner have: for I
am sure that he, of all other, will unfeignedly rejoice at my joy and gladness.


Da. whereabout here, is Pamphilus?


Pamph. Dauus.


Da. What man is that?


Pamph. It is I.


Da. O my master Pamphilus.


Pamph. Thou wotst not what has happened to me.


Da. Very true, but I wot well what has happened to my self.


Pamph. And so do I too.


Da. Yea it came to pas after the common course of the world, that you knew of
the evil that happened to me, sooner than I knew of the good that happened to you.


Pamph. My sweet love Glycerie, has found out who be her parents.


Da. O happy chance.


Car. This he says to himself.
What is that?


Pamph. Her father is a very special friend of ours.


Da. Who is that?


Pamph. Chremes.


Da. You say well.


Pamph. Neither is there any let or tariance, but that I may marry her out of
hand.


Car. This is spoken out of the hearing of Pamphilus.
What, does he not dream trow you, that which his mind ran upon being awake?


Pamph. Now moreover Dauus, as touching the child.


Da. Tush let it alone, God does specially provide for it above all other
children.


Car. Carinus is over heard by Pamphilus.
I am a made man, if this be true: I will sure speak with him.


Pamph. What man is there? O Carinus, you come to me, even as well as heart can
wish.


Car. It is well.


Pamph. What, have you heard the matter?


Car. Yes every whit: Go to, have some respect of me, now in the time of your
prosperity: I know that Chremes is now yours altogether, and will do all that
you will have him do.


Pamph. I wot it full well: but it would be too long for us, to tarry and look
for his coming forth:

Therefore follow me along this way: he is now within with Glicerie. Dauus go
thou thy way home: hye thee, go for company to bring her away hence. Why do
thou stand still? why go thou not?


Da. I am going.


This seems not to he spoken by any of the interloquutors, but by some other
coming last on the stage.
Do not stay looking for their coming out: for she shall be betrothed within:
and if any thing more remain to be don, it shall be dispatched within also.

Now clap hands, and rejoice.


FINIS.
Here is to be understood that as Pamphilus has Glycerie to wife: Even so
Carinus likewise has Philumena, the other Daughter of Chremes.


