SIX IDILLIA

THAT IS, SIX SMALL, OR PETTY POEMS, OR AEGLOGVES, CHOsen out of the right
famous Sicilian Poet THEOCRITVS, and translated into English verse.

Dum defluat amnis. PRINTED At Oxford, by JOSEPH BARNES. 1588.

E. D.

Libenter hic, and omnis exantlabitur
Labor, in tuae spem gratiae.
SIX IDILLIA, CHOSEN OVT OF THE famous Sicilian Poet THEOCRITVS, and
translated into English verse.
THE VIII. JDILLION.
Argument.
Menalcas a Shephearde, and Daphnis a Netehearde, two Sicilian Iads, ^ontending
who should sing best, pawn their whistles, and choose a Gotehearde, to be
their Judge. Who gives sentence on Daphnis his side. The thing is imagined to
be don in the I Will of Sicily by the Sea shore of whose singing, this Idillion is
called BVCOLIASTAE, that is, Singers of a Neteheards song.

BVCOLIASTAE.
DAPHNIS. MENALCAS. GOTEHEARDE.
WITH lovely Netehearde Daphnis on the hills, they say,
Shepehearde Menalcas met, upon a summers day.
Both yuth fullstriplings, both had yeallow heads of hear,
In whistling both, and both in singing skillful wear.
Menalcas first, behoulding Daphnis, thus bespake.
MENALCAS. Will thou in singing, Netehearde Daphnis, undertake
To strive with me? for I affirm, that at my will
I can thee pass. thus Daphnis aunswerde on the hill.

DAPHNIS. Whistler Menalcas, thou shall never me excel
In singing, though to death with singing thou should swell.

MENALCAS. Then will thou see, and something for the victor wage?


DAPHNIS. I will both see, and something for the victor gage.


MENALCAS. What therefore shall we pawn, that for us may befit?


DAPHNIS. I Will pawn a calfe, a wennell lamb lay thou to it.


MENALCAS. I Will pawn no lamb, for both my Sire and Mother fell
Are very hard, and all my sheep at evne they tell.

DAPHNIS. What then? what shall he gain that winns the victore?


MENALCAS. A gallant Whistell which J made with notes thrice three,
Joinde with white wax, both evne below and evne above,
This will I lay, my Fathers things I will not move.

DAPHNIS. And J a Whistle have with notes thrice three arowe,
Joinde with white wax, both evne above, and evne below.
J lately framde it, for this finger yet does ache
With pricking, which a splinter of a reed did make.
But who shall be our Judge, and give us audience?

MENALCAS. What if we call this Goteheard here, not far from hence,
Whose dog does bark hard by the kids?
the lusty boys
Did call him, and the Gotehearde came to hear their toies.
The lusty boys did sing, the Gotehearde judgment gave.
Menalcas first by lot unto his whistle brave
Did sing a Neteheards song, and Neteheard Daphnis than
Did sing by course, but first Menalcas thus began.

MENALCAS. Ye Groves, and Brooks divine, if on his reed
Menalcas ever sung a pleasant lay,
Fat me these Lambs; if Daphnis here will feed
His calfes, let him have pasture toe I pray.

DAPHNIS. Ye pleasant Springs, and Plants, would Daphnis had
As sweet a voice as have the Nightingales;
Feed me this heard, and if the sheepeheards lad
Menalcas cums, let him have all the dales.

MENALCAS. It Is ever spring, their meades are ever gaie,
There strowt the bags, their sheep are fatly fed
Where Daphne cums; go she away,
Then both the shepherd there, and grass is ded.

DAPHNIS. There both the Ewes, and Gotes bring forth their twins,
Their Bees do fill their hiues, their Oaks are hie
Where Milo treades; when he away begins
To go, both Neteheard, and the Nete wax dry.

MENALCAS. O husband of the Gotes! O wood so hie!
O kids, come to this brook, for he is there;
Thou with the broken horns, tell Milo shie,
That Proteus kept Sea-calfes, though God he were.

DAPHNIS. Nor Pelops kingdom may J crave, nor gould,
Nor to outrunne the winds upon a lea;
But in this cave I Will sing, with thee in hold,
Both looking on my sheep, and on the sea.

MENALCAS. A tempest marreth trees, and drought a spring,
Snares unto fowls, to beasts, netts are a smarte,
Love spoils a man. O Jove, alone his sting
J have not felt, for thou a lover art.

Thus sung these boys by course, with voices strong,
Menalcas then began a latter song.
MENALCAS. Wolf, spare my kids, and spare my fruitful sheep,
And hurt me not, though but a lad these flocks J gide;
Lampur my dog, art thou indeed so sound asleep?
Thou should not sleep, while thou art by thy Masters side.
My sheep, fear not to eat the tender grass at will,
Nor when it springs up again, see that you fail;
Go to, and feed apace, and al your bellies fill,
That part your Lambs my have, and part my milking paile.

Then Daphnis in his turn sweetly began to sing.
DAPHNIS. And me not long ago fair Daphne wistle eide
As J drove by, and said J was a paragone;
Nor then indeed to her I churlishlie replide,
But looking on the ground, my way still held J one.
Sweet is a cowcalfes voice, and sweet her breath does smell,
A bulcalfe, and a cow do low full pleasantly;
It Is sweet in summer by a spring abroad to dwell,
Acornes become the Oak, apples the Appletree,
And calfes the kine, and kine, the Neteheard much set out.

Thus sung these Yuthes; the Gotehearde thus did end the dout.
GOTEHEARD. O Daphnis, what a dulcet mouth, and voice thou have?
It Is sweeter thee to hear, than honie-combes to taste.
Take thee these pipes, for thou in singing do excel.
Jf me a Gotehearde thou will teach to sing so well,
This broken horned Goat, on thee bestow I will,
Which to the very brimm, the paile does ever fill.

So then was Daphnis glad, and lept, and clapped his hands,
And danst, as does a fawn, when by the damm he stands.
Menalcas greeud, the thing his mind did much dismaie,
And sad as Bride he was, upon the marrige day.
Since then, among the Shepeheards, Daphnis chief was had,
And took a Nimphe to wife, when he was but a lad.
DAPHNIS his Emblem. Me tamen vrit amor.

MENALCAS his Emblem. At haec Daphne for san probet.

GOTEHEARDES Emblem. Est minor nemo nisi comparatus.

THE XI. JDILLION.
Argument.
Theocritus wrote this Idillion to Nicias a learned Physician. wherein he
shows by the example of Polyphemus, a Giant in Sicilie, of the race of the
Cyclopes, who loved the water Nymph Galatea, that there is no medecin so
sovereign against love, as is Poetry. Of whose loue-song, as this Idillio^ is
termed Cyclops, so he was called Cyclops, because he had but one eye, that
stood like a circle in the midst of his forehead.

CYCLOPS.
O Nicias, there is no other remedy for love,
With ointing, or with sprinkling on, that ever I could prove,
Beside the Muses nine. this pleasant medsun of the mind
Grows among men, and seems but lite, yet very hard to find.
As well I wot you know, who are in Physic such a leeche,
And of the Muses so beloved. the cause of this my speech,
A Cyclops is, who lived here with us right welthele,
That anchent Polyphem, when first he loved Galate;
When with a bristled beard, his chin and cheeks first clothed were.
He loved her not, with roses, apples, or with curled hear,
But with the Furies rage. al other things he little plide.
For often to their fould, from pastures green, without a guide
His sheep returned home, when all the while he singing lay
Jn honor of his love, and on the shore consumde away
From morning until night, sick of the wound, fast by the heart,
Which mighty Venus gave, and in his liver stuck the dart.
For which, this remedy he found, that sitting oftentimes
Upon a rock, and looking on the Sea, he sung these rimes.
O Galatea fair, why do thou shun thy lover true?
More tender than a Lamb, more white than cheese when it is new,
More wanton than a calfe, more sharp than grapes unripe I find.
You use to come, when pleasant sleep my senses all do bind.
But you are gone again, when pleasant sleep does leave mine eye,
And as a sheep you run, that on the plain a Woolfe does spy.
J then began to love thee, Galate, when first of all
You with my mother came, to gather leaves of Crowtoe small
Upon our hill, when J as usher, squirde you all the way.
Nor when I saw thee first, nor afterward, nor at this day,
Since then could J refrain; but you, by Joue, naught set thereby.
But well I know, fair Nimphe, the very cause why you thus fly.
Because upon my front, one only brow, with bristles strong
From one ear to the other ear, is stretched al along.
Nethe which, one eye, and on my lips a hugie nose there stands.
Yet I, this such a one, a thousand sheep seed on these lands.
And pleasant milk I drink, which from the strouting bags is pressed.
Nor want I cheese in summer, nor in Autumn of the best,
Nor yet in winter time. my cheese-rackes ever laden are,
And better can I pipe, than any Cyclops may compare.
O Apple sweet, of thee, and of my self, I use to sing,
And that at midnight often. for thee, aleavne faunes up I bring,
All great with young, and four bears whelps, I nourish up for thee.
But come thou hither first, and thou shall have them all of me.
And let the bluish colorde Sea beat on the shore so nie.
The night with me in cave, thou shall consume more pleasantly.
There are the shadie Baies, and there tall Cypres-trees do sprout,
And there is Juie black, and fertile Vines are al about.
Cool water there J have, distilled of the whitest snow,
A drink divine, whiich out of woody Aetna mount does flow.
In these respects, who in the Sea and waves would rather be?
But if J seem as yet, too rough and savage unto thee,
Great store of Oken wood I have, and never quenched fire;
And J can well endure my soul to burn with thy desire,
With this my only eye, then which J nothing think more trim.
Now woe is me, my mother bore me not with finns to swim,
That J might diue to thee, that I thy dainty hand might kiss,
If lips thou would not let; then would J Lillies bring Jwis,
And tender Poppie toe, that bears a top like rattells red.
And these in summer time, but other are in winter bred,
So that I cannot bring them all at once. now certainly,
I Will learn to swim of some or other stranger passing bie,
That I may know what pleasure it is in waters deep to dwell.
Come forth, fair Galate, and once got out, forget thee well
(As I do sitting on this rock) home to return again.
But feed my sheep with me, and for to milk them take the pain,
And cheese to press, and in the milk, the rennet sharp to strain.
My mother only wrongeth me, and her I blame, for she
Spoke never yet to thee, one good or lovely word of me,
And that, although she daily sees, how I away do pine.
But I will say my head and feet do ache, that she may whine
And sorrow at the heart, because my heart with grief is swollen.
O Cyclops, Cyclops, whither is thy wit and reason flowne?
If thou would baskets make, and cut down browzing from the tree,
And bring it to thy Lambs, a great deal wiser thou should be?
Go coie some present Nimphe, why do thou follow flying wind?
Perhaps an other Galate, and fairer thou shall find.
For many maidens in the evening tide with me will play,
And all do sweetly laugh, when I stand harkning what they say,
And I some body seem, and in the earth do bear a swaie.
Thus Polyphemus singing, fed his raging love of old,
Wherein he sweeter did, than had he sent her sums of gould.
POLYPHEM'S Emblem. Vbi Dictamum inueniam?

THE XVI. JDILLION.
Argument.
The style of this Poem is more lofty than any of the rest, and Theocritus
wrote it to Hiero king of Siracuse in Sicily. Wherein he reprooueth the
nigardise of Princes and great men, toward the learned, and namely Poets, in
whose power it is, to make men famous to al posterity. Toward the end he
praises Hiero, and prays that Sicilie may be delivered, by his prowes, from
the invasions of the Carthagineans. This Idillion is named Hiero, in respect of
the Person to whom it was written, or Charites, that is Graces, in respect of
the matter whereof it treats.

CHARITES, or HIERO.
POETS have still this care, and still the Muses have this care
To magnify the Gods with songs, and men that worthy are.
The Muses they are Goddeses, and Gods with praise they crown,
But we are mortal men, and mortal men let us renown.
But who of all the men, under the cope of heaven that dwell,
By opening of his doors, our Graces entertaines so well,
That unrewarded quite he does not send them back again?
They in a chafe, al barefoote home to me return with pain,
And me they greatly blame, and, that they went for naught, they grutch,
And al to weary, in the bottom of an empty hutch,
Laying there heads upon there knees full cold, they still remain,
Where they do poorly dwell, because they home returnde in vain.
Of all that living are, who loves a man that speaks well?
I know not one; for now a days for deeds that do excel,
Men care not to be praysde. But all are ouercum with gain.
For every man looks round, with hand in bosom, whence amain
Coin he may get, whose rust rubde off, he will not give again.
But strait way thus he says; the leg is further then the knee,
Let me have goulde enough, the Gods to Poets pay their fee.
Who would an other here? Enough for all, one Homer is.
Of Poets he is prince, yet getts he naught of me Iwis.
Mad men, what gain is this to hoorde up baggs of goulde within?
This is not monyes use, nor has to wise men ever bin.
But part is due unto our selves, part to the Poets pen,
And many kinsfolks must be pleasured, and many men,
And often to the Gods thou must do solleme sacrifise.
Nor must thou keep a sparing house, but when in friendly wise
Thou have received strangers at thy boorde, when they will thence.
Let them depart, but cheefely Poets must thou reverence.
That after thou art hidden in thy grave, thou may here well,
Nor basely may thou mourn, when thou in Acharon do dwell;
Like to sum ditcher vile, whose hands with work are hard and dry,
Who from his parents poor, bewailes his life in beggerie.
In king Antiochus his Court, and king Aleuas toe,
To distribute the monthly bred, a many had to do.
The Scopedans had many droues of calfes, which in their stales
Mong Oxen loud, and shepeheardes kept in the Cranonian dales
Infinite flocks, to bear the hospital Creondan's charge.
No pleasure should these men enjoy, of their expenses large,
When ons their souls they had embarkt in the infernal Barge,
But leaving all this wealth behind, in wretched misery,
Among the dead, without renoune, for ever they should lie,
Had not Simonides, the Chian Poet with his pen,
And with his Lute of many stringes, so famous made these men
To all posterity. the very horses are renoun'd,
Which from their races swift returned, with olife garlandes crounde.
Who ever should have known the Lician Princes, and their race,
Or them of Troie, or Cignus with his woman's color'd face,
Had not the Poets sung the famous wars of them of oulde?
Nor yet Ulysses (who for ten years space, on Seas was roulde
By sundry sorts of men, and who at last went down to Hell
As yet alive, and from the Cyclops den escaped well)
Had got such lasting fame; and drounde should lie in silence deep
Swinehearde Eumaeus, and Philaetius, who had to keep
A heard of Nete; Laertes eke him self had bin unknown,
If far and wide their names, great Homers verses had not blown.
Immortal fame to mortal men the Muses nine do give.
But dead men's wealth is spent, and quite consumde of them that live.
But all one pain it is, to number waves upon the banks,
Whereof great store, the wind from Sea, does blow to land in ranks,
Or for to wash a brick with water clear, till it be white,
As for to move a man, whom avarice does ons delight.
Therefore adue to such a one for me, and let him have
Huge silver heaps at will, and more and more still let him crave;
But I, Goodwil of men, and Honor will prefer, before
A many Mules of prise, or many horses kept in store.
Therefore I ask, to whom shall J be welcome with my train
Of Muses nine? whose ways are hard, if Joue guides not the rain.
The heavens yet have not left to roll both months and years on reeles,
And many horses yet, shall turn about the Charret wheels;
The man shall rise, that shall have need of me, to set him out,
Doing such deeds of arms, as Ajax, or Achilles stout
Did in the field of Simois, where Ilus bones do rest.
And now the Carthagineans, inhabiting the West,
Who in the utmost end of Liby dwell, in arms are pressed;
And now the Syracusians their spears do carry in the rest.
Whose left-armes laden are with targets made of willoe tree.
Among whom, king Hiero, the anchent Worthies match, I see
In armor shine, whose plume does over shade his helmet bright.
O Jupiter, and thou Minerua fierce in fight,
And thou Proserpina, who with thy mother, have renown
By Lysimelia streams, in Ephyra that wealthy town,
Out of our Island drive our enemies, our bitter fate,
Along the Sardine Sea, that death of friends they may relate
Unto their children and their wives, and that the towns oppressed
By enemies, of the old inhabitants may be possessed;
That they may till the fields, and sheep upon the downs may blete
By thousands infinite, and fat, and that the heardes of Nete
As to their stalles they go, may press the lingering traueler.
Let grounds be broken up for seed, what time the Grasshopper
Watching the sheepheards by their flocks, in boughs close singing lies;
And let the Spiders spread their slender webs in armories,
So that of war, the very name may not be heard again.
But let the Poets strive, king Hieros glories for to strain
Beyond the Scythean Sea, and far beyond those places, where
Semiramis did build those stately walls, and rule did be are.
Among whom, I will be one; for maine other men beside
Joues daughters love, whose study still shall be, both far and wide
Sicilian Arethusa, with the people, to advance,
And warlike Hiero. Ye Graces, who keep resiance
In the Thessalian mount Orchomenus, to Thebs of old
So hateful, though of you belovde, to stay J will be bold,
Where I am bid to come, and I with them will still remain,
That shall inuit me to their house, with all my Muses train.
Nor you will I forsake; for what to men can lovely be
Without your company? the Graces always be with me.
Emblem. Sinihil attuleris, ibis Homere for as.

THE XVIII. JDILLION.
Argument.
Twelve noble Spartane Virgins are brought in singing in the evening at the
chamber door of Menelaus and Helena, on their wedding day. And first they
prettily jest with the Bridegroom, then they praise Hellen, lastly they wish
them both joy of their marriage. Therefore this Idillio^ is entitled Hellens
Epithalamio^, that is, Hellens wedding song.

HELLENS Epithalamion.
IN Sparta long ago, where Menelaus wore the crown,
Twelve noble Virgins, daughters to the greatest in the town,
All dight upon their hair in Crowtoe garlands fresh and green,
Danst at the chamber door of Helena the Queen,
What time this Menelay, the younger Son of Atreus,
Did marry with this lovely daughter of Prince Tyndarus.
And therewithal at eve, a wedding song they jointly sung,
With such a shuffling of their feets, that all the Palace rung.
Fair Bridegroom, do you sleep? has slumber al your lims possessed?
What, are you drousie? or has wine your body so oppressed
That you are gone to bed? for if you needs would take your rest,
You should have taken a season meet. mean time, till it be day
Suffer the Bride with us, and with her mother dear to play.
For, Menelaus, she at evening and at morning tide,
From day to day, and year to year shall be thy loving Bride.
O happy Bridegroom, sure some honest man did sneze to thee
When thou to Sparta came, to meet with such a one as she.
Among the demigods thou only art accounted meet
To be the Son in law of Joue; for underneath one sheet
His daughter lies with thee. of all that tread on ground with feet
There is not such a one in Greece. now sure sum goodly thing
She will thee bear, if it be like the mother that she bring.
For we her peers in age, whose course of life is evne the same,
Who at Eurotas streams, like men are oiled to the game,
And four times sixty maids, of all the weemen youth we are,
Of these none wants a fault, if her with Hellen we compare.
Like as the rising Morning shows a grateful lightening,
When sacred night is past, and winter now lets loose the spring;
So glittering Hellen shinde among the maids, lusty and tal;
As is the furrowe in a field that far out-stretcheth al,
Or in a garden is a Cypres-tree, or in a trace
A steed of Thessalie, so she to Sparta was a grace.
No damsel with such works as she, her baskets used to fill,
Nor in a diverse color'd web, a woofe, of greater skill
Does cut off from the loome, nor any has such songs and lays
Unto her dainty harp, in Dians and Mineruas praise
As Hellen has, in whose bright eyes, all Loves and Graces be.
O fair, o lovely maid, a matrone now is made of thee.
But we will evrie spring, unto the leaves in meadows go,
To gather Garlands sweet, and there not with a little woe
Will often think of thee, O Hellen, as the sucking Lamms
Desire the strouting baggs, and presence of their tender damms.
We all betimes for thee, a wreath of Melitoe will knit,
And on a shadie Plane, for thee will safely fasten it.
And all betimes for thee, under a shadie Plane below,
Out of a silver box the sweetest ointment will bestow.
And letters shall be written in the bark, that men may see,
And read, Do humble reverence, for J am Hellens tree.
Sweet Bride, good night, and thou, O happy Bridegroom, now good night,
Latona send you happy issue, who is most of might
In helping youth, and blisfull Venus send you equal love
Bitwixt you both, and Jove give lasting riches from above,
Which from your noble selves, unto your noble impes may fall.
Sleep on, and breath into your breasts desiers mutual.
But in the morning wake, forget it not in any wise.
And we will then return as soon as any one shall rise,
And in the chamber stur, and first of all lift up the head.
Hymen, O Hymen, now be gladsome at this marrige bed.
Emblem. Vsque adeo latet vtilitas.

THE XXI. JDILLION.
Argument.
A Neteheard is brought in chasing, that Eunica a maid of the city disdained
to kiss him. Whereby it is thought that Theocritus seems to check them, that
think this kind of writing in Poetry, to be too base and rustical. And
therefore this Poem is termed Neteheard.

NETEHEARDE.
EVNICA skorned me, when her I would have sweetly kissed,
And railing at me said, go with a mischief where thou list.
Think thou a wretched Neteheard me to kiss? I have no will
After the Country guise to smouch, of City lips I skill.
My lovely mouth, so much as in thy dream thou shall not touch.
How do thou look? How do thou talk? How plaiest thou the slouch?
How daintilie thou speakst? What courting words thou bring out?
How soft a beard thou have? How fair thy locks hang round about?
Thy lips are like a sickmans lips, thy hands, so black they be,
And rankely thou do smell, away, least thou defilest me.
Having thus sed, she spatterd on her bosom twice or thrice,
And still beholding me from top to toe, in skorneful wise,
She mutterd with her lips, and with her eyes she lookte aside,
And of her beutie wondrous coy she was, her mouth she wride,
And proudly mocked me to my face. my blud boild in each vain,
And red I woxe for grief, as does the rose with dewye rain.
Thus leaving me, away she flung; since when, it vexes me,
That J should be so skornde, of such a filthy drab as she.
Ye Shepeheards, tell me true, am I not fair as any swan?
Has of a sudden any God, made me another man?
For well J wot before, a cumlie grace in me did shine,
Like Iuy round about a tree, and dekt this bearde of mine.
My crisped locks, like Parslie on my temples wont to spread,
And on my eiebrowes black, a milk white forhed glistered.
More seemly were mine eyes, than are Mineruas eyes I know.
My mouth for sweetness passed cheese, and from my mouth did flow
A voice more sweet than hunniecombes. Sweet is my rundelaie,
When on the whistle, flute, or pipe, or cornet I do play.
And all the weemen on our hills, do say that I am fair,
And al do love me well. But these that breath the city air
Did never love me yet. And why? The cause is this I know,
That I a Neteheard am. They hear not, how in vales below
Fair Bacchus kept a heard of beasts; nor can these nice ones tell,
How Venus rauing for a Neteheards love, with him did dwell
Upon the hills of Phrygia, and how she lovde again
Adonis in the woods, and mournde in woods, when he was slain.
What was Endymion? Was he not a Netehearde? Yet the Moon
Did love this Neteheard so, that from the heavens descending soon,
She came to Latmos grove, where with the dainty lad she lay.
And Rhea, thou a Neteheard do bewail, and thou al day
O mighty Jupiter, but for a Shepeheardes boie did straie.
Eunica only dained not, a Neteheard for to love.
Better forsooth then Cybel, Venus, or the Moon above.
And Venus, thou hereafter must not love thy fair Adone
In city, nor on hill, but all the night must sleep alone.
Emblem. Habitarunt Dij quoque Syluas.

THE XXXI. JDILLION.
Argument.
The conceit of this Idillion is very delicate. Wherein it is imagined, how
Venus did send for the Bore, who in hunting slew Adonis, a dainty yuth, whom
she loved; And how the Bore aunswering for himself, that he slew him against
his will, as being inamored on him, and thinking only to kiss his naked
thigh, she forgave him. The Poets drift is, to show the power of love, not
only in men, but also in brute beasts. Although in the two last verses, by the
burning of the Bores amorous teeth, he intimates, that extrauagant and
unorderly passions, are to be restrained by reason.

ADONIS.
WHEN VENUS first did see,
Adonis dead to be,
With woeful tatterd hear,
And cheeks so wan and sear,
The winged Loves she bad,
The Bore should straight be had.
Forthwith like birds they fly,
And through the wood they hie.
The woeful beast they find,
And him with cords they bind.
One with a rope before,
Does lead the captive Bore.
Another on his back,
Does make his bow to crack.
The beast went wretchedly,
For Venus horribly
He fearde, who thus him cursed.
Of all the beasts the wurst,
Did thou this thigh so wound?
Did thou my Love confound?
The beast thus spoke in fear;
Venus, to thee J swear,
By thee, and husband thine,
And by these bands of mine,
And by these hunters all,
Thy husband fair and tall,
J minded not to kill,
But as an image still,
J him beheld for love,
Which made me forward shoue,
His thigh, that naked was,
Thinking to kiss alas.
And that has hurt me thus.
Wherefore these teeth, Venus,
Or punish, or cut out.
Why bear I in my snowt,
These needless teeth about?
If this may not suffice,
Cut off my chaps likewise.
To ruth he Venus moves,
And she commands the Loves,
His bands for to untie.
After, he came not nie
The wood, but at her will,
He followde Venus still.
And cumming to the fire,
He burnt up his desire.
Emblem. Raris forma viris, scula prospice, Impunita fuit.

FINIS.

