Of the Imitation of CHRIST,

Three, both for wisdom, and godliness, most excellent books; made 170.
years since by one THOMAS of KEMPIS, and for the worthiness thereof often since
translated out of Latin into sundry languages by diverse godly and learned
men: now newly corrected, translated, and with most ample textes, and
sentences of holy Scripture illustrated by THOMAS ROGERS.

John. 14, 16. I am the way, the truth, and the life. Mark. 8, 34. Whosoever
will follow me, let him forsake himself, and take up his cross, and follow me.
1. Cor. 11, 1. Follow me, as I follow Christ. Imprinted at London, by Henry
Denham, dwelling in Pater noster Row, at the sign of the Star.

Cum priuilegio Regie Maiestatis.

DOMINO THOMAE BROMLAEO, EQVITI AVRATO, NON MINVS EGREGIA PIETATIS, MORVM, AC
LITERARVM LAVDE, QVAM SVMMI IN ANGLIA CANCELLARIATVS AMPLITVDINE ILLVSTRI;
THOMAS ROGERIVS HOS VERE QVIDEM AVREOS DE CHRISTO IMITANDO LIBELLOS, A SE E
LATINO CONVERSOS, CASTIGATOS, ET VARIIS, AC MVLTIPLICIBVS SS. SCRIPTVRAE
SENTENTIIS INSIGNITOS, IN GRATI ANIMI TESTIMONIVM CONSECRAVIT.

The first Epistle of the Translator touching Christian imitation in general,
to the faithful Imitators of our Savior Christ in England, S.
WHO enters into Man by nature is given to imitation.
a due consideration of man's nature, shall easily perceive that most stranglie
it is addicted unto Imitation; and, though in truth, we should live by laws
not by examples, that examples do more mou^, than do laws. Servants in a
family; soldiers in an army; subjects in a Commonweal may confirm what I
say. For servants will imitate their masters; soldiers their capitaines;
subjects their governors Ecclus. 10 verse. 2.
, be they good, be they bad, yea get they praise or get they infamy, profit or
hurt therebie: thinking their lives to be a law; and that to be well done which
is done after their example Hieron. in Epist. ad Heliodo.
.

1. Wherebie I note, first, that they should have great regard unto themselves,
who are any way, either for birth, or for office, or for calling, whether it
be spiritual or temporal better than other men. For they cannot sin without
great hurt, and danger to the Commonweal say I of them, as once spoke Cicero
of judges Cic. act. 2. in Vetrem.
. Whence it is, that mighty men shall mightily be tormented Wisd. 6, 6.
.

2 Secondly, that, seeing our nature is such, we are to take special heed
whom we follow, or imitate. For every one may not be followed; neither shall
the ungodly behauior of others excuse us before God. For we must al appear
before the judgment seat of Christ 2. Cor. 5, verse. 10. Reu. 22, 12.
to receive according to our own deeds Ps. 62, 12. Mat. 16, 27. Romans 2, 6.
. The licentious life of the Magistrate shall not quite the subject, if he live
not under laws; nor the wickedness of masters excuse the servant, if he be
ungracious; nor the il conversation of the preacher, be a cause to save the
hearer, if he be ungodly. For that soul that sins, be he what he be may,
shall die Ezec. 18, verse. 4.
.

The precept therefore which is given Who are to be followed.
to an imitator of Orators, I could wish were followed of a Christian Imitator.
In oratorie imitation two sorts of examples there be: one always, and most
necessary to be followed Sturmius in ca. 1. lib. sui de Imitat. Orat. Oratorie
Imitation. Demost. Cicero. Poe^ts. Historiographers. Christian imitation.
Christ always to be followed. Good me^ but sometime and in somethings to be
followed, and why; Four sorts of examples of good men mentioned in the holy
Scripture.
, the other but sometime and in somethings. The example always necessarily to
be followed of an Orator is among the Graecians Demosthenes, Cicero among the
Latins: they who are but sometime, and in some things to be followed, are Poets
and Historiographers.

So in Christian imitation two sorts of examples there be: one to be followed
and that both necessarily, and always, which is our Savior Christ; the other
but sometime and in some things, as are good men and women, whether they be
alive or dead.

Strange perhaps it may seem, that the good but sometime and in some things
should be imitated. Yet is it not so strange as true. For every example of
theirs may not be followed of us. For the better conceauing whereof it is to be
noted that four sorts of examples, yea of the elect, and righteous we may
read of in the holy Scriptures.

1 The first we may behold to imitate: as Abraham's faith Genesis 15, 5. 6. Romans
4, 9. 10, etc.
; Joseph's chastity Genesis 39, 7 8. 9, etc.
; David's zeal Psalm. 119, 14, 20, etc.
; Tobias pitifulnes toward the poor Tobit. 1, 16. 17. 18. Tob. 2, 2. 3. 4.
; and such like wherewith the Bible is most singularly replenished. These are
set before us, that we should not be slothful, but folowers of them Heb. 6, 12
which through faith and patience inherit the promises.

2 Other examples there be which are wicked: as the incredulity of Moses and
Aaron Nomb. 20 verse. 12. Nomb. 27, verse. 14. Deuteronomy. 32, 51 52.
; the adultery of David 2. Sam. 11 verse. 2. 3. 4. 5.
; Peter's denial Matt. 26, verse. 69. 70, etc.
; the ambition of the Apostles Luke. 22, verse. 24. 25, etc.
etc. which are placed before us, but for diverse ends. First to keep us from
that vane opinion which in these days has mightily crept into the minds of
many, that the elect and regenerate sin not. For that each of these, yea and
al these too were elected, I think the most fantastical will not deny, and yet
that they sinned in most ^ainous manner is apparent.

Secondly to make us the more warelie to look unto our footing. For, if they
so highly in Gods favor, and so singularly adorned with his heavenly gifts,
did fall and defile themselves so filthilie with sin, with what great fear and
trembling ought we to make an end of our salvation Phil. 2. 12.
, who are nothing comparable in spiritual gifts unto them; least as God either
punished (as he did Moses Deuteronomy. 34, verse. 1, etc. 4. 5.
, Aaron Nomb. 20 verse. 25. 26. Nomb. 33, verse. 38.
, and David 2. Sam. 12 verse. 10. 11. 2. Sam. 16, verse. 22.
with temporal punishment) or reproved (as Peter Lu. 22, 61.
, and the Apostles Mar. 10, 42 Luke 22, 25. 26, etc.
) them to their amendment: so he punish us eternalie to our utter confusion!

Thirdly, though we sin, that we neither go on foreward, and proceed in
wickedness, nor despair of Gods mercy, no more than they did. For the Lord is
rich over al To. 10, 12
that call upon him, and repent. Therefore ought no man to despair. For it is a
true saying 1. Tim. 1, verse. 15.
and by all means worthy to be received, that Christ Jesus came into the world
to save sinners Matthew. 9, verse. 13. Mark. 2, 17.
, wherebie many have attained mercy, unto the ensample of them 1. Tim. 1,
verse. 16.
which shall in time to come believe on him unto eternal life.

Last of al they are set before us to this end, that as God is merciful; so
should we be Luke 6, 36.
. And as he is ready to receive such into favor as repent Luke. 15, verse. 20.
21. Ecclus. 2, verse. 18. 19. 20. 21.
: so should we be merciful toward al men Matt. 18, verse. 21. 22. Matt. 5, 44.
Luke. 17, 3. 4.
, that in his judgment, we may find mercy Matt. 5, 7.
. Wherbie certain both Heretics, as the Catharans, or Nouatians, who taught
that none which sinned after they were regenerate, could be saved Cypr. lib. 4.
Epist. 2. Epist. Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 43.
; and Atheists, as Machiauel, and his favorers, who think that injuries
received should never be forgiven Theorem. 6. lib. 3. Comment. co^tra
Machiauel. page. 314. 315. 316, etc.
, are confuted.

3 Other things were well done by good men in times passed, which in these days
cannot be followed of us without offense to God. As they circumcised their male
children the eight day Leu. 12, 2, 3.
, which is unlawful for us to do Acts. 15, verse. 1. 5, etc. Gal. 5, 1.
; they offered sundry, and many sacrifices, I mean blodie sacrifices, unto
the Lord Leuit. 17, verse. 3. 4, etc. Leui. 22, 17. 18. 19, etc.
, we may not so do Coloss. 2, verse. 20. Hebr. 9, 1. Heb. 10, 1. 2, etc.
; one brother in those days married the wife of another Deuteronomy. 25, verse. 5. 6,
etc. Ruth. 4, 3. Mat. 22, 24. 25, etc. Mar. 12, 19. 20, etc.
, so to marry now were incest.

4 Finalie some deeds we may read of which were singular, such as neither we
may, nor others in those days might follow without the special and
extraordinary motion of the holy Spirit. As was Abraham's readiness to kill his
own and only son Isaac Genesis 22, 1 2. 3, etc.
; as likewise was the spoil which the Jews made of the Egyptians by
deteining their jewels of silver, and jewels of gold Exodus 12, verse. 35. 36.
. The doing whereof was commendable in them, because they were commanded Genesis
22, 1. Exodus 11, 1. 2.
; but most damnable should be in others, for that there be commandments to the
contrary Deu. 5, 17. Exodus 20, 13. Matthew. 5, 21. Deuteronomy. 5, 19. Exodus 20, 15.
Romans 13, 9.
, but none to do so.

Wherebie it is apparent that good men are not in all things to be imitated. But
as S. Paul would be so followed, as he followed Christ 1. Cor. 11, 1.
: so should they be.

Therefore our Savior is the example Christ alwais necessarily to be followed,
and why;
of us to be followed, and that always, and necessarily: always, for that he
was most perfectly good Esai. 53, 9 John. 8, 46. 1. Pet. 2, 22. 1. John. 3, 5.
; and necessarily, because both himself Matt. 11, verse. 29. Ioh. 13, 15. 34.
Ioh. 15, 12.
, and his Apostles 1. Cor. 11. verse. 1. Ephesians. 5, 1. ^. Philip. 2, 5. 1. Pet.
2, 21.
, have commanded us to do so.

But here mistake me not, I beseech you. For albeit I say our Savior Christ is
always; yet do I not say in all things: and though necessarily to be followed;
yet not as he was God. For he fasted forty days and forty nights Matt. 4,
2.
; he rebuked the waves of the sea, and the winds, and they cessed raging Luke
8, 24 25. Mark. 4, 39.
; he walked on the sea as on dry land Matt. 14, verse. 25.
; with seven loaves and two little fishes he fed four thousand men Mar. 8, 9.
besides women and children Matt. 15, verse. 34. 38.
at one time; at another with five loaves and two fishes, he fed about five
thousand men Ioh. 6, 10.
, beside women and children Matt. 14, verse. 19. 21.
; he restored sight to the blind Matthew. 9, 27. 28. 29, etc.
; health to the sick Mark. 5, 25. 26, etc. Matthew. 4, 23. 24. Matthew. 9, 35.
; to the dead life John. 11, 43. 44. Mark. 5, 35. 41. 42.
; and many other miracles by the almighty power of his Godhead he wrought,
which are inimitable (as I may say) of mortal man. In so much that they offend
greatly, whether they do it of superstition, as Papists; or of mere zeal, as
did the God of Norweigh One so called for his fasting 40. days, which he did
more than once: of whom John Wierus in a treatise of his De Jeiunijs
Comentitijs, page 125.
, who dare enterprise to imitate our Savior in any thing which he did
miraculouslie as a God. My reason is, because there is neither commandment
that we should, nor example of any disciple or Apostle in holy Scripture that
would, or durst so do. For we are not commanded to make a new world, to create
things visible or invisible; no nor in the world to do miracles, and to raise
the dead, said Augustine August. de verbis Domini. Wherein Christ is to be
imitated.
, and so do I.

Our Savior Christ therefore in those things which he did as a God must
religiously be worshipped; and followed zelouslie in what he did as a man. He
that loves and hates what Christ as a God, does love and detest, imitates
Christ as much as man may imitate God Theodor. lib. de Actiua virtute.
* he that does that which Christ did as a man, does follow Christ as a
Christian should.

What that is, this book at large most notably, and Bernard in few words
does show, namely Bernardus li. Sent.
, to abhor the vanity of the world, and that courageously; For Jesus, because
he would not be elected a King, fled fro the multitude: to repent, and that
hartelie; For Jesus was killed as a Lamb: to have true charity; For Jesus
praid for his enemies.

1 And hereunto we are moved, as by Reasons why we should imitate, or follow
our Savior Christ.
the commandments both of Christ himself, and of his Apostles Paul and
Peter, of which before: 2 so partly because we are called Christians; but
Christians have their name of Christ, therefore is it meet that as they be
coheires of his name, so they should be folowers of his holiness, so Bernard
Bern. lib. Sent.
; and No man is rightly called a Christian, who to the uttermost of his
ability does not resemble Christ in his conversation, so Cyprian Cyprian. de
12. ab^sionibus.
; finalie, Who does not imitate Christ, may well be called a Christian, but he
is none, so Augustine August. de vita Christiana.
. For what does it profit thee to be called, what thou art not* and to usurp a
strange name? If thou love to be called a Christian, show the fruits of
Christianity, and then well may thou take the name of a Christian unto thee,
said the same Augustine In the foresaid place.
. 3 Partly for that he is our God. Therefore is it our parts to imitate him,
whom we worship and serve. 4 Partly, because we are by nature given to
imitation. Wisdom would therefore we should imitate the best. 5 And partly
because we are Englishmen, who of al other people are most famous, and infamous
too for imitation. A shame were it therefore for us to imitate so painefulie as
many do in eloquence Cicero; in philosophy Aristotle; in law Justinian; in
Physic Galen for worldly wisdom; yea to imitate, as most do, the French in
vanity, the Dutch in ^uxurie, in bravery the Spanish, the Papists in
idolatry, in impiety and al impuritie of life the Atheists, and not to follow
our Savior Christ in heavenly wisdom, and in all godliness of manners.

That we may so do, he from whom every good gift, and every perfect gift
does come Iam. 1, 17.
, the Father of lights grant, who with the Son, and holy Ghost, be praised
evermore both in our hearts, mouths, and conversation, that others seeing our
good works may glorify our Father which is in heaven Matthew. 5. verse. 16. 1.
Pet. 2, 12.
Amen.

the 30. of Iulie, An. 1580. Farewell in him whom we are to follow, Tho. Rogers.

A second Epistle concerning the translation and correction of this Book.
SEbastian Castellio having translated this book into Latin, thought it good
by way of Preface to give some reasons, both why he had translated the same
being in Latin already; and why so he had translated it, leaving somewhat of
the Author out.

The case stands with me as it did with Castellio. Therefore am I to yield
some reasons both why I have translated this book into English being in English
already; and why so I have translated it, leaving somewhat out, as I have done.

For the first I say, that neither is my doing for novelty strange; nor am I
(as I trust) to be reproved therefore. For both I have examples of good men in all sciences, and professions, who to their great commendation have done the
like; as may witness the sundry and diverse interpretations of the works of
Aristotle, and Plato for philosophy; of Demosthenes and Isocrates, for
Oratorie; of Galen and Hippocrates, for Physic; for Divinity of the sacred
Bible: and also I have taken the translation thereof upon me, not so much to
translate, as to illustrate the same with places of Scripture. For doubtless
great pity was it, that a book so plentifulie, or altogether rather
fraighted with sentences of the Scripture, was either no whit, as in some, or
no better, as in the best impressions, quoted. Besides, I have not only showed
the chapter, but the very sentence also of every chapter where what is
written may be found: a thing which, that I hear of, none before me has done.
The bringing of which to pass, how paineful it has been to me, he alone can
best report, who either has done or does go about the like; how not
comfortable only, but profitable besides it will be to others* they shall find
that zelouslie do read the same.

And this whatsoever I have done, was taken in hand at the motion of the
Printer hereof; whose zeal to set forth good books for the advancement of
virtue, and care to publish them as they ought to be, would some printers
follow, neither would the sale of good works be mard manie-times for lack of
well handling; nor vain and vile books to the dishonor of God, the infamy of
this land, to the confirming of the wicked in naughtines, and alienating of the
well disposed from virtue, I say, to the discredit of the Gospel, and abuse of
printing would not daily be so broacht as they are.

In which my translation I have rather followed the sense of the Author, than his
very words, in some places; the which also I have studied, as nigh as I
could, to express by the phrase of the holy Scripture, supposing it to be a
commendation, as to Ciceronians to use the phrase of Cicero: so to Christians
most familiarlie to have the words of the holy Scripture in their mouths, and
books.

Now touching my correction, I trust no good man will mislike the same. For I
have left out nothing but what might be offensive to the godly. Yet is it
neither for quantity much, nor for number above four sentences. The first
whereof is this In the second book, chapt. 12, in the beginning almost.
Hoc signum crucis erit in coelo, cum Dominus ad iudicandum venerit. According
to Castellios translation: Atque hoc erit signum crucis in coelo, cum Dominus
ad iudicandum veniet. In the English copy set forth by Edward Hake, thus, And
this sign of the cross shall be in heaven, when the Lord shall come to judge the
world. Which sentence, for so much as I see neither the Scripture, nor any good
writer does confirm the same, I have left out altogether.

The second is this In the foresaid chap.
, Sed nec inimicum Diabolum timebis, si fueris fide armatus, and Jesus cruce
signatus. According to Castellio, Quinne Diaboli quidem inimicitias timebis, si
fide armatus, and Jesus cruce signatus eris. In the English translation, Naie
thou shall not fear the enimitie of the Devil neither, if thou be armed with
faith, and marked with the cross of Jesus. What needs these words, And marked
with the cross of Jesus? I have therefore not mentioned them.

The third is In the same chap.
, Non enim flat meritum nostrum, and profectus status nostri in multis
suauitatibus, and consolationibus, etc. According to Castellio, Neque enim in
copia voluptatum and consolationum situm est meritum nostrum, officijque
profectus, etc. In the English translation, Neither is our merit, and the
coming forward in our duty consisting in plenty of pleasures and comfortes*
etc. Which I have thus Englished, Neither does our coming forward consist in
the stoare of pleasures, and comfort, etc. leaving out the word merit. Because
both the scripture is cleene against our meriting, and the Author too in many
places As most principalie in the third book chap. 26, cha. 52, page 227, chap.
58.
condemns the same.

The fourth In the 3. book chapt. 20, in the middle thereof.
, Sed neque qui tunc iusti erant, and saluandi ante passionem tuam, and sacrae
mortis debitum, coeleste regnum poterant intrare. According to Castellio:
Quinetiam qui tunc iusti, seruandique erant, ij ante supplicium tuum sacraeque
mortis meritum in coeleste regnum intrare non poterant. In Hakes translation,
Naie also even those who then were justified, and in the state of salvation
could not enter the kingdom of heaven before thy passion, and the merit of thy
precious death. Where then were they? In hell? I think none will say it. In
Abraham's bosom, as some Catech. Trident. upon these words of the Creed,
Descendit ad inferos. Bern. in festo omnium Sanct. sermon. 4
, in Lymbo patrum, as other Papists D* Tho. in 4. did. 45. q. 1. Art. 3.
Jauellus philosoph. Christ. p. 8. Tract. 4. cap. de locis infoelicium damnat.
do say? but that will not easily be proved. Wherefore as that which otherwise
might offend the godly, I have clean omitted, and left out that sentence.

And as I have ouerpast without mentioning these, which savor of superstition:
so have I added some godly sentences, which have been omitted both by
Castellio, and such as followed him, as may appear both in the 47. according
to Castle. as in mine the 48. chap. within three sentences of the beginning;
and also in the 63. as in mine the 64. chap. somewhat after the middle thereof.

So that I marvel, both why these were omitted, and the rest not amended by
such as have taken the translation of this book upon them. I grant they have
done the duty of translators: yet sure I am they have neglected a greater
duty than of translatorship. For my part I had rather come into the
displeasure of man, than displease God; and rather move the obstinat heretic,
than offend the weak and simple Christian.

It may be objected that I might have given some note by the way, and so let
them pass; as does Erasmus in his translations. Surely Erasmus might better
do so in Latin, than I may in English. For as much as most are learned, and
have judgment which read his; and I do that which I do for the simpler sort.
And were other books, that I could name, excellent for many good points, yet
for some things superstitious, purged and corrected, sure I am, both God would
greatly like thereof, and many men would then read them, who now reject them;
and much profit would be reaped, whereas now there is either little or no profit
at al taken.

One chapter you shall find in this my translation more than is in other books.
Yet have I added no chapter, but divided the 6. chapter of the third book. For
as much as it comprehends partly a thanksgiving unto God for his benefits,
and partly a commendation of charity, which aptly, me thinks, makes two
chapters.

Now he, who principalie both stirred the Author to make this book, and me to
do what I have done, even God almighty grant that both you, and I, and every
of us may use it to the comfort of our souls, Amen.

Yours in Christ Tho. Rogers*

A godly Preface made by him, whosoever he was, that translated this book out
of the Latin tongue into French.
IF this book, which concerns the following Christ's example, have
heretofore yielded some fruit to such as have given themselves to the reading
thereof; I think it will yield no less hereafter, specialie now that it is rid
and cleansed from a number of imperfections that were in it before.

And although it be apparent, that the conversation of such as call themselves
Christians, is woonderfulie corrupted: yet notwithstanding because God is so
good, that he will evermore draw some one or other of an infinite multitude
from it: it makes me that I am not altogether out of hope.

Again, like as in great and sore diseases, all the best remedies that can be
devised, are wont to be applied with all speed: even so the more we see
wickedness and ungodliness to abound, the more ought we to consider by what
means they may be remedied, that some may be saved among so many thousands,
which are hardharted and enemies to al good warnings.

It must needs be granted, and experience proves it sufficiently; that
there was never any age, wherein Christians have bin more out of order, nor
have had less regard of godliness, than they have at this day: yet
notwithstanding, this ought not to bar us, from hoping that God will draw some
continualie to himself. On the other side, like as among a great sort that are
stricken with extreme sicknesses and diseases, some do always escape as it
pleases God: so is it to be hoped, that among an infinite number of false
Christians, God will touch some to bring them back from the filthiness and
corruptions of the world, and to lead them to the fearing of himself.

Moreover, it is not to be doubted, but that God has always some servants of
his, as it were covered under the great number, which by the power of his holy
spirit, do live continualie in all pureness and vndefilednes, without cleaning
or consenting to the ungodliness and disorderednes of the wicked.

And this is it which confirms me in my hope, that this little book shall not
be unprofitable nor fruteles.

Nevertheless, this book is not full of great cunning, nor beautified with
flowers of humane wisdom, neither does it discourse or treat of high or
dark things* neither is it stuffed with subtle questions and arguments, nor
indicted with eloquent style, as those commonly be which are propounded and set
forth to the world, rather for boasting and vainglories sake, than for any
desire to do other men good. This book is plain, and without any great
gainesse; but yet so full of good and wholesome instructions, that I dare well
auow, that whosoever reads it with a right disposed mind, without respect to
Profit of this book.
any other thing than God and the salvation of his own soul, which is the
only mark that we must leuel at: he shall reap singular profit thereby.

As for my part, I can witness of my self, that God has oftentimes made it to
serve me for a spur, to quicken and waken me up from my slothfulnes and
dulnes, and to kindle in me a desirousnes of his service; and I hope that the
like shall befall to al such as shoot at none other mark, but to know, fear,
and love him with a pure, right meaning, and single mind; and to lead a holy
conversation before him.

And in good sooth, it may well be said, Good books as ladders to climb up to
heaven.
that unto true Christians, good and holy books are as ladders to climb up
to heaven; as sparks to kindle the heat of the spirit, when it is quenched or
waxed cold in them; and as props to stay up their faith that it may take
increase.

I speak of true Christians. For as for them that are Christians but in words
and ceremonies: some of them be so bereft of al true feeling of God and of
their own conscience, that they never enter into the considering of the thing
that might be auailable and necessary to the well instructing of them in the
truth, and to the training of them to some godly behauior; but are wholly
given to the things of this life, as though there were none other after it* And
othersome have their minds so tied to the letter, that they can make none
account of any other books, but such as may make them skilful, eloquent,
sharpewitted, and subtle, and consequently woonderful among men, despising al
such works as may make them better by moving them to the exercises of their
profession. And of this sort the number is very grear nowadaies; of whom
nothing can be said, saving that (as the Apostle speaks of them) they can
welynough say with their mouth that they know God, but in their deeds and
works they renounce him Tit. 1, 16.
.

And truly we be come to a time, wherein we be more given and more hasty to
reason and dispute of our religion, than to be religious in deed; more given
to make great and large discourses of it, than to put it in practice, and to
show the truth and pureness of it by our holy conversation; and at a word more
given to talk than to do: insomuch that we may well perceive, that the
Christian profession is nothing else nowadaies, but a lipwisedome, and a skill
to hold talk among such as make their vaunts of it.

But what* do I term it a lipwisdome* Nay, would God it were not rather
turned into a fleshly and licentious loosenes* as we may partly see already
by too many effects thereof.

But so does it always befall to such as having received Christ's doctrine,
apply not themselves forthwith to the forsaking of themselves, without the
which it is not possible for us to be Christ's true disciples Matthew. 16, verse.
24.
. For as the light cannot match with darkness *2. Cor. 6, verse. 14.
: so cannot Christ's Spirit match with sin and the lusts of the flesh: insomuch
that if the practice thereof be omitted, there is none other thing to be looked
for, but a kind of liberty whereby men shaking off al yoke, shall give them
selves over to al evil, and sooth themselves in their sins. Not that they
keep not still some outward show and countenance of godliness: for unless it be
some Epicures and godles men, they never proceed so far as to do away and to
give over al service of God.

But yet are al such shows and outward countenances in vain, and of none
account before him which requires men's hearts Deuteronomy. 6, 5. Matt. 22, 37
, and contenteth not himself with the only outward deeds John. 4, 22. 23.
, wherewith notwithstanding they think to quiet their own consciences, and to
avoid the feeling of Gods wrath for their sins* which thing may well serve
for a time in the behalf of the ignorant, and of such as have no better skill;
but as for those which know wherein the serving of God consists, they cannot
but be marvelously abashed, if they fall to examining of their own wicked
conversation.

For then there is no ceremony (how fair a show so ever it bear, no not
even though it be of the number of those which God has inioined for the
keeping of order in his Church) that can satisfy the conscience which is
trobled with the feeling of it own sin, and make it sure before the
judgment of God, who will not judge us according to ceremonies, but according
to our works 2. Cor. 5, 10
.

We read what Jesus Christ will say to such as shall have cast out Devils in
his name Mat. 7, 23
, prophesied in his name, and wrought many other great things in his name:
Away from me (will he say to them) ye workers of wickedness. How much more then
will he say so, to such as occupieng themselves alonelie in some ceremonies,
and not in the true godliness which the Apostle says is profitable to al things
1. Tim. 4, 8
, shall have given themselves to follow their flesh and the world!

To be short, we must come to this point, that forasmuch as Christianity is
not an outward profession, ne a thing that consists in outward ceremonies,
(so as it may suffice to busy our selves about it,) or in words (as who would
say it were enough to have the skill to talk and discourse of it as men do of
other worldly sciences;) but it is the very power and might of God Romans 1,
16. 1. Cor. 1, 18.
, whereby God intends to renew, and as it were to create again his own
image and likeness in man, who is fallen from it by his own fault, and to set it
again in the former brightness and perfection, that he may attain again to
the blessed immortality: it is not to be doubted but that the same is the
thing whereon we ought to fix and settle the eyes of our mind, and whereunto
we ought to apply al our wits, straining them earnestly and to the uttermost
of their powers to attain thereunto. Otherwise we shall but lose our labor in
seeking after this or that; and all that ever we can do shall serve to no
purpose, but only to train us the further from the mark that is set before
us.

I know well it will be replied hereunto, that the thing which I speak of can
not be obtained in this life, wherein we be subject to so many infirmities
Genes. 6, 5.
, and are so corrupted and frail, that it is impossible to attain thereto.

Neither do I say, that we can attain so far as to be set perfectly again
in our former vncorruptnes, so long as we be hild wrapped in this mortal body
Wis. 9, 15.
: That is reserved for the world to come, wherein al things shall be reduced to
the highest perfection Reu 21, 1. 2, etc.
. But my meaning is only to declare, that the thing which shall be
accomplished there, must be begun in such wise here, as we may not cesse to
draw nearer and nearer unto it Phil. 3, 13. 14.
, by shortening our way continualie.

And surely the Scripture teaches us manifestly, that none shall become
partakers of the glorious rising again Romans 6, 5. 4.
, wherein consists the full measure of our felicity, but those which have
endeavored here to die unto sin, and to live again in newnes of life, (which is
called the first resurrection,) even by ye Spirit of Christ whom al true
Christians have clothed themselves withal: which have mortified the deeds of
the flesh Gal. 5, 19. 20. 21. Roman. 8, 4. 5. 2. Corin. 7, 1. Coloss. 3, 5.
; which have put off the old man Ephesians. 4, 22. 24.
with all his works; and put on the new man according to the image of him that
created us; and which have cleansed themselves here from al uncleanness both of
body and soul.

And that is the reason why saint Paul Colos. 3, 4. 5.
, having said that when Christ appears, we also shall appear with him in
glory; does forthwith warn us to mortify our members that are upon earth:
whereby he does us well to understand, that this mortification must go before in
us here, if we purpose to attain to glory.

The same Paul tells us that our bodies shall be quickened by reason of
Christ's spirit Romans 8, 11.
which shall have dwelled in us here, and whereby we shall have repressed al our
froward affections.

Also Saint John protests 1. Ioh. 3, 3.
, that whosoever puts his trust in Christ, does purge himself after ye
example of Christ.

To be short, there are infinite texts touching this point in the holy
Scriptures. And though there were no mo but this one which they utter so often,
namely that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God 1. Cor. 6, 9.
; it might be enough to content us withal, and to put us in fear, and to move
us to the true and earnest repentance.

But alas* We be so loath to yield to this point, and our flesh breeds us so
many hindrances, that we do what we can to eschew that burden, and to shake
it from our shoulders. But in so doing what do we else, but strive against our
own soulehelth, and resist Gods grace, who comes to save us, howbeit by such
means as he himself has ordained, and by such way as he commands us, and
not by means or ways of our own choosing!

Well said, God has commanded us to believe in his Son, and for our believing
on him he promises us everlasting life, so as al they which believe in Christ,
taking him for their Savior, and applieng to themselves all the benefits which
he has purchased for us by his death: are in the right way.

But who be these believers* Even they (says the Apostle) which walk not
after the flesh but after the spirit Romans 8, 1.
; they which take pain to frame themselves to the will of Christ; into whose
body they be graffed, and unto whom they be knit together as his lively
members Ephesians. 3, 17. 18. 19. Ephesians. 4, 15. 16.
; they which endeavor to love God, and to give over the love of themselves Luke
9, 23.
and of the world 1. John. 2, verse 15. 16.
; they which have their whole conversation in heaven Phila. 3, 20
; they which loath their former life, and for fear of falling thereinto
again, do the more watch, and look the warelier to their thoughts, devises,
words, and deeds: they which feeling their own weakness and infirmity, make
incessant prayer to God for the spirit of strength and stedfastnes 1. These. 5,
verse. 17.
; and which feeling their coldness and vnlustines, do crave the spirit of
feruencie and earnestnes; they which in adversity do keep themselves from
murmuring, and endeavor to be patient Romans 5, 3. 4. 5. James. 1, 3. 4.
; they which bethink themselves of Gods benefits, and yield him thanks for
them Psalm. 116, verse. 12. 13.
; they that strain themselves to succur their neighbors both in body and
soul Romans 12, 4. 5, etc. 1. Cor. 12, 12 13, etc.
; and at a word, they which crucify the flesh with the affections and lusts
thereof Colos. 3. 5.
.

Insomuch that they in whom these fruts are not found, ne make not the talent
of faith to prevail in such manner as I have told you, cannot be said to be in
the number of the true believers and faithful ones, notwithstanding that they
pretend some countenance of honesty, and therefore much less can those be
said to be of that number, in whom the works of the flesh Gal. 5, 19. 20. 21.
are apparent.

But some fleshly Christian will say still, Imputation of righteousness.
that as for him, he is clothed with the righteousness of Christ; that the
perfect obedience which Christ has yielded to God his Father in satisfieng the
law, is imputed unto him, as if he himself had yielded it; and (to be short)
that he is reckoned for righteous by his faith, so as none of al his
imperfections are to be made account of.

If thou listest to beguile thy self, thou may: but it will be to thy harm
and confusion. In deed Christ lays not our sins to our charge, if we believe
aright in him, neither shall al our imperfections hinder the virtue and
efficacy of his death. But to bear thy self in hand, that Christ holds
thee for righteous, when thou give thy self to unrighteousness, and have none
other care but to follow thine own inordinate lusts: it is not only a doing
of great dishonor unto him, but also a scorning of him for his redeeming thee.

And I pray thee, what man of good and sound judgment, dares say, that
Christ holds him for lowly, which is puffed up with pride* Or for liberal
and charitable, which is full of niggardlines, distrust, and unkindness* Or for a
lover of God, which is full of self-love and love of the world* Or for a
worshipper of God, which makes no right account of him* Or for a delighter in
God, which has none other care but to satisfy his own pleasures and
delights* Or for a man mindful of Gods benefits, which is unthankful* Or (to
speak more homely) a whooremonger for a chaste person, or a glutton and a
drunkard for a sober and moderate feeder* I believe that even thou thy self (if
thou consider it thoroughly,) would be ashamed to think it, and much more to
speak it. For how is it possible yt a man should be righteous without
righteousness, good without goodness, virtuous without virtue!

Saint John says manifestly, that as Christ is righteous 1. Ioh 3, 7. 8.
; so he that works righteousness is righteous; and that he which sins is of
the Devil: yea and he says moreover, that the thing wherein the 10.
children of God do show themselves to differ from the children of the Devil,
is that the one sort work righteousness, and the other sort work sin.

And of a truth, I cannot tell how Gods true children, who are al true
Christians, could otherwise be better marked out, tha^ by their applieng of
themselves night and day, to do whatsoever is pleasant and acceptable to their
heavenly Father; whom because they know to be righteous, they also do wholly
endeavor themselves to do righteous things, wherein they show themselves to be
borne of him, as S. John shows yet further. If ye know (says he) that God
is righteous, know ye also that whosoever works righteousness, is borne of
him 1. John. 2, verse. 29.
.

Moreover, how can it come to pas, that the true Christians should not give
themselves to righteousness, seeing they have Christ's spirit, (for he that has
not Christ's Spirit (says the Apostle) is no Christian,) which being holy of
himself, cannot but drive forewarde the party to al holiness, whom he
possesses? It cannot be but that he must needs bring forth his fruts, which
are Gal. 5, 22. 23.
louingnes, gladness, quietness, mercifulnes, meekenes, faithfulness, mildnes, and
staiednes. To be short, it cannot be, but that he must needs alter the whole
man both within and without, to make a new creature of him.

But see to what point Satan and our own nature bring us: namesie, to fall a
sleep, and to sooth our selves in our vices, and to make us to let the bridle
lie loose on our necks, and al under color that Christ imputes not our sins
unto us 2. Corin. 5, verse. 19.
, Naie, he imputes them unto us if we continue in them Tit. 2, 11. 12.
. For he died not to leave us in them still, but to take us out of them really
and in very deed Romans 6, 5. 6, etc.
, as witnesses further saint John, who tells us plainly 1. Ioh. 3, 5.
that Christ appeered to take away our sins. In which place he intends not
to speak (as I take it) of the forgiveness of our sins past, but to say that
Christ does really and in very deed take away their sining in works, which do
believe on him; which cannot be done, but that he must also therewith put into
them, and imprint in them the love of righteousness.

Nevertheless, I will not strain my self any further about this matter, which
would require a whole book rather than a Preface. And in good sooth, I had not
spoken so largely thereof, but that I hoped to do some men good thereby, who
under pretense that they deserve not aught at Gods hand, do make so small
account of the good works which God requires at our hands, that they give over
the exercise of al godliness, and do weed out of their hearts al regard of good
life, and of seeking their soulehelth with fear and trembling Phili. 2, 12
Romans 11, 20.
as they show well enough by the sequel.

Furthermore, I thought by that means to draw on the readers to the receiving
of this little treatise the more willingly; wherein as there is not any thing
contained, but such as may serve to teach us to order our life well; so was it
also requisite to show, yt there is no point of Christianity in us, unless we
set our whole heart thereupon. And on the other part, forasmuch as the ground
hereof is how we may follow the example of Christ: it was very convenient to
warn Christian folk to enforce themselves thereto, without flattring
themselves, and without foding themselves with vain opinions that might turn
them from the right way, or hinder them in it.

For since hat Christ's life was not set forth unto us alonely to make a legend
of it, or to make a wondering at it in words, but to be followed by us: it is
the mark whereunto we must tend, in drawing to perfection as near as is
possible, and as much as our frailty can afford. And otherwise, seeing we be
tolled there unto by Jesus Christ himself, not only in words but also by
examples, which are as lively portraitures of the life which we ought to lead
here, in waiting for his glorious coming again; we cannot exempt our selves
from it without prejudice of our salvation, no nor yet without bewraieng that
we have no list to it. For were we rightly desirous to become happy, and to
attain to the endless life which is promised us in Christ: we could not show it
better, than in taking the way thereto, whereby we both may and must attain
unto it.

And that way is none other, than to believe in Christ, and to walk as he
walked. And that is Saint John's meaning where he says 1. John. 2, 6
, that he which says he dwells in Christ, ought to walk as he walked, yt is
to say, he ought to indeuer to live as he lived.

There are always ynow which boast Boasting Christians.
themselves to believe in Christ, or to be Christians. But the very mean to
know them, is to mark whether their whole endeuer be to follow Christ or no,
which is as the badge of this so excellent profession, or as it were the fair
colored liuerie whereby we show and declare our selves to be the same in deed
which we report our selves to be.

And certes it is not possible that they which are united and knit unto Christ
as his members, should not be touched with a desire to resemble him and to
follow his steps. For the very thing wherein the union and conjunction are
showed, is that the members do show themselves to be of the self same that
the head is. And where that is not done, it is an evident proof that the
member is rotten, senseles, and void of the life which is in the head.

And in this behalf I report me but to the judgment of man, who is wise
enough of himself to attain easily to this reason.

Not without cause therefore does Saint Paul say, that we must be of the same
mind which Jesus Christ was of Philip. 2, 5.
. For thereby his meaning is to do us to understand, that we which are members
of Christ, must be answerable to him in unity of affection and will. Which
thing he teaches yet more plainly in another place, where he says Romans 6, 5.
that we be graffed into Christ after the likeness of his death and
resurrection; meaning thereby, that we which are ^oined unto Christ as an imp
is to the stock of a tree, ought so to live of his life, as there may not
appear any deformity in us; but that as he has died, so we must die also;
and as he is risen again, so we must rise again likewise: we must die (I say)
unto sin, and rise again unto newnes of life; for that is the death and the
life which he speaks of.

Which thing I have said to the end that we which boast our selves to be
Christ's members, should understand that our vanting of that title is in vain,
if we labor not to resemble him in all our whole life. And in what things? Not
in raising the dead Ioh. 11, 43
; in giving sight to the blind Mat. 9, 28 29* 30.
; in healing the sick Mark. 2, 3. Luke. 5, 18. Matt. 4, 23. 24.
, or in fasting forty days Luke. 4, 1. 2, etc.
; (for these are miracles which he wrought both by himself, and by his
Apostles, for the confirming of his doctrine among men, that they might receive
it as heavenly and coming from God; and he wrought them once for all, without
any need of having them done again by us;) but in following his virtues, as
his faith, his obedience, his patience, his constancy, his temperance, his
lowelines, meekenes, mildnes, gentleness, perseverance, diligence, earnestnes in
praieng and thanksgiving, and many other things.

All the which he did, not to make a show of them to us, but to train us to the
same by his own example: not to impute them after such a sort unto us, that we
should be hild sor such as he himself is, without being so in deed; but to
the intent that as he did them, so we should do them too, as he himself says
Matt. 11, verse. 28. 29.
; and as Peter says 1. Peter. 2, verse. 21.
, to the end we should follow his footesteps.

And how shall we know that we be in him, and are made partakers of his graces;
but by our endeavoring of our selves to keep his commandments? And soothlie
the only mean to know and to be assured in our selves that we dwell in
Christ and Christ in us; is our keeping of his commandments, as Saint John
teaches 1. Ioh. 2, 3. 4. etc.
; adding further, that our knoweing that he dwells in us, is by the Spirit
which he has given us; because that by that Spirit, we endeavor to follow him,
and to frame our selves to his will, whereby we yield proof of the union that
is between him and us. For even as the children of this world, do witness
themselves to be al one with the world, by following their worldly lusts 1
John. 2, verse. 15. 16.
, ambition, covetousness, and pleasures, which thing I say also of the members
of Satan: so in like case, the Christians show themselves to be made one with
Christ by his holy Spirit, when they follow Christ step by step, and make his
life to serve them as a most perfect rule to lead their life by.

What remains then to be done in this ^ase? Soothly that we on our part do
enforce our selves, by eschewing al slothfulnes, which being hurtful and
noisome in all things, is most hurtful and noisome in this behalf, forasmuch as
it is of such importance, that we cannot neglect it without wilful
disappointing our selves of our salvation and sovereign felicity.

This way is narrow and rough, I confess it is so, as al Christians do, and
so does Christ himself say it also Mat. 7, 14.
. For in as much as thereby we must sorsake our selves to follow Christ Luke 9,
23.
(which is very painful and hard to the flesh which desrreth nothing but her
own pleasures and commodities:) no doubt but we feel it to be very bitter and
burdensome. But what for that? Yet must we take that way, without stepping
aside one way or other. For that is the only way which after many labors and
hard pinches, leads in the end unto life. As for the other way, it is very
broad Mat. 7, 13
, fair, and accompanied with great pleasures but the end thereof (says he)
leads unto death. Now, it is much better to go by labor to rest, by
tribulation to joy, and by death unto life: than contrariwise to go by rest to
labor, by joy to tribulation, and by life to death: for look what things
comes last, shall be everlasting.

What thing then should hold us back or hinder us in this race? If it be the
world with all the goods, honors, and pleasures thereof; let us understand
that al those things pass away 1. Co. 7, 31. 1. Ioh. 2, 17.
like an arrow which is shot at a white, the trace whereof is not perceived any
more when it is once past. If it be the roughnes and vneasines of the way: let
us consider how there is nothing so vneafie, nor so rough, which becomes not
easy and smooth by continual use. If it be the infirmity and weakness of our
nature; let us think upon him which has promised to stand by us, to help us,
and to strengthen us; who being good will help us; and being almighty will also
strengthen us, conditionalie that we pray to him continualie. Ask (says he
Luke 11, 9.
) and it shall be given unto you; seek, and ye shall find; knock at the door,
and it shall be opened unto you. Provided always that we on our side do
strain our selves Matt. 11, verse. 12.
: for he helps not them that are idle and do nothing. He gives his Spirit;
but it is to such as feeling their own feeblenes, and being displeased with
it, do earnestly desire and crave his Spirit Luke. 11, verse. 13.
. To such as nothing ask, nothing he does give. It is even he that works in
us; howbeit, not so long as we our selves sleep, not so long as we fold our
arms acrosse, and much less so long as we resist him.

The kingdom of GOD, (says Jesus Christ,) suffers violence Matt. 11, verse.
12.
, and the violent pluck it to them. And who be those violent? Those which
being inflamed with great desire and zeal to facion themselves like to their
head, do offer violence and force to themselves, to the intent that their
nature and flesh being restrained and brideled, may not cast any impediment in
the way of Gods Spirit, which works in them; which feeling themselves cold
and lasie, whether it be in praieng to God, or in giving him thanks for all
things, or in any work of godliness either toward God or toward their
neighbors, do quicken and stir up themselves, without suffering themselves to
go on, and to be overcome of their flesh; which take pains to mark al their
own thoughts and affections, and to restrain them from passing their bounds,
and from rouing astray, setting a sure watch upon their mind, and following the
counsel of the wise, because that from the mind comes the welspring of al
evil Matt. 15, verse. 11. 18. 19. 20.
; which knowing how easy it is for them, to slip aside at every least occasion
in the world, do set good guard upon themselves continualie, laboring to subdue
and overcome themselves; and finalie which by Christ's Spirit do incessantly
crucify the flesh with the lusts thereof.

And of a truth, we be of our own nature so contrary to God, and so bent to
the seeking of our own selves; and our affections are so heady and vehement,
and we be haled unto evil with so great force by our flesh, that we must not
think that God can have his dominion in us, unless we use great force to
overcome and subdue our selves to him.

Yet notwithstanding, there are some nowadaies, yea and a great some, who
without taking much pain, (I will not say, without taking any atal) cesse not
for all that to brag afterward, that they be of Gods kingdom. But they deceive
themselves. For seeing that Gods kingdom is righteousness, peace, and joy
through the holy Ghost (as says saint Paul Romans 14, verse. 17.
:) how can it have place in them which suffer unrighteousness to reign in them!
And verily it is a suffering of it to reign, when they repress it not,
according also as they show in effect by their conversation, which is no better
than the conversation of those whom they condemn.

I know well they have their shifts for it, saying that we have no power atal,
that we shall be flesh still, as long as we be in this life, and that we cannot
proceed far forward in this great frailty and weakness of our nature; but that
Christ will supply al our wants, and not lay our sins to our charge. Yea
verily; but when they say so, or rather flatter themselves after that manner;
perceive they not how they disgrade themselves from the degree of Christians?
For if they cannot obey God, and do the thing that he commands, they have not
Christ's Spirit Romans 8, 5.
: and if they have not Christ's Spirit, then are they not Christians. Saint
Paul says well, that the flesh neither will nor can obey Gods law: but 9.
yet he adds therewith, that Christians are not in the flesh, but in the
Spirit. You be not in the flesh, (says he) but in the Spirit; at leastwise if
Gods Spirit be in you. 8.
Whereupon it must needs follow, that they which cannot obey God are in the
flesh, and those (says he) cannot please God.

Which reason may serve also to this saying of theirs, that we shall always be
flesh. For if we be always flesh, we shall always Who are fleshly.
be still unchristianlike, because that to be flesh, and to be Christians, are
things that can by no means match together, I mean to be flesh in such wise
as to make none other trade than to follow a man's own lusts. For otherwise I
deny not, but that the flesh is still in us, (so long as we be wrapped in this
mortal body) to provoke us unto evil, and to make war against the Spirit: but
not to follow the froward motions of it any more. For this stands true, that
whosoever follows them, is not to be registered in the number of Christians.
And therefore Saint Paul threateneth everlasting death, to such as live after
the flesh Romans 8, 13
, specialy after they have bin taught that they be always subject to damnation.

As touching our frailty and weakness, wherewith they think to prevail
continualie against such as press them with their duty: surely I confess
with them, that it is great, and such as makes even the holiest to be
overthrown and vanquished oftentimes by Satan and their own flesh, which
thing they lament and bewail: but as for to make a sheeld or a defense of it
to sooth themselves in their vices, and to take license to follow their lusts;
it is for such folk to do, as seek al manner of occasion to do evil, and to
rid away al regard of upright dealing and righteousness: which thing cannot
agree with true Christians, whose whole study is to maintain themselves in
good works, as they that know how il it beseems those which profess
themselves to be made clean by the blood of Jesus Christ Heb. 9, 14.
, to turn back to the defiling of themselves again.

Moreover, to say that Christ will supply al our wants, and not charge us with
our sins, whereunto we have yielded our selves so freely and willingly after
we have known him, seems in my judgment to tend to none other thing, than
to make Christ a cloak for our vices, and to take occasion of his grace, to
flatter and maintain our selves in them: which cannot be done without manifest
wickedness. For seeing that Christ makes us partakers of his grace, upon
condition that we shall lead a life both pure, holy, and beseeming him; and to
bring the same to pass, does promise us his Spirit, so we ask it of him in
faith: if we do the contrary, it will not be without doing him wrong.
Wherethrough it will come to pas, that we shall bereue our selves of the benefit
of our redemption, and make our selves unworthy thereof. For (as Saint John
teaches us,) Christ's blood makes none clean, save those which walk in the
light as God is light 1. Ioh. 1, 7. 9.
.

But I beseech these men in the name of God, to consider these things
advisedly, and to think earnestly upon this saicng of Christ's, That not al
they which say Lord, Lord, shall be saved, but they which do the will of his
heavenly Father Mat. 7, 21
. Neither words nor ceremonies do prove folk to be Christians, children of
God, faithful ones, members of Christ, and chosen of God, (which are titles
wherewith they deck themselves as with things which belong peculiarly and
alonely unto them) but their deeds, and their love proceeding from a pure
heart, from a good conscience, and from an unfeigned faith.

Let us then conclude, that the only true mark of Christians and right
believers, is love; without the which, a man may well talk of Christ, and of
the Gospel, and he may well have the Sacraments, and all the godly ceremonies
that can be devised; and yet al shall be nothing 1. Co. 13, 1 2. 3.
.

And would God that the Christians of our time, as well the one sort as the
other; (for alas they be divided asunder) had put it well in ure these former
years. For then should we not see now so much hatred, hartburning, cruelty,
meddling, sedition, part-taking, treason, treachery, desire of revenge, and
other infinite mischeues that reign among us. Neither should blood have bin
shed after such a sort and in so great abundance as it is; and yet still
shall be, unless God using his absolute power restrain men's minds, which are now
fiercely bent and fleshed one against another, as they may not be able to bring
their desires and passions to pass: and that they also on their side do suffer
themselves to be bowed by acknowledging their faults, and by having recourse to
the remedy of repentance, which is the only mean to appease Gods wrath so
kindled against us; and (at a word) do turn their rage and cruelty into
mildnes and charity.

And to lay forth the matter yet more Marks of christianity.
particularly; the Christians are those which crucify the flesh with the
lusts and affections there of Gal. 5, 24.
. The children of God are they that are led by Gods Spirit Romans 8, 14.
, and not by the Devils spirit, nor by their own affections. The faithful are
they, which not only repenting themselves truly, do trust in Gods mercy
through Jesus Christ, but also do exercise themselves in all good works, and (as
says Saint Peter 2. Pet. 1, 5.
) do indeuer to show, in their faith, strength; in their 6.
strength, skill; in their skill, staiednes; in their staiednes, patience; in
their patience, 7.
godliness; in their godliness, brotherlines; and in their brotherlines,
louingnes. The members of Christ, are they that take pain to frame and facion
themselves like to their head, as much as can be in this life; assuring
themselves that it is not possible for the head to be of one will, and the
members of another Ephesians. 1, 22. 23.
. Gods elect or chosen, are they that endeavor to be holy and unblameable before
him in love.

Those, those be the marks where by a man may and ought to discern them from
the unbelievers, the heathenish, the unholy, the children and lims of the
Devil, and finalie from al kinds of false Christians.

In respect whereof it is not amiss to allege the saying of S. Augustine. The
wicked man (says he August. de laud charitatis.
) may have baptism; he may have the gift of prophesieng; he may receive the
Sacrament of the body and blood of our Lord; he may bear the ^ame of a
Christian and have Christ's name ^n his mouth; and he may have other virtues:
but charity is the thing which the wicked cannot have; it is peculiar to the
true Christians. And therefore (says he) ^et every man examine himself what
he ^oueth 1. Cor. 11, verse. 28.
, and thereby he shall find to what city he belongs. If he love the world and
worldly things, that is to wit, fleshlines, money, or honor; he is a citizen
of Babylon: but if he love God, he is a citizen of Jerusalem. He is good and
righteous, and therefore he must not doubt, but that God will at that day* give
unto him the crown of righteousness, Amen.

A. G.

BLESSED ART THOU O LAND,WHEN THY KING IS THE SON OF NOBLES ECCLES 10.17



The first Book of the Imitation of Christ.
Chapter. 1. That al worldly things are vain, and to be contemned.
HE which follows me, says Christ John 8, 19.
, does not walk in darkness, but has the light of life: by which words we are
iniomed to imitate his manners, and conversation, if we desire truly to be
enlightened, and delivered from al blindness of heart.

Wherefore, it is our parts most earnestly to consider what the conversation
of our Savior was.

The doctrine of Christ surpasses all the lerning even of the best men Ioh. 7,
46.
; and a man endued with his Spirit, finds an hidden, and heavenly Manna Reu.
2, 17. John. 14, 26
in his words: but for want of the Spirit of Christ Ioh. 16, 13
many though much they hear, yet little they profit by the preaching of the
Gospel.

Wherefore if any would fully understand, and with pleasure attain to the
knowledge of our Sauiors words, he must endeavor to frame his life after his
example.

What avails it thee subtilie to dispute about the Trinity, if thou lack
humility, and so displease the Trinity?

Doubtless dark saiengs make not an holy man: but a virtuous life brings
into the favor of God.

For my part I had rather find my self converted from sin, than cunningly
define what sin is.

If thou have the whole Bible, yea and the saiengs of al Philosophers too at
thy fingers end 1. Cor. 13, 2 3.
, what art thou the better if thou be out of charity, and the favor of God?

Vanity of vanities, and al is vanity Eccles. 1, 2. Eccles. 12, 8.
, save only to love, and to serve God syncerelie.

When al is done, the true wisdom is 1. Cor. 1, verse. 20.
by contemning the world to go on toward heaven.

It is vanity for a man to seek transitory riches Mat 6, 19. 20
, and to trust in them Psalm. 49, 6. 7. Psalm. 52, 7. Eccles. 2, 9. Prou. 11, 7.
.

It is vanity to hunt after preferment, and to be puffed up Pro. 16, 18. Psalm.
52, 1. 5. Psalm. 62, 9.
.

It is vanity to follow, and favor the lusts of the flesh Prouer. 6, verse. 25,
etc. Galat. 5, 16. 2. Cor. 10, 6.
, which one day thou will rue full greeuouslie.

Vanity it is to desire a long life Wisd. 4, 8 9.
, and not to care for a good life Romans 8, 12. 13.
.

It is vanity to behold the time present, and not to foresee what will come
hereafter Sira. 18. 23
.

And vanity it is to covet those things which pass away most swiftly 2 Pe.
3, 10.
, and not to hasten thither where is joy without end Reu 5. 16. 17.
.

Forget not the Proverb Eccles. 1, 8.
, The eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the care with hearing.

Wherefore endeavor thou to withdraw thy self from the love of this world 1.
Ioh. 2, 15. Coloss. 3, 1. 2. Hebr. 11, 14. 15. 16.
, and look on things which are not seen 2. Cor. 4, 18
. For they which give the raines to their desires Iam. 1, 14. 15.
, both defile their consciences with sin, and slaie their souls through Gods
displeasure Wisd 1, 3. 12. 15.
.

Chap. 2. Against vain glory in spiritual things.
AL men naturaly desire to know: but what is knowledge without the fear of God
1. Cor. 13, 2. Cor. 8, 7
?

The simplest country swain fearing God, is better than a proud Philosopher
which stareth upon the Stars, and cares not for himself Luke 12, 56 57.
.

He which knows himself thoroughly esteems of himself but lightly Luke
18, 13
, and waieth naught y^ praise of men.

If I had al knowledge and had not love 1. Cor. 13, 2
, what would that profit me before God, who will judge me according to my deeds
Psa. 62, 12. Matt. 16, 27. Romans 2, 6. 2. Cor. 5, 10. Reave. 22, 12
?

Study not over earnestly for knowledge: for that is but a vexation of the
Spirit Eccle. 1, 17 18.
, and a deceauing the mind.

For learned men commonly would be known, and counted wise 1. Cor. 8, 1.
.

Many things there be which known but little, if they do any thing, profit
the soul: and he is extremely foolish that casts his mind upon any thing
which tends not unto his everlasting welfare Mat 6, 33. Luke 12, 31.
.

Much words do not satisfy the mind; but a good conscience is a continual
feast Pro. 15, 15. 1. Pet. 2, 19.
, and makes a man with boldness to approach before God 2. Cor. 1, verse. 12. 1.
Ioh. 3, 20. 21.
.

By how much thou know mo, and better things than other men, by so much shall
thy pains be greater, and more grievous Luke 12, 47 Luke 19, 23. 24. James. 4,
17.
than others, unless thou live by so much better than other folks.

So then let none Art, nor knowledge make thee proud; but having knowledge be
thou more humble Eccl. 1, 13. Romans 11, 20.
.

And if, in thine opinion, thou know much 1. Tim. 6, 3 4.
, know thou that far more things there he which thou know not: and never be
proud, man, but confess thine ignorance.

Why preferrest thou thy self before others Ier. 9, 23, 1. Cor. 1, 19. 20,
etc. 1. Tim. 1, 7.
, seeing that many there be better learned, and more skilful than thy self?

If thou will be learned, and know in deed, then study to be unknown, and
to be obscure 1. Cor 2, verse. 1, etc.
.

For the true and perfect knowledge, is to know, and debase our selves: and he
which will esteem lightly of himself, and greatly of others Phili. 2. 3. Romans
12. 10 Matthew. 8, ^. Matthew. 23* 6
, is doubtless a wise, and perfect man.

When thou see one openly to offend Roma 11, verse. 17, etc. Roman. 14,
verse. ^, etc.
, and greeuouslie to transgress, conceive not by and by better of thy self
than of him: for thou know not how soon thou may fall thy self 1. Cor.
10, verse. 12.
.

For in very deed we are al frail Iam. 3, 2. 13.
: but think none more frail than thy self Galat. 6, 1.
.

Chap. 3. Of true knowledge, or knowledge of the truth.
Happy is that man whom the truth it self VVisdo. 9, verse. 4 etc. 17. John.
14, 6.
, not letters, nor figures which vanishe, does teach. For our own opinions,
and senses 1. Corin. 2, verse. 1, etc.
do many times deceive, and seldom profit us.

What avails it 1. Cor. 2, 6. 1. Cor. 13, 2.
subtily to dispute about obscure and dark things, the ignorance whereof shall be
none hinderance unto us at the day of judgment?

Certeinlie it is egregious folly to bend our wits unto curious, and hurtful
things, neglecting profitable and necessary matters: to have a through insight
in profane affairs, and to have no sight at al in Gods will, and word Mat.
13, 13 Mat. 23, 16. 17, etc.
.

What should we pass for terms, and questions Titus. 3, 9. 2. Tim. 2, 16
? For he is rid from sundry opinions, whom the everlasting word does speak
unto.

For by one word al things were made John. 1, 3. 2. 1. Hebr. 2, 10.
; and one word al speak; one word which was in the beginning speaks unto
al, without whom no man Luke. 10, verse. 22.
can either judge, or understand the truth.

Now he, to whom al things are but one thing; which draws unto one thing al
things; and sees al things in one thing Ioh. 17, 21.
, doubtless abides both constant in mind, and continualie in God.

O God, which art the truth John. 14, 6.
, make me one with thee in perpetual charity 1. Ioh. 4, 16
!

Many times to read much, and to hear much it irketh me: whatsoever I can
either wish or desire, it is in thee Mat. 23, 8. 10.
.

Al teachers be ye silent Zac. 2, 13.
, and al creatures hold your peace Haba. 2, 19
, but speak, Lord, speak thou only unto me. For the nigher one is to
himself, and the less he wandereth abroad, the more easily he conceaueth,
and the more excellent things; because he takes the light of his understanding
from above.

A pure mind, and a constant, is not distracted diverse ways; because it does
al things unto the glory of God, and laboreth earnestly to be free from
self-love Matthew. 6, verse. 22, etc.
. For what does more hinder, and hurt a man than the unruly affections of the
mind Ephesians 4, 22. James. 1, 13. 14.
?

A good, and godly man before he goes about any matter, consulteth first with
himself Sirac. 37, verse. 16.
; and is never drawn away by wicked affections, but makes them to serve at
the commandment of reason.

Of al combats the sorest is to conquer our selves; and of al cares the
cheifest should be to wax strong against vice, and continualie to profit more
and more in virtue, and holiness Ephe. 4, 11. 12. 13, etc. Coloss. 1, 9. 10,
etc. Coloss. 2, 1. 2. 1. Pet. 2, 12. 2. Pet. 3, 18.
.

The greatest perfection of this life is not without imperfection Roman. 7,
verse. 18
, and when we are best learned we are ignorant in many things 1. Cor. 13,
verse. 9, etc.
.

To conceive modestly of our selves Pro. 3, 34. Galat. 6, 3.
is a readier way unto happiness, than earnestly to study to be deeply
learned 1. Cor. 13, verse. 2.
.

And yet is not science, or knowledge to be contemned, because being rightly
considered it is good, and allowed of God 1. Cor, 12, verse. 8. 1. Cor. 1, 5. 1.
Tim. 4, 6.
: But for all that, the goodness of a man Pro. 19. 22 2. Cor. 1, 12.
is better than his knowledge, and a good life is to be preferred before
learning Sira. 19, 23
.

But because many desire to know, rather than to please God, it falls out
commonly that they er; and reap either no fruit, or very little by all their
study 1. Cor. 4, 19 20.
.

Now would they be as earnest in rooting out vices Matt. 3, 7. 8. Matthew. 7,
verse. 15, etc. Matt. 12, 33. 34.
, and in planting virtues, as they are diligent in proposing questions,
certainly both the rude multitude would be more virtuous, and the learned
sort more sage than they are.

Assuredly at the day of judgment we must tell, not what we have read, but
what we have done Matt. 25, verse. 34, etc. Romans 2, 6. 2. Cor. 5, 10. Reu. 22,
12.
; and how religiously we have lived, not how rhetoricalie we have persuaded.

Go to then, where be now those masters so famous, and so pointed at in their
life time 1. Co. 1, 20
* whose places such have as perhaps never think on the^? In their life time,
who but they? now, where are they? So quickly vanishes the glory of this
world Eccles. 1, verse. 2, etc. Eccles. 2, verse. 1, etc.
. Now, if they had lived according to their knowledge, (and known rightly the
word of God,) then had they studied to their everlasting praise and profit Psa.
112, 6.
.

Alas, how many even of the learned sort perish in this world for lack of the
fear of God Esai. 28, 13 14. Esai. 33, 18. 1. Cor. 1, 20. 21, etc.
! And because they covet to be rather famous than virtuous, they are carried
away with vain imaginations Roman. 1, verse. 21, etc.
.

So that in truth he which loves much Col 3, 14. Ephesians. 3, 17. 19.
, is famous; he which despises glory Matthew. 23, verse. 8, etc. Matt* 18, 4.
, is glorious; he which humbles himself, is honorable Pro. 15, 33 Luke 18, 14.
; he which counts al things but dung to win Christ Phili. 3, 8.
, is prudent; and he is learned in deed, which abandoneth his own will to do
the will of God Ioh. 7, 16. 17. 18.
.

Chap. 4. Wisdom must be used in all our dealings.
Believe not every saying, or spirit 1. Ioh. 4, 1.
, but examine the matter wisely by the word of God.

For, alas, naturalie we are given Genesis 6, 5.
both to think and speak rather il, than well of others.

But good men believe not every man's words: because they know how that we are
prone always unto evil Genesis 8, 21.
, and that the best offends with his tongue Ps. 116, 11. Sirac. 19, 16. James.
3, 2.
.

It is a point of great wisdom to be neither heddy Tob. 4, 18. James. 1, 19.
in our actions, nor obstinate in opinion Pro.: 7, 12.
. As great wisdom is it, neither to believe every man's words Ioh. 22, 11.
12. Sirac* 19, 4. Pron. 17. 4.
, nor by and by to rehearse that which has bin told Sirac. 19, 7. 8
.

Take counsel of a godly man Sirach. 37, verse. 12. Prou. 2, 20.
whom thou know to keep the commandments of God: and follow the counsel of
the wise Pro. 12, 15.
before thine own fancies. A good life makes a godly wise man Pro. 9, 19.
.

The more a man humbles himself before God Prou. 1, 4. Prou. 15, 33 Sirac. 3,
20.
, the more wise he is and quiet in all his affairs.

Chap. 5. How to read, and study the holy Scriptures with profit.
Look in the holy scriptures for truth, not for eloquence: and read them
with that mind wherewith they were written, for thine everlasting profit Ioh.
5, 39. 1. Tim. 3, 16. 17.
, not for a polished phrase.

Study as well godly books though they be rude 1. Corin 1, verse. 17, etc. 1.
Cor. 2, 13. 2. Pet. 1, 16. Romans 1, 16.
, as works both eloquent for style, and profound for method.

Respect not in the author either learning or ignorance, but let y^ pure love of
the simple truth allure thee to read Psalm. 43, 3.
: and never mark who speaks, but what is said.

Men die Psa. 89, 48. Psalm. 49, 10.
; but the word of God shall stand for ever Esai 40, 8. Psalm. 100, 5. Psalm. 117,
2
: and God sundry ways speaks unto us not respecting our persons Galat. 2,
6. 1. Pet. 1, 17. Deuteronomy. 10, 17
.

Many times through our own curiosity we profit little in the reading of good
books, whilst we stand to discuss those things which ought simply to be
ouerpast.

If thou desire to reap commodity, read with all humility Esai. 66, 2.
, simplicity, and zeal: and never covet to be counted learned Ier. 9, 23. 24.
1. Cor. 1, 29. 31.
.

Be questioning always with godly men, and harken with silence unto their
saiengs Sirac. 6, 36. Prou. 13, 20.
; be not offended with the dark speech of thine elders, for they never speak
without cause why.

Chap. 6. That inordinate, and carnal affections must be mortified.
Whenever a man does covet a thing immoderatelie straight way his mind is
out of quiet Pro. 18, 14. Esaie. 48, 22 James. 1, 13. 14. 15.
.

The proud and the covetous be ever vexed Pro. 13, 10 25. Prou. 15, 6. Eccles.
5, 9.
: but he which is poor Matt. 5, 3.
, and meek in spirit Mat. 11, 29
lives at great ease Pro. 15, 16 Matt. 11, 30.
.

He which does not mortify the inordinate affections of his mind Rom 8, (...)
Galath 6, ^ Coloss. 3,
, may easily be carried away to wickedness, and with trifling things be ouercom.

He that is weak, worldly, and carnal Roman. ^ verse. 5, and
can no ways withdraw himself from earthly desires Galath. verse. 17, and
: and therefore when he resists them, it greeueth him; when he is contraried,
he fretteth; and if he fulfill his mind he sins, and by and by does wound
his cons ience James. 1, Roman. verse. 5, ^
, because he follows his desires, which in steed of that peace which he
looked for, bring continual disquietnes Pro. 14, Esai. 57,
.

Wherefore the true quietness of mind is attained, not by following, but by
resisting wicked affections 1. Pe. 2,
; and remains in him which is fervent, and godly zealous Gal. 5,
, not in carnal, and worldly men Romans verse.
.

Chap. 7. Against vain hope, and vain glory.
IT is a vain thing to trust either in man Psalm verse. 1 Ierem.
, or in any other creature Psalm. 2
.

Be not ashamed to be in subjection to others Gala.
for Christ's sake; nor if thou be poor in this present life Matt. 5, 3.
.

Depend not upon thy self, but put thy confidence in the Lord Prou. 3, 5.
Psalm. 2, 12.
. Do thy part notwithstanding and GOD will bless thine endeavor Matthew. 25,
verse. 14, etc.
.

Trust not to thine own knowledge, neither do thou repose any confidence in
the wit of man Psa. 118, 8.
, but only in the Lord Psa. 56, 11.
which exalts the humble, and brings down the proud James. 4, 6. 1. Peter.
5, 5.
.

Glory thou neither in thy riches Iere. 9, 23. 24. 1. Cor. 1, 31.
, if thou have much; nor of thy friends, if they be mighty, but in the Lord,
who both gives al things Iam. 1, 17. Romans 8, 32.
, and gladly would give himself before al things.

Be thou proud neither of thy beauty, or bigness Ier. 9, 23.
. For a little sickness does both deforme the one, and consume the other Job. 2,
7. Job. 14, 2. Psalm. 39, 11.
.

Like not over well of thy self, if thou have a good wit, least y^ offend God
thereby, which gave whatsoever good thing thou have by nature 1. Cor. 4, 7
.

Think not thy self better than other men Luke 16, 11 12. Matthew. 7, 3. 4.
, least God, who knows what is in man John. 2, 25 Romans 8, 27. Psalm. 7, 9.
, condemn thee utterly for thine arrogant conceit.

Do thou well? Take heed of pride. God judges not as man does 1. Sam. 16,
verse. 7.
. For that commonly displeases him which pleases man Esai. 55, 8 9
.

If thou have any goodness in thy self, think that another has more 1. Cor.
13 verse. 4
: so shall thou always retain the true modesty of mind.

To debase thy self even under al men, can never hurt thee; but to prefer thy
self before one man, may easily condemn thee Luke 18, 1 1^ 1^ Mat. 20, 1^ 1^
.

The humble man is always in quiet 1. Pet. 5. ^
: but the hautie mind fumeth commonly with indignation Iam. 4, ^
.

Chap. 8. What company is to be followed, or refrained.
OPen not thine heart unto every man Sirac. 8,
, but communicate thine affairs with the wise and godly Sira. 37,
.

Acquaint thy self with reverend old men Sirac. 8,
, and delight not much in the company of youth, and strangers.

Flatter not the welthie Sira 13,
; and take heed of the mighty Pro 23 Sirac. 13,
; join thee to thine equals Sira. 13, 17, ^
, which are godly 2. Sam. verse.
; and Psalm. 18,
do that which is honest 1. Tim.
, and for the public welfare Ephesians. verse. 11,
.

Be familiar with no woman vnlawfulie Prou. 5, 3. 8, etc.
; but generalie commend as many as are good Pro 31, 30 1. Peter. 3, verse. 6,
etc.
.

Wish to be familiar but with God only, and his holy Angels Phili. 3, 20
: and utterly avoid the company of some men Pro. 22, 24 Prouer. 23, verse.
6, etc. 20. 21. Pro. 29, 24. Sirac. 19, 3.
.

Have peace with all men Romans 12, verse. 18. 1. These. 3, 12
, but not familiarity 1. Cor. 5, verse. 9, etc. Psalm. 26, 4. 5.
.

Many times it falls out, that we love a stranger through the report of
others, whom afterward we hate, having tried his conditions: And many times we
displease others by our lewd behauior, whom we thought we should please right
well, if we had but their acquaintance.

Chap. 9. For obedience, and subjection.
IT is greatly for our behoof to live under others 1. Pe. 2, 13. 14.
, not as we list our selves; and at more ease live subjects, than rulers.

Many obeie for fear Ephe 6, 6. Colo. 3, 22.
rather than for love; and grudginglie, not gladly. But such can never have
the liberty of mind, before they obeie both for conscience Romans 13, 5
, and for the Lords sake 1. Pet. 2, 1^
.

Wheresoever thou becommest look never to live at ease, unless thou keep thy
self within thy calling, and obeie thy superiors.

The opinion, and change of places has deceived many a man.

Every man by nature would follow his own mind, and favors such as are of
his opinion: but, if we fear God, we will sometime change our minds for
quietness sake Psa. 34, 1. Romans 12, 3 Roman. 14 verse 1, etc
.

For who is so wise, that he knows al things Romans 12 verse. 6, etc 1. Cor.
12 verse. 8, etc
? Therefore trust not too much unto thine own opinion Prou. 3, ^ ^
, but willingly give ear to the judgment of others Pro. 12, ^ 1^
.

And albeit thou stand in a good matter: yet, if it be more expedient to have
it otherwise, alter thy mind, and thou shall do better 1. Cor. ^ verse. 1,
etc 19, etc
.

I have heard many times that it is easier, yea better to hear, and take, than
to give counsel Pro. 17, 2 2
: and he bewraieth his pride, and pertinacie Pro. 21, ^
, which will stick in an opinion, though it be good, if wiser than himself
through deeper judgment and circumstances would have it altered.

Chap. 10. Against idle meetings, and vain talk.
SHun the common meetings of men Matthew. 14, verse. 23.
, as much as thou can. For to talk of worldly matters Pro. 10, 19
does greatly hurt us, mean we never so well.

The reason is. We are easily drawn away with vanity. And for my part I
have wished many times that I had bin both silent, and absent.

Now if any would examine the cause why so gladly we chat, and prattle
together, seeing we seldom speak without offense to God, and hurt to our
conscience, he shall find it to be even comfort forsooth, and recreation. For
y^ more earnestly we covet, and desire a thing; or the more certainly we
know any evil to be toward us, the more vehemently we love to talk and
think thereof, albeit commonly to small profit, and purpose.

For this outward comfort, does not a little hinder the inner consolation.

Wherefore we are to watch and pray Mat. 26, 41
that we spend not the time idlelie Matthew. 12, verse. 36.
: and if we will, or must of necessity speak, let our speech be good to the
use of edifieng Ephesians. 4, 29.
that it may minister grace unto the hearers.

To babble much we should not use, both because the custom thereof is naught,
and for that in many words there cannot want iniquity Pro. 10, 19
. But godly speech greatly avails to a virtuous life Pro. 10, 11 Pro. 18,
21. Luke. 6, 45.
, especialie where men of like minds and spirit, are copled together in the
Lord.

Chap. 11. How to come to quietness in mind* and to a godly life.
Would we not intermedle 1. Tim. 5, verse. 13.
with other men's doings, and saiengs, we might live at great ease and
quietness. But how is it possible that he should be quiet which busieth himself
with those matters that touch him not? which picketh occasions to go abroad;
and little, or sildome can keep himself at home? Blessed are the meek Matt.
5, 5
for they have much rest Matthew. 11 verse. 29
.

In old time many attained unto singular perfection, and were zelouslie
addicted to the contemplation of heavenly things. And how so? They mortified
their earthly members Colos. 3, 5. 2. Pet. 1, 4.
. We loase the bridle to al beastly desires, and care altogether for temporal
trash Luke 21, 34 1. Corin. 7, verse. 32, etc.
: Sildome, if at al, we subdue one affection in deed, neither desire we to
profit more and more daily in well doing. If therefore we remain in religion
either cold, or lukewarm Reu. 3, 15.
, what marvel?

But were we dead unto our selves Romans 6, 2. 2. Pet. 2, 10.
, and not entangled inwardly with perturbations, doubtless we should taste the
unspeakable sweetness of a godly life, and be inflamed with a burning desire
of celestial things.

For in very deed the greatest, if not the whole, let from godliness is,
because we are in bondage to vile affections Romans 6, 12 Romans. 7, verse. 4,
etc. Romans. 8, verse. 1, etc.
, and labor not to follow the footesteps of the faithful.

Hence it is that if we be never so lightly touched with adversity, we are
marvelously dismayed, and seek help of man Luke 8, 43. Mark. 5, 26. Esaie.
30, 16.
, which comes from the Lord Psalm. 44, verse. 1, etc.
.

Now would we keep our places Ephe. 6, 10
like valiant soldiors, the Lord would help us from above. For he is ready to
assist them which serve him 1. Cor. 10, verse. 13
; and will give us victory, if we fight his battle Iam. 1, 12.
. But if we place our religion in doing these outward things, in short time
our religion with them Col. 2, 22.
will utterly decaie.

Wherefore the axe must be laid unto the root Mat. 3, 10.
, and our wicked affections cut of; which is the only way to find rest for
our souls.

If every year we would root out a vice from our minds, oh how quickly
should we prove good men! But alas we see by experience that after many
years we are woorser than when at the first we professed religion. And he is
a holy man counted now a days, which can retain a part of his first and
former zeal: yet should the fire of godliness increase daily, and be inflamed
more and more.

The remedy whereof is at the beginning to strain our selves, so shall we
afterward do al things at pleasure.

I confess in deed it is hard to leave old woonts Luke 9, 59.
: and as hard, yea harder for a man to bridle his affections. At the beginning
therefore strive with thine inclination, and leave a wicked custom, least
otherwise when you would you cannot so easelie. For it is impossible that he
should vanquish and subdue mighty, which cannot overcome light, and trifling
things.

Oh, if thou would consider what quietness to thy self, and joy to others
thou should bring by godly, and good behauior Luke 15, 7. 10.
, doubtless thy cheifest care would be, how to live in the sight of God
religiously, and honestly in the eyes of man!

Chap. 12. Of the profit gotten by adversity.
IT is good for us sometime to suffer affliction. For it makes us to know our
selves in this world Ps. 119, 67 71.
, and to repose no confidence in any creature 2. Chr. 10, verse. 7. Psalm.
118, verse. 5, etc. 2. Cor. 1, 9.
.

It is good for us sometime to be il spoken of Mat. 5, 11.
, and il thought of, although we deserve not the same. For that brings to
humility 2. Sam. 16, verse. 10. 11. 12. Romans 5, 3.
, and drives from pride. And the more earnestly we call for the testimony of
God in our conscience Romans 8. 16 17. 1. Pet. 4, 14. 1. Ioh. 3, 21.
when we are contemned among men, and of no credit.

So that every man ought so to depend upon God Psalm. 94, verse. 17, etc. 2.
Cor. 1, 9.
, that he need not care for any worldly comfort.

For a good man the more he is trobled either outwardly in body, or inwardly
in mind, the more he considers how greatly he stands in need of Gods
assistance, without which he sees he can do no good Phili. 2, 13
. Then he sorroweth, and sobbeth, and desires to be delivered from misery;
then it greeueth him to live any longer Romans 7, 24
; and wishes to be loased, and to be with Christ Phili. 1, 23.
; and then he perceives full well that in this life we cannot find perfect
peace, and security Ioh. 16, 20 Reu. 7, 16. 17.
.

Chap. 13. That no man either is, or has bin without tentation, and how both
to suffer and resist the same.
AS long as we live in this world we cannot be without tentations, and
trobles. And that made Job to call man's life here on earth a warfare Job. 7,
verse. 1, etc.
.

Wherefore it stands every man upon to think hereof, and to watch in prayer
Mark. 13, verse. 33. 37. Matthew. 26, verse. 41, etc.
, that the Devil have no vantage against us, which never sleeps, but rangeth
about always seeking whom he may devour 1. Pet. 5. 8. Reu. 12, 12.
.

The best man is tempted sometime Sirac. 2, 1. 1. Cor. 10, verse. 13. Hebr. 12,
8.
; and to be utterly without tentation it is impossible.

Yea expedient is it sometime that we be tempted James. 1, verse. 2, etc.
, though we like not thereof Hebr. 12, verse. 11. Psa. 119, 67. 7^.
: for thereby we are humbled, purged Job. 5, 17. 18. Wisd. 3, 5.
, and instructed Hebr. 12, verse. 5, etc. Sirac. 18, 12
.

All the holy fathers have endured tentation, and bin schooled thereby 1. Pet.
1, 6. 7. Iudit. 8, 25. 26. 27.
; but they which fainted under the same, are utterly cast away Luke 8, 13.
Hebr. 12, 8.
.

There is no calling so holy; nor place so solitary, but you shall find there
both trobles to try you, and adversity to disquiet you: no, let not man look
in this life to be free from temptation. For we have that in our selves which
tempts us Iam. 1, 14. 15.
, in as much as we are borne in concupiscence, and conceived in sin Psa. 51,
5.
.

Tentations come upon tentations, miseries upon miseries, and always we have
somewhat to suffer: because we are fallen from the state of our felicity Gen
3, 24.
.

Many whilst they shun some trobles, fall into woorser Matthew. 26, verse. 70. etc.
. For they are not avoided by flight only Mat. 26, 56
, but by patience Esai. 30, 18 Luke 21, 19. James 1, 2. 3. 12.
; and true modesty makes to prevail over enemies.

He which only outwardly shunneth tentations, and plucketh not up ye root
from whence they do spring; is so far from escaping them, that they assail
him the sooner, and make him much worser than he was before Matthew. 12, verse.
45. Hebr. 6, 4. 5. 6. 2. Pet. 2, 20. 21.
.

By sufferance, through Gods grace, thou shall more prevail Roman. 5, verse.
3, etc. James. 1, 12.
, than by stubbernes, and resistance 1. Cor. 10, verse. 10.
.

In thy trobles use counsel. If thy neighbor be afflicted, give him no il
words Galat. 6, 1.
, but comfort rather Job. 6, 14.
, which thou would have thy self, if thou were in his case.

The cause of al wicked tentations in inconstancy of mind, and lack of faith
Mat. 8, 26. Matt. 14, 31.
. For as a ship without a stern is carried to and fro with wind, and weather:
so the wavering Iam. 1, 6. 8.
, and unconstant man is diversely tempted.

As fire tries iron: so tentation tries man Wisd. 3, 6. Sirach. 2, 5. 1. Pet.
1, 7.
. What we are able to do we know not many times: but what we are, tentation
shows 1. Cor. 3, verse. 13. James. 1, 12.
.

To avoid tentation it is good to be circumspect at the beginning of the same.
For the enemy is the more easily overcome, when we shut the door of our
understanding against him, and meet him at the threshold as soon as he begins
to knock. And therefore said a certain Poet right well to this effect Ovid in
his 3. book de Art amandi. Learn before thou speak, and use physic or
ever thou be sick. Sirac. 18, 18.
:

If thou be sick, prevent the wurst,
And seek for remedy at the furst.
For when a sickness has taken root,
If thou take Physic, it will not boot.
For first comes into our minds a The steps to sin.
bare cogitation of evil; then follows a strong imagination; out of which
proceeds a wonderful delectation; wicked motions, and assent unto sin: and so
by little and little the malicious enemy enters in, when at the first he might
easily be kept out.

Whereby this we get, that the longer we tarry before we resist, both we are ye
weaker when we do resist, and our enemy ye stronger whom we must resist Iam.
1, 14. 15.
.

Some as soon as they begin to amend their lives, others at their end, and
diverse al their life time are tempted, and afflicted: again there be, which
are but lightly assalted, which thing God, who works al things for the
salfetie of his elect Romans 8, 28.
, brings to pass according to the wisdom, and equity of his heavenly will.

And therefore we must not despair, when we are tempted, but so much the more
earnestly pray unto God that he would vouchsafe to help us in all extremities,
and, according to ye words of Paul 1. Cor. 10, verse. 13.
, give issue that we may be able to bear our tentation.

So then in all tentations, and trobles let us humble our selves under the
mighty hand of God 1. Pet. 5, 6: Iam. 4, 10.
. For he exalts the humble and meek Iam. 4. 6. Prou. 3, 34.
.

In adversity man is tried 1. Cor. 3, 13
, how he has profited in well doing, and so he gets not only favor before
God 1. Pet. 1, 6. 7.
, but also fame among men. For it is no great thing for a man in prosperity to
seem devout, and zealous: but he which continues patient in the time of
adversity Romans 5, 3. James. 1, 3.
, will doubtless prove a perfect man.

Many overcome great trobles, which are overcome by small, and daily: but such
cannot trust to themselves in great, which are so weak in trifling things.

Chap. 14. Against rash judgment.
Look into thy self, and judge not other men Matthew. 7, 1. Luke. 6, 37.
. For in judging others we labor vainelie, er commonly, and easily offend
Iam. 4, 11.
: but in judging and examining our selves 1. Cor. 11, verse. 31.
we reap singular commodity.

As we fancy a thing, so we judge thereof: and blinded with private affection
we commonly give partial sentence Romans 2, 1.
.

Now were the love of God always, and our only guide, our senses, which are
enemies to truth, would not so easily troble us. But commonly somewhat either
lurketh within, or chances without which carries us away.

Many in their doings unwittingly seek themselves; which are so long quiet
in mind, as they enioie al things according to their wish: but if any thing
fall out otherwise than they would, they chafe, fret, and fume.

Great dissension rises many times even among friends, and contriemen, yea
among the godly and zealous too through diversity of opinions. For, such is
our nature, we can hardly break an old custom; and farther than he sees no
man will gladly go. But if we cleave, or depend more upon reason and sense
John. 3, 3. 4.
than upon that virtue which brings under the obedience of Christ, let us
never look to be enflamed with the light of Gods holy Spirit. For God will be
served not with a piece of man, but with whole man Deuteronomy. 6, 5. Luke 10, 27.
Mark. 12, 29 30. Mat. 22, 37.
; neither does he allow reason to judge of religion.

Chap. 15. Of the works of charity; and how to do good works.
WE ought not to do wickedlie for any thing Romans 3, 8.
, nor for any man's sake Romans 8, 38 39.
: albeit in respect of the weak 1. Co. 9, 20 21. 22.
a good work may be undone sometime, or done otherwise. And that is not to
neglect a good work, but leave one good work to do a better.

If thou have not love, thine outward deeds profit nothing 1. Co. 13, 3
; if thou have love, be thy works never so small, and simple, they profit much.
For God respects not what is done, but how, and with what affection a thing
is done Luke. 7, verse. 40, etc.
.

He does much that loves much Luke 7, 47.
; He does much that does a thing as it should be don Mat. 26, 10
. And he does so, that seeks the common welfare before his own profit 1. Co.
13, 5.
.

It many times seems a charitable Carnal works, what;
deed, which in deed is a carnal For that which is done, as commonly works
are done, either of affection; or desire of gain; or hope of reward, which
are carnal inclinations, is doubtless a carnal, and not a charitable work.

A man endued with perfect charity Fruits of charity.
serves not his own turn, but only in all things seeks the glory of God
1. Ioh. 2, 15 16 17. James. 4, 4.
: He enuieth not 1. Co. 13, 4
. For he loves no private joy Iere* 9, 23.
; neither will rejoice in himself, but in the Lord 1. Co. 1, 31
: whose blessing he desires before al things. He ascribes no goodness unto
any, but acknowledges al things to come of God, from whom every good gift,
and every perfect gift does proceed Iam. 1, 17.
, and in whom all the Saints do rest in perpetual bliss Reu. 7, 15. 16. 17.
. Finally he which has but a spark of this true charity, accounts al
worldly things but mere vanity Eccles. 1, verse. 3, etc. Philip 3, 8.
.

Chap. 16. That men which offend must be borne withal sometime.
THat which thou can not amend neither in thy self, nor others, must
patiently be suffered 1 Thessalonians. 5, verse. 14.
, til GOD otherwise work Esai. 30, 18 Luke 21, 19.
.

Think with thy self, that perchance God does it to try thy patience Romans 5,
3. 4. 5. James. 1, 3. 4.
without which our merits do little avail: notwithstanding in thy trobles thou
ought to beseech almighty God to assist thee with his grace, that
patiently thou may endure his cross, and trial Luke 17, 5. James. 1, 5.
.

If any being diverse, and sondrie times admonished, will not amend Titu. 3, 10.
, deal with him no more, but commit the whole matter to God, that his will, and
glory may appear in all his creatures Mat. 6, 10.
which knows well how to turn al things to the best.

Endeavor thy self patiently to bear the faults, and infirmities of other
men whatsoever they be Galat. 6, 1. 2. 1. These. 5, 14
: forasmuch as thou art faulty thy self James. 3, 2.
, and must be borne withal. And if thou can not be such as thou would be,
think thou to make another according to thy mind?

We wish that others were godly, and yet we amend not our selves Matt. 7, 3.
4. 5. Romans 2, 1. 2. 3.
. We would have others severely corrected Matthew. 7, 1.
, which we refuse our selves. We find fault with the licentiousnes of others,
and we our selves will not be gaine-saide. We seek that others should be
bridled by laws, and we our selves refuse obedience. Whereby it is evident how
we love not our neighbor as our selves Mat. 7, 12. Luke. 6, 31. Tob. 4, 15.
.

If al were perfect, what should we suffer at other men's hands, for Gods sake
Mat. 5, 10. 11. 1. Pet. 4, 14.
? But now it pleases God, that we must bear one another burden Gala. 6, 2.
; and that because no man is without fault; no man but has his burden; no man
that can live by him self; no man but lacks advise sometime; and therefore we
ought one to suffer with another 1. Cor. 12, verse. 26, etc.
; to comfort one another; to help, instruct, and admonish one another.

And never shall the virtue of a man be so known as by occasion of adversity
Iam. 1, 12.
. For occasions make not a man frail, but show what he is 1. Pet. 1, 6. 7.
.

Chap. 17. The way to quietness both temporal, and eternal.
THou must bridle, and break thy will in many things, if thou will live a quiet
life Psa. 120, 7. Matthew. 5, 5.
. And if thou would stand upright, and go forward in godliness, account thy
self in this world but a banished man, and a pilgrim Ps. 119, 19 Heb. 11, 15.
16. 1. Pet. 1, 17. 18.
. And if thou desire to be a Christian, thou must prove a fool before men
1. Cor. 1, verse. 23, etc. 1. Cor. 3, 18. 1. Cor. 4, 10.
for Christ's sake.

A hoode, or a shorn head makes not a religious man: but an alteration from
vice to virtue Ephesians. 4, 22. James. 1, 21. 26. 27.
, and a mortification of the lusts Romans 13, verse. 12. 13. 14.
.

He which loves any thing besides God, and the salvation of his soul Psa.
119, verse. 29, etc. Mark. 12, 30 Luke. 9, 23. 26.
, shall find nothing but misery, and sorrow.

And let not him look to be long in quiet, which laboreth not in the sight of
man to be most abject and inferior to al Iam. 4, 6. Matthew. 20, verse. 24, etc.
. For thou art in this life to serve Mat. 20, 28 Philip. 2, 7.
, not to rule; and called to suffer Luke 9, 23.
, and to labor Genesis 3, 19.
, not to loiter, and to live at pleasure.

For men are tried in this world as gold is in the furnace Job. 23, 10 Wisd. 3,
6. 1. Pet. 1, 7. Psalm. 66, 10.
: and let no man look to stand here upright, unless with all his heart he humble
himself for the Lords sake 1. Co. 4, 10
.

Chap. 18. The virtuous life of the holy Fathers.
Behold the examples of those holy fathers, in whom true religion, and
perfection did shine, and you shall easily perceive how little, and in a manner
nothing it is which we do. Alack, what is our life compared with theirs!

Those holy men, and friends of Christ did serve the Lord in hunger, and
thirst 2. Cor. 6. verse. 4, etc. 2. Cor. 11, verse. 27, etc.
, in cold and nakedness, in wearines, and painfulnes, in watchings, and
fastings, in prayers and meditations, in manifold persecutions, and trobles
Hebr. 11, verse. 36, etc.
.

What, and how great miseries did the Apostles, and Martyrs, and Confessors,
and Virgins, and al which at any time followed the steps of our Savior Christ,
endure? For they hated their lives in this world Ioh. 12, 25 Matt. 10, 39
Matt. 16, 25. Mark. 8, 35. Luke. 9, 24. Luke 17, 33.
that they might save them for eternal life.

O what an hard, and severe life did those holy fathers lead in deserts! what
long and grievous tentations suffered they! How often did the enemy assail
them! how zelouslie did they offer the sacrifice of prayer unto God! with what
severity did they tame their bodies! what study spent they to profit in
religion! what conflicts had they with vices and wickedness! How vprightlie did
they spend their time before God!

In the day time they labored, in the night they prayed, and at no time cessed
they from devout meditations Ephesians. 6, 18. Colos. 4. 2. 1. These 3, 10 1. These. 5,
17
. Finally no time was idly spent, and al hours that they consumed seemed
very short, insomuch, that many times for to profit their souls, they little
did regard the relief of their bodies Mat. 14, 15 Mark. 6, 35. 36. Luke. 9,
12.
. And as for wealth, authority, promotion, friends, and kinsfolks they
renounced them Mat. 19, 27 Mark. 10, 28 Luke 18, 28. Acts. 2, 44. 45.
, together with all worldly things.

So that in man's eyes they were poor Matt. 5, 3. Luke. 6, 20.
, but in the sight of God, and in respect of their virtues most mightily rich;
outwardly they seemed needy 2. Cor. 6, verse. 10.
, but inwardly they were refreshed with Gods heavenly grace, and comfort Psa.
94, 19.
; in the world mere strangers Ioh. 16, 2.
, but to Christ friends, and familiars Ioh. 15, 15.
; in their own judgment most vile Ioh. 13, 6. 8.
, and odious to the world Ioh. 15, 19
, but to almighty God dear and precious Ioh. 16, 20 22.
.

They were humble, and obedient, and friendly, and patient: whereby they found
good success in the spirit, and grace before God 2. Cor. 9, verse. 13. 14.
.

Therefore should al godly men follow their steps, and be more moved by ye
example of them to virtue, than of lukewarm Christians, though they be
infinite, to wickedness.

Oh what zeal had the godly in ye primative Church Acts. 4, verse. 10, etc.
! what devotion to prayer Acts. 2, 46. 47.
! what contention to excel in well doing! what severe discipline! what
reverence, yea what obedience showed they to the doctrine of their teachers!
Their monuments to this day show, that they must needs be most singularly
perfect, which have so valiantly subdued the world Heb. 11, verse. 36, etc.
.

But now a days if a man can but keep himself from gross offenses, or
refrain from reuengement, he is accounted a good, and perfect man.

O the security of our time, which have so quickly declined from our first
heat Revel. 2, 4.
, and loathed life because we are lukewarm Reu. 3, 16.
, and weary Matthew. 24, verse. 48, etc.
! But surely it is a manifest argument that we are dead from well doing, which
see so many examples of godly men before us, and follow none of them.

Chap. 19. The exercise of a true Christian.
THe life of a Christian should be adorned with all virtues; that he may be
inwardly such, as he outwardly appears to the world Matt. 5, 14 16. 20. 47.
48.
: yea more virtuous should he be, than he seems; inasmuch as God sees our
hearts 1. Sam. 16* verse. 7. Psalm. 33, 15. Revel. 2, 23. Hebr. 4, 13.
, whom we must entirely reverence wheresoever we are, and before whom we
must walk vprightlie as Angels.

Every day we should renounce our minds Romans 12, 2
, and as though we were but newly converted from sin, we ought to inflame
our zeal, and say:

O my Lord and God, assist me I humbly beseech thee, in this my good purpose,
and zeal; and give me grace even at this present time godly to enter into thy
service. For what hitherto I have done, is nothing.

In this our race, and going forward in godliness we must use great diligence,
if we mind to finish our course as we should. For if he which courageously
goes on, is tired many times; what will become of him which either sildome, or
faintlie sets forward?

Many things cause us to change our good minds: but we never so lightly omit
spiritual exercise, but we greatly hinder our selves thereby.

The purpose of the just depends upon the favor of God Philip 2, verse. 13.
, not upon their own wisdom Prou. 3, 5.
, on whom they trust in all their enterprises. For man may purpose Prou. 16, 9
33.
, but God disposes; neither can man of himself bring any thing to pass.

If we omit our accustomed exercise, either for religions cause, or to profit
our brethren, we may easily attain thereunto again: but if carelessly of
sloth, or faintnes of mind we neglect the same, we do both highly displease
God, and greatly endammage our selves James. 1, verse. 22. 23. 24.
.

Let us do our best, yet shall we offend in many things James. 3, 2
. Albeit it will be good to shoot at some certain thing, and especialie against
those vices which hinder us more than others. We must examine, and set in order
as well outward, as inward things, for both are necessary to our proceeding
Ephesians. 4, verse 20, etc. Coloss. 3, 17
.

If thou can not at al times take an account of thy self, yet do it sometime,
and at the least once a day, to wit, at morning, or at night.

In the morning consider how thou will spend the time til evening: and at night
call into mind how thou have past the day, and what thy thoughts Psalm. 19, 14
, words, and deeds have bin. For thereby we commonly both displease God, and
offend man.

Girde thy loins like a man Ephesians 6, 14.
against Satan 1. Pet. 5, 8
; bridle thy riotous appetite Prou. 23, verse. 31, etc. 1 Thessalonians. 5, 6
, so the more easily shall thou bring under all the unruly desires of the
flesh.

Be thou at no time idle altogether Prouer. 6, verse. 6, etc.
, but always either read, or wright, or pray, or meditate, or do somewhat
for the public welfare.

The body must be exercised with judgment. For all exercises be not for every
man. Private exercise must not be used in a public place. Albeit thou art to
take heed that thou be not to public slow, and swift unto private: but
having done thy duty according to thy calling, if any leisure be gotten
betake thee to thy self, as thy profession does require.

Al men cannot use one exercise: but that is for some, which is not for others.

Again, according to the diversity of times we think of exercises. For some
like us on holie-daies, some on working-daies; some in the time of war, some
in the time of quietness; some we mind when we are pensive, and some when we
rejoice in the Lord 1. Cor. 1, 3^
.

Good exercises should oftentimes be renewed especialie on holiedaies, as
though we then were departing out of this life, and going to the everlasting
days of rest. And therefore at such times especialie we should show our selves
most devout, and most carefully execute Gods hestes, looking, as it were
presently for a reward of our labor from God. Which if it be deferred, let us
think with our selves that we are not sufficiently prepared, but unworthy so
great glory to be revealed unto us at a time convenient, and prepare our
selves more diligently to our end.

Happy is that servant, says our Savior Christ Luke. 12, verse. 43. 44.
, whom the Lord when he comes shall find watchful: know ye of a truth, he
will make him ruler over all that he has.

Chap. 20. Of solitarines, and silence.
Seek a convenient time to meditate; and oftentimes call the benefits of GOD
into mind.

Omit curious things: and choose such matter as may rather stir up thy mind
unto godliness, than busy thee too much.

Withdraw thy self from speaking vainelie Matthew. 12, verse. 36. Philip. 4, 8.
9.
; from gadding idelie; from listening unto rumors and novelties, and thou shall
find good leisure, and sufficient for thy spiritual exercise: and that after
the example of the most godly, who shunned the company of men, as much as
they might, and choase to live apart unto God.

One said Seneca.
, I never came among men, but I departed more wicked than I was before. And this
we find true when we talk much together.

It is easier to be altogether silent, than not to exceed in words; and to
tarry at home, than not to offend abroad, it is easier.

Wherefore he which would be zealous, and godly, must avoid company with
Jesus Matthew. 14, verse. 23. Mark. 6, 46.
.

No man salfelie does go abroad, but he which gladly can abide at home; no
man salfelie does govern, but he which gladly can be in subjection Matthew. 20,
verse. 26. 27.
; no man salfelie does command, but he that has learned willingly to obeie
Romans 13, verse. 1, etc. Coloss. 3, 22 23.
; no man salfelie is merry, but he that has a good conscience Prou. 15, verse.
13. 15 2. Cor. 1. 12.
; and no man salfelie can speak, but he that willingly can hold his peace.

And yet has not the security of good men, at any time bin without ye fear
of God Pro. 28, 14
: neither did their excellent, and heavenly gifts make them any whit proud,
but the more humble Romans 12, verse. 16. 1. Cor. 4, 6. 7.
. But the security of ye wicked, as it arises of pride Pro. 28, 25. 26.
: so it turns to their destruction Esa. 48, 22.
.

Never look to live at thine hearts ease in this world, seem thou never so
godly, and religious Psa. 34, 19. Acts. 14, 22.
.

It falls out many times that they fall greeuouslie through pride, which in
man's opinion were most religious men Luke. 18, verse. 10, etc.
: whereby it is evident, that tentation is very good for some Ps. 119, 67 71.
Lames. 1, 1. 2.
; both to keep them from pride 2. Cor. 12, verse. 7.
, and outward consolation.

O, if man would avoid vain pleasure, and not love the world 1. John. 2,
verse. 15. 16. 17.
; what a good conscience should he always retain! If man would cast away al
vain cares, and think only upon heavenly things, and trust wholly in God
Psalm. 3, verse. 1, etc. Psalm. 4, 7. 8. 1. Pet. 5, 7. Esaie. 26, 4
, what a continual joy should he feel in his mind!

No man shall find any spiritual comfort, except he occupy himself
diligently in stirring up his mind unto godliness Esaie. 26, 8. 9.
: the which thou shall the more easily attain, if thou enter into thy chamber
Matthew. 6, 6.
, and shut thy self from trobles of the world, as it is written Psalm. 4, 4.
, Examine your own heart upon your bed, and be still.

For commonly thou shall find that in thy closet, which thou would leese
abroad.

The more thou use thy closet, the more thou will like it: the less thou
come thereinto, the more thou will loath it. But frequent the same rightly,
and tarry therein at thy first conversion from wickedness, and afterward thou
shall do it with exceeding pleasure.

Solitarines, and quietness is good for him that would proceed in virtue, and
learn the mysteries of holy Scripture. For there shall he find even floods of
tears Psalm 6, 6.
, whereby he may wash, and cleanse himself every night, that he may by so
much be nigher unto his maker, by how much he is farther from the resort of men.

So that God with his holy Angels comes unto him, which withdraws himself
from his friends, and acquaintance.

It is better to live in a corner, so a man have a regard to himself, than
without care of his own salvation even to work miracles Matt. 7, 22 1. Cor.
13, 2.
.

It is no shame, but praise for a godly man seldom to go abroad Psalm. 102,
verse. 6, etc.
; to shun to be seen, and not to love to see.

Why look thou on that, which is not lawful for thee to have Exo. 20, 17
? The world passes away, and the lust thereof 1. John. 2, verse. 17. 1. Cor.
7, 31.
.

The desire of pleasure makes thee to roaue abroad: but when the pleasure is
past, which is quickly gone, what gettest thou thereby but repentance, and a
wandering soul?

A merry out going brings commonly a morneful returning home; and a merry
evening watch is sign of a louring morning: even so the joy of this world
enters pleasantly, but ends bitterly Prou. 14, verse. 13. Prou 23, 31 32.
. What can thou see in another place which is not here? Behold the heaven,
and the earth, and all the elements: for of these do al things consist. What
see thou in any place that abides ever 1. Cor. 7, verse. 31. 1. John. 2,
verse. 17.
?

Perchance thou think to satisfy thy self with contemplation; but thou
shall never do so.

What if thou saw even al things before thine eyes? it were but a vain
sight Eccl. 1, 14
.

But lift up thine eyes, man, unto God Psalm. 25, 1. Psalm. 121, 1.
; and ask pardon for thine offenses Sirach. 17, verse. 23.
.

Leave vain things to vain folks; and give thou thy mind to do the will of God
Deuteronomy. 11, 1 Eccle. 3, 12.
.

Shut thy self within thy door Matt. 6, 5.
, and call thy well-beloved Jesus unto thee Salamons songs. 2, 14. Sal. songs. 3,
verse. 4.
. Tarry with him in thy chamber: for else where thou shall never find so great
quietness.

Had thou not gone abroad, nor listened unto rumors and tales, thou
mightedst the better have enioied quietness: but now because thou give thine
ears to hear news, thou art trobled greatly, and vexed in mind.

Chap. 21. Preparatiues unto Godliness.
Will thou come foreward in godliness? Then fear God Prou. 1, 7. Prou 9, 10.
Psalm. 19, 9. Ps. 111, 10. Sirach. 1, 16
; and be thou not over loose in behauior, nor given to vain pleasure Prou. 9,
17 18.
, but keep under thy senses by discipline.

Prepare thy self to unfeigned repentance Romans 12, 2
, and thou will prove religious. For repentance brings unto godliness, and
negligence quickly does forgo the same.

It is marvel that any man can hartelie rejoice in this life, which considers
his banishment, and the manifold perils of his soul 1. Pet. 1, 6.
.

Through ye weakness of our minds, and security, we feel not the sorrows of
ye mind, but oftentimes we laugh, when in deed we should weep Matt. 5, 4.
Luke. 6, 21.
.

There is no true liberty, nor good mirth; but in the fear of God joined with
a good conscience 2. Cor. 1, 3. 4. 12. 1. Pet. 3, 15. 16. Prou. 15, 15
.

Happy is that man which casting of the lets of al worldly business, can give
himself wholly to the stirring up of his mind. Happy is he that can keep
himself from al those things which may either defile or burden his conscience
2. Cor. 1, 8 9. 10.
.

Fight like a man 2. Tim. 2, 1
; custom is overcome by custom.

If thou mindest not to meddle in other men's matters; they for their parts, will
not meddle in thine.

Take not upon thee another man's charge; neither troble thy self in the
affairs of thy betters.

But look upon thy self Matthew. 7, verse. 1, etc.
; and before thy dearest friends give thy self counsel.

If thou lack the good will of men, take it not heavily; but if thou behave not
thy self well, and circumspectly as becomes the servant of GOD, and a true
Christian Luke 8, 21. Romans 2, 8. 9.
, houle and weep James. 5, 1.
.

It is good for a man not to have much comfort in this life, especialie
worldly comfort. As touching heavenly, if we either feel it not at al, or
but seldom, the fault is in our selves, which neither seek occasions to stir
up the mind, nor forsake transitory, and external comfort 2. Cor. 1, verse.
9. Heb. 12, 1.
.

Think with thy self not only that thou have not deserved any heavenly
comfort, but also that thou do deserve great misery, and affliction Luke 18,
13*
.

A man set on fire with the sparks of true godliness loves not 1. John. 2,
verse. 15.
but loatheth the world Philip. 3, 8*
, and all that is therein 1. John. 2, verse. 16.
.

A good man continually finds occasion to weep, and mourn. For whether he
behold himself, or other men, he sees that no man lives without misery in
this world. Yea the more earnestly he considers himself, the more
abundantly does he shed tears Luke. 23, verse. 28.
. And in deed our manifold sins, and transgressions Esai. 59, 2.
wherewith we lie so wrapped that hardly we can behold celestial things, should
move us so to do.

Think more often of thy death Sirach. 7, verse. 36.
, than of a long life; and doubtless thou will give thy self more earnestly to
repentance, than thou do. Again call into thy mind the pains of hell, when
God shall turn away his face Sirach. 18, verse. 23.
; and it will make thee both to lament thy sins, and to take adversity in
good part.

But because these things come not into mind Prou. 14, 9
; and we follow the vain pleasures of this transitory world; we go on, God
knows, coldlie and slowly in religion, for lack of the spirit of God Gal. 5,
18. 22. Roman. 8, verse. 12, etc.
; whence it is that our wretched bodies do so easily complain.

Wherefore make thine humble petition unto almighty GOD, that he would inflame
within thy breast his heavenly fire Psalm. 51, verse. 6, etc.
, and say with that Prophet Psalm. 80, 5. Psalm 102, 9.
: Feed me, O Lord, with ye bread of tears, and give me tears to drink with
great measure.

Chap. 22. A view of the misery of mankind.
WHersoeuer thou art, and whethersoeuer thou turnest thy self, thou art
miserable, unless thou return unto God Psa. 84, 10. 11. 12.
.

Why art thou trobled? Because things fall not out according to thy mind? But
who is he that has al things at his hearts desire? Not I, not thou, nor any
mortal man: no doubtless, man is not without misery and troble, no not a King,
nor the proud Pope himself.

Who is then in best estate, and condition? Even he which for Gods cause can
suffer affliction Matt. 5, 10 11. 1. Pet. 3, 14. 1. Pet. 4, 14.
.

Weak, and foolish people say commonly, See how happy he is; how welthie;
how mighty; in what authority; of what a goodly stature; how fair is he!
But look upon heavenly gifts, and thou shall find that these things are not
to be accounted of. For they are uncertain Matt. 6, 19. 1. John. 2, 16 17.
, and burdensome Mark. 4, ^9
because they can never be kept without carefulnes and fear Luke 12, 33 34.
.

Man should not think that in abundance of these worldly things an happy
life does consist 1. Tim. 6, 17 18. 19. Luke 12, 21.
; but he is to content himself with a mean estate Psa. 37, 16
, and to think that as long as he lives in this world he is miserable.

The more a man hungereth after godliness, the more he abhors this life 2.
Cor. 12, verse. 10.
; because he perceives more sensibly, and more evidently sees the sins of
man's corruption. For undoubtedly to a man zelouslie addicted, and desirous to
be loased from sin Romans 7, 24.
, to be with Christ Phili. 1, 23
, it is a misery and troble even to eat, to drink, to sleep, to rest, to
labor, and to be subject to other things necessarily incident unto mortal
man. For these things do greatly suppress the mind of man Wisd. 9, 15.
. Therefore most humbly does that Prophet desire to be delivered from them on
this wise, Draw me out of my necessities, O Lord.

But miserable are they which see not their own misery: but more miserable
which love this misery Luke 6, 24 25.
, and mortal life, in which some so delight (albeit with all their carking, and
care they can hardly provide things necessary for themselves) that, were they
sure to live always in this world, they would not set a point by the kingdom
of God Matt. 6, 21. Luke 12, 16. 17. 18. 19.
. Which mad, and faithles wretches, so deeply drowned in the earth that they
can think upon nothing but earthly things, shall one day to their pain
understand, how vile and vain it was which they loved Philip. 3, verse. 19.
.

But those men of God, and friends of Christ, looked not on those things which
pleased the flesh, and flourish for a time Phili. 3, 7. 8.
: but they coueted after everlasting riches with all desire, and greedines; yea
with their whole hearts they longed for things on high, not seen 2. Cor. 4,
verse. 18. 1. Pet. 1, 8.
, that y^ desire of things which are seen, might not draw them unto things
below.

Despair not, brother, to come forward in godliness; thou have yet time, and
space Psalm. 32, 5. 6. Esaie. 55, 6. 7.
. Defer not therefore thine amendment Eccles. 12, verse. 1, etc.
from day to day: but rise, and out of hand begin, and reason with thy self
on this wise, Behold now is the time to work, now to win the field, now is
the time to amend 2. Cor. 6, 1. 2. Galat. 6, 9. 10.
; in adversity the time is to deserve well.

Through fire and water thou must pass, before thou can come to the place of
comfort Psa. 66, 12.
. Except thou offer violence unto thy self Matthew. 11, verse. 12.
, thou shall never triumph over sin.

As long as we bear about frail, and earthly bodies, let us not look to
live without grief, and sorrow Roma. 7, verse. 24
.

In deed we could wish to live quite from misery: but forasmuch as through
sin we have lost our innocence Romans 5, 15
, our felicity, and quietness is gone therewithal.

Wherefore let us be patient Luke. 21, verse. 19.
, and expect the mercy of God, until our wickedness be put away, and this
mortality be swalowed up of life 1. Cor. 15, verse. 54.
.

O Lord, how great is man's frailty! How is man proane continually unto sin
Genesis 6, 5. Genesis 8, 21. Sirac. 17, 14.
! To day thou do confess thy sins Matt. 6, 12 13. Luke. 11, 4.
, and tomorow thou will sin as fresh as erst thou did. Now thou art
purposed to offend no more, and yet by and by thou do so wickedlie, as if
thou had never meant to do well Roman. 7, verse. 15, etc.
.

So that great cause we have to debase, and to think humbly of our selves,
being so frail, and subject to offending James. 3, 2. James. 4, 1.
.

Again, if with little negligence we leese that, which by great labor could
hardly be obtained; what will become of us at the end which so soon wax cold
Luke 9, 59 61.
?

Woe to us, if we so go on unto rest, as if now there were peace and security
1 Thessalonians. 5, verse. 6. 7.
, when in very deed as yet there appears no token of godliness in our
behauior.

Then undoubtedly we must be trained up afresh, like young soldiers 2. Tim. 2,
4
, if we hope to return unto goodness, and to proceed in godliness.

Chap. 23. That man ought to think upon his end.
Seeing the life of man is so frail, and short Job. 14, 1.
, consider wisely what thou take in hand.

To day a man, to morrow none Sirach. 10, verse. 11.
: and being out of sight, thou art out of mind Eccl. 1, 11. Eccles. 9, 5.
.

Oh the dulnes, and hardness of man's heart, that thinking of things present,
has no care of the time to come Sirac. 7, 16 17. Sirac. 18, 23
!

It were thy part so to behave thy self in all thy deeds, and thoughts, as
though thou should depart out of this world by and by.

Had thou a clear conscience, y^ would not greatly fear death Romans 8,
23 2. Cor. 1, 8. verse. 9. Sirach 41, 1.
.

It is better to avoid sin, than to fly death.

If thou art not ready to day, how will thou be to morrow? The next day is not
certain Matthew. 24, verse. 36, etc. Matt. 25, 13. Mark. 13, 32 33. Luke 21, 34.
. And again, how know thou that thou shall live til to morrow?

What are we the better to live long, if we prove not better by our long
life? Assuredly long life does not make us better to God ward, but the farther
from God Romans 2, 4. James. 5, verse. 1, etc.
.

Oh well were we, if we had lived well but one day in this world! Many keep
in mind how long they have favored good religion, but they never think what
fruit they have showed worthy amendment of life Matt. 3, 8.
.

If thou think it irksome to die, thou shall find it more perilous and
dangerous to live long.

Happy is that man which always thinks of his end, and prepares himself
daily for to die 2. Cor. 4, verse. 16, etc.
.

When thou see a man to die, consider by and by that thou must depart the
same way Heb. 9, 27 Sirac. 41, 3.
.

In the morning think not to live til night; and at night look not to live
til morning: and always live so circumspectly, and be so godly prepared,
that death may find thee ready whenever he shall come.

Many before they look for death, depart sodeinlie Luke 12, 20
: for the Son of man will come in an hour when men look not for him Luke.
12, verse. 40. Matthew. 24, verse. 50.
. But when that hour shall come, then will thou begin to think otherwise of
thy life past than thou have done, and then will thou bitterly bewail, that
ever thou wast so sluggishe, and negligent Mat. 7, 22 23. Matthew. 25, verse. 41,
etc.
.

Happy is that man which endeuoreth to seem such in this life, as he would
appear at ye hour of death Luke 12, 37
.

He which hates the world perfectly 1. John. 2, verse. 15.
; and favors godliness zelouslie Reu. 3, 15 16.
; and will be admonished willingly Prouer. 2, verse. 1, etc.
; and endeuoreth to amend his life seriously Luke 3, 3, Matthew. 3, 8. 10.
; and can obeie his superiors gladly Ti^. 3, 1. Colos. 3 22 23.
; and deny himself thoroughlie Mark. 8, verse. 34. Luke. 9, 23.
; and take affliction for Christ's sake patiently Matthew. 10, verse. 38. Matt.
5, 10. 11. 1. Pet. 3, 14. 1. Pet. 4, 14.
, gives most notable tokens that he will die a good man.

Whilst thou art in health thou may do many good deeds; but when thou art
sick, I see not what thou art able to do. For in the time of sickness few
amend: and they which defer their amendment til then, do hardly come into
the favor of God.

Better is it to amend, and while time is Gal. 6, 10. 2. Cor. 6, 2.
to live well, that hereafter thou may live for ever Reu. 7, 15. 16. 17. 1.
Cor. 2, 9.
. But if thou forgo so good opportunity, thou afterward wilt seek it, when
it is too late: and perhaps desire but an hour, or two to repent, and they will
not be granted.

Wherefore consider diligently both what perils thou shall escape, and what
miseries avoid Prou. 14, verse. 27.
, if always like a wise man, thou think upon thine end. And endeavor so to
live in this world, that at the hour of death thou may rejoice rather tha^
fear Psalm. 23, 4.
.

Now, while time is, learn to die unto the world, that then thou may live
with Christ Romans 6, ^8.
. Now, while time is, learn to contemn the world 1 John. 2, verse. 15. Luke.
14, 26 33. Matt. 10, 37
, that then without let thou may go unto Christ. Now, while time is, beat
down thy body 1 Cor. 9, verse. 27.
by repentance, that then thou may have an assured boldness.

Ah fool, what think thou to live long, seeing thou art not sure to live one
day Luke 12, 17 18. 19. 20. 40.
? How many have bin deceived and sodeinlie taken out of this world Eccles. 9,
verse. 12.
?

Thou have heard, I am sure, and that oftentimes, how one was killed by the
sword; another drowned; another brake his neck with a fall; another as he was
at meat; another at play; another with a knife; another of the sickness;
another of thieves. Thus al die Sirac. 41, 3
(though not after one sort), and man's life passes away like a shadow Job.
8, 9. Job. 14, 2. Psa. 102, 11. Psa. 144, 4.
.

Who after death will help thee, if in thy life time thou leese good
opportunity Luke. 16, verse. 24, etc.
? Now, I say, now or never is the time to do well 2. Cor. 6, 2.
, while both thou know not the hour of thy death, and may do good to thy
self in time.

Now, while time serves, lay up everlasting treasures for thy self in heaven
Matthew. 6, verse. 20. Luke 12, 33.
; think of nothing but on heavenly things Coloss. 3, verse. 1. 2.
, and care for nothing but thy salvation. Now, I say, while time serves make
friends, which after death may receive thee into everlasting habitations Luke
16, 9
.

Account thy self on the earth but a pilgrim, and stranger Hebr. 11, verse.
13, etc.
, unto whom the affairs of the world do nothing apperteine. Get thee a quiet
conscience, and lift up thy mind unto God Coloss. 3, 1
: because in this world thou have no continuing city Heb. 13, 14 Micah. 2,
10.
.

Thither direct thy prayers, and daily groans with tears, that after death
thy spirit may go to God in bliss Psalm. 31, 5. Luke 23, 46. Acts. 7, 59,
.

Chap. 24. Of the last judgment; and of the punishment for si ne.
Whatsoever thou take in hand remember thine end Sirac. 7, 36
, and how thou must appear before a severe judge, in whose sight nothing is
hid Heb. 4, 13.
, which neither is pleased by reward, nor admits vain excuses; but rightly
and indifferently judges al men 1. Pet. 1, 17
.

O fond man, and miserable wretch, what answer will thou make unto God, who
knows al thy sins Job. 9, 3. 14.
, which oftentimes fear even the looks of an angry man?

Why do thou not look to thy self against the day of that judgment, when
no man shall excuse, or defend another Romans 14, verse. 12. 2 Cor. 5, 10.
? for every man shall have enough to answer for himself Psa. 62, 12. Romans 2, 6.
1. Cor. 3, 8. Galat. 6, 5
.

Now may thou do good, if thou take pain; now will thy tears be accepted,
if thou weep; now may thy groans be heard, if thou sigh Psalm. 32, 6. Esaie.
55, 6.
, and both pacify God, and purge thy self.

And in deed thoroughlie is the patient man purged, which being iniuried, does
bewail the wickedness of the inferrer rather than the injury offered to
himself; prays for his enemies Matt. 5, 44. Luke 23, 34. Acts. 7, 60. 1.
Cor. 4, 13.
; forgiueth them from his heart Matt. 6, 12. 14. Mark. 11, 25 Sirac. 28, 2.
; asks pardon speedily of others whom he has offended Matt. 5, 24
; is more easily moved to pity than to anger; offers often violence unto
himself Matt. 11, 12
; and laboreth earnestly to bring his body into the subjection of the Spirit
1. Cor. 9, verse. 27.
. And these things must not be deferred, but be done while we live, and that
with speed Gal. 6, 10.
. But we deceive our selves through an inordinate desire of the flesh Rom 8, 12
13.
.

That hell fire Matthew. 25, verse. 41.
, what else will it burn but sins? The more thou have loved thy self, and
pampered thy flesh, the more shall be thy pains, and ye more substance to burn
thee haste thou lay together Luke 12, 20 Luke. 16, verse 19, etc. James. 5, 3.
. For in what things a man has sinned, in the same he shall be punished Wisd.
11, verse. 13.
, according to the greatness of the offense.

There idle persons shall be pricked with burning forkes; gluttons there shall be
tormented with extreme hunger, and thirst Luke 16, 24 25.
; there epicures and voluptuous persons for their sweet delights shall have
burning pitch to boil them, and stinking brimstone to anoie them; the envious
there shall howl like mad dogs; and no vice but shall have his torment. There
the proud shall have shame; and the covetous churl shall have miserable penury.

To be short; one hour of pain in that place shall be more grievous, than al ye
time they had in this world to amend their manners. For there is no rest Esai.
66, 24 2 Thessalonians. 1, 8.
; comfort there is none: here sometime their sorrow ceased, and sometime they
received comfort of their friends.

Wherefore have a care of thy self whilst thou art alive, and bewail thy
sins, that in the day of that judgment thou may safely rejoice with Gods
elect Luke 16, 25 Wisd. 3, 3. Matt. 25, 34
.

For then shall the righteous with great boldness stand against such as have
vexed, and oppressed them Wisd. 5, 1. Psalm 1, ^.
. Then shall he sit to judge Matthew. 19, verse. 28.
, which now is content to be judged of men. Then shall the poor Matt. 5, 3.
, and meek Luke 14, 11 Luke 18, 14.
triumph, when the proud shall quake on every side Prou. 16, verse. 18.
. Then shall they say, He was wise, which for Christ his sake seemed a fool
and abject 1. Cor. 4. verse. 10.
. Then shall the memory of misery patiently sustained be sweet Ps. 126 5.
Esaie. 25, 8.
, when in the mean while the wicked shall sob, and sigh Reu. 21, 8.
. Then shall the godly rejoice, and be glad, but the reprobate shall howl and
weep Mat. 25, 46 John. 5, 29. Dan. 12, 2.
. Then shall the afflicted more triumph, than if continualie he had bin in joy
Roma. 8, verse. 18.
. Then shall the base apparel be glorious 2. Cor. 5, 2
, and the proud attire infamous. Then shall the poor cottage be more commended
2. Pet. 1, 13 14. 2. Cor. 5, 1.
, than is the gilded palace praised. Then shall constant patience more prevail
Esai. 30, 18 Luke 21, 19.
than all the power of the world. Simple obedience shall more be commended then,
than all the subtlety of man Esai. 29, 16 1. Cor. 1, 20.
. Then shall a clear and good conscience more rejoice a man Esaie. 33, verse.
14 15.
, than profounde skill in Philosophy. The contempt of riches shall do more good
Matt. 5, 3.
then, than all the riches in the world. Then shall a zealous prayer bring more
delight Sirach. 35, verse 13, etc.
, than ever did fine cates. Thy silence kept in thy life time shall more chere
thy heart at that time Esa. 30, 15.
, than long babbling Matt. 6, 5. 6. 7.
. Good works then shall be more respected Roma. 2, verse. 10.
, than copy of sweet words. And then shall thy pains taken to reform thy
manners more delight Prouer. 11, verse. 3, etc.
than could all the pleasure in the world Wisd. 5, 8.
.

Wherefore learn in this life to suffer small things Romans 8, 18 35.
, that in the world to come thou may escape great, and grievous dangers.
Try first in thy life time, what thou can suffer after thou art dead. And if
thou can not endure but light things in comparison now, how will thou bear
afterward everlasting torments? And if now so little pain can make thee
impatient, what will the fire of hell do? For persuade thy self, thou can not
be twice happy, that is, enioie thy pleasure in this life Luke 16, 25
, and reign too with Christ in the world to come. Now suppose thou have lived
hitherto in perpetual honor and pleasure, what good would these things do
thee, if thou should die out of hand Luke 9, 25. Luke 12, 20.
?

See thou not how al things are vain Eccle. 1, 2. Eccles. 12, 8.
, save only to love and to serve God ^. Pet. 1, 10
?

For he which loves God with all his heart, fears neither death, nor pain,
nor judgment, nor damnation Romans 8, 38 39.
. For perfect love makes a man with boldness to appear before God 1. Ioh. 4, 17
18.
. But marvel it is not though, he which delights as yet in sin Romans 6, 12
14.
do both fear death, and the day of judgment.

Notwithstanding, if the love of God cannot allure thee unto godliness, yet let
the fear of hell fire drive thee from wickedness Prou. 14, verse. 27. Luke. 3,
verse. 7, etc.
. But if neither the love of God, nor the fear of hell cannot better thee one
jot, then look not to stand in a good thing long, but quickly to fall into
the snares of Satan.

Chap. 25. That we must earnestly endeavor to amend our lives.
BE thou zealous, and earnest in the service of God: consider with thy self
wherefore thou wast made, and wherefore thou have renounced the world, even to
live to God Romans 7, 4.
, and to become a good man Ephe. 2, 10
.

Therefore endeavor thou zelouslie to go forward. For yet a little while and thou
shall have a reward of thy labors, and neither fear nor sorrow shall be about
thee Esai 25, 8. Revel. 7, 17. Revel. 21, 4. Matthew. 5, 4.
.

Labor but a while longer, and thou shall find great, yea everlasting rest Romans
8, 18
.

If thou continue faithful, and diligent unto the end Matthew. 24, verse. 13. 2 Thessalonians. 3, 13 2. Tim. 2, 5.
, God will show himself faithful, and bountiful in rewarding Matthew. 25, verse.
21, etc.
.

Hope well to win the garland Romans 8, verse. 24. 2. Tim. 4, 7. 8
, but shun security Matthew. 24, verse. 42, etc. Matthew. 25, 8 Luke 12, 42.
, both to avoid wearines, and pride.

A certain man tossed between hope and fear, on a day in his prayers
uttered these words, Oh if I knew certainly that I should persevere! and
forthwith he seemed to hear these heavenly words in his mind: What if thou
knew as much; would thou continue in the course thou have taken? well go
to, Do that which thou would do, and doubt not to persevere. With which
comfortable words being encoraged he straight way committed himself to the
will of God; and from thence forth neither wauered any more in mind, nor
labored curiously what might become of him, but bent himself wholly to do that
was agreeable to the will of God 1. Ioh. 2, 17
, and most necessary for his going forward, and continuing in the race of
virtue.

Trust thou in the Lord, and do good, (says the Prophet Psalm. 37, 3.
) so thou shall dwell in the land, and be fed assuredly.

One thing there is that withdraws many men from proceeding in virtue, and
earnest amendment of their manners, and that is the horrible hardness, and the
painefulnes to subdue our selves Matthew. 19, verse. 21, etc. Mark. 10, verse. 21,
etc. Luke. 18, verse. 22, etc.
.

But who profit more than others in well doing? Not they whom such things
dismaie, but they which endeavor valiantly to overcome those counterbuffs Ps.
27, 14. 2. Tim. 2, 1.
. For the more a man overcomes, and by Gods assistance subdueth himself 2.
Pet. 2, 9.
, the more he goes forward, and comes the more into the favor of God.

How be it al men have not like power to overcome, and to mortify themselves.
Yet this I say, he which has less ability, if he use diligence in this
point, shall more prevail Matthew. 19, verse 27, etc. Luke 18, 13.
, than another which is slothful, though perhaps otherwise he seem virtuous
Matthew. 19, verse. 20. Luke 18, 11. 12. 21.
.

Now there be two things, that make much to a man's amendment, namely, to
withdraw our selves violently from such things, whereunto by our wicked nature
we are inclined Mat. 11, 12
; and to bend our selves wholly to the attaining of that good, which we stand
in need of Psalm. 37, 3. 4.
. Also those things are especialie to be taken heed of, and avoided, which we
commonly mislike, or condemn in other men Matt. 7, 3. 4. Roman. 2, verse. ^,
etc. 1. Cor. 11, 31
.

Take profit of every thing. If thou hear, or see examples of virtue,
follow them; if of wickedness, avoid them. As thou priest into other men's
manners: so do others into thine Matthew. 7, 4. 2.
.

Oh what a ioieful and comfortable thing is it to see professors of
Christianity, folowers of Christ's doctrine 1. Cor. 13, verse. 3 4. 1. Tim. 1,
5. 19.
! Again what a lamentable, and grievous thing is it that such as would be
counted Gospelers live looselie, and contrary to their calling!

How hurtful is it to alter the purpose of thy profession, and to incline to
those things which are not commanded thee 1. Tim. 4, verse. 1, etc. 1. Tim. 5,
13. Coloss. 2, 20
!

Remember thy profession, and always have in mind Christ which was crucified
Gal. 6, 14. 1. Cor. 1, 23.
; when thou see his life be ashamed of thy self, that have so long a while
professed Christianity, and yet so little, if any whit, followed the example of
Christ 1. Cor. 11, verse. 1. ^. Pet. 2, 9. 21.
.

He which attentively, and carefully thinks upon the life, and death of
Jesus, shall find sufficiency of al necessary, and profitable things in the
same; neither shall he need to seek any better thing without Jesus Roman. 8,
verse. 1, etc. Coloss. 2, 12 13. 14.
.

If Jesus crucified came into our minds, quickly, and sufficiently learned
we should prove 1. Cor. 2, verse. 1, etc.
.

The delight of a Christian is in the Law of the Lord Psalm. 1, 2. 1. John. 5, 2.
, and therein does he exercise himself: but if he once wax negligent, and
luke warm Reu. 3, 15. 16.
, then miseries come which oppress him, and trobles that vex him, because he
is void of inward consolation, and forbidden to seek any outward comfort
Esaie. 57, verse. 3, etc.
.

And doubtless he which passes the bounds of Christ's doctrine, is greatly
subject to a grievous destruction Prou. 1, 24 25. 26.
; and he that loves a loase, and secure life, is never in quiet Esa. 57, 20 21.
; for some thing evermore displeases him.

Rather follow the straight, and virtuous life Matt. 7, 13 14.
of the Apostles, and Disciples of Christ 1. Cor 11, 1 1 Thessalonians 1, 6. 7. 1 Thessalonians. 2, verse. 14. 2 Thessalonians. 3, 9 Hebr. 13, 7.
; and in so doing, doubt thou not, but that God of his wonted mercy will give
thee strength to do well. This is the way to be full of hope, and strength; this
is the way, even the heavenly way so to proceed, that thou may despise al
worldly things Psa. 56, 4 ve. 10, and 11.
.

And would to God we had no let, but that we might praise God even with heart,
and mouth Psalm. 34, 1. 2.
, and keep his commandments Psa. 119, 5.
! would to God we were quite rid from al worldly business, and did set our
affections on heavenly things Coloss. 3, 2
! For when man is come to that point, that he cares for no worldly comfort
Psalm. 86, 7 8. Psalm 2. 0, 7. Psalm. 56, 11. Romans 8, 38. 39.
, then begins he to taste the sweetenes of God; to take al things in good
part, howsoever they fall out; to be neither over iocunde in prosperity, nor
too pensive in adversity Psalm. 30, 7. 8.
; but evermore confidentlie to hope in God Psalm. 37, 3. 4.
, who is al in all To. 11, 36. 1. Cor. 8, 6 1. Cor. 12, 6. 1. Cor. 15, 28
, to whom nothing dies, but al things live, and continualie obeie at his beck
Ps. 104, 1.
.

Always remember the end Sirac 7, 36
; and think that time lost will never come again Ephesians. 5, 15. 16. Galat. 6, 10.
.

Without care, and diligence thou shall never attain to godliness Romans 12, 6
verse. 7, and 8 2. Cor. 11, 23
. If thou wax faint, thou shall every day be worse and worse Luke 9, 62
John. 5, 14. 2. Pet. 2, 1. verse. 12, etc.
: but go thou zealouslie forward Mat. 25, 10 ve. 21, and 22. 1. Pet. 3, 10.
11. Psalm. 34, 12. 13.
, and thou shall find both great peace, and pleasure in thy well doing, both
because God favors thee, and thou fauorest virtue.

An earnest, and zealous man is prepared unto al things Romans 8, 35 38. 39.
Ephesians 6, 12.
. It is more paineful to resist vices, and perturbations of the mind, than to
sweat again with bodily labor: and he which in time takes no heed of small
sins, by little and little falls into great offenses James. 1, verse. 13. 14.
.

Thou shall evermore be merry at night, if thou have behaved thy self godly
in the day.

Watch for thy self 1. Cor. 16, verse. 13.
; stir up, and admonish thy self; whatsoever becomes of others, have a
regard to thy self 1. Tim. 6, verse. 11. 12.
; For so do thou profit, as thou offerest Mat. 11, 12
violence unto thy self.

Thus ends the first Book.
The second Book of the Jmitation of Christ.
Chapter. 1. Of the inward life of man.
THe kingdom of God is within says Christ Luke 17, 21
.

Turn thee unto the Lord with all thine heart, having forsaken this wretched
world, and thou shall find rest for thy soul Psalm. 4, 8. Psalm. 15, 1. Matt.
11, 29.
.

Learn to contemn outward things Luke. 17, verse. 20. 21.
, and to addict thy self to spiritual; so shall thou perceive the kingdom of
God to come into thee.

For the kingdom of God is righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy
Ghost To. 14, 17.
, which the wicked enioie not Esai. 57, 21
.

Christ will come unto thee, and comfort thee John. 14, 23
, if thou make a fit resting place for him within thee. For all his glory, and
beauty is within Psa. 45, 13
; there does he gladly abide.

With the inner man does he oftentimes walk; and reason sweetly; and delight
himself pleasantly; and agree notably; and familiarlie continue Prouer. 8,
verse. 32, etc.
.

Go to now, O faithful soul, prepare thine heart for this bridgroome Sal. song.
5, verse. 4. 2. Cor. 11, 2
, that he may come unto thee, and dwell within thee. For thus he says Ioh. 14,
23
, If any man love me, he will keep my word, and my Father will love him, and
we will come unto him, and will dwell with him.

Wherefore keep out others, and let Christ have room: if thou have him, thou
have enough Romans 8, 17 Philip. 3, 8.
. For he will have a care of thee, and so faithfulie ouersee al thine affairs,
that to put any confidence in man thou shall not need Psa. 37, 3. 34. 39.
Hebr. 13, 6.
.

For men quickly are changed, and speedily depart Psalm. 62, 9 Psalm. 39, 11.
Psalm. 116, 10. 11.
: but Christ abides for ever Heb. 13, 8.
, and continues by his unto the end Matt. 28, verse. 20.
. Neither set any great affiance on mortal and frail man, albeit he be dear
unto thee, and may do thee good Psa. 118, 8 9*
; and if sometime he gainesaie, and troble thee, be not over pensive.

They which take thy part to day, to morrow may be thine enemies, and
afterward thy friends: for they change manie-times like the wind.

But put thy confidence in ye Lord 1. Pet. 5, 7. Psalm. 43, 5.
, and see thou serve, and love him Matthew. 22, verse. 37. Mark. 12, 29 30.
: he will handle thy cause right well, and set it in good order Ps. 73, 24.
.

Here thou have no continuing city Heb. 13, 14
, and wheresoever thou go, thou art a stranger, and pilgrim Heb. 11, 13
verse. 14, etc.
, never finding rest til thou art fast joined unto Christ Ephe. 2, 19
.

Why do thou here gaze about, seeing this is not the place of thine abode? In
heaven should be thy conversation Phil. 3, 20
, as for earthly things thou should behold them only to see how they pass
away 1. Cor. 7, 31 1. John. 2, 17
, and thou with them Psalm. 90, 5 verse. 6, etc.
. So look upon them, that thou love them not 1. John. 2, verse. 15. 16.
, least thou perish being taken with vain delight.

Cast thy cogitations upon the most hie God 1. Pet 5, 7
; and pray unto Christ without ceassing Psa. 55, 16 17. Luke. 18, 1. Coloss.
4, 2. 1 Thessalonians. 5, verse. 17.
.

If thou can not meditate on deep and heavenly mysteries, rest thy self in
the pains of Christ, and abide willingly in his wounds 1. Pet. 2, verse. 21,
etc. 1. Pet. 4, 13.
. Run thou zelouslie unto those healthful wounds, and stripes of Christ, and
thou shall find a great comfort in adversity, yea thou shall not set a rush
by the reproaches of men, but take al slanders in good part 1. Pe. 2, 19 20. 1.
Pet. 3. 9, 14.
.

Christ himself was despised of men in this world Psalm. 22, 6. Matt. 27, 31
John. 15, 18. 19. 20. Hebr. 12, 2. 3.
; yea at a great extremity his very friends forsook him, and fled Mat. 26,
56 70. 72.
. Christ himself suffered, and was contemned Esaie. 53, verse. 3, etc. Luke
18, 32.
; and will thou complain? Christ himself had adversaries, and backbiters 1
Pet. 2, 23 24.
; and would thou have no enemies, nor be il spoken of?

How shall thy patience be crowned, if thou sustain no adversity 2. Tim. 2, 3
4. 5.
? And if thou will not be contraried in any thing, how will thou be the friend
of Christ Ioh. 15, 13 14. 20.
? But make thou an account to suffer tribulation both with Christ Romans 8, 17
, and for Christ 1. Pe. 4, 14
, if thou desire to reign with Christ 2. Tim. 2, verse. 11. 12.
.

Oh had thou but once entered into the secret closet of Jesus, and felt
but even a very little of the heat of his love, thou would not only make
none account either of prosperity, or adversity in this world Luke. 5, 11
Luke. 9, 23.
, but also even rejoice when thou art defamed Acts. 5, 41.
! For the love of Christ makes a man even to despise himself Roman. 8, verse.
35, etc. Philip. 3, 8.
.

I say the true spiritual man, which is void of inordinate desires, and
loves Jesus unfeignedly, can both turn himself freely unto God, and
ravished in spirit above himself, quietly enioie him Phil. 3, 20.
.

He, to whom al things seem as they are in deed, not as they are esteemed in
ye vain opinion of man, is doubtless a wise man, and rather taught of God Esa.
54, 13. John. 6, 65.
, than of men.

He that has learned to abide within, and to make small account of outward
things, neither seeks a place 1. Tim. 2, 8
, nor expects leisure to exercise himself in godliness Galat. 6, 9. 10. 1 Thessalonians. 3, 10
. The inward man can quickly call himself home, inasmuch as he never is
altogether abroad. Neither outward labor can let him, nor necessary business
stay him for a time: but as every thing falls out, so does he apply
himself Romans 8, 38 39.
.

He that is well prepared, and reformed inwardly, is nothing trobled with the
wonderful, and perverse behavior of the world Psalm. 56, 4. 1. Cor. 4, 3.
. Look how greatly a man draws business unto himself, so much is he
hindered, and distracted.

Were thou well settled, and thoroughly purged, al things would be for thy good,
and profit Romans 8, 28
. But for that thou art not plainly dead unto thy self 1. Pet. 2, 1. 2, 3.
Coloss. 3, 5.
, nor separated wholly from earthly things, many things displease, and troble
thee oftentimes.

Nothing does so defile, and snarle the mind of man, as the impure desire of
earthly things Titus. 2, 12
.

Wherefore if thou will despise the consolation which this world does minister
1. Ioh. 2, 15
, thou shall more easily both behold celestial things, and inwardly rejoice.

Chap. 2. Of Patience, and humility, two virtues necessary to be in a
Christian.
CAre not greatly who is on thy side, or against thee Psalm. 56, 4. 2. Cor. 1,
12.
, but care to please God in all thy doings, and to have a good conscience: so
will God defend thee right well. And whom he defends, none can hurt Romans 8, 31
.

If thou have learned to hold thy peace, and to be pacient Psa. 27, 14
, doubt thou not but God will aid thee from above. He knows when to deliver
thee 2. Pet. 2, 9.
; therefore ought thou to commit thy self to his pleasure.

It is God that aideth Psa. 121, 2.
, and delivers man from shame, and rebuke.

It is manie-times good, to bring us more and more down, to have our vices
known, and reprehended of others Ps. 119, 67 71.
.

When a man humbles himself for his offenses, he easily pacifieth such as
are offended, and with small ado comes into favor again.

The humbled man does GOD protect, and save Psa. 34, 18
; to the humble he humbles himself, yea the humble has many things at his
hands Iam. 4, 6
; the humble he exalts unto glory 1. Pet. 5, 6. Prou. 22, 4.
; and to the humble he both reuealeth his secrets Luke 10, 21
, and offers himself Esai. 66, ^.
. The humble man, be he never so much iniuried, or backbited, is always quiet
in mind: because he trustethin God, not on the world Psalm. 23, 4.
.

Think not to come forward in religion any whit, unless thou think thy self
inferior unto al James. 4, 6
.

Chap. 3. That we ought to be at peace both with our selves, and with all men.
BE first of al at peace with thy self Psa. 51, 12 13.
: and then shall thou pacify others Matt. 5, 9.
.

A quiet man does more good, than a learned.

The contentious construeth a good thing on the il part, and harkeneth unto
evil Prou. 17, 4
: But a good, and quiet man turns al things to the best Pro. 15, 18
. The quiet man conceaueth sinisterlie of no man 1. Cor. 13, verse. 5.
: but the unquiet, and suspicious, will neither be quiet himself, nor suffer
others to be at rest; he both speaks that manietimes which he ought not, and
does not that which he should; he considers what is another man's duty, and
neglects his own Ioh. 21, 21 22.
.

Wherefore do first thine own duty: and then look that another man do his
Matt. 7, 5.
.

Thou have the trick how to color, and excuse thine own deeds Romans 2, 1. 3.
yet will thou not allow the excuses of another. But reason would, thou
should excuse another, and accuse thy self Pro. 10, 12. Prou. 17, 9. 1. Pet
4, 8.
. If thou would be borne withal, be are thou with another: and see how far
thou art as yet from true patience, and charity, which fretteth and is
offended with none but with it self 1. Cor. 13, verse. 4. 5. 6. 7.
.

To dwell with good, and quiet men it is no hard matter, for all men naturalie do
like thereof, and every man desires quietness, and love such again as love
them Matt. 5, 46. 47.
. But to live quietly with crabbed, and froward fellows, with enemies, and il
conditioned men, is doubtless the part of a man in deed deserving commendation
Mat. 5, 44 45.
.

Some are at peace both with themselves, and with others Roma. 12, verse. 18,
etc.
: Some will neither be quiet themselves, nor suffer others Prou. 6, 19. Romans 3,
17.
; these are ill to themselves, but worse to others. Again some both keep
themselves in charity Prou. 3, 30
, and study to bring others unto concord Matt. 5, 9.
.

And yet all the peace which we have in this miserable life, does rather
consist in patient suffering Luke 21, 19
, than in not feeling adversity.

The more a man knows how to suffer miseries, the more quietness does he
enioie: and such a man is a victorious conqueror of himself Matt. 5, 38. 39.
; a Lord of the world Romans 8, 37
; a freende of Christ Ioh. 15, 13 14.
; and an heir of heaven Romans 8, 17 32. Matthew. 5, 10.
.

Chap. 4. Of pureness in mind, and plainenes in meaning.
MAn is carried over earthly things with two wings, to wit with plainenes
Matt. 6, 16
, and pureness Matt. 6, 22 2. Cor. 1, 12.
. Plainenes is of meaning, pureness is of the mind; that minds God, this
apprehends, and tastes what he is Matthew. 5, 8 Psalm. 24, 4.
.

No good action shall hinder thee, if thy mind be free from al inordinate
affections Matt. 6, 22 23.
.

If thou only seek, and mind to please God, and to profit others, thou
shall enioie the freedom of mind Psalm. 1, 2. 3. Psalm. 27, 14.
.

Were thy mind upright, ye whole world were naught unto thee but even a glass
to frame thy life, and a book of godly instructions Romans 1, 19 20.
. For nothing is there so small, and vile, but it represents the goodness of
God Psalm. 8, 2. Psalm. 19, 1. 2.
.

And if thy mind were good, and pure, thou should easily behold, and well
perceive al things Matt. 6, 22
.

For a pure mind penetrateth both into heaven Matt. 5, 8.
, and hell: and as a man's mind is, so does he judge of things Matt. 6, 23
.

If there be any joy, the man which has a pure heart does enioie the same
Psalm. 51, 10. 6
: and if there be any sorrow, and misery, he has it which has a guilty
conscience Esa. 57, 20 21. Esai. 48, 22.
.

As fire takes away the rust from iron, and makes it bright: so does
repentance wipe away wickedness, and makes of a sinner a new man Deu. 4, 29.
30. 31.
.

A man that is but warm in godliness, flies even the least pains, and seeks
outward comfort Pro. 19, 15 24.
; but would he once earnestly begin to subdue himself, and stoutly take the
ready way to a virtuous life, doubtless those things which at the first he
counted grievous, will seem light, and easy Matthew. 11, verse. 29. 30.
.

Chap. 5. Of the consideration of a man's self.
WE ought not overmuch to trust to our selves Prou. 3, 5. Luke 18, 11. 2. Cor.
1, 9.
: for manietimes we lack both grace, and will.

Small is the judgment which we have John. 1, 9.
, and that also we may easily forgo by negligence Matt. 25, 8
.

And yet, so blind are we, manietimes we perceive not so much: and manie-times
when we sin, we excuse our wickedness; yea, and through a blind affection,
suppose it to be zeal, which is woorst of al 1. Cor. 2. 14
.

We reprehende others for small things: and ouerpasse great offenses in our
selves Matt. 7, 4.
. We can quickly see when we are iniuried, and will not easily put up wrong:
but how we injury others our selves we never call into mind.

Assuredly would a man rightly, and wisely consider his own doings Matthew.
18, verse. 32. 33. Luke 7, 37. 38. 39.
, he should find no cause why to condemn another.

The godly man has a greater care of himself, than of any thing beside: and
he which looks to himself diligently, will speak but little of another.

Look not to prove godly, and religious, unless thou bridle thy tongue from
talking of others, and have a through insight into thy self 1. Cor. 11, verse.
28. 31. 2. Cor. 13, 5.
.

If thou give thy mind wholly to know thy self, and to do the will of God, no
outward thing shall move, or troble thee Phil. 3, 7. 8. 2. Cor. 4, 16
.

Where art thou while thou art not with thy self? or when thou have ouerpast
al things, what art thou the better, if thou neglect thy self Mat 16, 26 Mark.
8, 36. Luke. 9, 25. Ioh. 12, 25.
? Thou must of necessity neglect al other things and think hereof, if thou
mind to attain unto peace, and quietness: yea thou shall mightily increase, if
thou cast of worldly cares Mat. 6, 25. Luke 12, 22. Philip. 4, 6.
; and contrariewise as greatly decrease, if thou make any account of earthly
things 1. Tim. 6, 8. 9. 10. 1. Pet. 5, 7.
.

Count nothing woonderful, nothing excellent, nothing grateful, nothing
acceptable, but either God, or yt which is of God 1. John. 2, verse. 15. 16.
17. 1. Ioh. 4, 21.
: as for worldly pleasure deem it but vain 1. Cor. 7, verse. 30. 31. 1 John.
2, 15. 17.
.

The soul which loves God, in respect of GOD, contemns al things Phili. 3,
7. 8.
. God alone which is eternal 1. Tim. 1, verse. 17.
, infinite Job. 11, 7.
, and incomprehensible 1. Kings. 8, verse. 27.
, is the comfort of the soul, and the true joy of heart 1. Ioh 4, 16 Sirach.
1, 11. 12.
.

Chap. 6. The joy of a good conscience.
THe glory of a good man consists in the testimony of a good conscience 2
Cor. 1, 12
.

If thy conscience be good, thou have continual joy Prou. 15, verse. 15.
.

A man that has a good conscience endures much Roman. 8, verse. 35, etc.
, yea reioiceth in adversity James. 1, verse. 2, etc.
: but a wicked man is evermore timorous Genesis 3, 8.
, and unquiet Genesis 4, 5. 6. Esai. 57, 20. 21.
.

Sweet will be thy sleep, if thy conscience accuse thee not Psalm. 3, 5.
.

Rejoice not, but in well doing 1. Cor. 13, 6
.

Wicked men at no time rejoice in deed, neither feel the peace of a godly
mind: for, as says the Lord Esa. 48, 22. Esai. 57, 21.
, There is no peace unto the wicked. And though they say they live in peace,
and can never be molested with adversity, nor iniuried by man, believe them
not. For suddenly shall the heavy displeasure of God so fall upon them Romans 1,
28 Romans 2, 8. 9. 1 Thessalonians. 5, 3.
, that both their doings shall come to naught, and themselves utterly consume
away.

For a godly man to rejoice in tribulation is no hard thing Romans 5, 2. 3. 2.
Co. 12, 10 Galat. 6, 14. James. 1, 2.
: and so to rejoice, is to rejoice of Gods fatherly care.

Vain is the praise which is either ascribed, or received of men Ioh. 5, 41.
44. John. 12, 43
. The praise of the righteous is in their conscience 2. Co. 1, 12
, not in the tongue of men. The righteous rejoice of GOD, in God Psalm. 9, 2. 14.
Ierem. 9, 24. 1. Cor. 1, 31 2. Cor. 10, 17
, and in the truth 1. Cor. 13. verse. 6.
.

He that seeks for true, and eternal glory, contemns worldly praise Ioh
8, 54. Galat. 6, 14.
: but he that either coueteth, or does not contemn temporal, he doubtless
waieth but little celestial glory Ioh. 12, 43.
.

Great quietness has he that cares neither for praise, nor dispraise 1. Cor.
4, 3.
. And he is well content and quiet whatsoever his condition be, which has a
clear conscience 2. Cor. 1, 12
.

If thou be praised, thou art not the better; nor the worser, if thou art
dispraised: what thou art, thou art; and greater thou art not, than God
accounts thee to be 1. Sam. 16, verse. 7*
.

Consider what thou art within, and way not what thou art thought to be
abroad 1. Cor. 4, 3
.

Man beholds the countenance, but God the heart 1. Chr. 28, verse. 9 Psalm. 7,
9. Iere. 11, 20. Iere. 17, 10. Iere. 20, 12. Romans 8, 27.
: and man judges of the deeds, but God of the mind, and intent.

Evermore to do well, and to count baselie of a man's own self Roma. 12, verse.
10.
, is a singular token of a modest mind. So is it an argument of rare
integrity, and faith, to contemn the comfort of worldly things.

He that seeks no record elsewhere Ioh. 5, 34. 41.
, has doubtless wholly addicted himself to the service of God. For he that
praises himself, says Paul 2 Cor 10, verse. 18.
, is not allowed, but he whom the Lord praises.

To deal with God in mind Psalm. 16, 7* 8. 9. Acts. 2, 26. 46. 47.
, and never to be moved outwardly with any perturbation, is the property of
him that is a spiritual man.

Chap. 7. That our Savior Christ is to be loved above al things.
BLessed is he which knows what it is to love Jesus, and for his cause to
contemn al things Mark. 8, 34 35. Luke. 9, 23. 24.
.

For loves sake even the beloved must be left: in as much as Jesus will be loved
above al things Matt. 10, verse. 37. Luke 14, 26.
.

The love of earthly things is deceiptful, and frail: but the love of Jesus
does endure, and continue. He which loves worldly things, shall perish
therewithal 1. Ioh. 2, 17
: but he that embraces Jesus abides ever Ioh. 3, 16.
.

Love him, and retain his good will, which when al things vade away will never
forsake thee Mat. 28, 20 John. 14, 16.
, nor suffer thee to perish John. 6, 37 38. 39. 40.
.

Will thou, nil thou, one day thou must leave this world Job. 14, 5. Psalm. 39,
5.
: and therefore stick to Christ both in life, and death Romans 14, verse. 8,
etc. Phil. 1, 21. Reave. 14, 13
, commit thee unto him which alone can help thee when al things fail.

This thy freende is of that nature, that he will only be loved, he alone
claims thy mind for himself, and he alone will sit there like a King in his
throne.

Therefore have thou no fellowship with earthly things Luke 9, 24. Luke. 19,
8. 9.
, and Jesus gladly will abide with thee.

Thou shall find that well nigh lost, whatsoever is spent upon any besides
Jesus.

Neither trust, nor stay upon a wavering reed 2. King. 18, verse. 21. Esaie.
36, 6.
. For all flesh is grass, and all the grace thereof, is as the flower of the
field Esaie. 40, 6.
.

If thou trust in man Iere. 17, 5
thou shall easily be deceived: yea if thou seek comfort, and profit by any
other thing, thou shall sustain great loss Phil. 3, 7.
.

If thou seek Jesus in all things, thou shall find Jesus; but if thou seek
thy self, thou shall find thy self, but to thy damnation Matthew. 10, verse.
37, etc. Matthew. 16, verse. 24, etc. John. 12, 25.
.

For whosoever seeks not Jesus, does more hurt himself, than all the world
again, and his enemies besides can do.

Chap. 8. Of the familiarity with Jesus.
WHile Jesus is present al things go well, and seem comfortable: but when he
is absent, nothing is sweet John. 16, 6
. If Jesus speak not in the mind of man, little good can worldly comfort do
him: but speak he but a word, and great joy shall he feel Ioh. 16, 22
. So Marie Magdalene arose quickly from the place where she wept Ioh. 11, 29
28.
as soon as she heard by Martha that the Master was come, and called for her.
Happy is the hour wherein Jesus calls from tears unto the joy of the
Spirit Ioh. 16, 22
.

How hard, and dry art thou without Jesus John. 15, 6
? How vain, and foolish if thou desire any thing without Jesus? Greater shall
be thy loss if thou do so, than if thou should leese the whole world
Philip. 3, 8. 1. John 2, 17 Matt. 16, 26.
. For what can the world do without Jesus Mat. 28, 18 John. 17, 2.
?

To be without Jesus is a bitter death: but to abide with him, is even a
pleasant life Psalm. 27, 1. John. 14, 6.
.

If Christ be with thee, what enemy can hurt Romans 8, 31 38. 39 John. 10, 28.
?

He which finds Jesus, finds a good treasure, or rather the cheifest
felicity Coloss. 2, 2 3.
: he which leeseth Jesus, leeseth too much. What said I too much? He leeseth
more, than if he lost the whole world Mark. 8, 36
.

He that lives without Jesus, is most miserable Matthew. 19, verse. 21, etc.
: but he whom Jesus favors, is for riches most welthie Ioh. 17, 2. 3.
.

To live with Jesus, is great cunning; and to know how to keep him is most
singular wisdom Ioh. 8, 31.
.

Be thou meek, and lowelie Matthew 11, verse. 29.
, and Jesus will come to thee. Yea, be thou godly, and quiet, and Jesus will
abide with thee John. 14, verse. 15, etc.
.

But turn thou once unto outward things Galat. 4, 9. Coloss. 2, 20
, and thou do make him forsake thee, and so leese his favor. And if he once
forsake thee, unto whom will thou fly John 6, 68. Hebr. 6, 4. 5. 6.
? or what friends will thou find?

Without a freende thou can not long live: and if Jesus be not thy freende
before al others, thou shall mourn without measure, when he once does leave
thee Sal. song. 5, verse. 6.
. And therefore thou do foolishlie, if thou either trust, or rejoice in any
besides him Iere. 9, 23. 24. Ierem. 17, 5 Galat. 6, 14.
.

Better were it to have the whole world against thee, than Christ Jesus alone
Romans 8, 31 38. 39.
.

Wherefore before al things which thou love, love Jesus best Matthew. 10,
verse. 37. Luke 14, 26.
: love others for Jesus sake, but love Jesus for his own.

He alone must singularly be loved, because he alone is the good and faithful
freende John. 15, verse. 13, etc. 1. John. 3, 16 1. John. 4, 10 19.
. For him, and in him thou must love both freende, and foe Matthew. 5, verse 43,
etc.
; and pray him, that al men 1. Tim. 2, 1.
may know, and love him.

Never covet thou any singular praise, or love Iere. 9, 23. Dan. 4, 34.
; for that belongs unto God, who has none equal Dan. 3, 29.
. Neither wish to have any body addicted unto thee 1. Cor. 3, 3 verse. 4, etc.
, nor do thou in ordinatelie love any man 1. Cor. 7, verse. 23.
: but let Jesus be in thee, and in all good men Gal. 1, 10.
.

Have thou a pure mind Matt. 5, 8.
, void from al hinderance of worldly things Iam. 1, 21.
. For thou must be pure, and bring an upright mind unto Jesus, if thou will
behold, and see how sweet the Lord is Matthew. 5, 8. Psalm. 34, 8. Psalm. 24, 4.
.

And doubtless thou shall never come to that point, unless God prevent thee, and
draw thee John. 6, 44.
, whereby thou may reject, and renounce al things, and be coopled to him
alone Luke 5, 11
. For if thou be in Gods favor, nothing is there, which thou can not do Mark
9, verse. 23. Philip. 4, 13.
: but if that be gone, thou art poor, and feeble, and left as it were to the
whip Ps. 104, 29
.

Now if thou feel the want thereof, thou ought not to cast down thy self,
or despair James. 1, verse. 2, etc. 12.
, but patiently abide the good pleasure of God, and bear al chances to the
praise of Christ Jesus 1. Pet. 1, 6. 7.
. For summer follows winter; and after night day comes; and fair weather
after storms Tob. 3, 22
.

Chap. 9. Of the want of comfort.
IT is none hard thing to contemn worldly comfort, while thou feel
heavenly Psa. 94, 19.
: but to lack both worldly, and heavenly consolation Matthew. 27, verse. 46.
, and willingly to bear the bannishment of the mind for the glory of God;
and neither to seek thy self in any thing, nor to respect desert, is
doubtless a great matter, or rather the greatest of al.

For what great thing is it to be merry, and godly, while God favors Psa.
94, 19.
? who does not wish to see that hour?

He rides cheerefullie, whom the grace of God carries: and what marvel if he
feel no burden, which is borne of the almighty Esa. 10, 20. Mat. 11, 28.
and led by the best guide?

Greatly do we delight our selves with some one thing of this world or other,
and hardly can man forsake himself altogether Matthew. 19, verse. 22, etc. Luke
9, 23. Luke 18, 22.
; therefore mightily, and a long while must he strive, before he can learn to
subdue himself, and draw al his senses under the obedience of God.

As long as man depends on himself he will easily slide unto worldly
delights: but the unfeigned lover of Christ, and earnest follower of virtue,
nether inclines unto those comfortes, nor seeks such delight of senses, but
rather vehement exercises, and sore labors for the love of Christ Luke 9, 23.
24. 2. Corin. 4, verse. 8, etc. Galat. 6, 14.
.

Therefore if at any time spiritual comfort be given thee from above, receive
the same with thanksgiving, and think that it is Gods gift 1. Cor. 4, 7
, not that thou do deserve it, and be not puffed up therewithal Coloss. 2,
verse. 18.
.

Be not high minded, or proud because of thy gift Roma. 11, verse. 20.
, but so much the more humble rather, and in all thy doings circumspect, and
fearful. For the time of comfort will pass away, and tentation will follow.

And though thy consolation be gone, despair not out of hand, but look for
help from above and that with modesty, and patience Romans 5, 3. Romans 15, 4.
James. 1, 2. 3.
. For GOD is able to endue thee with a more ample benefit, and consolation 2.
Corin. 1, verse. 3, etc.
.

Neither is this a new thing, and strange to such as tread in ye paths of
godliness Psalm. 94, verse. 1, etc. 2. Cor. 7, 4. 5. Acts. 14, 19.
. For men of greatest holiness, and the old Prophets have tasted such alteration
many times Ps. 34, 19.
.

And therefore said one vpholden by the power of God, on this wise Psalm. 30, 6.
, In my prosperity I said, I shall never be moved.

But what happened unto him when that was taken away, he ioineth afterward in
these words: But thou 7.
did hide thy face, and I was trobled.

Yet for all that he despaired not, but so much the more earnestly prayed unto
God, saying: Then I cried unto 8.
thee, O Lord, and prayed to my Lord.

At the last he obtained the end of his prayer, and confesses that he was
heard, when he said: O Lord my 2.
God, I cried unto thee, and thou have restored me. But wherein? Thou have 11.
turned my mourning into joy, thou have loosed my sack, and girded me with
gladness.

Now if these things have happened to men of such wonderful holiness, we
miserable and poor souls should not despair Romans 15, 4 Revel. 3, 19.
though we be sometime in cold, and sometime in heat, as much as the spirit
goes, and comes at his pleasure John. 3, 8.
. Therefore says Job Job. 7, 17. 18.
: Thou do so magnify him, that thou set thine heart upon him; and do
visit him every morning, and triest him every moment.

So then in what thing should I hope, or to whom should I trust, but only to
the infinite, and heavenly mercy of almighty God Psalm. 5, 11 12. Psalm. 20,
7. Psalm. 28, 7. Psalm. 56, 11. Psalm. 146, verse. 5, etc.
?

For be it that I have about me good, and godly brethren, and faithful
friends, and holy books, and pleasant speech, and sweet music, yet little
does all this help, little does it comfort, if, being forsaken of God Ps. 119,
50. 92. 2. Cor. 1, 3. 4.
, I am left to my self. At that time the best remedy is patience Luke 21, 19.
, and the denieng of my self Luke 9, 23*
according to the will of God.

For my part I never yet found man so religious, that has not felt sometime
the lack of Gods assistance, and at sometime bin cooler in zeal than at
others: Neither has any godly man bin so carried aloft, and illuminated, but
either sooner, or later, or at one time or other he has bin tempted Roman. 7,
verse. 14, etc. 2. Cor. 12, 7 Galat. 5, 17. James. 1, 2.
.

He is not worthy to behold God in deep contemplation, who has felt no
misery for Gods sake Job. 5, 17. Matt. 5, 10. James. 1, 12
. For commonly the tentation that goes before, is a sign of consolation to
come afterward Psa. 94, 12 13. 2. Cor. 1, 7.
. And they, which are tried with tentation, are promised the ioies of heaven
Iam. 1, 12. Matthew. 5, 10
. To him that overcomes, says the Spirit Revel. 2, 7
, will I give to eat of the tree of life.

Furthermore God sends his comfort, that man may be the stronger to bear
adversity Romans 5, 2. 3. James. 1, 3. 4.
. And tentation follows, that he wax not proud of his gift 2. Cor. 12, verse.
7.
.

Satan sleeps not 1. Pet. 5, 8.
, and the flesh is not yet dead Romans 7, 23 Romans 8, 5. Galathi. 5, verse. 16, etc.
: therefore at al times prepare thy self unto battle 1. Tim. 6, verse. 12. 2.
Tim. 2, 3. 2. Tim. 4, 5.
: for on every side thou have troblesome enemies Psalm. 91, 7.
.

Chap. 10. Of thankefulnes unto God for his benefits.
WHat seek thou for quietness, seeing thou art borne unto labor Genesis 3, 19.
Job. 5, ^.
?

Give thy self to patience Luke. 21, verse. 19.
rather than to pleasure; and to bear the cross, than to delectation Eccle.
7, 4.
.

For what worldling is there which would not willingly enioie spiritual
comfort, if he might at al times? as that which surpasses all the ioies of the
world, and pleasures of the flesh Ioh. 16, 22. Philip. 4, 7.
. For all worldly delights are either vain, or vile 2. Pet. 2, verse. 13, etc.
: but the ioies of the Spirit are only sweet, only honest, springing of
virtue, and powered into pure minds of God himself Roma. 14, verse. 17. Romans
15, 13. 32. 1. John. 1, 4.
.

But these heavenly consolations are of that nature, that no man can keep
them at his pleasure; forasmuch as tentation ceasseth not any long time Luke.
4, verse. 2 etc. 2. Cor. 12, 7.
.

Two things are great enemies to this heavenly joy, false freedom of the
mind Esai. 66* 3.
, and too much confidence in our selves Ierem. 17, verse. 5, etc.
.

God does well, which bestows on man the benefit of his comfort; but man does
ill, which does not with thanksgiving 1 Thessalonians. 5, verse. 18.
acknowledge God to be the giver of the same 1. Cor. 4, 7. James. 1, 17.
.

Hence it is that God powers not his benefits upon us; even because we are
ungrateful, and send not al things back unto the spring of the fountain 1.
Cor. 12, verse 6, etc. Hebr. 2, 6. 7. 8.
.

He which gives thanks, beggeth a new benefit: and that is commonly taken
from the proudly ungrateful Matthew. 18, verse. 32, etc. Matt. 25, 28
, which is bestowed upon the modestly thankful.

I like not that comfort which takes from me all sorrow for sin Luke 6, 24
25. 26.
: neither desire I that knowledge that makes me forget my self 1. Cor. 8, 1
.

For all that is hie, is not holy; neither is every desire pure; nor all that
is sweet, wholesome; nor every thing that likes man, pleases God Luke 16, ^3
.

But those benefits are welcome unto me, which make me humbler than I was
before Luke 9, 48. Rom 11, 20 1. Corin. 3, verse. 18, etc.
; and readier to forsake my self Luke 9, 23.
.

He whom God has schooled both by prosperity, and adversity, will arrogate
nothing unto himself 1. Cor. 4, 7
: but confess rather his nakedness, and misery Job. 1, 21. Eccles. 5, 14 1.
Tim. 6, 7.
.

Give unto GOD that which is Gods, and ascribe unto thy self, that which is
thine: that is, give GOD thanks for his benefits 1 Thessalonians. 5, verse. 18.
, and ascribe sin to thy self Dan. 9, 5. 8.
, and for sin think thou deseruest punishment Deuteronomy. 28, verse. 15. 16, etc.
.

Take the lowest room, and the hiest shall be given thee Prou. 25, 6 7. Luke.
14, 8. 9. 10. Mat. 23, 12.
: for without the lowest, there cannot be highest.

Those whom God accounts chefest for holiness, they esteem themselves for
vilest: and the more glorious they are, ye more humbly they behave themselves,
being full of celestial truth and glory 1. Cor. 1, 31
, not of vain glory desirous.

They which depend upon God, never wax insolent; and they, which ascribe unto
God whatsoever good thing they have, receive not praise one of another John. 5,
44
, but seek it of God, whom they wish might be extolled above al things, both
of themselves, and of al other holy men; and to him ward always they tend
Psalm. 34, 3. 9. 11. 1 Thessalonians. 5, 11 14. 15.
.

Wherefore be thankeful in small things, so shall thou be meet to attain
greater Matthew. 25, verse. 21. 23.
.

Albeit account even the least, and vilest gifts, for glorious and greatest.
For if you respect the majesty of the giver James. 1, 17
; no reward or gift ought to seem vile, or little.

For that is no small gift which the most hie God gives, whatsoever it be: yea
if he give thee stripes, and correction, thou ought to receive it in good
worth, inasmuch as it makes always to our welfare whatsoever he sends or
suffers to come unto us.

He that would keep the favor of God, let him both be thankeful for benefits
given Coloss. 3, verse. 17.
, and patient if they be taken aware Colo. 1, 11
; that they may come again, let him pray: and least he lose them when they
are come, let him be wise, and humble.

Chap. 11. The small number that love Christ unfeignedly.
CHrist has now adays many that love his heavenly kingdom Luke 9, 59 Luke.
18, 18. Matt. 19, 16. 22.
but few that will bear his cross: many that desire comfort, but few
adversity Matt. 7, 13. 14.
: many partakers of his meat John. 6, 26 27.
, but few of his continency. Al men would rejoice with Christ Matthew. 20,
verse. 20, etc.
, but few sustain adversity with him Matthew. 26, verse. 56. Mar. 14, 50.
. Many follow Jesus even to the breaking of bread John 6, 26.
; but few to drink of his cup Luke. 22, verse. 54.
: Many honor him for his miracles Mar. 7, 37.
; but few follow the shame of his cross Gala. 3, 13.
: Many love him, while prosperity does last Mark. 10. verse. 37, 38.
; and many praise, yea and thank him while they receive any comfort at his
hands John 6, 14. 15.
: but if he but hide himself, and forsake them for a while, they fall either to
bitter complaining, or to utter despair.

But they which love Jesus, not for any pleasure that they look to find, but
for Jesus sake, they as well in misery, and sorrow, as in prosperity commend
him Mat. 5, 10. 11. 12. Acts. 5, 41. Rom 5, 3. Romans 12, 12.
, and thank him evermore: which they will always do, albeit he should never
give them any comfort at al. Such is the force of the unfeigned love of Christ,
it seeks neither outward profit, nor it self 1 Cor. 13, 5
.

So that as many as seek always for pleasure may rightly be termed
hirelings Ioh. 10, 12. 13.
: and such as hunt after profit and lucre Matthew. 10, verse. 37, etc. John. 12,
4. 5. 6.
, love themselves, more than Christ out of doubt. How many will serve Christ
freely without gain Matt. 10, 8.
? Or who is so spiritual that will forsake al Luke 18, 28 Matt. 19, 27
? I say, who can find him that is truly poor in spirit Matt. 5, 3.
, and bare from al worldly things? that precious fellow may be sought the whole
world over.

If a man feed the poor with all his goods 1. Cor. 13, verse. 3.
, he has yet done nothing; and if he chastise himself with sorrow for his
sins, it is yet too little; and though he knew al secrets, and 2.
al knowledge, he is yet far from the mark; yea were he most singularly 3.
virtuous, and could burn for religion, yet lackes he something, even one
thing which is needeful Luke. 10. verse. 42.
. And what is that? Even that, when he has forsaken al things, he forsake
himself Luke 5, 11. Luke. 9, 23.
; and going wholly out of himself, retain no piece of self, or private love
within him Matthew. 10, verse. 37. 38, etc.
.

When he has done, which he knows should be done, let him think that nothing
he has done; neither let him glory in that he may be great, but confess
rather that he is an unprofitable servant, even as the truth it self does say
Luke. 17, verse. 10.
: When ye have done al things, which are commanded you, say, We are
unprofitable servants: We have done but that which was our duty to do.

Then at length will he find himself needy, and naked in spirit Matt. 5, 3.
, and may say with that Prophet Psalm. 86, 1.
, I am poor and needy. And yet notwithstanding none is richer, none freer,
none mightier than he which can forsake the world, and himself too Luk 5, 11.
Luke 18, 29. 30.
, and debase himself even under the basest things Phil. 2, 5. 6. 7. 8.
.

Chap. 12. Of patient bearing the cross of Christ.
THis seems a hard saying to many, Forsake thy self Matthew. 16, verse. 24.
Mark. 8, 34. Luke. 9, 23.
, take up thy cross, and follow me: But those last words will be much harder
Matthew. 25, verse. 41.
, Depart fro me ye cursed into everlasting fire. For they which now gladly do
hear, and follow the saying of the cross, shall not then dread the heavy
sentence of eternal punishment Psa. 112, 6. 10.
.

Then all the servants of the cross, which have lived after the example of him
yt was crucified, shall approach unto Christ with great boldness Wisd. 5, 1.
Matt. 19, 28 29. Luke 22, 28.
.

Why then fear thou the cross, which is the way unto heaven Luke. 24,
verse. 26 Rom 8, 17. 2. Tim. 2, 11. 12.
?

In the cross salvation is; in the cross, life; in the cross, aid against
enemies; in the cross, celestial comfort; in the cross, strength of mind;
joy of the spirit is in the cross; in the cross, the chiefest virtue;
perfection of holiness is in the cross; finalie without the cross there is
neither salvation of the soul, nor hope of eternal life Gala. 2, 19. Galat. 6,
14.
.

Wherefore take up thy cross, and follow Christ, and thou shall go unto
eternal life Luke 9, 23 24. John. 12, 25. 26.
. He went before thee bearing his one cross Ioh. 19, 17
, and for thy sake died on the cross Gala. 3, 13. 1. Pet 2, 24.
, that thou also might bear the cross, and desire to die upon the same 1.
Pet. 2, verse. 21, etc.
. For if thou die with him, thou also shall live with him; if thou suffer with
him, thou shall also reign with him 2. Tim. 2, 11 12 Matt. 19, 28. Luke 22, 28
29
. For know this, in the cross, and in dieng al things do consist, neither is
there any other way unto life and quietness, than by the cross, and daily
mortifieng of thy self Romans 6, 3. 4. Galat. 6, 14. Coloss. 3, 5.
.

Whersoeuer thou turnest thy self, or castest thine eyes, thou shall find
neither above, nor beneath, a better way unto bliss, than by the cross Luke.
24, verse. 26. Acts. 14, 22.
.

Though thou set al things in never so good order, yet can it not be avoided,
but something thou must suffer either voluntarily, or against thy will Sirac.
2, 1.
, and always run upon the cross. For either sickness of body, or sorrow of
mind will vex thee. Either God will forsake, or man afflict, or (which worser
is,) thou will be a burden to thy self: and that in such sort, as no remedy
can salve, nor comfort quite thee, but of necessity thou must bear it, as long
as God thinks good Phil. 1, 23.
.

For it is Gods will to have thee suffer misery without comfort Matthew. 27,
verse. 46.
, that thou may submit thy self wholly unto him, and be more humble thorough
adversity Ps. 119, 67 71.
.

No man so feels the pains of Christ in his mind, as he which has suffered
the like himself Gal. 6, 17. Philip. 2. 17. 30.
.

So that the cross is prepared, and abides for thee in every place, neither
shall thou escape it, run where thou will Ioh. 16, 1. 2. 20. Galat. 6, 12
: for wheresoever thou becommest, thou bear thy self about, and shall find
thy self always Romans 7, 14
.

Turn thee upward, turn thee downward, turn thee outward, or turn thee
inward, eueriewhere thou may find the cross; and always thou must have
patience, if thou will enioie the peace of mind, and crown of rest Luke 9, 24
Luke 21, 19.
.

If thou will carry the cross willingly, the cross will carry thee even to
ye desired end, namely where misery has an end Reu. 7, 17.
, which will not be in this world Ioh. 16, 20 33.
. But if thou bear it grudginglie, thou do increase thy burden, and press
down thy self the more, and yet must thou bear it do what thou can Prou.
14, 14
. If thou escapest one misery, thou shall assuredly fall into another Matthew.
19, verse. 22, etc. 2. Tim. 3, 12 13. Judith. 8, 11. 14.
, and perhaps into a woorser.

Think thou to escape that which no mortal man could ever yet Job 5, 7. 17.
Job. 14, 1.
? What man ever lived in the world without his cross, and misery Ps. 34, 19.
Acts. 14, 15. 22.
? Yea even our Lord and Savior Christ was no one hour without grief, and
troble while he lived here on earth Luke 9, 22.
. For Christ suffered Luke. 24, verse. 26.
, and so entered into his glory, and will thou seek another path: and not
walk in this kingly hie way? The whole life of Christ was even a mere
cross, and vexation Esaie. 53, 3 John. 7, 7. John. 15, 18.
, and will thou seek for rest, and quietness?

Thou art out of ye way, surely thou art out of the way, if thou look for
any thing but misery in this world: seeing the whole life of mortal man is full
of trobles, and compassed about with calamities Job. 14, 1. 22.
. And the more godly a man is, the more often does he suffer adversity, for
the soarnes of his affliction increases through his love of God Romans 8, 35.
36. 2. Co. 12, 10 Philip. 1, 14. 20. 21.
.

And yet is not this man of whom we speak without comfort, inasmuch as he
believes that by this cross he shall reap much fruit Psa. 94, 19. Rom 5, 3.
James. 1, 3.
.

For whilst willingly he comes under the cross, it falls out that the
whole burden of trobles is turned upon the confidence of Gods heavenly comfort
Psalm. 34, 22 Psalm. 91, 2. 9. 2. Cor. 7, 11.
: and the more the flesh by calamity is weakened, the more the Spirit is
confirmed by the comfort of mind Roman. 7, verse. 23, etc. Roman. 8, verse. 10,
etc. 2. Cor. 4, 16.
. Yea so is he strengthened many times through the feeling of trobles, and
adversity (of such force is his love which suffers after ye ensample of
Christ 1. Pet. 2, 21
,) that he would not wish to be without sorrow, and affliction Romans 6, 5. Romans
8, 35. 2. Tim. 2, 3. 11. 12.
. For he believes that he is the more acceptable to God, the more he can
suffer for his sake Acts 5, 41. 2. Cor. 4, 16. 17. 18.
.

And yet is it not by the power of man, but of the mercy of God, that he can
in his frail flesh love, and through the zeal of the spirit set upon those
things Gal. 5, 16. 24. Phil. 4, 13. 1. Tim. 1, 12.
, which man by nature does fly, and abhor.

For man of himself cannot endure the cross, love affliction, tame and bring
under the body, shun promotion, abide to be reviled, despise himself, yea
covet to be despised, bear adversity, and contemn the prosperity of this
world Luke 22, 32 40. 46. 2. Cor. 4, 7. 8.
.

If thou depend upon thy self 2. Cor. 1, 4.
thou shall do none of these things: but if thou trust in God, he will send
thee comfort from above John. 16, 7.
, whereby the world, and the flesh shall be brought under thy subjection 2. Co.
12, 9. 10.
. Yea thou shall not fear the malice of the Devil Psalm. 91, 5.
, if thou be steadfast in faith 1. Pet. 5, 9.
.

Thou therefore suffer affliction as a good soldior of Jesus Christ 2. Tim. 2, 3
, who for thy sake was crucified 1. Pet 2, 24
.

Prepare thy self to suffer much adversity, and sundry incommodities in this
miserable life: for as much as such is thy lot wheresoever thou becommest, or
lurk where thou will, yea by no means shall thou escape these trobles, but
must bear them of necessity Luke. 21, verse. 19
.

Drink heartily of y^ Lords cup Mat. 20, 22 23.
if thou desire to be his friend and companion.

And as touching consolation, refer that to the will of GOD, let him give it at
his discretion: but yield thou thy self to the bearing of adversity, and let
it be thy joy Acts. 5, 41. James. 1, 2.
. For the afflictions of this present time, are not answereable to the glory
which shall be hereafter Romans 8, 18
, though thou could bear them al thy self.

After thou art come unto that pass, that thou can with pleasure and joy
endure adversity for Christ's sake, think thou art an happy man, which have
found the kingdom of heaven here on earth Matt. 5, 10.
On the otherside, as long as it greeueth thee to bear it, so long art thou in
il case, vexed every where with the flight of miscrie Prou. 10, verse. 29.
. But do thy duty, that is, prepare thy self to the cross, and to die, and
in short time shall thou be assisted, and find quietness 1. Pet. 4, 12 13.
.

If thou were taken up even into the third heaven with Paul 2. Cor. 12, verse.
2.
, yet were thou not assured, that none adversity shall come to thee. I will
show him, says Christ Acts 9, 16.
, how many things he must suffer for my Name sake.

So that of necessity thou must suffer, if thy mind be to love, and serve
Christ evermore Luke 9, 23.
.

And would to God thou were counted worthy to suffer for the Name of Jesus
Acts. 5, 41
; then what glory to thy self Romans 5, 2.
, joy to the Saints of God 1. Cor. 12, verse. 26, etc.
, and profit to mankind Colos^. 1, verse. 24. 2 Timothy 2, 1^.
, would arise! For all commend patience, though few will suffer Matthew. 26,
verse. 56.
. Doubtless there is great cause why thou should endure a little for Christ,
seeing thou can suffer a great deal more for the world 1. Cor. 9, verse. 25.
. And know this for a truth, that thou must live by dieng to thy self Roman.
6, verse. 8, etc. 2, Tim. 2, 11.
. And the more a man dies to himself, the more he lives to God.

No man is meet to comprehend celestial things, unless he can be content to
bear adversity for Christ his sake Romans 8, 35
.

To conclude, nothing is either more acceptable in the sight of God, or
profitable for thy self in this life, than willing lie to suffer adversity
for the Name of Christ; insomuch that, if choice were given, thou should
choose to suffer for Christ rather than to be refreshed with much consolation
Romans 12, verse. 12. Galat. 6, 14.
: for so shall thou become the more like to Christ Ioh. 15, 20 1. Pet. 2, 21.
, and al his holy servants Matt. 5, 11. 12.
.

Neither does our coming forward consist in the store of pleasures, and
comfort, but rather in bearing great evils, and adversity Romans 5, 3. James. 1,
2.
.

And if any thing had bin better, or more expedient for man than to suffer
misery Ioh. 14, 27.
, doubtless Christ would have showen ye same both by words, and deeds. But now
in plain words he does counsel both his own disciples, and as many as are
desirous to follow him, to bear the cross, in these words Matthew. 16, verse.
24. Mark. 8, 34 Luke. 9* 23. Luke 14, 27.
: If any man will follow me, let him forsake himself, and take up his cross,
and follow me.

Therefore al things being read over and over, and put in practice, let this be
the end of our speech Acts. 14, verse. 22.
: By many afflictions we must enter into the kingdom of God.

Thus ends the second Book.
The third Book of the Jmitation of Christ.
Chapter. 1. Of the spiritual communication between Christ, and the faithful
soul.
I Will ha^ke^ what the Lord within me will say Psalm. 85, 8.
. Blessed is y^ soul, which hears the Lord speaking within her, and from his
mouth receaueth the word of comfort.

Blessed are the ears, which can hear when God whispereth, and do naught
regard the noise of y^ world Psa. 38, 13. 14.
. Yea blessed are the ears, which listen not to the outward sound, but to the
truth speaking to the heart Psa. 94, 12. Matt 16, 17 John. 8, 43.
.

Blessed are the eyes which are close from seeing outward, but open to behold
inward things.

Blessed are they who pierce unto spiritual things, and prepare themselves more
and more by daily meditations Psalm 1, 1. 2.
to come unto the knowledge of Gods heavenly mysteries.

Blessed are they who rejoice in serving God, and cast of al those things as
may withdraw them from so doing Luke 10, 41. 42.
.

O my soul, consider these things, and banish from thy mind carnal affections
Gal. 5, 19. 20, etc.
, so shall thou understand what thy Lord God will say within thee Psalm. 85, 8.
.

Thus says thy freende: I am thy Salvation Ephesians. 1, 7. Ephesians. 2, 5.
, thy peace Ioh. 16, 33.
, and thy life John. 14, 6.
; stick unto me, and thou shall find quietness Matthew. 11, verse. 28. 29. Ephesians.
2* 14.
. Leave al worldly things Luke 16, 13 Luke 12, 15. 16, etc. Matthew. 6, 24. 25.
, and seek after heavenly Luke 12, 31 Coloss. 3, 2.
. For what are al things in this world, but vain Eccl. 2, 11.
; or what good can they do, if God forsake thee Mat. 16, 26. Mark. 8, 36. Luke
9, 25.
?

Wherefore, al things renounced, seek unfeignedly to please God Eccle. 12, 1
13. Romans 12, 1. 11.
, that thou may attain unto the true felicity Re^. 2, 26.
.

Chap. 2. That the truth speaks inwardly without noise of words.
SERVANT. Speak Lord; for thy servant hears 1 Samuel 3, verse. 10.
.

I am thy servant: O give me understanding Ps. 119, 34
, that I may learn thy statutes.

Incline my soul unto the words of thy mouth, even unto thy words which still
down like the dew Deuteronomy. 32, 2
.

The Israelites said unto Moses in old time Exo. 20, 19 Deuteronomy. 5, 27. Hebr. 12,
18. 19, etc.
: Talk thou with us, and we will hear, but let not God talk with us, least we
die. But I pray not so, Lord, I pray not so, but with the Prophet Samuel
rather I beseech thee, saying 1. Sam. 3, verse. 10. Psalm 85, 8.
: Speak Lord, for thy servant hears.

And let not Moses, nor any other prophet speak to me, but thou Lord, which
inspirest, and lightenest all the Prophets 2. Pet. 1, 21 ^ohn. 1, 9.
, speak thou to me. For thou can instruct me without their help, but they
can profit naught without thee 1. Cor. 3, 7.
.

They may sound outwordes in mine ear, but they bring not the Spirit Ioh.
14, 16 John. 15, 26 John. 16, 7.
. They can speak trimly, but, if thou hold thy peace, they inflame not the
mind Matt. 7, 28. 29.
. They teach the letter, but thou openest the meaning Revel. 5, 9
. They talk of deep things, but thou vnlockest the sense of that which was
sealed up Romans 16, verse. 25. 26. Coloss. 1, 26 27.
. They pronounce the commandments, but thou helpest to fulfill them. They show
the way, but thou give strength to walk in the same 2. Pet. 1, 3
. They deal outwardly with the senses, but thou teach and lightenest the
minds Ephesians. 1, verse. 15, etc. 18.
. They water, but thou give the increase 1. Cor. 3, 6 7.
. They cry with open mouths, but thou give wisdom unto the hearer Ioh, 6,
68.
.

So then, let not Moses talk with me, but speak thou my Lord, and God, which
art the everlasting truth, least I die, and prove unfruitful: and least, being
outwardly admonished, and not inwardly inflamed, the word heard, not done
Mat. 7, 26 27. Matt. 13, 19.
; known, not loved Romans 2, 8. 13.
; believed, not observed Iam. 1, 22. 23, etc.
, make unto my condemnation.

Wherefore speak Lord, for thy servant* hears 1. Sam. 3, verse. 10.
. For thou have the words of eternal life Ioh. 6, 68.
. Speak to me even that which may be to the comfort of my soul; to the
ame^dment of my life; and to the advancement of thine everlasting glory,


Amen.
Chap. 3. That the words of God with all reverence should be heard; and that
they are not understood of most men.
LORD. Son hear my words, for they are most comfortable, and excel the
knowledge of Philosophers, and wise men of this world Prou. 9* 10 1. Cor. 1, 18.
.

My words are spirit, and life Ioh. 6, 63.
, and are not to be waied by the sense of man, nor drawn to serve for vain
pleasure, but must be heard with silence, and received with humility and
greedines.


SERVANT. Blessed is the man Ps. 94, 12. 13.
, whom thou chastisest, O Lord, and teach in thy Law, that thou may give
him rest from the days of evil, whiles the pit is dug for ye wicked.


LORD. I both inspired the Prophets in old time 2. Pet. 1, 21 2. Tim. 3, 16.
, and cease not in these days to speak unto al: but many are deaf and will
not hear my words Esai. 42, 19 20.
. Most harken unto the world rather than to God, and more gladly obeie the
desire of the flesh Romans 8, 5. 6 Galat. 5, 16. 17.
, than his heavenly will.

The world promises but temporal, and small things, and they serve it even with
greedines Luke 16, 13 14.
. I promise most excellent, and eternal things Esai. 64, 4 Esaie. 23, 18 Matt.
7, 11. 1. Cor. 2, 9.
, and men care not for them.

Who with such a desire serves, and obeieth me in all things, as they serve the
world Matt. 7, 13. 14.
, and the Prince thereof Ioh. 14, 30
? Be ashamed hereof, and if thou would know why, hearken: For small wages
many run a great way: but for eternal life few will once step their foot out
of doors Matt. 7, 13 14.
. Filthy gain is earnestly sought for; for one penny sometime they
shamefullie contend; for a vain thing, and small reward men fear not even to
weary themselves night and day: but for goods immutable, for a reward
inestimable, for honor endless, and immortal glory, they will take no pains.

Wherefore blush I say, thou slothful, and whining servant, that they shall be
more ready to fall into the pit of hell, than thou to come unto heaven; that
they shall take more pleasure in vanity, than thou in the truth.

Again they manie-times miss of their purpose: but what I promise I fulfill,
and he that trusts in me speedeth well Ps. 37, 34. Psalm. 22, 4. 5.
. That which I promise in words I perform in deed Esa. 46, 11.
, to him which continues constant unto the end in loving me Matthew. 10, 22.
Mark. 13, 13
. I reward al good things, and I am a diligent examiner of al religious men
Hebr. 11, verse. 36, etc.
.

Write my words in thine heart, and meditate earnestly thereupon. For in the
time of tentation they will do thee good Ps. 119, 92.
.

That with reading now thou do not conceive, in the time of curing thou
shall understand. And two ways I am wont to cure mine elect, to wit, by
tentation, and by comfort 1. Sam. 2, 6. 7. Psalm. 66, 8. 9, etc. Psalm. 94, 12.
13. 19. Tob. 13, 2. Wisd. 16, 11. 13.
: and two ways I instruct them daily, first by reprehending their wickedness,
then by exhorting to proceed in virtue, and godliness.

He that hears my words Ioh. 5, 24. 29. Ioh. 12, 48. 2. Cor. 2. 15 16.
, and despises them, has that whereby he shall be condemned in the day of
judgment.


Chap. 4. A prayer for the attaining of the true knowledge of Gods heavenly
will; and for zeal in religion.
SERVANT. O Lord my GOD, which art al my goods and riches, what am I that I
dare speak to thee? I am thy poor servant, and a vile worm Job. 25, 6.
, yea much more vile, and poor, than I either know, or dare show forth Luke
18, 13
.

And yet, Lord, remember even this one thing, that I am nothing, that I have
nothing, that I am nothing worth. Thou alone art good Mat. 19, 16 17.
, thou alone art righteous Job. 9, 32. Sirach. 18, 1.
, thou alone art holy Deu. 32, 4.
, thou can al Job. 11, 7. 8, etc.
, thou do al Esai. 44, 6. 7, etc.
, thou fillest al 1. Kings. 8, verse. 27. Psalm. 139, 7. 8, etc.
, only the wicked thou sendest empty away 1. Sam. 2, 7. 8. Luke. 1, 53.
.

Remember, O Lord, thy tender mercies Psalm. 25, 6. Psalm. 98, 3. Luke. 1, 54.
, and fill me with thy favor, thou will that none of thy works should serve in
vain. For how can I stand upright in this wretched world, unless thy mercy
and favor do hold me up Ps. 119, 41. 76. 77, etc.
?

Turn not thy cheereful countenance from thy servant Ps 51, 11.
; defer not to heal me from day to day; withdraw not thy comfort, that my
soul be not as the thirsty land Ps. 143, 6.
.

O Lord, teach me to do thy will Ps. 143, 10 8.
, teach me to walk woorthilie, and humbly in thy presence. For thou art my
wisdom 1. Cor. 1, verse. 30.
, and know me in deed Psa. 139, 1. 2, etc.
. Yea thou knew me not only before I was conceived in my mothers womb, but
also before the very world was made Psalm. 90, 2^* Romans 8, 29. 30.
. So be it.


Chap. 5. That we must walk syncerelie, and humbly before God.
LORD. Son, walk thou vprightlie in my sight; and seek me always in
singlenes of mind Matthew. 5, 8
.

He that walks vprightlie, walks salfelie: for the truth delivers him
from deceauers, and slanders of the wicked. And if the truth shall make you free
Ioh. 8, 32. 36.
, you shall be free in deed, and fear naught the vain words of men.


SERVANT. Truth Lord: therefore I beseech thee deal so with me, that is, let
thy truth instruct me, defend me, and bring me to a blessed end Psalm. 43, 3.
. Yea, let the same thy truth deliver me from al wicked lusts, and inordinate
affections: so will it come to pass, that I shall enioie a wonderful freedom of
the mind 1. Ioh. 3, 19
.


LORD. And I will teach thee what is right, and acceptable in my sight Psalm. 25,
4. 5.
.

Call thy sins to remembrance continualie, and that with hearty sobs, and
sorrow Joel. 2, 12. 13. Ezec 18, 30 31. 32.
; and never brag of any good deed which thou have done 1. Co. 4, 6. 7.
. For in very deed thou art a sinner Ps. 143, 2.
, and subject to many infirmities of the mind; yea by nature always thou
tendest unto vanity Genesis 6, 5. Genesis 8, 21.
, and may easily fall, easily be overcome, and easily trodden down, and
cast to the ground Romans 3, 23
.

Finalie thou have nothing wherein to boast 1. Cor. 4, 7.
: but many things to make thee humble; being much more weak than thou can
perceive. So then look that none of thy deeds seem great in thy sight, or
excellent, or precious, or wonderful, yea count nothing excellent, nothing
glorious, nothing commendable, and to be sought for in deed, but only that
which is eternal Ps. 119, 14. 24. 35. 50, etc.
.

Let the everlasting truth like thee above al things Psalm. 57, 9. 10. Psalm.
108, 3. 4. Psalm. 117, 1. 2.
; and thine extreme vileness mislike thee ^s. 108, 12.
.

Fear nothing, fly nothing, mislike nothing so much as thy sins, and
wickedness Psalm. 119, verse. 128. 136. 1^^. 158. Psa. 139, 19, 20. 21, etc.
, they should more disquiet thee, than the loss of the dearest thing in the
world.

Some behave themselves not syncerelie enough toward me, seeking out
earnestly, through curiosity and pride, my secrets, and mysteries,
neglecting themselves and their salvation Romans 1, 21 Romans 2, 17. 18, etc. 1.
Cor. 13, 2.
: these fellows, by reason of their pride and curiosity, fall manietimes into
grievous tentations Romans 1, 26 28. 2. These. 2 11 12.
, through my displeasure.

But stand thou continualie in awe of the heavy sentence of the almighty God
Psa. 90, 11. Prou. 28, 14 Philip. 2, 12.
; and search not out the works of the most Hie, but search out painefullie
both how much evil thou have committed, and what good thou have left undone.

Somes religion is altogether in their books, or in pictures, or in some
outward signs, and ceremonies Matt. 23, 5. 23, etc.
; some have it in their mouth Mat. 7, 21. 22. 23. Esai. 29, 13.
, but not in their heart. And contrariewise some being clear in mind, and pure
in heart Matt. 5, 8. John. 4, 23. 24.
, do covet always after heavenly things Col. 3, 1. 2.
, hearken unwillingly unto earthly matters, and serve the necessities of
nature with grief, and sorrow: and these men perceive what the Spirit of
truth speaks within them, how it teaches them to despise earthly and to
desire celestial things, to contemn the world, and to wish for heaven night,
and day Psalm. 1, 1. 2. Philip. 3, 8. Colos. 3, 2.
.


Chap. 6. A praise and thanksgiving to God for his benefits.
SERVANT. OCelestial father, father of my Lord Jesus Christ 2. Cor. 1, 3
, I praise thee for vouchsafing to remember me a poor, and sinful wretch 1.
Cor. 15, verse. 9. 10.
.

O father of mercy 2. Cor. 1, 3
, and God of ^l comfort, I yield thee humble ^hankes, for refreshing me,
vnwoor^hie al comfort, with thine heavenly ^omfort 2. Cor. 7, 6
.

Evermore will I praise, and magni^ie thee together with thine only ^egotten
Son, and the holy Ghost ^he comforter 1 Ioh. 5, 7.
for ever and ever 1. Tim. 1, 17
.

O Lord my God, which love me ^o holilie, I will rejoice with mine ^hole heart,
when thou shall come unto my mind.

Thou art my glory, and the joy of ^ine heart: thou art mine hope and ^efuge
in the day of my troble Ps. 59, 16.
.

But forasmuch as yet I am weak, and of small power, I have great need of
thine assistance, and comfort: wherefore visit me oftener Ps. 106, 4.
, and school me with holy discipline.

Set me free from wicked affections of the mind, and heal my soul of al
unbridled desires, and sins, that being inwardly healed, and purged
thoroughlie, I may be made fit to love, strong to suffer, and constant to
continue Psalm. 23, 4. Psalm. 59, 9. 17.
,


Amen.
Chap. 7. The praise and force of godly love.
Love is a great thing, doubtless love is an excellent thing; it can make y^
which is heavy light Rom 8, 35 1. Cor. 13, 4. 5, etc.
; and carry that equalie which is unequal. It bears a burden and feels it
not; and conuerteth al sower things into sweet and sauorie: I say that noble
love of Jesus drives one to adventure great things, and forces always to
come unto perfection Ephe. 3, 17 18, etc.
.

Love will be above, and cannot be kept* down by any abject thing The force,
and power of true love you may behold as in a glass, Romans 8, 35, etc. Romans 14,
1. etc. To. 15, 1, etc. 1. Cor. 13, 1, etc. 1. Tim 1, 5. 2. Pet. 1, 5, etc. 1.
Ioh. 2, verse. 7, etc. 1. John. 4, 7. Acts. 2, 42. 44. 45 46. 47.
. Love will be free, and loose from al worldly affection, that neither her
inward sight be dimmed, nor she be either entangled by worldly prosperity, or
subdued by adversity. Love is most sweet, most strong, most hie, most large,
most comfortable, most perfect: nothing is better than love either in heaven
above, or in earth beneath. For it arises from God 1. Ioh. 4, 7 16.
, and rests on God above al things.

He that loves, flies, runs, reioiceth, is free and cannot be bound; he
gives al for all, and has al in all, as he which rests in one above al which
is most hie 1. John. 2, verse. 5, etc.
, from whom every good thing does spring, and arise Iam. 1, 17.
. He respects not gifts, but looks on the giver above al.

Love knows no measure, but burns above measure. Love feels no burden,
ways no labor, contendeth above strength, and considers not whether a thing
may be done or no, for it counts nothing hard, or impossible. Therefore love
can do al things; and he that loves bringes many things to pass, if he
faint, and tire not.

Love waketh, and sleeping slombreth not; laboring tires not; laden faltereth
not; terrified dismaieth not, but as a quick flame, and burning touch breaks
forth upward, and falselie pearceth out.

He that loves, knows what this means. A great cry in the ears of God,
is the ardent affection of the mind, while it says, O my God, my love, thou
art al mine, I am wholly thine. Raise up in me a vehement love, that I may
taste Psalm. 34, 8.
with ye inner mouth of mine heart, how sweet it is to love, and swim as it
were in the streams of love.

Grant that I may so burn in love, that through the heat of desire I may
exceed my self Psalm. 18, 1. Psa. 119, 97. 103.
: that I may sing the ballad of love, follow thee my lover aloft, and set
forth thy praises with such a zeal, that even my heart may faint again: that
I may love thee more than my self; yea neither love my self, nor any other,
that love thee unfeignedly, but in thee, and for thee, even as the law of love
that shines out of thee commands, and does require.

Love is swift, sincere, godly, pleasant, and fruteful; it is strong, patient,
faithful, wise, long suffering, and manly; love seeks not her own 1 Cor.
13, verse. 5.
. For there love perishes, where any serves himself.

Love is circumspect, modest, just, not dainty, not light, not given to
vanities, but sober, chaste, constant, quiet, and temperate in all the senses.

Love obeieth betters, despises it self, fears, thanketh, trusts and
hops always in GOD, yea when God seems to abhor it For without pain, none
live in Love.
.

He that is not prepared to suffer al things, and to yield himself to the
pleasure of his friend, is unworthy to be called a friend.

To conclude, a friend must receive al, even hard, and bitter things in good
part for his friends sake, and never leave him in the time of adversity Romans
5, 7. 8, etc.
.

Chap. 8. How to try a true friend; also, how to resist the enemy.
LORD. MY son, as yet thou art not a stout, and prudent lover.


SERVANT. Why Lord?


LORD. For as much as a little assault makes thee to leave off 1. John. 4,
verse. 18.
, and over greedily thou seek consolation.

A valiant lover endures tentations, and gives no ear to the subtle
persuasions of the enemy: and therefore he so likes prosperity, yt with
adversity he will not be trobled Psalm. 16, 8. Acts. 2, 44. 1. Pet. 5, 10.
.

A wise lover respects not so much the gift of the lover, as the love of the
giver; he looks more on the mind, than on the thing; and waieth no gifts in
respect of his friend.

The noble lover rests not in the gift, but in me above al gifts.

Neither must thou by and by be out of heart, though sometime thou think not so
reuerendlie, as thou would, either of me, or my servants.

That good and sweet affection wherewith thou art delighted now and then, is
an affection of present favor, and a certain fore-taste of the celestial
contrie, on which fore-taste thou must not too much depend, because it alters
manie-times. But to strive against the wicked motions of the mind, and to
despise the inticements of Satan 1. Pet. 5, 8. 9.
, is doubtless a valiant exploit, highly pleasing God.

So that no cause is there why these absurd imaginations, which are wont to
arise of every trifling occasion, should so torment thee: persevere
constantly in thy purpose Psalm. 25, 2. Psalm. 27, 14.
, and serve God with an upright affection.

Neither is it an illusion, that thou sodeinlie sometimes art ravished up on
hie, and by and by cast down unto the old vanities of the mind 2. Cor. 12,
verse. 7.
: which, for as much as thou suffer them rather against thy will Roman. 7,
verse 17, etc.
; than willingly, as long as they displease thee, and thou strugglest against
them, they are rather profitable than hurtful.

Know this for a certainty, the drift of the old enemy is to hinder thy
study of godliness, and to withdraw thee from al exercise of religion 1 Pet.
5, 8.
, that is to say, from the godly remembrance of the pains of Christ, from
the care of thy salvation, and from thy purpose to go forward in well doing
Matthew. 13, verse. 25. 39.
.

Many wicked cogitations does the enemy bring into thy mind Matthew. 13,
verse. 25. 26.
, to make thee to loath and abhor prayer, and the reading of yc holy
Scripture. He cannot abide an humble confession of sins, and if he could, he
would withdraw thee also from the communion.

But believe him not, though manietimes he lay snares to entrap thee, care not
for him. Turn them upon his own pate, when he provoke thee to wickedness,
and say unto him Mat. 4, 10.
: Avoid Satan, thou unclean Spirit, blushe thou cursed wretch, thou which
put these things into my head, avoid I say; thou would carry me away
from my God, but thou shall not. For Jesus will assist me, and so thou shall but
get a shameful foil. I had rather die, and suffer any thing, than consent to
thee Roman. 8, verse. 35, etc.
. Wherefore be quiet, and hold thy peace, for I will not hear thee though thou
trouble me never so much Matt. 16, verse. 23.
. The Lord is my light, and my salvation Psalm. 27, 1
, whom shall I fear? The Lord is the strength of my life, of whom shall I be
afraid? Though 3.
an host pitched against me, mine heart should not be afraid, the Lord
protecting and delivering me.

Thou therefore strive courageously as a good soldier 2. Tim. 2, 3
: and if at any time of infirmity thou fall, take a better heart unto thee, and
doubt not of mine especial favor Psalm. 91, 2. 3.
: and in any wise beware of pride, and arrogancy, a cause why many are led
into error, and fall into blindness almost incurable many times Romans 1, 21. 24,
etc.
.

Let the fall of those proud ones, foolishlie arrogating too much to themselves
Romans 11, 18 19. 20. 1. Pet. 5, 5. Luke 18, 14. Esai. 14, 10. 11, etc. 2. Pet.
2, 4.
, be a continual warning to thee to beware of pride.


Chap. 9. Of modest concealing the benefits of God.
LORD. Son, it is good and profitable for thee to keep close the zeal of
religion that GOD has given thee, not to commend the same too insolentlie with
words, or to praise it out of measure, but rather to despise thy self, and, as
one unworthy those so excellent gifts, to fear To. 11, 20. 1. Cor. 4, 6. 7.
.

Thou must not stick too much unto that affection, which may easily be
changed into the contrary.

Think while thou have the favor of God, how miserable and wretched thou
should be without his favor Romans 3, 24 Romans 5, 1. 2, etc. 1. Co. 15, 10
Ephesians. 3, 7.
: and think not that thy coming forward in godliness consists only in
having the benefit of Gods heavenly comfort, but also if thou can
patiently, and quietly endure the want thereof Romans 5, 3. James 1, 2. 3. 4.
, in such sort that thou faint not in prayer, nor omit altogether thine
accustomed exercises, but as well as thou can, discharge that which is in thee
to do, and neglect not thy duty for the unquietness of mind which thou feel
in thy self.

For many, when things fall not out even as they would have them, are by and by
either impatient, or careless Luke 8, 13.
.

It is not always in the power of man to dispose his affairs at his pleasure
Ierem. 10, verse. 23.
, but God it is that both gives and comfort Phil. 2, 13. Romans 9, 16.
, both when he will, and what he will, and whom he will, and as he will himself.

Some through a blind devotion have cast themselves away, whilst, endeavoring
above their strength, they consider not the corruption of their nature, but
follow the affection of their mind, rather than the judgment of reason: the
which, because they took in hand more than Gods will was they should, did
quickly forgo the favor of God: and they which made their nests in heaven,
became poor, vile, and forsaken Esa. 14, 10 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. Luke. 1, 51.
52.
, that the afflicted and poor might learn not to fly with their own wings,
but with my feathers.

As for such as are but yonglings, and not trained up in the way of the Lord,
they unless they harken to the counsel of the wise, may easily be deceived, and
overthrown Prou. 12, 1. Prou. 13, 1. 14. 18.
: yea if they follow their own brain before such as have experience, they are
in the greater danger, because they will not be withdrawn from their opinion
once conceived Pro 21, 29.
.

It is seldom seen that selfe-wise men will yield to any.

And therefore better is it to have small wisdom with modesty, than profounde
knowledge with a proud mind: yea better is it to have little, than having much
to wax proud Prou. 11, 2 Prou. 15, 25
.

He deals not circumspectly enough, that gives himself wholly unto
pleasure, forgetting his old adversity, and the chaste fear of the Lord, the
property whereof is to be always wary that it leese not benefits received
Romans 11, verse. 20. 21.
.

And he is not virtuouslie wise, that in ye time of misery despaireth over
much, and reposeth less confidence, and trust in me, than he should. He which
in the time of peace is too secure, in the time of war is out of heart
commonly, and of no courage.

Had thou the way to behave thy self modestly, and lowly Matt. 11,
verse. 29.
, and to govern thy spirits aright, thou could not so easily fall into
peril, and blame.

It is a point of wisdom while thou art hot in the spirit, to consider what
would fall out, if the light should go away Job. 17, 11. 12.
: and again, when that comes to pass, to think that it may return again,
being therefore withdrawn by me that both you thereby may be the wiser Ps.
119, 71.
, and I the more glorious.

For commonly thou shall find such trial more profitable Iam. 1, 2. 1. Pet.
1, 6. 7.
, than if continualie thou enioiedst prosperity at thine hearts desire.

For thou art not virtuous though thou have heavenly visions, and consolations
1. Cor. 13 verse. 1, etc.
, learning, and hie degree, unless withal thou have true modesty Matthew. 5,
verse. 5
, christian charity 1. Cor. 13, verse. 2, etc.
, and zeal of religion 1. Cor. 10, verse. 31. Coloss. 3, 17
, unless thou unfeignedly despise thy self, and rejoice that others do despise,
and contemn, rather than honor and commend thee Mat. 5, 11. 1. Pet. 4, 14.
.


Chap. 10. That man must debase himself in the sight of God.
SERVANT. I Dare speak unto my Lord, though I am but dust and ashes Genesis 18,
27.
: and if I should make any better of my self, thou stand against me, and
my sins bear witness against me Job. 9, 20. 30. 31.
, which I cannot gainesaie.

But if I make none account of my self, but, laieng aside proud imaginations
Luke. 1: 8, verse. 13. James 4, 6. 1. Pet. 5, 5. Prou. 3, 34.
, esteem my self for dust, as I am in deed, then will thou be favorable, and
thy light shall shine upon mine heart: then will it fall out, that if I esteem
never so little of my self, even that little, I being pressed down to nothing,
will vanish utterly.

And here thou will show me to my self even what I am, what I have bin, and
whence I came, to wit, nothing from nothing. And being left to my self I am
nothing but mere infirmity Psalm. 8, 4. Psalm. 39, 9. Genesis 2, 7.
.

But if thou shine upon me with thy favor, I am straight way made strong Ps.
104, 30.
, and filled with new comfort.

And this is a woonderful strange thing, that so sodeinlie I should be lifted
up, when thou do so graciously embrace me, which of my self always am
carried downward Wisd. 9, 15 Romans 7, 23. 24.
unto earthly things. This is a fruit of thy love, which freely preuenteth me
Ps 59, 10.
, and saves from so many trobles Psalm. 89, verse. 1, etc. Psalm. 59, 16.
, and preserves from grievous dangers, and delivers me, to say the truth,
from so infinite evils.

For loving my self inordinatelie I cast away my self Luke 15, 13
: but after once I sought and loved thee syncerelie, I both found thee, and my
self Luke 15, 21
, and by that love also I brought my self the more to nothing.

For thou, O my sweet Savior, thou bestowest more things upon me Psalm. 89,
verse. 1, etc.
, than I can deserve, and a great deal more than I dare hope for, much less
desire.

Wherefore I thank thee, my God, which, albe I am unworthy the least of al
thy blessings, yet of thine honor, and infinite goodness, ceassest not
continualie to load even the ungrateful Mat. 5, 45 Luke 18, 13. 14.
, and thine enemies with benefits. O Lord, thou which art our salvation Exodus
15, verse. 2. 2. Sam. 22, 2 Psalm. 18, 2. Esaie. 12, 2.
, our strength, and our shield, convert us, we beseech thee, that we may
prove grateful, humble, and godly in thy sight,


Amen.
Chap. 11. That al things are to be directed unto God, as to the principal end.
LORD. Son, if thou desire to be happy, thou must make me thy cheifest and
principal end Romans 11, verse. 36.
. Herebie shall thy nature be purified Genesis 6, 5. Genesis 8, 21.
, which most commonly bends unto it self, and to things created.

For as soon as thou seek thy self in any thing Mat 15, 3. 1. Cor. 3, 18.
19.
by and by thou faintest, and witherest in thy self.

And therefore thou must refer al things to me alone, which gave al Iam. 1, 17.
, and send al, and therefore unto me, as to the chief spring, al things must
return To. 11, 36.
.

Out of me the small as well as the great, the poor as well as the rich do draw
the water of life Psalm. 36, 9. Esaie. 12, 3. John. 4, 10.
as from a lively fountain: and they which frankelie and willingly serve me,
they shall receive one benefit upon another Ioh. 1, 12.
. But if any will glory, or delight in any private thing besides me Iere. 9,
23. 24. 1. Cor. 1, 31. 2. Co. 10, 17 18.
, he at no time shall feel true joy, and comfort in his mind, but fall into
sundry discommodities, and trobles.

Therefore thou must ascribe no goodness, nor godliness neither to thy self, nor
to any mortal man, but al to God 1. Cor. 3, 6. 1. Cor. 1, 30.
without whose blessing man has nothing Iam. 1, 17. 1. Cor. 4, 7.
.

I gave al, I challenge al of right, and I look to be glorified for all Romans 11,
36
.

This is the truth, whereby the vain glory of man is put to flight.

And who so has the favor of God, and true charity Romans 5, 5. Romans 8, 35.
, he is neither envious, nor faint hearted, nor proud 1. Cor. 13, verse. 4, etc.
. For heavenly love subdueth al things, and stretches forth all the powers of
the mind Romans 8, 37 1. Cor. 13, 7
.

Wherefore if thou be wise, thou will rejoice and trust in me alone, even as
God alone is good Matthew. 19, verse. 17.
, who above al and in all is to be praised for evermore 1. Tim. 1, verse. 17. 1.
Tim. 6, 16
,


Amen.
Chap. 12. That it is a sweet thing to serve God, and to despise the world.
SERVANT. O Lord, I will speak again, I cannot hold my peace, and in the ears
of my God, my Lord, and my King dwelling in the hie heavens, this I say. O
Lord, how great is thy goodness which thou have laid up even for them which
fear thee Psalm. 31, 19
? Much more then for them which love thee, yea much more for them which honor
thee with all their hearts.

Truly unspeakable is the sweetenes of thy contemplatio^, which thou
impartest on such as love thee Esai. 64, 4. 1. Cor. 2, 9.
.

And herein chiefly thou declaredst the force of thy love, in that, when I
was not, thou made me Genesis 2, 7. Job. 10, 8. 9, etc.
, and after, when I went astraie* thou broughtst me home again; and
commandedst that I should serve Ps. 119, 4.
, and love thee.

O fountain of everlasting love, what shall I say of thee? or how can I forget
thee: that have vouchsafed to remember me? Who beyond al hope have bin merciful
to me thine own, even when I was dead Ephesians. 2, 5.
, and cast away: and at such time as I deserved naught, did bind me unto
thee thorough thy favor and freendship.

Now what shall I render for this thy bounteousnes Ps. 116, 12.
? Surely I will serve thee. But that is no great thing to serve him, whom al
creatures of duty must obeie Matthew. 28, verse. 18. 1. Cor. 15, verse. 27.
Hebr. 2, 8.
. This rather is wonderful, and strange, that thou vouchsafest to take and
admit so vile a wretch, as I am, into thy service among the number of thy
beloved Romans 11, verse. 17.
.

Lo, whatsoever I have to do thee service withal, it is thine Matthew. 25, verse.
14. 15 1 Cor. 4, 7.
. But what? me thinks you serve me, more than I you? For behold, heaven and
earth, which thou have made for the use of man Psalm. 8, 3. 4, etc.
, are present, and continualie discharge the duty which thou have enioined
them Psalm. 18, verse. 7, etc.
. Yea the Angels also thou have created, and ordained for the use of man Psalm.
34, 7. Matt. 18, 10. Hebr. 1, 14.
. But of al other things this is most wonderful, that thou would debase thy
self so much as to serve man Matthew. 20, verse. 28. Mark. 10, 45
, and have promised to give thy self for him John. 6, 5
.

For these thy benefits what shall I render unto thee Ps. 116, 12
? Oh that I could serve thee al my life long! Yea, would to God I could serve
thee even one day syncerelie! Truly thou art worthy al service, al honor,
everlasting praise 1. Tim. 1, verse. 17.
. Doubtless thou art my Lord, and I am thy poor servant Luke 17, 10
, bound to serve thee with all my strength Luke 10, 27 Deuteronomy 6, 5.
, and to sing out thy praises without ceassing Deu. 11, 18 19. 20.
. And surely so I will, or would at leastwise, but what I cannot, supply
thou, O Lord, of thy goodness.

A great honor, a great preferment is it to be thy servant, and to contemn
worldly things for thy sake Matthew. 10, verse. 37, etc. John. 12, 25
. For great shall be their reward which voluntarily submit themselves to this
holy service Mat. 5, 11. 12. Roman. 8, verse. 35, etc.
; and they shall feel the sweet comfort of the holy Spirit, who through the
love of thee have despised the pleasures of this present world 2. Cor. 1, 3. 4.
. Great freedom of mind shall they come unto, which entering into the narrow
way Mat. 7, 13. 14. Luke 13, 24.
, have cast aside worldly cares, and cogitations Matthew. 6, verse. 25, etc.
.

O how sweet, and comfortable is the service of God, whereby a man is made
free, and holy Roman. 8, verse. 15.
! O the holy state of Gods servants, which makes men equal to Angels Heb. 1,
14.
, acceptable to God Matthew. 5, verse. 3, etc.
, to the Devils terrible Mat. 10, 8. Acts. 19, 15.
, and honorable among the faithful Eccles. 10, verse. 20. 21. 25.
! O noble service, and always to be wished for, whereby both the cheifest
felicity is gotten, and joy without end obtained Ioh. 12, 25 John. 17, 2.
!


Chap. 13. That the desires of the mind must be examined, and bridled.
LORD. MY son, thou have yet many things to learn.


SERVANT. What are those, Lord?


LORD. That thou make thy desire obedient to my commandment, and be no more a
friend to thy self, but desirous to observe my will Luke. 22, verse. 42. John.
4, 34. John. 5, 30.
.

Many times thou art inflamed, and vehemently driven on through desires: and
when thou art so, consider with thy self; whether thou seek more my praise,
than thy profit Luke. 22, verse. 24. John. 5, 44. John. 12, 4. 5. 6.
. For if thou covet a thing for my sake, thou will take in good part that
which I shall send: but if covetousness cause ye same, then art thou kept back,
and pressed down Luke. 9, verse. 23, etc. 59. 61. Luke 18, 22. 23.
.

Wherefore take heed that thou lean not too much to thy conceived desire, I
not being of counsel Prou. 3, 5. 7.
, least afterward thou buie it full dearly; and that at another time displease
thee, which at the first thou did like, and long for Luke 9, 59. 61. Luke 18,
18.
. For every affection that seems good, must not be followed, nor the
contrary sodeinlie avoided.

Sometime it is good to bridle even good motions, and desires, least either
thou pass thy bounds through importunity of mind; or offend others through
thine intemperancie; or thou sodeinlie fall through the resistance of them.

Otherwhiles it is expedient to use violence Matthew. 11, verse. 12.
, and to resist the appetite, and not to way what the flesh either likes or
mislikes Gal. 5, 16. 17, etc. Romans 6, 12. Roman. 8, verse. 12, etc.
, but rather to use diligence that it be constrained to obeie the spirit, and
so long be kept under in bondage, til it be pliant unto al things; and have
learned to be content with a little, and simple estate, and never to murmur for
any affliction.


Chap. 14. The way to patience, and to fight against fleshly desires.
SERVANT. THen, my Lord and God, as far as I perceive, I have much need of
patience Luke 21, 19
. For many contrary things happen in this life: in so much that albe I desire
quietness by all means, yet is it impossible for me to live without war, and
troble Job. 7, 1. John. 16, 20. 22.
.


LORD. Thou say true, my son. Yet I will not have thee to seek after that
peace which is without tentations, and trobles: but then to think thou have
found peace, when thou shall be tried with manifold miseries and vexations Iam
1, 2. 3. 1. Pet. 1, 6. 7.
.

Now if thou say, thou can not suffer much, tell me, my son, how then will thou suffer the everlasting torments of hell fire Matthew. 7, verse. 23. Matt. 25,
41.
? Of two evils always the lesser must be chosen. Wherefore to avoid those
everlasting pains, study to endure the miseries of this present world
patiently for the Lords sake Matt. 5, 10 11. ^. Pet. 4, 14.
.

Think thou that the men of this world feel either none adversity, or but
little? If thou do, thou art in a wrong opinion, for they which live most
delicatelie, live in misery Genesis 3, 10. 11. 17. Job. 14, verse. 1, etc.
.

But thou will say: They have their delights, and they follow their fancies,
and therefore be they little touched with their miseries. Well, suppose every
thing falls out according to their wish; how long will that last Luke. 12, verse.
20. 45. 46. 1 Thessalonians. 5, 3
? Verelie even as smoke shall they consume away Psa. 37, 20. 2. 9. 13, etc.
, which are welthie in this world Luke 6, 24. 25. 26.
, so that of ioies passed there shall be no remembrance Psalm. 37, 9. 10. 20, etc.
.

Yea, while they live too they enioie them not without sorrow, troble, and
fear. For of what things they take pleasure, of the same they receive sorrow
manie-times. And deservedly. For they which beyond reason follow vain
delights, even reason would that they should not have them without pain, and
grief Prou. 14* verse. 13.
. And their pleasures too are but very short, and deceitful, and dishonest,
and filthy. But this they perceive not, they are so drunken and blind* but
like brute beasts, for a little pleasure in this world, they cast their souls
into everlasting pains Ps 49, 12* 13, etc.
.

Wherefore, my son, follow not thou thy lusts Eccles. 18, verse. 30. 31.
Galath. 5, verse. 16, etc.
, but renounce thine own will Luke. 9, verse. 23, etc.
. Delight thy self in the Lord Psa. 37, 4.
, and he will give thee thine hearts desire.

For, know this for a truth, if thou would truly rejoice, and receive much
comfort at mine hands, thou must utterly despise al worldly things, and
contemn those vain delights Iere. 9, 23. 24.
. For therein true felicity, and ample reward of comfort does consist. And the
more thou withdrawest thy self from worldly pleasure, the sweeter consolations
shall thou find in me Ps. 94, 19. 2. Cor. 1, 3. 4. James. 1, 2.
. But, as I said before, thou shall not attain thereunto without sorrow, and
labor Acts. 14, 22
.

For there is against thee old custom, but that will be foiled by a better
custom: the flesh, but that will be bridled Roman. 8, verse. ^, etc. Galat. 5,
16. 17.
by the heat of the spirit: the old serpent 2. Cor. 11, verse. 3. Reu. 12, 9.
12. 17.
Satan, but he both at thy prayer will fly, and by godly exercise run away
1. Pet. 5, 8. 9. Mat. 26, 41.
.


Chap. 15. Of obedience to our betters, after the example of Christ.
LORD. Son, he that withdraws himself from obedience, drives himself out
of Gods favor Deuteronomy. 11, 1. Deuteronomy. 21, 18 19, etc.
: and he that seeks private, forgoeth public things.

He which gladly, and voluntarily Ephesians. 6, 6 Coloss. 3, 22
obeieth not his better, shows plainly therebie, that he has not yet
brought his flesh in subjection, but that it wincheth backward, and murmureth
manie-times Tit. 3, 1. 3.
.

Wherefore learn with all speed to submit thy self to thy superior 1. Pet. 2,
13 14.
, if thou desire to tame thy flesh 1. Pet 2, 11.
. For the outward enemy is the more easily overcome, if the inner man be
sure, and strong Matthew. 26, verse. 41. Luke 22, 40. 46.
.

Thou have none so il, and troblesome an enemy to thy soul, as thy self, if
thou be out with the spirit Gal. 5, 16.
. For thou must unfeignedly contemn thy self, if thou will be master over
blood, and flesh. But forasmuch as thou love thy self as yet immoderatelie,
thou abhorrest to commit thy self who lie to the will of another Luke. 9, verse.
23, etc.
.

But, O earth and ashes Eccl. 10, 12
, what great thing do thou, if for the Lords sake thou obeie man 1. Pet. 2,
verse. 13.
; when I the Almighty and most Hie, who of nothing created al things Col. 1,
16. John. 1, 1. 2. 3.
, submitted my self humbly to man for thy sake, and was most vile and
contemptible Matt. 20, verse. 28. Philip. 2, 6. 7. 8.
, that thou by mine humility might overcome that pride of thine Matthew. 11,
29.
?

Learn to obeie, O dust Eccles. 10, verse. 12. Genesis 3, 19.
; learn to bring down thy self, O earth, and slime Genesis 2, 7.
, and to throw down thy self under al men's feet. Learn, I say, to break
thy will, and humbly to submit thy self to al Ephesians 5, 21. 1. Pet. 2, 13,
. Wax hot against thy self, and suffer not pride to have place within thee:
but show thy self so lowly, and simple, that al may tread thee under feet
like mire in the streets Esai. 10, 6.
.

What have thou, O vain man, to complain? How can thou, O wicked wretch,
speak again to them which dispraise thee, seeing so oftentimes by offending
GOD thou have deserved the pains of hell Matthew. 18, verse. 21. 22, etc.
? But I graciously have spared thee Romans 2, 4. 1. Pet. 1, 3. 2. Pet. 3, 9.
making no small account of thy soul, that thou perceiving this my love to thee
wards, might always show thy self thankeful for my benefits Ps. 116, 12
13. 17.
, and evermore, being given to true obedience, and modesty 1. Pet. 1, 17
, take it patiently when thou art contemned 1. Pet. 2, verse. 20, etc.
.


Chap. 16. That we are to consider the secret judgments of God, least we wax
proud in his gifts.
SERVANT. O Lord, when thou thunder est forth thy judgments against me, thou
make al my members to shake, and quake for fear, and terrifiest my mind
above measure Job. 4, 17. 18. 19. Psalm. 6, 1. Psalm. 38, 1. 2, etc.
.

Astonished I consider that the very heavens are not clean in thy sight Job.
15, 15.
. And if thou foundedst folly in thine Angels, and therefore did not spare
them, what shall become of me Job. 4, 18. 19.
? If the very stars did fall from heaven Esa. 14, 12.
, what shall I that am but ashes and dust Eccle. 10, verse. 12.
hope for? They whose works seemed commendable, have utterly bin confounded
Matthew. 11, verse. 20, etc. Matthew. 23, verse. 3, etc.
; and such as were fed with the bread of Angels, I have seen to be delighted
with the husks that swine cate Luke 15, 16
.

So that there is none holiness, if thou, Lord, draw back thine hand, no
wisdom helps, if thou govern not 1. Cor. 1, verse. 17, etc.
; no strength does good, if thou assist not; no chastity is sure, if thou
defend not; and no custody can keep safe, if thou watch not Psalm. 127, 1.
.

For being forsaken, alas, we drown, and perish Matthew. 8, verse. 25 Luke 8, 24.
; but if thou care for us we live, and prosper. We are of our selves frail,
but strong through thee; and of our selves neither hot nor cold, but zealous
through thee Luke 17, 5.
.

Doubtless it is my part to conceive most humbly, and baselie of my self: and
though I seem to have some goodness, yet must I not way the same Luke. 18,
verse. 11, etc 1. Cor. 4, 7.
. I say, it is my part to submit my self to those bottomless judgments of
thine Psalm. 19, 9. Psalm. 119, 7. 30. 52.
, seeing I find my self to be no better than nothing of nothing.

O weight without measure! O sea impassable Psalm. 36, 6.
, where I find my self to be nothing but altogether nothing! Where is then the
covert of glory? Where is the vain concept of glory? Al vain glory is
swalowed up in the gulf of Psalm. 9, 16. Ps. 119, 120.
thy judgments over me. What are al men in thy sight? Even as claie in respect
of the potter Esa. 29, 16
.

Can he wax proud with vain praises, whose mind is truly obedient to the
Lord? No, though all the world should extol him, seeing he is in service to the
truth; he will not be moved Iere. 9, 23. 24.
with their commendations, whose trust is fixed upon the Lord. For even they
al, who utter his praises, are nothing, and together with the sound of their
words, shall vanish away Ps. 89, 48. Psalm. 49, 10.
. But the truth of the Lord endures for ever Esai. 40, 8. Psalm. 117, 2.
.


Chap. 17. What words, and manner we should use in desiring any thing at the
hands of God.
LORD. Son, in thy prayers thou must use these words: Lord, be it even so,
if it please thee I am. 4, 15. Acts. 18, 21. 1. Cor. 4, 19, Matthew. 6, 10.
Matt. 26, 39. 42.
; Lord, if it be for the advancement of thy glory, let it be done in thy Name;
Lord, if thou see it good, and profitable for me, grant that I may use it to
thine honor, and praise: but if thou know it will be hurtful, O Lord, remove
away this desire fro me Iam. 4, 3.
.

For every desire, which seems right and good in the judgment of man, is
not of the holy spirit: and it is an hard matter to discern rightly whether
a good or an evil spirit does provoke thee to covet this or that; or whether
thine own spirit move thee thereunto 1. Cor. 2, verse. 11.
. Many in the end have bin deceived, who seemed to be stirred up by a good
spirit.

And therefore always thou must wish for yt which thou would have in the
fear of God, and with humblenes of mind Psalm. 19, 7. Psalm. 111, 5. Prou. 1,
28. 29.
: and commit the whole matter to the Lord, with a mere check to thy self,
saying on this wise:

Lord, what is better for me thou know; do thou whether of both thou will
thy self Matt. 8, 2. Mark. 14, 36
. Give me what thou will, as much as thou will, and when thou will thy self.
Deal with me as thou think good, and as it shall please thee, and be most
for thy glory. Place me there, where thou will thy self, and in all things use
me at thy pleasure. I am in thine hand Psalm. 31, 5.
, turn me, lose me every way. Behold, I thy servant Ps. 116, 16. Luke. 1, 38.
am prepared to al things: because my desire is to (and would to God I could
rightly, and perfectly) serve thee, not my self Romans 14 8 Phil. 1, 20.
.


Chap. 18. A prayer for grace to do the will of God.
SERVANT. O Most bountiful Savior, extend thy favor toward me Psa. 80, 3.
, let it be with me, and labor with me, and continue with me until the end
Phil. 2, 12.
.

Give me grace to wish, and covet those things Phil. 2, 13.
, as may be grateful to thee, and acceptable in thy sight.

Let thy will be my will, and let mine always follow thine, and agree therewith
Mat. 6, 10 Mat. 26, 39. 42. Mat. 14, 36
.

Grant that I may like and mislike that which thou do Ioh. 4, 34. John. 5,
30. John. 6, 38.
, and never like or mislike any thing, but that which thou do either like
or mislike.

Assist me to crucify my self to al worldly things Gal. 6, 14. Roman. 6,
verse. 3, etc. Philip. 3, 8.
; and for thy sake to covet in this world to be contemned and unknown.

And above al things grant that I may rest, and have peace in thee: thou art
the true peace, thou alone art the quietness of mind Phil. 4, 7.
. Without thee al things are hard, and troblesome John. 14, verse. 27. John.
16, 33.
. In this peace, that is, in thee alone which art the cheifest, and everlasting
felicity, I will sleep, and take my rest Psalm. 3, 5. Psalm. 4, 8.
,


Amen.
Chap. 19. That the true comfort is to be sought for, in God alone.
SERVANT. Whatsoever pleasure I can wish, or imagine, I look not for it in
this life, but in the world to come Romans 8, 18 32. 1. Cor. 2, 9. Heb. 13, 14.
.

If I alone had all the pleasures that might be, and enioied all the delights in
the world, certain it is they would not long endure Ioh. 16, 20 22. 1. Cor. 7,
31. 1. Ioh. 2, 17.
.

And therefore thou can not fully be delighted, and refreshed thoroughlie (O
my soul) but in the Lord 1. Cor, 1, 31 2. Cor. 1, 3. 4.
, who comfort the abject 2. Cor 7. 6
, and assisteth the meek James. 4, 6
.

Hope a little while Psalm. 27, 14.
, O my soul, hope for the promise of GOD, and thou shall attain to plenty of
al good things in heaven. But if thou immeasurable desire temporal things,
make an account of it, thou shall forgo eternal Luke. 16, verse. 25. 1. Ioh. 2,
15. 16. 17.
.

Use this world 1. Cor. 7, verse. 31.
, but desire heaven Colos. 3, 1. 2.
.

No temporal thing can satisfy thee Eccle. 1, 8. Eccles. 4, 8.
; for thou art not created to enioie the same.

Had thou al creatures in thine own possession: yet were thou not blessed.
But thy felicity consists in God the creator of al Psalm. 36, 7. 8. 9. Psalm.
42, verse. 1, etc.
. Which is such, not as is seen and commended of the foolish favorers of this
present world, but as the good, and faithful disciples of Christ hope for, and
they sometime foretast who are spiritual and pure in heart Matt. 5, 8. Psalm. 24,
4.
, whose conversation is in heaven Phil. 3, 20.
. Vain, and short is al worldly consolation: but true and blessed is the
spiritual Psa. 31, 19.
which the truth does minister.

The godly man carries always about his comforter, even Jesus 2. Cor. 1, 2.
5. Coloss. 1, 2.
, whom on this wise he speaks unto:

O Lord Jesus, be with me in all places, and at al times. Let this be my comfort,
to lack al worldly comfort willingly Job. 6, 7.
: Or if at any time I lack thy consolation, let thy will, and due trial of me
1. Pet. 1, 7.
be in steed of cheifest comfort Psalm. 23, 4.
. For thou will not always chide, neither keep thine anger for ever Psa. 103,
9.
.


Chap. 20. That al our cares must be cast upon God.
LORD. MY son, let me deal as I will with thee Iam. 4, 7.
. I do know what is for thy profit. Thou conceauest as a man Ps. 94, 11. Matt.
16, 23. 1. Cor. 3, 1.
, and in many things do so think, as thy fleshly mind does counsel thee.


SERVANT. Truth Lord: Thou have more care of me, than I can have of my self
Psa. 55, 22. Esai. 49, 14. 15.
. For he stands totteringlie, who trusts not wholly in thee 1. Pet. 5, 7.
.

O Lord, so that my will may be right and grounded on thee, deal with me even
as thou will Luke 1, 38.
. For it cannot be but good whatsoever thou shall determine of me.

Wherefore whether thou will that I be in darkness, I praise it Romans 12, 12 2.
Corint. 6, verse. 4, etc.
; or in the light, I praise it; whether in prosperity, I praise it; or in
adversity, I praise that also Psalm. 34, 1.
.


LORD. Son thou must be so minded if thou will deal with me: and be as
willing to suffer James. 1, 2. John. 15, 19. John. 16, 2.
, as to rejoice; and to be poor, and needy Matthew. 19, verse. 27. Luke. 9, 23.
, as rich and wealthy.


SERVANT. Lord, I will gladly suffer for thy sake whatsoever thou shall send:
yea I will take in good part at thine hands evil as well as good, sower as
sweet, sorrow as joy Phil. 4, 4. 5. Coloss. 1, 11. 12.
, and for all things yield thanks 1 Thessalonians. 5, verse. 18.
.

Defend me, O Lord, from sin, and I will fear neither death, nor ye Devil:
and so thou forsake me not utterly, neither blot me out of the book of life,
no misery shall dismaie me Psalm. 91, verse. 5, etc.
.


Chap. 21. That the troubles of this life are patiently to be suffered after
the example of our Savior Christ.
LORD. MY son, for thy saltion I came down from heaven John. 3, 13: John. 6,
33. 38, etc. Philip. 2, 7. 8.
, and took thy miseries upon me not of necessity Esai. 53, 5.
, but voluntarily; to teach thee to be patient, and to bear the miseries of
this world gladly, not grudginglie 1. Pet. 2. verse. 21, etc.
.

For from the hour of my birth even til my death on the cross, there never
wanted sorrows which I was to suffer Esaie. 53, verse. 2, etc. Luke. 9, 22
. I bare the want of necessary things Luke. 2, 7. Matthew 4, 2. Luke. 9, 58.
; I hard much muttering against me Ioh. 7, 12.
; I put up many tauntes and reproaches Matthew. 12, verse. 24. John. 8, 48.
; for my benefits, I received unkindness Esaie. 5, verse. 1, etc. Matthew. 21,
verse. 33, etc.
; for my miracles, il words Luke 11, 14. 15.
; for my ghostly counsel, reprehension John. 7, 28. 30.
.


SERVANT. O my Lord, seeing thou in this life have showed thy self patient
(wherein especialie thou fulfilledst the commandment of thine heavenly father
Ioh. 17, 4. Philip. 2, 8.
:) good reason is it, that I a miserable, and sinful wretch do show my self
patient according to thy will, and, while thou think meet, bear the burden
of mortal life after thine ensample 1. Pet. 2, verse. 21, etc.
.

For although this present life seem burdensome: yet through thy favor it is
made the lighter, and may the more easily be borne of weakelings both by
thine example Matthew. 11, verse. 29. 30.
, and of thy saints Phil. 4, 13. Hebr. 6, 11. verse. 12. Hebr. 11, 32. 33, etc.
.

Yea much more comfortable is it now, than it was in the old law, when both the
way was harder to find 2 Cor. 3, verse. 13, etc.
, and few had a desire to seek the celestial kingdom To. 9, 29. 1. Cor. 10,
6,
.

Then how much am I bound to thee, which have vouchsafed to show both to me,
and to al believers a right and ready way unto thine everlasting kingdom
Ioh. 14, 6.
! For thy way, is our way: and by holy patience we strive to come unto thee,
our crown: whom, unless thou had gone before John. 14, 2. 19. John. 15, 18.
, and schooled us Ioh. 16, 32 33.
, who would care to follow? How many would abide not only behind, but a great
way of also, if they had not these thy noble examples before their eyes?

And, hearing such commandments and signs, and yet are lukewarm, what would
we do, if we had not such a light given us to follow thee?


Chap. 22. Of long-suffering; and who is patient in deed.
LORD. WHat is that thou say, my son? cesse to complain. Behold how both
I Heb. 12, 2.
, and other saints Hebr. 11, verse. 32, etc. Hebr. 6, 11. 12.
have suffered; thou have not as yet resisted unto blood Heb. 12, 4.
. Little is it which thou suffer being compared with them, who have suffered
so much, so mightily bin tempted, so grieuouslie afflicted, so many ways
tried, and exercised Heb. 11, 34 35. 36. 37.
.

And therefore call such into mind as have endured more troubles: so shall thou
more easily bear thine own. And if thine seem not light, look whether
impatiencie do not cause thee to think so. But, be they small, be they great,
endeavor thou to bear them patiently 2. Cor. 6, 4 James. 1, 2. 3.
.

For the more patience thou showest; the more wisely thou do; the more
favor thou shall get; the more easily thou shall bear adversity, being both
in mind, and custom not slothfullie prepared hereunto Romans 5, 3. 4.
.

And say not, I neither can, nor may suffer this at his hands; for he has
iniuried me greatly, and accused me of those things, which I never thought of;
if another had dealt so with me, I could yet have put up such things, as I see
might reasonably be put up. I say, use not these speeches, for they are
foolish cogitations, such as neither weigh the woorthines of patience, nor the
reward due for the same Iam. 1, 12.
, but respect persons rather, and injuries received Mat. 5, 43. 44, etc.
.

He is not truly patient that will bear but with whom he list, and what he
list. But he is patient in deed, that waieth not who molesteth him, whether
his better, or his equal, or his inferior; whether he be good and godly, or
wicked and ungracious: and howsoever he be iniuried, and when so ever, he
takes it in good part, as sent from God, and puts it in his winnings. For the
smalest thing that is, being suffered for Gods sake, shall have a great reward
Matt. 5, 11. 12. Romans 8, 18. Phil. 1, 12. 13, etc.
.

Wherefore be thou girded Ephesians. 6, 14
unto the battle, if thou will have the victory. Unless thou strive thou shall
never obtain the crown of patience 2. Tim. 2, 5.
. So that, if thou will not suffer, thou refusest to be crowned: but if thou
desire to be crowned, strive manfully, and suffer patiently the brunt of the
battle Ps. 27, 14. Psalm. 31, 24.
. For neither quietness without labor, nor victory without fighting is obtained
2. Tim. 2, 5
.


SERVANT. O my Lord, grant that through thine assistance I may do that, which
of my self me thinks I cannot do 2. Cor. 3, 5
. Thou know that otherwise I can but suffer little, and even by a small puff
of adversity, am easily overthrown.

Grant that al trobles for thy name sake may be welcome to me, and wished
for: for to suffer, and to be afflicted for thee, is very good for my souls
health Psalm. 119, verse. 67* 71. Roman. 5, verse. 3, etc. James. 1, 2. 3.
,


Amen.
Chap. 23. A confession of man's weakness, and misery.
SERVANT. I Will confess my sins, and wickedness unto thee, O Lord, Psalm 32, 5.
.

Oftentimes a small thing brings me down, and trobles me. Sometime I determine
to play the stout champion; and by and by with a light tentation I am
overthrown. Now and then of a small thing arises a grievous tentation; and
when I think I am safe, unawares manie-times I receive the foil.

Wherefore, Lord, behold mine humility, and frailty which is well known to
thee. Have mercy on me, and deliver me out of this mire Psalm 69, 1. 2
.

This does vex me at the very heart, and confoundes me in thy presence, when I
see how frail I am, and weak to resist affections: which albe they draw me
not altogether to assent Romans 7, 15 16. 17. 24.
, yet they disquiet me greatly by their sore assaults, and make me weary of
my life, they fight so within me.

And hereby more evidently I perceive mine own infirmity, in that I see
wicked cogitations do more easily invade, than forsake me.

Oh that thou most mighty God of Israel, and lover of godly souls Heb. 4, 15
, oh that thou would behold my pain and grief Psalm. 25, 16
, and prosper mine endeavors!

Strengthen me with courage from thine holy heavens, that the old man, even
the miserable flesh, not plainly as yet made subject to the spirit Romans 8, 5.
, get not the upper hand Romans 6, 12
, whom, as long as we live in this wretched world, we must resist Gal. 5, 16.
17.
. I call it wretched, because therein al things are full of snares, and enemies
Job. 14, 1. 22. 1. Pet. 5, 8.
. For tentations come upon tentations: yea, while one conflict is a making,
others come on the neck of them unlooked for Job. 7, 13. 14.
.

So then can this life be loved, which has so much gal therein, and is open to
so many trobles, and miseries Job. 5, 7.
? Or can it be called a life, which causes so many deaths, and plagues Job.
10, 17
? And yet, notwithstanding all this, it is loved, and many seek for pleasure
in the same Mat. 7, 13. Luke. 13, 23 24.
.

The world is manie-times dispraised, because it is deceitful, and vain 1.
John. 2, verse. 17.
: and yet it is hardly forsaken, the desires of the flesh bear such a swaie
1. John. 5, verse. 19.
. For in very deed some things provoke to love, other to abhor the same. To
love it, the lust of the flesh, and of the eyes, with the pride of life 1.
John. 2, verse. 16.
will allure to abhor it, the pains, and everlasting miseries to come Ioh.
16, 20 Luk 16, 25.
, may cause.

But, alas, vile pleasure subdueth the mind addicted to the world: so that to
feed the senses it thinks it a pastime, having neither seen, nor tasted the
sweetenes of the Lord Psalm. 34, 8.
, nor the inner comfort of virtue 1. Cor. 2, 9. 10. 14.
.

But they, which utterly contemn the world, and study under holy
discipline to live unto GOD, they both know the heavenly comfort, promised to
such as forsake themselves Luke 9, 23. John. 16, 33.
, and also perceive how lamentably the world does er, and lies in wickedness
1. John 5, verse. 19.
.


Chap. 24. That we must repose no confidence in any creature, but in God alone.
SERVANT. O My soul Psa. 116, 7.
, trust in the Lord in all things, and above al things: for he is the
everlasting rest of ye godly Ps. 132, 14
.

Give me grace, O sweet Jesus, O my GOD, to rest in thee above al things in the
world; above al health, and beauty; above al honor, and glory; above al power
and dignity; above al knowledge and dexterity of wit; above al cunning and
riches; above al mirth and ioiefulnes; above al praise, al fame, al sweetenes,
al pleasure; above al hope, al promise, and al merit; above al desire, al
gifts, al rewards which thou can give, and power out; above al joy, and
iolitie which the mind can feel, and conceive; finalie, above al Angels, and
Archangels, above all the host of heaven, above al things visible and invisible,
above al things, which thou art not Matthew. 10, verse. 37. 38. 39. Mat. 19, 27.
28. 29. Romans 8, 35. 38. 39. 1. Ioh. 2, 15.
, O my God.

For thou, my God, thou art best of al; thou alone art almighty; thou alone
art plentiful; thou art most sweet, and thou art most comfortable; thou art
most fair, most lovely, most noble, and most glorious Psalm. 36, verse. 5,
etc. Psalm. 42, ^.
.

In thee are, have bin, and will be evermore al good, and perfect things: and
therefore both little is it, and less than thy self whatsoever thou give me
besides thy self, or openest and promisest of thy self not seen, neither
perfectly attained.

For my mind will never be at quiet, nor content with that is present, until,
having passed over al gifts and worldly things, it rest in thee Psa. 116, 7.
.

O Christ, my sweet spouse and savior, O most faithful lover, Lord of the
whole world 1. Tim. 6, verse. 15. Revel. 1, 5.
, O that I had ye wings of true liberty: that I might fly unto thee, and rest
in thee Psalm. 55, 6
!

O when shall I be mine own man, and behold how sweet thou art, my Lord, my
God Psalm. 34, 8.
! When shall I wind my self wholly into thee in such sort, that for the entire
good will I bear thee, I may not know my self, but thee alone after an
incredible manner, known but unto few Psa. 17, 15.
!

Now oftentimes I sigh To. 7, 24.
, and bear my wretchedness with grief, because much evils rush upon me in this
veil of miseries, the which manie-times trouble me, and grieve me, and
ouershadowe me, and hinder me, yea they distract, and withdraw, and so entangle
me, that I can have no free access unto thee, nor enioie thy loving
embracements in the presence of thy blessed Saints 1. Cor 13, verse. 12.
.

O my God, let my so manifold sighs, and sorrows of mind, which I feel in
this world, move thee.

O Jesus the brightness of eternal glory, and comfort of the wandering soul, my
mouth is with thee that cannot speak, and in silence Esa. 30, 15
do I speak to thee.

How long will my Lord defer his coming? Oh that he would come to me poor
wretch, make me glad, and with stretched out arm deliver me from al troble
Psalm. 40, 7.
!

Come, Lord Jesus, come Revel. 22, verse. 20. 17. Psalm. 130, 5. 6. 7.
. For lacking thee I am no day, no hour in quiet: because thou art my joy,
without whom my table is empty.

I am a caytiue, and I know not how, kept in prison, and kept down with
fetters To. 7, 23. 24.
, and so shall be til thou comfort me with the light of thy presence, set me at
liberty, and show me a friendly countenance Romans 8, 2.
.

Let others seek in steed of thee what they will: nothing neither does, nor
shall please me, but thou, my God, my hope, and eternal salvation Psalm. 3, 3.
Psalm. 16, 2. 2. Sam. 22, 2
.

I will never be silent, I will never cesse to pray Luke 11, 9. 10. Luke 18, 1.
7.
, until y^ put away al displeasure, and speak to me again.


LORD. Lo, because thou call for me, I am come: thy tears, thy groaning,
thine humility, and hearty sorrow have moved me so to do.


SERVANT. O my Lord, through the desire I have to enioie thee, I, who am ready
to renounce al things for thy sake Phil. 3, 7. 8.
, have called thee. But thou first did stir me up to seek thee Luke. 10,
verse. 22.
. For which thing, O Lord, I yield thee humble thanks, who of thy great
goodness have bestowed so singular a benefit upon me.

Now what remains, but that I humbly submit my self to thee Psalm. 78, 8.
Psalm 119, 5.
, being always mindful of my sins, and vileness Ps. 119, 19
?

For among al things either in heaven or earth none is like to thee Ps. 35, 10.
Psalm. 71, 19. Psalm. 89, 18. Psalm. 86, 8.
.

Thy works are exceedingly good Genesis 1, 31.
, O Lord, thy iugdements are true, and al things are guided by thy providence
Psalm. 19, 1. 2. Matthew. 6, verse. 26, etc.
.

Wherefore praised, and magnified be thou, O wisdom of the Father 1. Cor. 1,
verse. 24. Coloss. 2, 3.
; and thou my soul Ps. 146, 1. 2.
, and mouth, with all creatures of the world Ps. 150, 6. Psalm. 148, verse. 1,
etc.
, extol and glorify him for ever.


Chap. 25. Of the continual calling into mind the infinite blessings, and
benefits of God.
SERVANT. O Lord, open thou the eyes of my understanding Ps. 119, 18. 17.
, and teach me to live according to the rules of thy Law.

Grant that I may know thy will, and with great reverence, and painfulnes, call
thy manifold benefits conferred both upon me, and al men into mind, that so
I may render due praise unto thee for the same Psalm. 26, 7.
.

Albeit, to say the truth, I cannot sufficiently commend thee for the least
of all thy benefits Eccl. 18, 4.
; yea so unable am I to extol thee duly for them Psalm. 40, 5.
, that when I consider thy liberality, I am utterly dismayed at the greatness
thereof.

For whatsoever we have, belonging either to the body, or to the soul,
outwardly or inwardly, naturally or otherwise, they are thy benefits, and
commend thy bounteousnes, and liberality Psalm. 33, verse. 6, etc. 1. Corin.
12, verse. 8, etc.
, of whom we have received al good things Iam. 1, 17.
.

And although some have more than others, yet al is thine Matthew. 25, verse. 14,
etc.
, and without thee even the least thing cannot be attained Ioh. 3, 27.
.

Now if any have received greater gifts, he cannot brag of his own merit, nor
extol himself above others, nor despise his inferior 1. Cor. 4, 6. 7.
. For by so much is a man greater, and better, by how much he ascribes less
to himself Mat. 11, 29
, and is the modester in yielding thanks. And ye more vile and unworthy a man
judges himself, the more capable is he of greater things Mat. 23, 11 12. Luke
18, 13. 14.
.

Again he that has fewer gifts, ought not to take it heavily, nor to envy
his better Iam. 4, 2.
; but rather to cast his eyes upon heaven, and highly to commend thy goodness,
who give thy gifts so abundantly, and so frankly without respect of persons
Matt. 5, 45 Luke. 6, 35.
.

From thee we have al 1. Cor. 4, 6, etc. James. 1, 17.
, and therefore in all things thou art to be glorified. What is meet for every
man thou know; and why this man has little, and he much, it is not for us,
but for thee to judge, who know what is necessary for every man.

Therefore, my Lord and God, I count it for a great benefit, to have but few
things which seem glorious, and praise-woorthie in the opinion of man. And
thus I think, that baseness, and poverty should be so far from disquieting the
mind, and bringing down a man, that they ought to be occasions of great
comfort, and reioicing, inasmuch as thou, God, do choose the poor, humble,
and despised in this world into the number of thy saints, and servants Psa.
113, 7. 8. Matthew. 5, 3. 1. Cor. 1, 26. 27. 28.
.

As witness thine Apostles, whom thou made princes through all the earth Ps.
45, 16.
: who behaved themselves so modestly, and showed forth so little malice, and
deceit, that not only they absteined from complaining, but also reioiced to
suffer rebuke for thy Name Acts. 5, 41.
: yea those things which we naturalie abhor, they did greedily embrace 1 Thessalonians. 2, verse. 15. 2. Co. 11, 23 24, etc.
.

So that nothing should so comfort, and rejoice the heart of him which loves
thee, and confesses thy goodness, as the knowledge of thine heavenly will Iere.
9, 23, 24. 1. Cor. 1, 31.
, wherewith he ought so to content himself, that he desire as greatly to be
of small, as another does to be of great account; and take as well in worth the
lowest place, as the hiest room, and to be despised and contemned; as to be
honored, and extolled above al Matthew. 20, verse. 25. 26. 27. Luke 22, 25. 26.
27.
. For more should he desire to have thy will done Mat. 6, 10. Mat. 26, 39. 42.
44.
, and thine honor advanced, than any thing besides 1. John. 2, verse. 15. 16.
17.
; yea more pleasure should he take therein tha^ in any thing else, which either
he has already, or may have Romans 8, 35 36, etc.
.


Chap. 26. Of the things, in number four, which procure quietness.
LORD. I Will now teach thee my son, the ready way unto peace, and freedom.


SERVANT. Do, Lord, as thou say: for that is it which I desire.


LORD. My son, do the will of another, rather than thine own will Ioh. 4, 34.
John. 5, 30. John. 6, 38.
: always desire little before a great deal Acts. 20, verse. 33. 34. 35.
: always covet the lowest place Luke 14, 8. 9. 10. Prou. 25, 7.
, and submit thy self to al Ephesians. 5, 21.
: always pray and wish that thou may thoroughlie do the will of God Mat. 6,
10.
; and doubtless thou shall enter into the bounds of peace, and quietness.


SERVANT. This thy short speech, Lord, contains much perfection: and though
it be brief for words, yet is it pithie for sense, and most effectual. And,
did I faithfulie obeie the same, sure I am, affections would not bear such a
swaie within me, as they do Roman 7, verse. 15, etc. Galat. 5, 17.
: and, I never am grieved, and out of quiet, but when I swerve from this thy
doctrine.

But thou, Lord, which art almighty, and always do desire the welfare, of
man Ezech. 18, verse. 32.
, extend thy favor toward me, that both I may do thy will, and attain
salvation,


Amen.
Chap. 27. A prayer against evil thoughts, or cogitations.
SERVANT. O Lord, my God forsake me not Psalm. 22, 1.
; O my God, assist me. For evil cogitations, and fears be in my mind, which
disquiet me; insomuch that I see not how to avoid, and break them off without
great hurt to my self.


LORD. I will go before thee, and suppress the power of man: and, having opened
the prison door Acts. 5, 19. Acts. 12, 10.
, reveal my secrets, and mysteries to thee.


SERVANT. Do so, Lord, and with thy countenance Psalm. 67, 1.
banish al wicked cogitations fro my mind. For this is my only hope, and
comfort in troble, even to fly unto thee Psalm. 18, 3. 6.
, to depend upon thee, to call upon thee zelouslie, and patiently to expect
thine heavenly comfort Psa. 27, 14.
.


Chap. 28. A prayer unto almighty God to have the eyes of our understanding
opened.
SERVANT. O Sweet Jesus, lighten me with ye brightness of thine eternal light,
and drive al darkness, as it were, from the mansion house of my soul John. 1,
9. John. 12, 8.
.

Suppress those wandering thoughts; and break in pieces those violent
tentations.

Fight thou courageously for my defense, and vanquish evil beasts, to wit, the
enticing desires of the flesh, that by thy power I may get peace, and sing out
thy praises in the holy court of my soul.

Rebuke the winds Matt. 8, 26 Luke. 8, 24.
, and tempests, command the sea to be quiet, bid the North wind not to rage,
and there will be a great calmnes. Send thy light, and truth Psalm. 43, 3.
, which may lighten the earth: for I am rude earth, good for naught, until thou
inlighten me.

Power out thy favor from above, replenish my soul with thine heavenly grace;
and minister the water of godliness, which ye uppermost part of the earth being
watered, may bring forth good, or the best fruit rather.

O Lord, lift up my mind which is pressed down through the weight of sins,
and stir up the same who lie to the desire of celestial things, that having
tasted the sweetenes of supernal happiness, it may greatly grieve me even to
think of this world Philip. 3, 8 Coloss. 3, 1. 2.
. Take me, or pluck me rather from al momentanie pleasure of earthly things:
for no creature can either quiet, or comfort my mind Ioh. 16, 33 2. These. 2,
16 17.
.

Join me to thee by an vndissoluble band of goodwil. For thou alone do
suffice thy friend, and without thee al other things are vain Coloss. 3, 2
,


Amen.
Chap. 29. That we ought not curiously to enquire how other men do live.
LORD. MY son, be not curious, neither have thou vain cogitations in thy
mind. What is this or that unto thee? Follow thou me Ioh. 21, 22
. For thou need not care what manner of folks others are, either what they
do, or speak Matt. 7, 1. 2, etc.
.

Thou art not appointed to plead for other men: but thou must answer for thy
self Matthew. 25, verse. 20. 21, etc. 1. Pet. 4, 4. 5. Galat 6, 5. Reu. 22, 12.
. Why then medlest thou with that which nothing touches thee?

It is I which know al, and see al whatsoever is done under the coape of heaven
Match. 15, verse. 2.
: yea I know how it goes with every man, what he thinks, what he would, and
whether his counsel tendes Psalm. 7, 9. Hebr. 4, 13. Reave. 2, 23.
.

And therefore commit al things to me: be thou quiet, and let troblesome people
alone in their doings. For they shall one day yield an account of al their
deeds, and saiengs Romans 14, verse. 12.
, neither can they mock me Gala. 6, 7.
.

Way thou neither the shadow of a great name, nor the familiarity of many,
nor the private good-wil of men. For these things do but distract the mind
sundrie-waies, and replenish it with black clouds of darkness.

Would thou diligently attend my coming, and open the door Sal. so^g. 5,
verse. 2. Reave. 3, 20.
of thy mind to let me in, then would I gladly speak, and reveal my secrets
unto thee.


Chap. 30. Wherein the true peace, and profiting of the mind does consist.
LORD. MY son, thus have I said Ioh. 14, 27
, Peace I leave with you; my peace I give unto you, not as the world gives,
give I unto you.

Al men desire peace: but al men care not for those things which belong unto
the right peace Luke. 19, verse. 42.
.

My peace deals with such as are modest, and meek in heart Psalm. 119, verse.
130. Mat. 11, 29.
. Thy peace does consist in long suffering Luke. 21, verse. 19. Romans 2, 7. 10.
; which thou may enioie plentifully, if thou will harken to me, and follow
my saiengs Psa. 119, 1. 2
. Wherefore in all things consider what thou do, and what thou speak; and
let this be thy cheifest care, how thou may please me Colos. 1. 10 Ephesians. 5,
10
, and besides me take pleasure in nothing Ier. 9, 23. 24.
.

Of other men's saiengs and doings judge not thou rashly Matthew. 7, verse. 1,
etc.
; neither intrude thy self into another man's charge 2 Thessalonians, 3, verse. 11.
: so shall thou either little, or very seldom be trobled.

For thou can not be void of al troble living in this world Ioh. 16, 33
; to feel no vexation either in mind or body is peculiar to the saints in
heaven which enioie everlasting rest Ioh. 16, 22 Reave. 12, 4.
.

So then think not that thou have found true peace, if thou feel no
adversity 1. Cor. 4, verse. 8, etc.
; or that al is well, if thou have none enemy; or that thou art in good state,
if thou enioie prosperity 1 Thessalonians. 5, verse. 2. 3.
: neither deem that thou art somewhat, or highly in my favor, though thou
remainest where great exercise of religion is, yea or tastest the sweetenes of
the same Mar. 14, 17 18. 19. 20.
. For by these things a true lover of godliness is not known, neither does the
profiting, and perfection of a man consist in these things.

Wherein then? Namely in submitting thy self wholly to the will of God; and in
seeking thy self in nothing Romans 12, verse. 16.
, be it little or much, neither now, nor hereafter, but always both in wealth
and woe keeping one manner countenance with thanksgiving Phil. 4, 11. 12.
waieng every thing in equal balance.

Finalie, if thou show thy self so valiant, and constant in faith, that when
inward consolation is withdrawn, thou can address thy self to suffer
greater things Romans 5, 3. 4. 5 James. 1, 3.
, and yet for all that refrain from praising thy self vainelie for thine
holiness, and zeal Luke 18, 11 12 Romans 11, 18 20.
, doubtless thou shall find the right, and ready way unto peace, yea and one
day behold my countenance again Psalm. 42, 2.
with mirth, and joy Psa. 91, 14. 15. 16.
.

And if thou once come unto such a pass, that thou can fully, and
perfectly contemn thy self Phil. 4, 11. 12. 13. Coloss. 3, 5.
, know of a truth, that thou shall enioie as much peace, and quietness, as
possibly may come unto a mortal man.


Chap. 31. In praise of a quiet, and free mind; with an humble petition for
the attaining of the same.
SERVANT. Doubtless it is the part of a perfect man, Lord, never to loase the
mind from the study of heavenly things, but to pass over the manifold cares
of this world even without care, not like a sluggard, but through the
excellency of a free mind, cleaving to no worldly thing with an immoderate
desire Philip. 3, 8 Coloss. 3, 1. 2. 1. Ioh. 2, 15.
.

O most gracious, and merciful God, keep me, I beseech thee, from the cares of
this world Mat. 6, 25. 26, etc. 1. Cor. 7: 31.
, that I be never too much entangled by reason of the manifold things which
this body needs; nor taken with the vain delight of that which hurts the
soul; nor finalie broken, and overthrown with sorrows.

I say not from those things, which the vain world does greedily hunt after
1. John. 2, verse. 16.
: but from those miseries, which suppress the mind of thy servant by a
common, and penal curse of mortality, and so withdraw me, that I cannot
enter, when I would, into the freedom of the spirit Romans 7, 16 17.
.

O my God, which art sweetness unspeakable, make al fleshly joy, which
withdraws me from ye love of eternal things, and enticeth with ye beholding
of, I cannot tell what present, and pleasant goodness, make this joy to be
grievous, and odious unto me Gal. 6, 14. Philip. 3, 7.
.

Let not flesh and blood, O my God, let not flesh and blood ouer^ome me 1. Ioh
2, 15 16.
; let not the world, and the vain glory thereof deceive me Ioh. 12, 43
; let not Satan by his subtletie supplant me 1. Pet. 5, 8
.

Give me strength to resist 1. Pet. 5, 9.
, patience to endure Ephesians 3, 16. 17. Romans 12, 12
, constancy to persevere unto the end Matthew. 24, verse. 13. Revel. 2, 7,
.

Grant me for the comforts of this world the most comfortable ointment 2. Cor.
1, verse. 21.
of thine holy spirit; and for the lust of the flesh, pour on me the love of
thy name Iam. 4, 4.
. The very meat, and drink, and apparel with other things necessary for the
nurishment of the body are even burdensome to a fervent spirit 1. Co. 7, 32
33. 34.
. Give grace that I may use these things moderately, and never be snarled
with an over great desire of them Matt. 6, 25
.

Al things are not to be rejected, for then nature would decaie: again to
covet superfluous, and every pleasant thing, thy sacred commandments do
forbid, for so the flesh would insult over the spirit Romans 8, 8. Galat. 5, 16.
17.
. Wherefore between these things let thine hand direct me, and teach me to do
nothing out of measure,


Amen.
Chap. 32. That self love is the cause of pe^dition.
LORD. MY son, thou must buie the whole with the whole, and keep back
nothing of thy self Mat. 19, 21 27. 29. Luke. 9, 23. 24.
. For know this, self-love does more hurt thee Matt. 7, 3. 4. 5. Math. 19, 22
, than any thing besides: and according to thy love every thing does more or
less cleave unto thee. So that, if thy love be pure Matthew. 5, 8 1. John. 2, 17
, simple, and godly, thou shall be quite from the bondage of things.

Covet not that, which thou may not have Exodus 20, verse. 17. Romans 7, 7.
: and have not that which may hinder thee, and deprive thee of the liberty of
mind Gal. 5, 16. 17.
.

It is marvelous, that thou do, not wholly commit thy self to me with all
that thou have, or can desire. Why do thou vainelie consume thy self with
sorrow? Why do thou weary thy self with superfluous cares Psalm. 42, 5. 11.
Psalm. 43, 5.
? Show thy self obedient to my will, and I will see that none hurt come to thee
Matthew. 6, verse. 33.
. But if, to attain profit, and to enioie thy desire, thou apply thy self to
seek things, and mind to change thy soil, look never to be at quiet, or
free from care. For in every thing thou shall wish some thing, and in no place
look for perfect peace.

Therefore every thing does good, but not every thing which we have gotten,
and mightily heaped together, but contemned, and cut fro the mind by the
roots Phil. 3, 7. 8.
: which I would not should be understood of money, and riches only, but also
of the desire of honor, and vainglory, al which do perish with the world 1.
John. 2, verse. 17. 1. Cor. 7, 31.
.

The place also does smalie defend, if zeal of the spirit be lacking Gal. 5,
22.
: neither can that outward peace long continue John. 14, verse. 27.
, if it be not grounded upon a stayed mind, that is, unless thou depend upon
me, though thou change thy soil thou shall not better thy self. For when
occasion does arise, and is received, thou shall find not only those things
which thou did shun, but a great deal more.


Chap. 33. A prayer to obtain the purity of mind, of heavenly wisdom.
SERVANT. STrengthen me, O God, by the grace of thy holy spirit Ephesians. 3, 16.
: confirm the inner man, that my mind may utterly be void of al vain
cares 1. Cor. 7, verse. 32.
and grief, and I never drawn away with the desire of any thing, be it
vile, or precious, but may count both my self Luke 9, 23.
, and al other things even corruptible Phil. 3, 8.
. Forasmuch as nothing under the Sun continues ever Eccl. 1, 3. 4. 1. Ioh.
2, 17.
, but they are al vain, and vexations of the spirit Eccles. 2, verse. 11, etc.
. He who thus thinks, is most singularly wise.

O Lord, give me heavenly wisdom Eccl. 2, 26 Wisd. 9, 4. James. 1, 5.
, which may teach me to seek Mat. 6, 33.
, and find thee above al, to savor of thee Psalm. 34, 8.
, and to love thee Mat. 22, 37 Mark. 12, 29 30. Luke 10, 27.
above al: and to take other things as they are in themselves, according to the
order of wisdom 1. Co. 7, 29 30. 31.
. Give me grace both wisely to avoid flatterers Prou. 2, 16 Prou. 5, 3. 4.
Prou. 29, 5.
; and patiently to bear my foes 1. Pe. 2, 21 23. 1. Pet. 3, 8. 9. Prou. 16,
32.
. For, neither to be moved with every blast of words Prou. 14, verse. 29.
, nor to listen to the flattering Marmaid Eccl. 7, 28 Proverb. 6, verse. 20,
etc. 24.
, is doubtless a great part of wisdom, and the ready way to go forward
salfelie in our journey begun.


Chap. 34. Against il tongues.
LORD. MY son, take it not greuouslie, though some conceive, and speak
amiss of thee Mat. 5, 11.
; but think worse of thy self than they do, and believe that none is more
weak than thy self Luke. 18, verse. 13.
.

If thou tread the secret path of virtue, thou will not greatly way flieng
words Psa. 56, 11
.

It is no small wisdom in adversity to be silent Ps. 112, 7. Esai. 30, 15.
Luke 21, 19.
, to turn unto me, and not to be disturbed whatsoever men do think. Thy peace
must not depend upon the speech of men: for thou art one manner of man still,
speak they il, or speak they well of thee: but in me, in me, I say, true
glory, and true peace does consist Ioh. 16, 33
, the which he shall mightily enioie, who neither desires to please men, nor
fears their displeasure Matthew. 10, verse. 28.
.

Of intemperate love, and vain fear, al unquietness of mind, and distracting
of the senses do arise Matthew. 9, verse. 21. 22.
.


Chap. 35. How we ought to call upon God, and to praise him in adversity.
SERVANT. PRaised be thy Name, O Lord, for evermore, whose will it is, that I
should be tried with this affliction Iam. 1, 2.
: which of my self I cannot escape, but am to fly unto thee, requiring thine
assistance Psalm. 71, 2. 3.
, and to turn it to the best.

O Lord, now am I in troble, and my mind is greuouslie vexed thorough my
present misery.

And therefore, O most dear father, what shall I say? I am entrapped on every
side: deliver me from this hour, wherinto I doubtless came, that thou thereby
might purchase great praise both for bringing me so down, and delivering me
again Ps. 22, 23. 24.
.

O Lord, I beseech thee deliver me from this evil, me poor and needy soul
Ps. 40 17.
, knowing not whether to turn my self without thee.

In like sort, O Lord, give me patience now Heb. 12, 1. Heb. 10, 36.
, help me, O my God, so will I not fear, be I never so greeuouslie afflicted
Psa. 56, 11. Acts. 5, 41.
.

And now in these my trobles, what shall I say? Even thy will be done, Lord
Matt. 6, 10
: I have deserved this affliction, and punishment Psalm. 69, 5.
, and therefore must of necessity bear it (God grant that patiently I may
do so) til after these storms fair weather comes again.

I know right well, thou can by thine almightines either altogether remove
away this tentation, or mitigate the rage thereof, that I faint not utterly,
as often heretofore thou have done Psalm. 77, 1. 2. 5. 6, etc.
of thy great mercy toward me, O my God. And the more trobles suppress me,
the more sweetly shall I be refreshed with the help of thine almighty right
hand.


Chap. 36. Of calling for Gods assistance, and hope to recover his favor again.
LORD. MY son, I am that Lord even the strengthener of men in the day of
troble Nahum 1, verse. 7.
, unto whom thou must make recourse as often as it goes not well with thee.

But thou feel not my heavenly comfort, because thou turnest not thy self
with speed unto prayer Ps. 50, 15. Psalm. 86, 1. 2, etc.
.

For, before thou make any earnest prayer unto me, thou seek much
comfort else where, and take pleasure in outward things; which do thee small
good, until thou persuade thy self in deed, that I it is who deliver such out
of troble as put their confidence in me Psa. 33, 18. Psalm. 27, 14. Psalm. 31, 24.
, and that without me no help is available Psalm. 33, 16 17. 18.
, no counsel profitable Job. 5, 13. Psalm. 2, 2, 4.
, no physic durable Luke 8, 43.
.

But now having taken courage unto thee after storms, wax thou strong again
in the light of my mercy. For I am ready says the Lord Reu. 22, 7.
, not only to restore al things to their integrity, but also mightily to
renew them Reu. 21, 1. 2 Pet. 3, 13.
.

Is there any thing too hard for me Job. 9, 4. 5. 6, etc.
? Or am I like to them which keep not promise 1. Kings. 8, verse. 23. Titus.
1, 1. 2.
? Where is thy faith? Stand constantly, and persevere Mat. 24, 13
: show thy self a patient and valiant man, and doubt thou not but in due time
thou shall find comfort Ps. 27, 14. 1. Cor. 16, verse. 13.
.

Wait Psa. 37, 3. 7. 34.
, wait I say for me, and I will come and heal thee. It is tentation that
trobles thee; and vain fear which terrifies. What good does care of future
chances, but even bring sorrow upon sorrow Mat. 6, 25 26, etc. Prouer. 10,
verse. 22.
? The day has enough with his own grief Matt. 6, 34
. A vain thing it is, and to no purpose, either to be sad, or to rejoice for
things to come, which perhaps will never come to pass.

But man with such imaginations may be deceived; albeit so easily to be
carried away with the tentation of the enemy, is an argument of a faint heart,
and little faith Matthew. 14, verse. 31. Matthew. 16, 8.
. He waieth not whether he illude, and deceive a man with true things, or with
false, whether with the love of present Matthew. 4, 8. 9. Luke 4, 5. 6. 7.
, or fear of things to come.

Wherefore neither be thou trobled in mind, nor fear; trust only in me, and
repose confidence in my mercy Psalm. 27, 1. Psalm. 28, 7. Psalm. 34, 22. Psa.
115, 11.
.

Manie-times thou think I am far off, when in deed I am at hand Ps. 119,
151 155. 1. Co. 10, 13
: and when thou supposest that al is gone, manie-times thy gain comes rouling
in Iam. 1, 12
. So that al is not lost, though thou sustain adversity.

According to the sense of present miseries thou must not judge; neither when
any mischance happens, be so moved and dismayed as though no hope of escape
were left at al 1. Cor, 10, verse. 13.
.

Think not thou art utterly cast off, though for a time either I send
affliction, or deny thy desired comfort; for thereby thou must enter into the
kingdom of heaven Acts. 14, verse. 22.
. And assuredly it is better both for thee, and all the rest of my servants, to
be stirred up with adversity Psalm. 119, verse. 67. 71. Luke. 9, 23. 1. Pet. 1,
6. 7.
, than to enioie al things at your hearts desire.

For I am so privy to the secret cogitations of the heart, that I know it is
greatly for thine everlasting welfare, to be sometime left to thy self in
trobles, lest perchance being puffed up with prosperity, thou think thy self
to be that which thou art not Deu. 32, 15.
.

I can take away that I gave Mat 25, 14 15, etc. 28.
, and give it again, when I think it good. If I gain, it is mine 1. Cor. 4, 7
: If I took away, I took not thine, forasmuch as every good giving, and
every perfect gift is fro me Iam. 1, 17.
.

Wherefore, when I send thee misery, and adversity, neither do thou fret 1.
Pet. 4, 12.
, nor faint Heb. 12, 3. Heb. 10, 35. 36.
: for I, even I the same can speedily succor thee, and turn thy sorrow into
joy again Deuteronomy. 32, verse. 39. 1. Sam. 2, 6.
.

But, in that I deal so with thee I am righteous Psalm. 119, verse. 75. Dan. 9,
14.
, and much to be commended. And if thou be wise, and waiest this my doing
vprightlie, thou will never so heavily mourn for thine adversity, but rather
be glad 1 Thessalonians. 1* 6 James. 1, 2.
, and thank me therefore Ephesians. 5, 20.
? yea, thou will confess thy self, that herein especialie thou should
rejoice, in y^ in punishing I do not spare thee Job. 6, 7. 10.
.

As the Father has loved me, so have I loved you, said I to my disciples Ioh
15, 9.
, whom I sent not unto transitory pleasures Ioh. 16, 20
, but unto great combats Mat. 10, 16* 17. 18.
; not unto honor Luke. 22, verse. 25.
, but unto infamy Mat. 5, 11. 1. Pet. 3, 13. 14.
; not unto idleness Matt. 10, 7. 8, etc.
, but unto painfulnes Matt. 9, 37. 38.
; not unto rest Luke 10, 2.
; but to bring forth much fruit with patience. My son, forget not these my
words.


Chap. 37. That to find God, our creator, we should forsake al things.
SERVANT. O My Lord, as yet I stand greatly in need of thy favor, that I may
come to that pass, that neither man, nor any other creature Romans 8, 35* 36,
etc.
may let me. For as long as any thing deteines me back, I cannot freely take
my flight to thee Luke 9, 23. 24. 25.
.

He that said Psalm. 55, 6.
, Oh that I had wings like a dooue, that I might fly away and rest, would
freely have flied.

What is more quiet than the simple eye Matt. 6, 22
? or what more at liberty, than he who desires nothing in the world Luke 9,
23.
?

So that man must ouerpasse al creatures, and bring himself unto that
forwardnes, that ravished beside himself, he confess that thou the Creator of
al things art nothing like unto thy creatures Esai. 44, 6. 7. 8. Esaie. 55, 8.
9. Revel. 5, 2. 3. 5.
.

Unless man be free from the love of every creature Luke 5, 11. Luke 14, 26. 27.
, he cannot quietly apply himself to heavenly things.

For therefore few there be which addict themselves to the study of celestial
things, because few can withdraw themselves, wholly from the love of this
world Matthew. 22, verse. 5. Luke 14, 18.
.

But to do so we have need of the special favor of God Ioh. 6, 44. 65.
, which may lift up the mind, and ravish it above it self.

And unless man be so lifted up in spirit, and, being delivered from al worldly
things, conioined to God, whatsoever he either knows, o^ possesses is to
very small purpose 1. Cor. 13, 1* 2. 3.
*

A long while shall he be a nouice, and grouel on the ground, which makes
account of any thing, besides that one eternal, and infinite good thing Matthew.
13, verse. 44. 45.
. Whatsoever is not God is nothing, and to be esteemed for nothing To. 8, 33*
34, etc. Philip. 3, 8.
.

Doubtless great difference is there between the wisdom of a man inspired
from above Gal. 1, 11. 12.
, and the knowledge of worldly wise men 1 Cor. 1, verse. 18. 19, etc.
: and much more excelent is that doctrine which flows from heaven 2. Tim. 3,
verse. 16. 17.
, and the celestial fountain, than that is painfully fetched from the brains
of man Matt. 15, 9. 1. Cor. 1, 20
.

Many there be which study heavenly things; but which do those things that
belong thereunto Matt. 7, 22* Romans 2, 21. 22, etc. James. 1, 22* 23, etc.
, not many.

Another great let is, for that men stand upon signs, and sensible things
Galat. 4, 9. 10. Galat. 5, 1. Coloss. 2, 20
, and bestow small diligence in the mortifieng of themselves Coloss. 3, 5
Galat. 6, 14.
.

I marvel what the matter is, or with what spirit we are led, or what comes
into our minds, which are called spiritual, that with such care and study we
seek after vile and vanishing things Matt. 6, 19. Ezech. 34, 2. 1. Pet. 5, 2.
, and so seldom call our wits together to think upon the matters of salvation
Coloss. 3, 2
! Yea after a little consideration we by and by burst out again, and way not
our deeds any more in the balance Reu. 3, 17. 18.
.

Where our affections be Matt. 6, 21
, we mark not: and that al which we have is vnpure Esai. 64, 6.
, we lament not.

For every man has corrupted his ways Romans 3, 10* 11. 12. Psalm. 14, 1. 3.
, which was the cause of so great a flood in the old world Matthew. 24, verse.
37. 38. 39. Luke 17, 26. 27.
.

So that the affection within being vnpure, needs must the actions proceeding
from the affections, which show the want of strength, be vnpure Matt. 6, 22*
23. Matt. 12, 33* 35.
. For of a pure mind the fruit of a good life does proceed Luke 6, 45.
.

Inquiry is made, how much a man does* but how zelouslie it was done, no
consideration is had.

Whether he be rich, or strong, or fair, or stout; whether he can write well,
or sing well, or plough well, we enquire: but how poor in spirit he is Matt. 5,
3.
, how patient and meek Matthew. 11, verse. 29.
, how religious and spiritual, many will not tell.

Nature beholds the outward parts of man Ioh 7, 24. John. 8, 15.
; Grace respects the inward James. 2, 5. John 8, 16.
: that commonly is deceived Iam. 2, 6.
, this has her trust in God Psa. 116, 7. 8. 9.
, that she may not er.


Chap. 38. That we must deny our selves, and renounce utterly al carnal
desires.
LORD. MY son, thou can not come unto perfect freedom, unless thou utterly
deny thy self Luke 9, 23.
.

As many as are covetous 1. Cor. 6, 9 10. 1. Tim. 6, 8. 9. 10.
; as many as love themselves Esai. 5, 21.
; as many as lust Iam. 1, 13. 14. 15. 1. Pet* 2, 11.
; as are curious 1. Tim. 1, 4.
; busybodies 1. Pet. 4, 15.
; desirous always of pleasure Luke. 16, verse. 25
not of Jesus Christ; attempting that which shall not abide Ps. 2, 1. etc 4
, (for whatsoever is not of God will come to naught Acts. 5, 38. 39.
), are captives and in bondage unto Satan Romans 6, 1^ 13. 14.
.

Take this for all. Forsake al Luk* 9, 23.
, and find al Mat. 19, 27 28. 29
. Forsake thy desire Mat. 8, 34.
, and find rest Mat. 10, 39
. Meditate hereof continualie, and when thou have fulfilled al, thou shall
understand.


SERVANT. O my Lord, this cannot be done in a day, neither is it a play for
children: but therein briefly the whole perfection of a godly man, is
comprehended.


LORD. Son, change not thy mind for all that, neither be thou dismayed at the
naming of perfection: but so much the more stir up thy self unto higher things
Phil. 3, 13. 14. 15.
, and at the least in desire sigh after them.

Oh that thou were come unto that pass that thou could not love thy self,
nor disobeie me Romans 12, 1 2.
; then would I like thee well, then should thou lead thy life in joy, and
quietness Leu. 26, 3* 4, etc. Deuteronomy. 28, 1. 2, etc.
!

Thou have as yet many things to be forsaken, the which unless thou altogether
yield up to me, look not to attain the end of thy desire.

I counsel thee to buie of me gold tried by the fire Reu. 3, 18.
, that thou may be made rich, I mean celestial wisdom which treads al
abject, and vile things under feet.

Cast away the wisdom of this world 1. Cor. 1, 26
, that is, cesse to please, and flatter thy self after the facion of the world
1. Ioh 2, 15 16.
.

I tell you, the most vile things, must be bought with precious things Matthew.
13, verse. 44. 45. 4^.
, and such as are of greatest account among men. For the true wisdom of GOD,
which does not arrogate much to itself 1. Cor. 13, verse. 14.
, nor desires to be greatly accounted of in this world Mat. 11, 29
, which many commend in words Mat. 7, 22. 23.
, but dissent there from in deeds Mat. 23, 3.
, seems but a vile 1. Co. 1, 20 21.
, and base thing, and therefore is not thought upon well nigh: and yet for all
that it is the precious treasure Matthew. 13, verse. 44. 45. 46.
, and the pearl hidden fro many.


Chap. 39. The mutabilitie of man's heart; and of thinking upon God in, and before
al things.
LORD. MY son, believe not the affection which mooues thee at this time, for
speedily it will change.

For so long as thou live, thou shall be subject to mutabilitie even
per-force Ps. 144, 4.
; and be now merry, now sad; now quiet, now trobled; now zealous, now cold; now
earnest, now rechles; now grave, and by and by light of behauior.

Notwithstanding the wise man rightly instructed in the spirit, stands fast
upon these mutable things, not regarding what he feels in himself, or on
what side the wind of instabilitie does blow, but how he may bring his
purpose to a right, and blessed end Psalm. 16, 8.
.

For so it falls out, that one, and the same man, may abide unmoved Ps,
112, 6. 7. 8.
among so manifold events, if the single eye of his mind be directed
continualie upon me.

And the more pure the eye of his mind is Mat. 6, 22. 23.
, the more constantly does he abide in the mids of storms Acts. 5, 41.
. But many have this sight of theirs trobled, so that easily they look upon
every pleasure objected; and hardly can one be found without al blemish of
self-love 1. Co. 13, 4. 2. Cor. 12, 14 15.
.

So came the Jews unto Martha, and Marie being at Bethania, not for Jesus sake
only, but that they might see Lazarus John. 12, 9
.

Therefore the eye of the mind must be purged Matt 6, 22 23.
, that it may be simple, and right, and cast upon me altogether,
notwithstanding the manifold diversity of things which come between.


Chap. 40. That it is a pleasure above al pleasures, to love God above al, and
in all things.
SERVANT. BEhold, my God, and al things 1. Cor. 15, verse. 28.
. What will more? what more happy thing can I wish for?

O sauorie, and sweet word; but to him which loves the word, not the
world, nor the things in the world 1. Ioh. 2, 15 16. 17.
!

My God, and al things. To him that understands I have said sufficient; and
to repeat the same oftentimes is a delight to him that loves Romans 8, 31. 32,
etc.
.

For, if thou be present Ps. 104, 29 30.
, al things bring joy; if thou be absent, what can make merry?

Thou make the mind quiet; and thou bring much peace, and the joy of
heart Psalm. 4, 7. Psalm. 16, 8. 9.
.

Through thee we think well of al things Romans 8, 35 36, etc. Philip. 1, 21.
Phi. 4, 11. etc
; and through thee Phil. 2, 13
in all things Ephesians. 5, 20
we praise thee. With out thee nothing can like us long; and that every thing
may be grateful and good, thou must bless it with thy favor, and season it
with the sauce of thy wisdom.

What is not sauorie to him, to whom thou art sauorie Psalm. 34, 8.
? Again what can please him, to whom thou art not pleasant?

But the wise of this world Romans 1, 22 1. Cor. 1, 19. 20, etc.
, and such as savor of the flesh Romans 8, 5.
lack thine heavenly wisdom: for in the flesh ^s death Romans 8, 6.
, and much vanity in the world 1. Cor. 1, verse. 20.
.

But they are wise in deed, who follow thee in contemning the world, and in
mortifieng the flesh: because they are translated from vanity unto verity,
and from the flesh to the spirit Rom 8, 5.
. These relish God: and these refer al things created unto the laud and
praise of the Creator Psa. 69, 34 Psalm. 149, 1. 2, etc.
.

But ods there is, and great ods too between the savor of the Creator Romans 8,
5. 6.
, and of the creature 1. Ioh. 2, 15 16. 17.
; of eternity, and of time; of light uncreate, and of ^ight enlightened.

O light everlasting John. 1, 4. 9.
, which passest al lights that are made, shine ^hou upon me; and pierce,
purge, comfort, and lighten with thy brightness even all the inward parts of my
soul: revive my spirit with all the powers thereof, that I may cleave unto
thee with a song of exceeding joy.

Oh, when will that blessed hour come, always to be wished, wherein thou will
so fill me with thy presence, that thou will be al in all to me 1. Cor. 15,
verse. 28.
! until when, my joy doubtless will not be perfect Ioh. 16, 22
.

As yet the old man Romans 6, 6.
to my great grief Phil. 1, 23.
, not yet wholly crucified Gal 6, 14.
, nor yet dead Coloss. 3, 5
, is within me. As yet the flesh lusts against the spirit Gal. 5, 17.
, it fights within me James. 4, 1.
, and disquiets the kingdom of the soul.

But thou, who rulest the raging of the sea Psalm. 89, 9. Matthew. 8, 26 Luke. 8,
24.
, and stillest the waves thereof when they do arise, scatter the people that
delight in war Psa. 68, 30
, bring them down by thy mighty power. Extend thy mightines, and make thy
right hand to be known.

For in thee, O Lord, is mine whole trust Psalm. 31, 1.
, mine only refuge is in thee Ps 56, 11.
.


Chap. 41. That this life is never free from tentations.
LORD. Look not in this world to be without trobles my son Job. 7, 1.
, but while thou live, thou shall stand in need of spiritual armor 2. Cor.
10, verse. 4. 5. Ephesians. 6, 10. 11, etc.
. Thou live among enemies, on the right hard, and on the left thou art
assaulted 2. Cor. 6, 7. Matt. 10, 16
. And therefore unless thou take the shield of faith Ephesians 6, 16.
, and the sword of the spirit Ephesians. 6, 17.
, which is the word of God, thou can not long be without some grievous wound.

Furthermore, unless thou fasten thy mind upon me with a pure affection to
suffer al things for my sake 2. Cor. 6, 4. 5, etc. Ephesians 6, 10. James. 1, 2. 3.
, thou can neither sustain the heat of persecution, nor obtain ye crown
of eternal life 2. Tim. 4, 7 8. Revel. 2, 7. Revel. 7, 13. 14. 15, etc.
. Wherefore thou must ouerpas al things like a man Psa. 31, 24. 1. Cor. 16, 13
, and show a courage howsoever things fall out. For to him which over comes
is Manna given Reu. 2, 17.
: but for him who sleeps, is misery prepared Matthew. 25, verse. 10. 11. 12.
30.
.

Now if thou seek rest in this life Ioh. 16, 33.
, how will thou enter into eternal rest Heb. 4, 11
?

Then prepare thy self, not to peace, but unto patience Heb. 10, 36
; and seek for quietness not on earth, but in heaven Ioh. 14, 27 Ioh. 16, 33.
, not among men, or in the world, but in God alone 1 Thessalonians. 5, verse. 23. 2.
These. 3, 16 Philip 4, 7.
.

Thou ought to endure al things for Gods sake Romans 8, 35 36, etc. 1. Cor.
13, 7.
, even labors, grief, tentations, afflictions, trobles, need, sickness,
injuries, evil reports, reprehensions, oppression, infamy, correction,
contempt 2. Cor. 6, 4 5, etc. Phil. 4, 11. 12, etc.
.

For these things inuit, as it were, unto virtue; these try the young soldier
of Jesus Christ 2. Tim. 2, 3. 5.
; these bring to the crown of bliss 2. Tim. 4, 7 8. 1. Pet. 5, 4.
. To such a man I will give for his small pains an eternal reward; and for
temporal shame, glory without end Matt. 5, 10 11.
.

Think thou always to have prosperity at thine own desire? Look not for
it. Mine old saints and servants could never have it: but they were feign to
suffer much troble Acts. 5, 41 Heb. 11, 8. 17.
, manifold tentations 2. Cor. 6, 4 5. Heb. 11, 32. 33, etc.
, miserable ends Matthew. 14, verse. 10. Acts. 7, 59. 60. Heb. 11, 37.
, which they endured patiently Reu. 7, 13. 14.
, trusting rather upon God, than upon man Ps. 56, 11.
, and counting the afflictions of this present time, not worthy ye glory which
was to come Romans 8, 18
.

Now would thou have that out of hand, which so many with tears, and long
trobles could hardly attain? Hope therefore in the Lord Psa. 27, 14 Psalm. 31,
24. 1. Cor. 16, 13
, be strong, and give not over disloialie, but valiantly imploie both thy
body and life for the glory of God Romans 8, 35 36, etc.
. I will in the end most bountifully reward thee Revel. 2. 7 Matthew. 5, 12.
, and in thy trobles assist thee Ps. 50, 15. Psalm. 91, 1. 2, etc.
.


Chap. 42. Against the vain judgment of men.
LORD. CAst thy burden co^stantlie upon the Lord Psa. 55, 22.
, my son, and fear not the judgment of man 1. Cor. 4, 3 4. 5.
, so long as thy conscience does not condemn thee 2. Co. 1, 12
.

It is expedient, and a blessed thing to suffer on such wise Matt. 5, 10
; neither is it hard for an humble mind Mat. 11, 29 30.
, and man that trusts in the Lord, so to do 2. Cor. 6, 4 5, etc. Philip. 2,
13.
.

Many men say many things, and therefore little regard should be given to
them: and to please al, it is impossible Matthew. 6, verse. 24.
.

And although Paul endeavored to please al men 1. Cor. 4, verse 12. 13, etc.
, and made himself al things to al men 1. Cor. 9, verse. 22.
: yet passed he little to be judged of man 1. Cor. 4, 3
.

He did as much as lay in him to profit, and salve others 1. Cor. 9, verse. 22.
: but for all that, he could not stay the slanderous tongues of the wicked 1.
Co. 4, 12 verse. 13.
and therefore committed he his whole cause unto the Lord 1. Cor. 4, 5.
, who knew al, and against the slanderous and backbiting speeches of the
ungodly he defended himself with patience, and longsuffering Coloss. 1,
verse. 24. 1. Cor. 4, 12. 1. Pet. 2, 20. 21, etc.
.

Notwithstanding sometime he answered again Acts. 25, verse. 10. 11. Acts.
26, 2. 3. 4, etc. 1. Cor. 9, 1. 2, etc. Philip. 1, 12. 13. 14.
, least the weakelings through his silence should be offended.

Why then fear thou the sentence of a mortal man, who being alive to day,
may be dead to morrow Sirach. 10, verse. 11.
?

Fear God, and thou will not fear man Psalm. 27, 1. Psalm. 56, 4.
.

What hurt do any man's words, and injuries to thee? Naie, himself he hurts
rather; and shall not escape the judgment of God, whosoever he be Rom 14,
verse. 10. 2. Cor. 5, 10.
.

Have thou GOD alwaie before thine eyes, and contend not with quareling words.
And though now thou be without cause defamed 1. Pet. 2, 19 20.
, take it not grieuouslie, neither by impatiencie diminish thy reward Matt. 5,
12
, but rather cast the eyes of thy mind upon me in heaven, who both can deliver
thee from al infamy, and injury of men Psalm. 50, 15
, and will reward every one according to his works Romans 2, 6. Reu. 22, 12.
.


Chap. 43. That we must wholly resign over our selves unto God, if we mind to
attain unto the freedom of mind.
LORD. MY son, if thou forsake thy self Luke 9, 23
, thou shall find me.

See thou challenge nothing to thy self, nor have nothing proper, and always
thou will gain Matthew. 19, verse. 29.
. For as soon as thou yeeldest up thy self wholly without reuocation, thou
shall be endued with most excellent rewards Luke. 18, verse. 29. 30. Mar. 10,
28. 29. 30.
.


SERVANT. Lord, how often shall I yield up, and wherein shall I forsake my self?


LORD. Always, and every hour; both in small, and great matters. I except
nothing: my desire is to have thee renounce al things Matthew. 13, verse. 4^. 45.
46.
. For how can thou be mine, and I thine, unless both inwardly, and outwardly
thou have left, and lost thine own will Matthew. 26, verse. 39. 42 Luke 22, 42
John. 4, 34. Matthew. 6, 10
?

And this the sooner thou do, the better thou shall speed: and the more
thoroughly and syncerelie, the more thou shall please me, and profit thy self
Matthew. 24, verse. 45. 46. 47. Mat. 25 21. 22, etc.
.

Some there be which give over themselves, but it is with some exception Luke
9, ^9 60. 61.
. They do not fully depend on God, and therefore they study how to provide
for themselves.

Others at the first renounce themselves wholly: but afterward when tribulation
or persecution comes Matthew. 13, verse. 20. 21.
they fall away, and so do no good at al.

These men shall never aspire either unto the true liberty of y^ mind, or to
the most comfortable benefit of my familiarity 2. Cor. 13, verse. 13.
, unless they wholly renounce Luke 9, 23
, and daily sacrifice themselves Romans 12, 1
, without which none either can, or shall enioie the favor of God.

I have said oftentimes, and now I say again, Forsake, yield up thy self
Matthew. 16, verse. 24. Mark. 8, 34. Luke. 9, 23.
, and thou shall enioie the sound quietness of mind Matthew. 11, verse. 29.
Matthew. 16, verse. 24, etc.
. Give the whole for the whole, call back nothing, keep back nothing Luke 18,
verse. 22. 23, etc.
. Abide unfeignedly, and faithfully in me, and thou shall have me, the
freedom of mind, and deliverance from darkness Matthew. 25, verse. 35, etc.
.

Wherefore let this be thy study, let this be thy prayer, wish continualie,
that thou may even nakedlie follow naked Jesus Luke 9, 23.
, and die to thy self Romans 6, 6.
, to live eternalie with me 2. Tim. 2, verse. 11. 12.
. Then shall both vain imaginations Psalm. 1, 1.
, and vile affections Mat. 6, 22. 23.
, and superfluous cogitations 1. Co. 7, 31 32.
depart away: then both immoderate fear shall vade 1. Ioh. 4, 18
, and intemperate love consume away 1. Ioh. 2, 17
.


Chap. 44. Of the right use of outward things; and that we should fly unto God
when we are afflicted.
LORD. MY son, thou must have a special care, that thy mind be single and
pure Mat. 6, 22. 23.
in every place, in every action, in all thy business: also, that al things
serve thee, and not thou them Matt. 6, 24
; also that thou be not a slave, and bondsman to thine own actions Galat. 5, 1.
; but a master, a ruler, a freeman, an Hebrew translated into the lot, and
liberty of the sons of God Gal. 4, 3. 7. 9.
, whose eyes are turned from worldly Gal. 5, 13.
, and cast upon heavenly things Colos. 3, 1. 2.
; who look upon temporal things with the left, but with the right eye upon
eternal; who will not be brought under the power of any thing 1. Cor. 6, verse.
12. 1. Ioh. 2, 15. 1. Co. 10, 23
; but make al things to serve to good purpose, according to the order of
almighty God the Creator Psalm. 8, 6 7. 8.
, who has done nothing of all that he did in vain Genesis 1, 31.
.

Furthermore if in thy troble thou will not stick unto outward things, nor with
a carnal eye behold the things that are seen and heard: but with Moses in all
thine affairs enter by and by into the tabernacle of the Lord Exo. 33, 9.
Nomb. 7, 89
, doubtless thou shall receive answer sometime, and return instructed in
things both present, and to come.

For it was Moses wont in matters of controversy, and difficult things to go
into the Tabernacle, and to be rid from the wickedness of men he used prayer
Exodus 33, verse. 13.
, and the calling for Gods assistan^e. So ought thou to enter into the
privy closet of thine heart Matt 6, 6.
, and there most earnestly to call upon God.

For we read Josh. 9, 14
that Joshua, and the rest of the Israelites were therefore deceived of the
Gibeonites, because they counseled not with the mouth of the Lord, but gave
light credit to their fair tale.


Chap. 45. That man should not be too i^portunate in his matters.
LORD. Son, cast thy burden upon me Ps. 55, 22.
, and in due time I will grant thy request.

Look upon my commandments, and thou shall find great profit thereby Deuteronomy.
6, 3. 4, etc. Deuteronomy. 12, 28 Psalm. 85, 8.
.


SERVANT. O my Lord, I willingly refer mine whole cause to thee Matt. 6, 25
26, etc. 1. Pet. 5, 7.
: for I find that al my cares do naught prevail.

Oh that I were not so careful of worldly things, but could even out of hand
unfeignedly obeie thee Luke 5, 11. 28.
!


LORD. My son, manie-times a man desires a thing, which afterward he
mislikes when he has it once. Because the desires of one thing do not long
endure but force you to covet after sondrie and diverse.

Wherefore it is no small thing for a man even in smalest things to forsake
himself: and, he that will go forward in deed must utterly deny himself
Luke 9, 23 Luke 14, 26. 33.
, for he who so does is most at liberty, and safe.

But the old serpent Reu. 12, 9. 10, etc.
, an utter enemy to good men Matthew. 13, verse. 24. 25, etc.
, cesseth at no time from tempting Luke. 4, 3. 4, etc. 1. Tim. 6, 9. 10. 1. Pet
5, 8. 9.
; but night and day lays snares to entrap, and overthrow the simple.

Wherefore watch and pray Matthew. 26, verse. 41.
, that ye enter not into tentation.


Chap. 46. That man has nothing which good is of himself; neither that he
should glory of any thing.
SERVANT. LOrd, what is man that thou art mindeful of him Psalm. 8, 4.
? and the son of man, that thou visitest him? What has he deserved Romans 11,
6 Ephesians. 2, 8.
, that thou should regard him Psa. 144, 3.
?

O Lord, I may not complain, if thou do reject me Rom 9, 20
: neither reason with thee, if thou deny my requests.

But thus may I truly both think with my self, and say, Lord, I am
nothing, I have no goodness of my self 2. Cor. 3, ^ 1. Cor, 4, 7.
: but naked came I out of my mothers womb Job. 1, 21. Eccl. 5, 14. 1. Tim. 6,
7.
, and naked shall I return thither.

If thou assist me not, and inwardly instruct me, I faint utterly, and become
dissolute Ps. 51, 10. 11, etc.
.

But thou, Lord, always art one, and abidest the same for evermore Ps. 102,
12. Esaie. 44, 6.
; thou art always good Psalm. 5, 4.
, righteous Deu. 32, 4.
, and holy 1. Pet. 1, 15.
; for thou do al things well, righteouslie, purelie, and with wisdom Ps.
104, 1. 2, etc.
.

But I, alas, am more proane to come rather backward than forward; I continue
not evermore at one stay Job. 14, 1. 2.
, because I am subject to alteration, like the time.

Notwithstanding, if thou reach forth thine helping hand, I shall speedily be
comforted Psa. 16, 8.
, for thou without man's aid can assist, and so strengthen me, that my
countenance no more shall alter and change diversely, and my mind shall be
fixed, and wait upon thee alone Ps. 104, 27
.

Therefore, did I know, while either I covet the zeal of the spirit, or am
driven by some occasion to seek thee (for there is none that can comfort me),
how to contemn the comfort of this world 1. Ioh. 2, 15 16.
, doubtless I should both hope well of thy favor, and look with ioiefulnes
sometime for the gift of thy consolation Ioh. 16, 22.
. Finalie, if it fall out well with me at any time, it is of thy goodness Iam. 1,
17.
: I am but vanity in thy sight Psa 39, 11.
, of none account Ps. 144, 3. 4.
, mortal Ps. 89, 48. Psalm 49, 10. 11. 12.
, and frail Job. 14, 22
.

Whereof then do I boast? Or why covet I to be had in admiration? Even of
nothing Ier. 9, 23.
: but that is vanity.

Doubtless a most pestilent, and vain thing ambition is; it both draws man
away from the true glory, and spoils him utterly of Gods eternal favor
James. 3, 1. James 4, 6. Eccl. 10, 7.
.

For while man pleases himself, he displeases thee Luke 18, 9. 14.
; while he seeks the praise of men Ioh. 5, 44. Ioh. 12, 43.
, he leeseth the true virtues of the mind.

But the true glory and true reioicing is for a man to glory not of himself,
but of thee Iere. 9, 23. 24 2. Co. 10, 17. 18.
: and to rejoice of thy name, not of his virtue, or any thing besides, but
only for thy sake.

Wherefore praised be thy Name, not mine; extolled be thy works, not mine; let
thy holy name be magnified Psalm. 96, 1. 2. 3, etc. Psalm. 145, 3
, let me have no praise at al.

I will evermore glory in thy praise Ps. 106, 47.
; of my self I will not, except it be of mine infirmities 2. Cor. 11, verse.
30. 2. Cor. 12, 5.
.

Let the Jews receive honor one of another Ioh 5, 44. John. 12, 43
, I will seek that which comes of God alone.

All the glory, the credit, the estimation of this world, if it be compared
with that everlasting glory of thine Reu. 21, 23 24. 25. 26.
, what it is but mere vanity, and foolishnes Eccl. 10, 7. 9. 12, etc.
?

Wherefore, O my truth, my mercy, my God Psalm. 25, 2.
, O blessed Trinity, to thee be praise Reu. 5, 13. Revel 7, 12. 1. Tim. 1, 17.
2. Tim. 4, * 8.
, and honor, and glory, and power for evermore,


Amen.
Chap. 47. That the praise of this world is to be contemned.
LORD. BE not thou trobled, my son, though thou see others extolled, and
esteemed, and thy self despised, and contemned Iam. 2, 3.
.

Cast the eyes of thy mind upon me, and, I warrant thee, thou will brook thy
contempt well enough Matt. 9, ^9.
.


SERVANT. O Lord, we are blind, and, alas, easily seduced with vanity Genesis 6,
5.
. If I look well into my self, I am not hurt of any thing; so that I have no
cause to complain of thee at al Dan. 9, 14
. But for that I have both manietimes and grieuouslie offended thee, al thy
creatures do rightly arm themselves against me Genesis 3, 17. 18.
.

Therefore praise, and honor, and glory belongs to thee, but to me shame,
and contempt Dan. 9, 7. 8.
.

And except I frame my self patiently to bear the contempt and despite of
al men Ps. 123, 2. 1. Pet. 2, 21.
, I shall never attain either a quiet mind Mat. 11, 29
, the light of thy spirit, thine everlasting society 2. Tim. 2, 11 12.
.


Chap. 48. That we must not rest, or depend upon man.
LORD. MY son if thou for amity and freendship sake, repose any confidence
on man, never look to be quiet, and at rest Ioh. 14, 27 John 16, 33. Psalm.
118, 8. 9 Psalm 146, 3. 4
. But if thou betake thy self unto the immortal, and everlasting truth Psa.
117, 2.
, at the departure of thy friend, thine heart will not be trobled.

On me should thy love be grounded, and for my sake ought every good man to be
loved 1. Pet. 3, 8. 9. 1. Pet. 4, 8. 1 Thessalonians. 3, 12 1. Ioh. 3, 17. 18, etc.
, and the more dearly.

Without me freendship cannot last: neither is it true, and pure love, which I
cople not together.

So mortified should thou be from these affections, that, as touching thy
self, thou should seem to be without al comfort Matthew. 10, verse. 37. 1.
Cor. 7, 31.
.

So much the nigher is man to God, as he is farther from the comfort of this
world: and so much the more highly does he ascend up to God, as the more
deeply he descends into, and despises himself Phili. 2, 5. 6. 7, etc.
James. 4, 6. 7, etc. 1. Pet. 5, 6.
.

But he, who arrogates any good thing to himself, lets the favor of God
from dwelling within him. For the holy spirit does always seek a meek, and
humble mind Psa. 5^, 17. Esai. 66, 2.
.

Could thou once bring thy self unto nothing, and renounce the love of this
world 1. Ioh. 2, ^5 Ioh. 12, 25.
, surely I would come, and power upon thee most singular benefits. But while
thou look upon creatures, thou loasest the sight of the Creator Iam. 4, 4.
.

Learn in all things to master thy self for thy Makers sake: so shall thou
attain unto the knowledge ^ God.

Even the vilest thing loved, an^ looked upon vndiscreetlie Matthew. 10, verse.
37. Matthew. 22, 1. 2, etc
, does defile a man, and hinder him from happiness.


Chap. 49. Against vain, and worldly knowledge.
LORD. MY son, be not tho^ carried away with the fair^ and subtle speech of
man For the kingdom of God is not i^ word, but in power 1. Cor. 4, 20
.

Listen to my words, for they in flame the mind Ps. 119, 97.
, lighten the understanding Psalm. 119, verse. 130. 105. Psalm. 19, 7. 8.
; set men on fire Ier. 23, 29.
; an^ bring the true comfort Psalm. 19, 8. Psa. 119, 50. 111.
.

Read nothing with a mind t^ seem the more learned only, o^ wise: but to
mortify thy sins. For this will more profit thee, than the knowledge of many
obscure an^ hard questions 1. Cor. 13. 3 8.
.

Though thou have read much; ye^ at the last thou must be feign t^ come unto
one principle Luke. 10, verse. 42.
.

I only teach men wisdom, an^ I (not men) give understanding to the simple
Prou. 1, 4. Prou. 2, 6. Matt. 11, 25
: so that they, whom I speak unto, do easily prove wise, and profit much in
the spirit.

Woe to them who seek many things of man, and neglect the way to serve me
Mat. 23, 23 24, etc.
.

The time will come, when the master of masters, the Lord of angels, even I shall
appear, to take an account of al men, and to examine the conscience of every
one Mat. 25. 19 20, etc. 31. 32, etc.
: then will I search Jerusalem with lights Zeph. 1, 12
, and discover those things which lay hid ^n darkness 1. Cor. 4, 5
, at what time tongues Thal cease, and knowledge do no good 1. Cor. 13,
verse. 8.
.

I, even I do so lift up the humbled mind, that in a moment it shall con^eaue
more knowledge of the eternal truth Mat. 10, 19 20. Mark. 13, 11 Luke. 21, 14.
15.
, than any man by ten years study can attain unto.

I teach neither ianglinglie to disquiet; nor diversity of opinions to
distract; nor ambitiouslie to get fame; ^or contentiouslie to obtain victo^ie
by force of argument.

I teach, how to despise the world Matthew. 5, 3 4, etc.
; ^o loath things present Luke 9, 23.
; to seek and ^auor eternal Matt. 6, 33.
; to fly vain glory Ioh. 8, 50. 54.
; ^o suffer injuries Mat. 5, 44. 45.
; to trust in me Ioh. 14, 12.
; without me to covet nothing Ioh. 14, 14
; and to love me highly and zealouslie above al Mat. 10, 37
.

For by loving me some have so profited in heavenly things, that to the
admiration of men they have spoken Mark. 13, verse. 11.
; and have gotten more by forsaking al Matthew. 19, verse. 27.
, than by any study.

But to some I speak common, to other special things; to some I comfortablie
appear in outward signs and figures, to others my secrets appear as
cleerelie as the light Mat. 13, 10 11. Mark 4, 11.
.

The Scriptures in deed speak one, and the same thing John. 5, 39
, yet teach they not al men alike 2. Co. 3, 14 15.
: but I teach truth in the inward parts Ioh. 6, 68. John 14, 6.
; I search the heart John. 8, 6. 7. 8. Revel. 2, 23.
, and I know the thoughts Matthew. 26, verse. 34. 35.
, I prick forward to well doing Phil. 2, 13
, and give to every man that which is needeful 1. Cor. 12, verse. 4. 5, etc.
.


Chap. 50. That we should not covet after earthly, and outward things.
LORD. MY son, remember that thou be ignorant of many things 1. Cor. 2, 1. 2
; and that thou esteem thy self but for a dead man in this world; even for
him to whom the whole world is crucified Gal. 6, 14.
. Thou must ouerpasse much as though thou heardest not: and think always on
that which belongs to thy peace Luke. 19, verse. 42.
.

Better is it, to turn from those things which mislike thee, and to let every
man have his own saying, than to contend with brauling words To. 13, 13.
.

If thou be at a good point with God, and have his judgment always in thy
mind Eccl. 18, 23
, thou shall the more easily bear it is thou be overcome.


SERVANT. O Lord, to what pass are we come! Behold if we loose a temporal
thing we lament; for a little profit we run, and labor, yea though it be all the
night long; but the loss of our soul we utterly forget Matthew. 16, verse. 26.
Luke. 9, 25.
. That which little, if any thing at al, profits, we seek after; but that
which is most necessary Luke. 10, verse. 41. 42.
, we utterly neglect, so gladly does man addict him wholly unto outward
things, and without speedy repentance welter in the same 1. Ioh. 2, 15
.


Chap. 51. That every man is not to be credited; and that by words we easily
offend.
SERVANT. O Lord, help me now in this troble: for vain is the help of man Ps.
60, 11.
.

How often have I bin deceived where I looked for faith? Again there have I
found it, where I looked for none. So vain is the trust in men Ps. 108, 12.
: but in thee, O God alone the salvation of the righteous does consist Ps. 37,
39.
.

We thank thee 1 Thessalonians. 1, verse. 2. 1. These. 5, 18
O Lord our God, for all whatsoever betideth us miserable and weak ones, which
are easily deceived, and changed with a little.

What man is he that so wisely, and circumspectly behaues himself in all
things, that he is never deceived, nor comes into danger Iam. 3, 2.
?

Yea, he who trusts in the Lord Psa. 125, 1.
, and serves him with a simple mind, does not so easily and soon offend: and
though he fall sometime into trobles, and perils, yet either speedily he
escapes, or is strengthened so that he can endure them. For thou, Lord,
continuest with them unto the end, who put their trust in thee Psalm. 31, 1.
24. Psalm. 94, 14. Psalm. 71, 1.
.

Hard is it, yea doubtless it is very hard to find such faithful friends as
will stick by us in all extremities: but thou, Lord, thou only art faithful
Deu. 32, 4
in all things, neither is any like unto thee Deu. 32, 39
.

Oh how wise was that good soul, that said: My mind is rooted, and built in
Christ Coloss. 2, 6 7.
! were I at that stay, my mind so easily would not be trobled with worldly
fear Psalm. 56, 4. 11.
, neither should the darts of bitter words Psa. 64, 3.
disquiet me.

But who can foresee al things? Who can avoid miseries to come? Now, if
things though foreseen, hurt manie-times; how much more greeuouslie will
things nothing foreseen, annoie?

But, alas, wretch that I am, why have I not better looked to my self? Either,
why so lightly have I put confidence in others? Hereby we declare our selves
to be men, and that frail men too Iam. 3, 2.
, albeit many vnrightlie account, and flatteringlie do call us Angels.

Whom shall I credit, Lord, whom? but only thee, who art the very truth Ioh.
14, 6. Romans 3, 4.
, and can neither deceive, nor be deceived.

For all men doubtless be liers Ps. 116, 11. Romans 3, 4.
, and weak, and unconstant, and frail especialie in words Iam. 3, 2. Eccl.
14, 1. Eccl. 19, 16. Eccl. 25, 8.
, that rashly hand over head every thing may not be credited, whatsoever
color of truth it bear.

Therefore not without great cause, and wisdom thou did fore-warne to
beware of men Mat. 10, 17
; and fore-tel, that a man's enemies should be those of his household Micah. 7,
6. Mat. 10, 36.
; and say that such are not to be believed, who say Matthew. 24, verse. 23.
Mark. 13, 21
, Lo here he is, or there he is.

This have I learned to my loss, God grant I may prove the more wise, not
foolish thereby.

Play the wise man, said one, play the wise man, and that I tell you, keep
to your self. Which thing I did, thinking none should have understood the same:
but afterward he that willed me to be silent, could not keep it secret
himself, but forthwith bewraied himself, and betrayed me.

From such tatlers, and indiscreet men, O Lord, deliver me Ps. 120, 2. 3.
, that I may neither fall into their hands, nor follow their kind of dealing.
Let my mouth utter continualie the truth Prou. 8, 7.
; and remove away far fro me a dissembling tongue Ps. 34, 13.
. For my part is not to do that to another, which I would not have done to my
self Mat. 7, 12. Luke. 6, 31. Tob. 4, 15.
.

Oh how good is it, and what quietness does it bring to say nothing of others;
not to believe every thing; to speak little; to open our selves but to few;
to seek after thee, which know our minds Romans 8, 27 John. 2, 25.
; not to be carried about with every blast of words: but to covet that al both
inward, and outward things may be finished, and brought about according to thy
will and commandment Iam. 1, 18. 19, etc.
!

Oh, how necessary to the keeping still of Gods favor is it to shun the pomp
of this world; not to covet those things which are wonderful in sight Luke. 16,
25.
; but to follow, and with all diligence to pursue that which may bring us both
unto amendment of life, and to zeal of godliness 1. Tim. 6, verse. 11. 2. Tim.
2, 22 Tit. 2, 12.
!

How many has virtue known, and ouer-hastelie commended, endamaged! Again,
to how many has the same done good, being used in silence Esa. 30, 15
in this miserable life, which is altogether counted a tentation and misery
Job. 7, verse. 1, etc.
.


Chap. 52. That we ought to repose our confidence in the Lord, when we are
pierced with the darts of slandering tongues.
LORD. MY son, show thy self constant, and trust in me. For what be words
Ps. 112, 7. 8.
, but words? which fly about the air, yet hurt not so much as a stone.

If thou art faulty, amend thy self: if not guilty of any crime, study to
suffer the slander patiently for Gods sake Mat. 5, 11.
. At the least bear with i^ words sometime, though as yet thou can bear no
great blows.

Why do such trifling things disquiet thee, but only because thou art carnal
as yet, and have more regard of men Matthew. 10, verse. 26. Luke. 12, 4.
, than is meet?

For, because thou fear to be contemned, thou will not be reprehended for
thy faults, but seek the shadows of excuses. But look thou more earnestly
into thy self, and thou shall see that both the world, and a vain care to
please men Gal. 1, 10.
does live within thee.

For by shunning to be corrected, and blamed for thine offenses, thou give
most evident arguments, that thou art not truly modest, and that neither thou
art rightly dead to the world, nor the world to thee Gal 6, 14. Romans 6, 2. 3.
.

But listen thou unto my words, and thou will not pass upon the words yea of
ten thousand men Psalm. 3, 6.
.

What if all the worst words that may be invented were spoken against thee;
they could not hurt thee one jot, if thou would bear Mat. 5, 11.
, and esteem them but as motes? For they cannot pluck so much as an hair
from thine head 2. Sam. 14, verse. 11. Mat. 10, 30. Acts. 27, 34.
.

But he who is either weak of courage, or wicked of conversation, is easily
moved with evil words. But he that trusts in me, and depends not upon his
own judgment, is void of this worldly and fleshly fear Psalm. 56, 3. 4. 11.
.

For I both judge and know al secrets 1. Cor. 4, 5 Reave. 2, 23.
; I know what and how every thing is done Heb. 4, 12. 13.
; I know both who offers, and who suffers injury. This proceeds from,
and through my permission Amos. 3, 6 Mat. 10, 16. 18, etc.
, that the thoughts of many hearts may be opened Luke 2, 35
.

I will judge both the guilty, and the guiltles 2. Cor. 5, verse. 10. John. 5,
29,
; but first it is my mind to try them both by a secret judgment.

The witness of men deceaueth Ps. 116, 11
manie-times; but my judgment is true Romans 2, 2. Romans 3, 4.
; and shall never be overthrown. But that commonly is hidden, and known but
of a few Psalm. 36, 6.
: yet for all that it never does, or can err Psalm. 19, 9. Psalm. 67, 4.
, albeit in the judgment of fools it seem scarce indifferent.

Therefore it is good to appeal unto me in every judgment, and not to follow
private affection Matt. 7, 1. 2. Romans 2, 1. 2. 3. 1. Cor. 4, 3. 4.
.

The righteous man is never moved Psalm. 91, 4. 5, etc.
by any cross that God does send; neither does he either greatly way
slanderous reports, or vainelie rejoice when he is excused by other men. For
he considers that I am he who search the hearts, and the reins Psalm. 7, 9.
Reu. 2, 23.
, and judge not according to the outward person, or appearance Romans 2, 11. 1.
Pet. 1, 17.
. For that commonly I condemn Luke 16, 15
, which in the judgment of man is commended.


SERVANT. O Lord God, who art a righteous judge, strong, and patient, knowing
the frailty and wickedness of men, be thou my strength, and confidence Psalm. 7,
1. Psalm. 86, 2.
. For mine own conscience will not serve me 1. Cor. 4, 3 4.
: thou know that which I know not. Therefore my part was to humble my self
when I was reproved, and to take it patiently Prou. 13, verse. 18. Prou. 15, 5.
: which, if I have not showen, forgive me Mat. 6, 12.
, O Lord, of thy mercy; and so bless me, that hereafter I may show my self
more patient. For thy singular mercy Romans 3, 24
does more serve to the attainement of pardon, than the opinion of mine own
righteousness to the defense of my secret conscience. And albeit I think my
self clear from sin, yet am I not thereby justified 1. Cor. 4, verse. 4.
. For without thy mercy no man can be saved Ps. 143, 2.
.


Chap. 53. That for the attainement of everlasting life, al manner trobles must
be endured.
LORD. MY son, let neither trobles break thee, nor adversity, sustained for
my sake, throw thee down: but comfort and confirm thy self in all extremities
with my promise 1. Cor. 10, verse. 13.
, who am able enough to give thee most ample, and infinite rewards Iam. 1, 17.
Revel. 2, 10. 23. 26. Revel. 3, 5.
.

Long thou shall not labor here in this world Hebr. 10, verse. 37.
, neither be afflicted always. Hope a while longer Reu. 3, 11.
, and thou shall see a speedy dispatch of al evils, and the time will shortly
come, when there shall be neither trobles, nor tumultes any more Reu. 7, 16 17.
Revel. 21, 4.
. Little is it, and short, whatsoever by time comes to an end.

Wherefore go to, as thou do, labor faithfully in my vineyard, I will be
thy reward Matthew. 20, verse. 8 Reu. 22, 12.
.

Write thou, meditate, sing, sigh, keep silence, pray, suffer adversity with
a courageous heart. For doubtless everlasting felicity deserves al these, yea
and greater conflictes Romans 8, 18
.

One day, God knows how soon, quietness will come, and then shall there be
neither day, neither night, as now there is, but light perpetual without end,
brightness infinite without comprehension, peace which never shall decaie, and
quietness which evermore shall last Esai. 60, 19 20. Reu. 21, 23 Revel. 22, 5.
. Then thou will not say, O that I were delivered from the body of this death
Romans 7, 24
! neither cry out on this wise Ps. 120, 5. 6.
, Woe is me that I dwell so long in this world! For then both death shall be
destroyed Hos. 13, 14 1. Cor. 15, 55
, and salvation shall appear which never shall have end Reu. 20, 6. 14.
; there no anguish Reu. 21, 4.
, but blessed joy, and sweet and virtuous company shall be.

Oh, did thou behold the everlasting crowns Iam. 1, 12. Reave. 2, 10.
, or the glory, wherewith they, who in this world were contemned 1. Cor 4,
verse. 10. Heb. 11, 33. 34. 35.
, and thought not worthy to live, do triumph withal: doubtless thou would
forthwith debase thy self even to the ground, and desire rather to be in
subjection to al men, than to rule but one: thou would not covet many merry
days in this world Phil. 1, 23.
, but rejoice in suffering trobles for the Name of God Acts. 5, 41.
; and think it great gain to be contemned among men!

Now if thou could brook these things, and let them sink into thy mind,
thou would not once complain Romans 12, 12 2. Cor. 6, 4. 5. James. 1, 2. 3.
. For be not al trobles to be sustained for eternal life sake Romans 8, 18 35. 36.
? or is it so small a thing either to get, or to forgo the kingdom of heaven
Mat. 6, 26,
?

Lift up thine eyes, man, upon heaven: behold with me how al my saints, who
have past the sharp conflictes of this world, rejoice now Mat. 25, 21 23. 24.
Luke 16, 25. Luke 23, 43
, how they now feel comfort, how they be where they would be, how they rest,
and shall ever rest with me in the kingdom of my Father Reu. 7, 14. 15. 16. 17.
Reu. 21, 4. 23. 24. 25.
!


Chap. 54. Of the happiness of the life to come; and of the miseries of this
present world.
SERVANT. O Most blessed mansion of the eternal city Reu. 21, 10 11. 12, etc.
! O most bright day of euerlastingnes, the which is never obscured by any
night Esa. 49, 10. Esai. 60, 19 20. Reu 7, 15. Reu. 21, 25.
, but always enlightened with the most glorious truth! A day of continual
joy, of continual quietness, and happy state of perpetuity.

Oh that that day had once appeared Psalm. 42, 2. Phil. 3, 7. 8.
; and that this world had once an end!

That day, doubtless, shines to the saints in perpetual cleerenes, but yet a
far of Hebr. 11, verse. 13.
, and as it were darkly 1. Cor. 13, verse. 12.
, because they be pilgrims in this world 1. Pet. 2, 11. Heb. 11, 13.
as yet.

The citizens of heaven they see the ioiefulnes of this day: but the banished
children of Eve do sigh, because the day of this life both short, and evil
Genesis 47, 9. Psalm. 39, 5.
is full of trobles and disquietnes Genesis 3, 16. 17. Ephesians. 6, 11. 12. 2. Tim. 3,
1. 2. 3. 4. 5.
, full of grief and anguish where man defiles himself with so many sins,
entangleth himself with so many evils, is trobled with so many fears,
busied with so many cares, with much curiosity distracted, enwrapped with
much vanity, enclosed about with such errors, consumed with such labors,
oppressed with tentations, weakened with pleasures, and vexed with poverty 2.
Cor. 11, verse. 23. 24. 25, etc.
.

Oh when shall these manifold trobles have an end! When shall I be delivered from
this miserable servitude of sin! Oh Lord, when shall I think, but only upon
thee! when shall I rejoice my fill in thee Psa. 16, 11.
! when shall I without al manner let, without al grief either of mind, or
body Romans 7, 23 24. Philip. 1, 23.
enioie true liberty! When shall there be sound peace, peace I mean continual,
and trusty, peace within, and peace without, and peace on al sides without
perturbance Reu. 21. 4. 23. 24. 25. Revel. 22, 3. 4. 5.
!

O good Jesus, when shall I behold thee face to face! when shall I contemplate the
glory of thy kingdom! when will thou be al in all 1. Cor. 15, verse. 28.
to me! or when shall I be with thee in thy kingdom, which thou have prepared
for thy beloved from the fundations of the world Matt. 25, verse. 34. 1. Cor.
2, 9.
!

I am left here even succurles as a banished man in the land of mine enemies,
where continual war is Ephesians. 6, 10. 11. 12. 1. Pet. 5, 8. 9.
, and much misery Genesis 47, 9.
: O give me comfort in my banishment, and joy in my trobles, inasmuch as with all the desire of mind I sigh, and long for thee Ps. 27, 13. Psalm. 42, 1. 2.
. For all the comfort which this world does minister, is even burdensome to me
Gal. 6, 14.
.

To enioie thee is al my desire Phil. 1, 23.
, yet can I not apprehend thee. I wish to abide in heavenly things, yet
earthly, and unmortified affections Wisd. 9, 14 15.
keep me down. In mind I would subdue al things, yet against my will I am
compelled to serve the flesh Romans 7, 19 23.
. Thus, unhappy man that I am, I fight with my self, and am grievous to my
self, whilst my spirit soareth upward, and my flesh bends downward Romans 8,
5. Romans 7, 23.
. Oh what a combat feel I inwardly Gal. 5, 17.
, when meditating of heaue^lie things, I am assaulted sodenlie even with a
swarm of carnal cogitations!

Wherefore, O my God, forsake me not, neither cast me away in thy displeasure
Psalm. 27, 9.
. Oh scatter with ye brightness of thy lightning all the imaginations which the
enemy does cast in, shoot forth thine arrows and disperse them Ps. 144, 6.
. Call home my senses unto thee; make me to forget al worldly things, and to
throw away and contemn the cogitations of wickedness.

O succor me, eternal verity Psa. 43, 3. John. 14, 6.
, that no worldly vanity may carry me away! O come celestial sweetenes,
that al uncleanness may avoid at thy coming Psalm. 68, 1. 2.
!

This also I am to crave at thy hands, that it would please thee mercifully to
pardon, and forgive me, though I have other things in my mind when I pray
besides thee. For, to say the truth, I am wont greatly to be distracted; and
manie-times there am I not, where bodily I sit, or stand, but whether my
cogitations carry me. Verelie there I am, where my cogitatio^ is. Where my
thoughts are commonly, there is that I love. And that which either I love
naturalie, or customablie do like, comes easily into mind.

This made thee, O truth Ioh. 14, 6.
, to say, Where your treasure is, there will your hearts be Mat. 6, 21.
. If I love heaven, I will gladly think on heavenly things; if the world, in
prosperity I am iocund, and pensive in adversity; if the flesh, mine
imaginations are fleshly Romans 8, 5.
; if the spirit, to think on spiritual things will be my delight. For what
soever I love, I gladly both speak of and hear of, and think thereof
earnestly when I am at home.

Wherefore undoubtedly he is an happy man, who for thy sake, O Lord, does
forsake al things Matthew. 19, verse. 27. 28. 29 Luke. 5, 11. Luke. 9, 23.
; offer violence to nature Matthew. 11, verse. 12.
; and crucify his carnal affections Coloss. ^, 5 Galat. 6, 14.
through the zeal of the spirit, yt his conscience being at quiet Heb. 9, 14.
, he may offer unto thee the sacrifice of devout prayer, and be meet to be
admitted into the company of Angels Heb. 10, 34
, al earthly things being excluded Romans 8, verse. 35. 36. 1. Cor. 9, 24. 25.
both inwardly and without.


Chap. 55. Of the desire of eternal life; and of the good things promised to
such as fight.
LORD. MY son, seeing thou perceauest thy self to be endued from above with a
desire of eternal happiness, and couetest to go from the tabernacle of thy body
2. Cor. 5, 1 2. 2. Pet. 1, 13. 14.
, therebie to behold the brightness of my glory without shadow of turning Iam.
1, 17.
, open thy mind, and receive with greedines this holy inspiration.

Give hie thanks Ephesians. 5, 20. 1 Thessalonians. 1, 2. 1 Thessalonians. 5, verse. 18.
unto almighty GOD, for dealing so graciously with thee; for visiting thee so
mercifully; for stirring thee up so zelouslie; for helping thee so mightily,
that of thine own weight thou fall not down unto earthly things Wisd. 9, 14
15.
.

Neither shall thou attain thereunto by thine own endeavors, and cogitations,
but by the mere grace and favor of God Romans 5, 20 21. Phil. 4, 13.
, that as in all other virtues thou should go forward, so especialie increase
in modesty, prepare thy self unto battles to come Luke 9, 23. 1. Tim. 6, 11.
12. 2. Tim. 2, 2.
, and endeavor to cleave to me with all thy strength Deuteronomy. 6, 5. Mat. 22, 37.
Mat. 12, 29. 30. Luke 10, 27.
, and to serve me always with a burning affection.

My son, the fire burns manietimes, yet never does the flame ascend without
smoke Eccles. 22, verse. 24.
: so diverse burn with desire of heaue^lie things, and yet are they not free
from the tentation of carnal affections Mat. 13, 20 21.
, and therefore for the only glory of God they crave not those things Ioh. 6,
26. 27. John. 12, 5. 6.
the patient bearing whereof they desire so earnestly at his hands.

Such also manie-times is your desire, which for all that you pretend to be most
sincere. But that is not pure and perfect, which any way seeks after
private commodity Matt. 6, 24. 25. 1. Cor. 13, 5
.

Crave not that which may bring either profit or pleasure to thy self, but
what is acceptable in my sight Matt. 6, 9. 10 Mat. 26, 39. 42. Luke 22, 42.
, and for the advancement of my glory. For, if thou have a right judgment,
thou will prefer and follow my decree before thy desire, yea or what soever may
be desired.

I know thy desire, and I have heard thy often groanings. Thou would
presently enioie the glorious freedom of the sons of God Phil. 1, 23.
. Presently thou art delighted with the everlasting house, and celestial
country replenished with all joy Reu. 21, 4.
. But that hour is not yet come, and the time is yet otherwise, even a time of
war Ephesians. 6, 10. 11. 1. Pet. 5, 8. 9.
, of labor Gen 3, 17. 18. 19. Job. 7, 1. 2.
, and of trial Acts. 14, 22
. Thou wishest that once thou had attained the chief felicity Phil. 1, 23.
: but yet thou can not have the same.

I am he, says the Lord, whom thou must look for, until the kingdom of God
do come. Yet longer thou must be tried in the world, and exercised in many
things Eccles. 2, 1. 2. 5.
. Sometime I know thou shall be comforted, but not fully, and continualie.
Wherefore show thy self constant, and valiant both in doing, and also in
suffering things contrary unto nature Dan. 10, 2. 3. Ephesians. 3, 13.
.

Thou must put on the new man Ephesians. 4, 24. Romans 6, 4. Coloss. 3, 9. 10.
, and change thy condiitons. And manie-times thou must both do those things,
which thou would not Matthew. 11, verse. 12.
; and omit that which thou would do Romans 7, 15 19.
.

Others in their dealings shall prosper, but thou shall not Psa. 73, 1. 2, etc.
; the saiengs of other men shall be heard, thine shall be contemned Matthew. 10,
verse. 16. 17, etc.
. Other men shall obtain their suits quietly, but thou shall suffer the
repulse Psalm 22, 2.
; others with mighty commendations shall be extolled, but no word shall be made
of thee Ioh. 15, 18. 19.
; other men shall be preferred unto hie offices, but they shall judge thee to be
good for nothing 1. Cor. 1, verse. 28.
. For these causes thy nature will be trobled sometime, and suffer great
conflicts: but much good shall thou get therebie, bearing it in silence Esa.
30, 15. Luke 21, 19.
.

By these, and such like, the faithful servant of the Lord is tried oftentimes,
whether he can deny, and break himself of his own will in all things Luke 9,
23 24.
.

And surely thou have most need to be mortified therein, namely to see and
to suffer those things which naturalie thou can not brook, especialie when
things, in thy judgment, absurd, and hurtful are enioined thee Matthew. 26,
verse. 39. 42. Luke 22, 42. John. 4, 34. John. 5, 30. John. 6, 38. Ephesians. 6, 6
. Wherein, forasmuch as thou dare not resist the higher power, whereunto thou
art subject Romans 14, 11 Phil. 2, 10. Romans 13, 1. 1. Pet. 2, 13. 14.
, it seems hard in thine opinion to obeie the commandment of another and
not to follow thine own mind.

But consider thou, my son, what commodity, and what an ample reward will
shortly follow these labors of thine, and doubtless thou will be so far from
sustaining them greuouslie, that most sweet, and great comfort thou will take
of thy patience 1. Co. 13, 7 Acts. 5, 40. 41.
.

For in steed of thy momentanie will, which gladly thou have renounced, thou
shall have an everlasting will in the heavens Ioh. 17, 24. 1. Ioh. 2, 17.
. There whatsoever thou would have, or can wish for, thou shall find 1.
Co. 2, 9.
. There abundance of al good things thou shall have, without fear of loasing
them Matt. 6, 19 20.
. There thy will together with me Ioh. 17, 24
shall never covet after any outward or private thing. No man there shall resist
thee, no man complain of thee, no man troble thee any manner way, but what
thou can desire shall be present, and satisfy the desire of thy mind
abundantly Reu. 7, 14. 15. 16. 17. Revel. 21, 4. 23. 24. 25. 26. Revel. 22, 5.
.

There I will render glory for reproach sustained Wisd. 5, 1. 2, etc.
; the garment of gladness Esai. 61, 3.
for heaviness; for the lowest room a kingly throne for evermore Matthew. 25,
verse. 34.
. There the fruit of obedience shall appear Revel. 22, verse. 14.
; the labor of repentance shall rejoice John. 3, 5. Ezec. 18, 21, 22.
; and humble obedience shall gloriously be crowned 2. Tim. 2, verse. 11. 12.
Coloss. 3, 4.
.

Wherefore do thou modestly obeie al men 1. Pet. 2, 13.
; and never care who speaks or commands, but give thine earnest endeavor to
take it in good worth, whatsoever is spoke, and faithfully to fulfill that
whatsoever is required at thine hands, howsoever it be either by word or
sign, yea whosoever, be he thy better, or thine equal, or thine inferior that
would have it done.

Let other men seek other things; let others glory in what they will, and be
commended of the world even to the skies, but do thou rejoice when thou art
reproched Mat. 5, 11. 12. Acts. 5, 41. Galat. 6, 14.
; when thou do execute my will 1. Cor. 1, 31
, and promote my glory: and let this be thine only desire that GOD may be
magnified always in thee, whether it be by life, or by death Phil. 1, 20.
.


Chap. 56. How a man oppressed with trobles, ought to yield him self to the
Lords will.
SERVANT. O Eternal God, and heavenly Father, I yield thee immortal thanks,
for that thou do what thou will Psa. 115, 4. Matt 19, 26.
, and wilt nothing but that is good Deuteronomy. 32, 4 Matt. 19, 17.
.

Let me thy servant rejoice in thee 1. Cor. 1, verse. 31.
* not either in my self, or in any other thing Iere. 9, 23
. For thou alone art the true comfort; thou art my hope and my crown; thou
Lord art my joy and mine honor 2. Sam. 22, verse. 2. 3. Psalm. 18, 2. Psalm.
142, 5.
. Of thee I have whatsoever I have, and that not of any merits at al of mine.
Thine are al things Psa. 50, 10. 11. 12.
which thou have either given Iam. 1, 17.
, or made Psa. 136, 5. 6, etc.
. I poor soul, worn out with labors even from my youth, and grieved in mind
Psalm. 88, 3.
, and that in such wise, that sometime I burst forth into tears Esa. 38, 14 15.
, and am greatly out of quiet for the evils which hang over mine head.

O Lord, I long after the comfort of peace, it is the peace of thy children,
who are fed with the light of thy consolation Psalm. 119, verse. 130.
that I require.

If thou give peace, if thou fill me with joy Luke. 15, verse. 22. 23.
, my heart shall rejoice exceedingly, and devoutly sound out thy praises Ps.
149, 1. 2, etc.
: But if (as manie-times thou do) thou hide thy face Ps. 104, 29
, I shall not be able to run the way of thy commandments Psalm. 119, verse.
32.
, but rather falling on my knees I shall smite my breast Luke. 18, verse. 13.
, because it goes not with me as erst it did, when, thy lantern lightening
me from above I was, under the shadow of thy wings Psalm. 17, 8.
, protected against evils that rushed upon me Psalm. 18, 3. 4, etc. Psalm. 57,
2. 3.
.

O righteous Father always to be praised, the hour is now come Ioh. 12, 23.
John. 17, 1.
wherein I thy servant must be tried. O most loving Father, meet is it that I
suffer somewhat for thy sake Mat. 5, 10.
, at this time. O Father evermore to be worshipped, the hour is now come,
which from everlasting thou did know would come, wherein I for a little time
must outwardly so die, that inwardly I may live with thee for evermore; for
a little while be contemned, perish as it were in man's opinion, and be afflicted
with grief and adversity, that hereafter in the morning of the new light Esa
65, 17 Reave. 22, 1.
I may rise again with thee, and be glorified in the heavens Ioh 17, 24
. O most holy Father, such was thy decree, such is thy pleasure, and that
which thou commandedst Ioh. 16, 2. 20.
, is come to pass.

For this benefit thou bestowest upon thy friend, that albeit for thy sake he
must suffer affliction 1. Pet. 4, 14 1. Pet. 2, 21.
in this world, yet is it but when, and of whom, and as thou will give leave.
For in the world nothing comes to pass either without thy counsel Mat. 6,
26. 27. Matt 10, 28 29. 30. 1. Cor. 12, 6.
, without thy providence, or without cause why.

And assuredly it is good for me, O Lord, that I have bin afflicted, that I
may learn thy statutes Ps 119, 71. 67.
, and cast off al pride, and arrogancy of mind.

It is good for me that I am put to shame, that I may seek comfort from thee
rather than of men Ps. 44, 23. 24 Psalm. 69, 29
. Thereby also do I learn to stand in fear of thine unsearchable judgments
To. 11, 33.
, who punishest the righteous as well as the wicked Psalm 73, 2. 3, etc. 1. Pet.
4, 17.
and yet none of them without equity, and justice Psalm 99, 4. Ps. 119, 75.
.

I thank thee, O Lord, for not sparing to afflict me with evils, with bitter
pains, grief, and anguish both within and without. None is there of al under
heaven that can comfort me in this misery, none I say is there, but thou
alone, my God, and my Lord who art the celestial curer of souls Ps. 147, 3.
Matthew. 9, 2. 22. 25. 29. 33. 35.
which both woundest and make whole again Deu. 32, 39
, bring down to the grave, and raisest up 1. Sam. 2, 6 Tob 13, 2.
.

Thy correction is upon me, thy rod teaches me wisdom Prou. 29, verse. 15.
. Lo, most loving father, I submit my self to the rod of thy discipline Matthew.
26, verse. 39. 42.
. Strike both my back, and my neck too, that I may turn mine vntowardlines
after thy will. Make me, O Lord, thine humble and godly disciple, as thou have
right well accustomed to do, that I may even wholly obeie every commandment
of thine Ps. 119, 71.
. To thee, and to thy correction I commend both my self, and al mine: for
better is it to be punished here than hereafter Esa 55, 6. Galat. 6, 9. 10.
.

Thou know al, and every thing; yea the most secret cogitation in the heart
of man, thou know Heb. 4, 13.
. Thou know what shall be before it come to pass Romans 11, 2
: neither have thou need to be informed, or admonished of those things which
are done in the world. Thou know wherebie I may profit best, and what good
adversity will do to the scouring off, as it were the rust of wickedness Wisd
3, 6* 1. Pet. 1, 7.
. And therefore use me even as thou will Luke. 22, verse. 42.
; and reject me not for my wicked life Luke 18, ^3
, which none knows so well as thou, yea, to say the truth, none knows it
but thou alone Ioh 2, 24. 25.
.

O Lord, grant me to know those things that I should know Ioh. 17, 3.
; to love that are to be loved Deuteronomy. 6, 5. Matt. 22, 37
; to praise that which pleases thee; to make account of such as thou have in
price; and finalie to mislike that which thou do loath.

Suffer me not either to judge after the sight of the outward eyes Deuteronomy. 1, 17
1. Sam. 16, 7. Sirach 42, 1 Job. 10, 4.
, or to give sentence according to the hearing of mine unskillful ears: but
with right judgment to discern between things both visible, and spiritual 1.
Co. 2, 10 11, etc.
, and before al things evermore to seek after the pleasure of thine heavenly
will. For commonly the senses of men in judging 1. Cor. 2, 7 8 James. 2, 2. 3,
etc.
are deceived; and the friends of this world by loving only visible things
1. Ioh. 2, 15 16. 17.
are deceived also.

Is a man so much the better, as he is greater in the opinion of man Luke. 16;
verse. 19. 20.
? The deceitful in praising the deceitful; the vain man in extolling the
vain; the blind in commending the blind; the weak in magnifieng the weak,
deceaueth him; and by praising vainelie, he does verily shame him Ioh. 5, 44.
John. 12. 43.
. For in truth such is a man, and no more, as thou esteemest him to be, as one
Francis the Minorite.
said right well.


Chap. 57. That we are to exercise our selves with baser works, when we cannot
do the best.
LORD. MY son, thou can not always abide in the most earnest, and ardent
study of virtue, nor continue in the highest degree of heavenly
contemplation, but offorce through original corruption Genesis 3, 16. 17, etc.
Romans ^, 14. 15. etc.
thou art made sometime to come down unto inserior things, and to bear the
burden of this mortal life Wisd 9, 5. 13.
though unwillingly and with grief. For as long as thou carriest about a
mortal body, thou shall feel the weight and heaviness of the same Wisd. 9, 15
.

Therefore in the flesh thou must often groan under the burden of flesh Romans
7, 24 25.
; because thou can not always without intermission continue in the study of
spiritual things, and heavenly contemplations.

Here then it is behooueful to make recourse unto base and outward works; to
refresh thy self in good deeds; and with a strong faith to wait Matthew. 24,
verse. 46. 47.
til I come from on hie to visit thee; and to suffer with patience thine exile
Heb. 11, 13 14. 15. Gen 47, 9. Psa. 119, 54.
and hunger of mind until I see thee again 1. Cor. 15, verse. 51. 52.
, and deliver thee from al trobles Revel 21,
.

For I will make thee to forget thy pains, and to enioie fully the inner
quietness Ioh. 16, 22.
. Yea, I will open unto thee the field of the holy Scriptures, that with a
ioieful mind thou may begin to trauers the way of my commandments Ps. 119,
32.
, and break into these words Romans 8, 18.
: The afflictions of this present time are not worthy the glory which shall be
showed unto us.


Chap. 58. That man should think himself to deserve not comfort at Gods hand,
but condemnation.
SERVANT. O Lord, I am not worthy thy comfort, or any spiritual consolation
1. Cor. 15, verse. 9. 10.
. And therefore thou do right well Ps. 115. 75
when thou forsakest me poor wretch, and leauest me without comfort.

For though I should power out even a sea of tears, yet could I not deserve
any comfort at thine hand. That which I deserve be stripes, and punishment,
because I have so often so greuouslie offended thee, and in so many things so
greatly sinned Luke 15, 18 21.
. So that, were the matter duly considered Psalm. 69. 5. 13. 16.
I am not worthy the least of al thy comforts.

And yet, O gracious and merciful God, who wilt not that thy works should
perish Ezech. 33, verse. 11.
, to declare the riches of thy goodness upon the vessels of thy mercy Ephesians ^,
7. 8. Ephesians. 2, 4. 5.
, thou do vouchsafe to comfort me having no merit, far beyond the manner of
men Psalm. 71, 15 Luke 15, 22. 23. 24.
. Neither be thine heavenly comforts, like worldly communications 2. Co. 1,
12 2. Cor. 7, 4. 5. 6.
.

But what have I done, Lord, that thou should impart upon me any spiritual
comfort at al Romans 11, 5. 6, etc.
?. Truly that I remember, I have done no good at al, but always have bin both
proane unto sin Genesis 6, 5. Genesis 8, 21. Matt. 15, 19. Romans 3, 9. 10.
, and slow to repent. And this is so true, as if I should deny it, both thou will find me a liar, and no man dare stand to excuse me Job. 9, verse. 2, etc.
32.
.

By my sins what have I merited but hell, and everlasting fire Matt. 25,
verse. 41.
?

And therefore I plainly, and in deed confess, I am worthy al reproach and
contempt; and most unworthy to live among thy sons, and servants Luke 15,
21 Luke. 18, 13
.

And albeit I can hardly be brought to do it; yet because it is true, I will
confess against my self my wickedness Psalm. 32, 5.
, that so the sooner I may obtain mercy at thine hand.

But what shall I, sinner that I am, full of al manner shame and infamy, what
shall I say? Surely I have nothing to say, but even this: I have sinned,
Lord, I have sinned, take mercy on me Ps. 25, 11. Psalm. 40, 11. 12. Psalm. 51*
1. 2. 3.
, forgive me; suffer me yet a while to be wail my wretchedness, before I pass
over into the land of darkness, covered with the shadow of death Job. 10, 21
22.
.

For what else do thou of a guilty and miserable man require, but that he
afflict, and humble himself for his sins Eze. 18, 21. 22. Ezec. 32, 14 15.
?

For of true repentance, and humbling of the mind, arises hope of pardon
Psalm. 32, 5. Psalm. 51, 17.
; the trobled conscience is reconciled unto God Heb. 9, 14.
; the favor of God which was lost is recovered Zach. 1, 3.
; man is preserved from yc vengeance to come Matt. 3, 7. 8.
; and with an holy kiss both God, and the sorrowful soul do meet together
Luke. 15, verse. 20.
.

I say, the unfeigned repentance of sins committed is the accepted sacrifice
unto thee, O Lord, savoring more sweetly in thine ears than does the perfume
of frankincense Ps. 51, 16. 17. 19.
. This is the sweet ointment which thou, who never despisest the trobled and
humbled mind of man Psa. 147, 3.
, would should be powered upon thine holy feet Luke 7, 37 38.
. This is the place of refuge against the rage of the enemy Ps. 138, 6. 7.
; here it is amended and washed away whatsoever else where was polluted, and
defiled Psalm. 51, 2. 7. 1. Cor. 6, 11.
.


Chap. 59. Men carnalie minded find no favor before God.
LORD. Son, my favor is more precious, than that it will meddle with outward
things, and earthly pleasures Ioh. 14, 27 John. 16, ^3. Phil. 4, 10. 11. 12.
.

Wherefore thou must cast off what soever is a let thereunto Luke 9, 23 John. 8,
54.
, if thou would be replenished with the same.

Leave company Matt. 6, 6. Matt. 14, 23.
; love to dwell by thy self alone; avoid communication; but power out godly
prayers before the Lord Luke 18, 1. 2, etc. 1. These. 5, 17 18.
, that thy mind may be stirred up unto godliness, and kept from sin.

Despise even the whole world, and prefer the calling of God before al outward
things Luke 9, 59. 1. John. 2, 15. 16.
. For doubtless thou can not both serve me, and delight in transitory things
too Mat. 6, 24.
.

Thou must leave thine acquaintance, and dear friends Luke 9, 23. 24. Luke.
14, 26. 27. Ioh. 12, 25 26.
; and call away thy mind from al worldly pleasure 1. Ioh. 2, 15 16.
. So does Peter admonish the disciples of Christ, that they behave themselves
in this world as pilgrims, and strangers 1. Pet. 2, 11
.

O with what a faith and confidence shall he die, who is not kept back with the
desire of any earthly thing Gal. 6. 14. Romans 8, 35. 36. Phil. 3, 20.
!

But no sick man can have such a mind; neither does the carnal man perceive
the liberty of him who is spiritual Romans 8, 5. 1. Cor. 2, 14. 15. 16.
.

But if he will become spiritual, he must renounce both strangers, and nigh
friends also Matthew. 10, verse. 37.
, and take heed of none more than of himself Romans 7, 23 1. Cor. 2, 14.
.

If thou have perfectly subdued thy self Mark. 8, verse. 34.
, thou shall with more ease vanquish other things. For that is true victory,
to triumph over a man's self.

For he, who has his mind so in subjection, that both his desire obeieth
reason, and his reason fulfilleth my commandments in all things, is doubtless
both a conqueror of himself Matthew* 5, verse. 38. 39.
, and also a Lord of the world Rom 8, 37
: to which top of perfection if thou would clime, thou must manfulie begin,
and lay the axe to the root Mat. 3, 10.
, so to cut off even by the root al hidden and immoderate love, both of thy
self, and also of every private and carnal good thing.

For of this immoderate self-love only depends almost all that a man must
utterly root up Matthew. 7, 3. 4.
: which vice being once subdued, great peace, and perpetual quietness will ensue
Mat. 11, 29
.

But, for that few do endeavor perfectly to mortify Romans 6, 3. Coloss. 3, 5.
and altogether to forsake themselves Ephesians. 4, 22. 23. 24.
, it comes to pass that many do remain snarled within James 4, 1. 2* 3.
, and cannot in spirit rise above themselves.

But he that freely would live with me, must mortify and slaie al wicked and
intemperate affections of his mind Gal. 5, 19. 20. 11.
; and stick to nothing created over greedily 1. Ioh. 2, 15 16. Philip. 3, 7.
8. 1. Cor. 7, 29. 30. 31.
.


Chap. 60. The diverse working of Nature, and of Grace.
LORD. MY son, consider diligently the diverse motions between Nature and
Grace. For after so subtle, and contrary a manner their motions be, that
hardly they can be discerned but of the spiritual, and illuminated man 1. Cor.
2, verse. 14.
.

Al men covet in deed that which is good, yea and pretend a color of goodness
in their deeds, and saiengs: therefore under the show of that which good is
many are deceived.

Nature is crafty, and carries away, intrappeth, and deceaueth many a man;
yea and it would always be the end of actions Romans 1, 20 21. Romans 10, 3. 4.
: But Grace deals simply, and declineth from al kind of evil; uses no
deceit; does al things plainly for Gods sake, and rests in him unto the end
1. Cor. 13, verse. 1. 2. 1. Cor. 15, 30 31. 32.
.

Nature refuses to die Matthew. 26, verse. 69. 70. Luke 22, 55. 56. 57. John.
21, 18. Romans 7, 15. 16, etc.
, to be kept down, to be overcome, to be in subjection, and to be kept under:
Grace studieth to be mortified Gal. 6, 14.
; strives against appetite Romans 7, 22 23.
; coueteth to be brought in subjection, and to be overcome Ephesians. 5, 9. 1. Pet.
2, 11. 12.
; will not use her liberty 1. Co. 6, 12 13.
; loves to be kept in awe; will not lord over any; but is ready evermore to
live, to abide to be under God, yea and for Gods cause humbly to obeie every
man 1. Co 13, 3. 4, etc.
.

Nature seeks after profit Matthew. 19* verse. 21. 22.
, and considers what lucre may be gotten by another: but Grace does note
rather what may benefit others 1. Cor. 9, 12 15. 1. Cor. 10, 33 Coloss. 3, 1.
2.
, than profit her self.

Nature is glad when she is had in honor, and commended among men Ioh. 5, 44.
John 12, 43 Acts. 12, 21. 22. 23.
: but Grace ascribes al glory and praise unto God 1. Co. 10, 31 Coloss. 3, 17
Acts. 14, 13. 14 15.
.

Nature fears reproach and contempt Luke 18, 18
: but Grace is glad to be rebuked for the Name of Christ Acts. 5, 41. Matthew 5,
10.
.

Nature loves ease and quietness of body Mat. 25, 8. 18
: Grace cannot be idle, but willingly sets her self to labor 1. Cor. 15,
verse. 30. 32. 2. Co. 11, 23 24.
.

Nature seeks after curious, and goodly, and abhors from base and gross
things Luke 16, 19
: Grace is delighted with simple and base things, despises not rough, neither
refuses to put on old rags Phil. 4, 11. 12. 2. Co. 11, 27 1. Tim. 6, 7. 8.
.

Nature respects transitory things Luke 12, 16 17, etc.
, reioiceth at worldly gain, fretteth at loss, and at every despiteful word
is out of quiet: but Grace has respect unto heavenly things, cleaves not to
the world Lu. 12, 22. 23.
, at loss is not trobled 1. Co. 13, 7
, nor disquieted at sharp words Mat. 5, 11.
. Because her treasure is reposed in heaven, where nothing perishes Mat. 6, 20.
.

Nature is covetous, and more gladly takes than gives 1 Cor. 6, 9. 10.
, loving private gain: but Grace is bountiful 1. Cor. 13, 4
, and liberal, shunneth private commodity, is content with little Act. 20, 33
34.
, judging it better to give than to receive.

Nature is bent unto the world Genesis 6, 5.
, unto the flesh, unto vanity, and to vagaries: but Grace allureth unto God
and unto well doing; bids al creatures fare-wel, flies the world, abhors
the desires of the flesh 1. Ioh. 2, 15 16. 1. Cor. 7, 31. Galat. 5, 19. 20.
, abstaineth from idle gaddings, and blusheth to be seen abroad.

Nature seeks outward sola^e, by whose allurements it may be delighted Luke
15, 13
: but Grace seeks comfort at God alone, and delights her self in the
chief good 1. Cor. 1, 31
above al visible things.

Nature does al for gain, nothing frankly; and still looks either for as
good a reward or greater, and hops either for praise or for favor in respect
of benefits conferred; finalie it coueteth to have her deeds, and gifts to be
greatly accounted of Matthew. 6, 1. 2.
: but Grace hunteth after no worldly thing, neither looks for any
recompense besides God alone; nor yet coueteth more temporal things than are
necessary for the attainement of everlasting life 1. Tim. 6, 7 8.
.

Nature glories in the multitude of friends, and kinsfolk, and boasts in
the nobility of stock, and ancestors; favors the mighty, flattereth the
wealthy; and loves her equals: but Grace loves even her enemies Mat. 5, 44.
45.
, braggeth not of many friends, neither yet respects the place, or stock
whence she was borne Ioh. 8, 33.
, unless the greater virtue and godliness flourished there. This Grace favors
the poor more than the rich; lamenteth the case of the innocent more than of
the mighty; delights in the true not in the deceitful; and always exhorts
good men to follow chiefly the most excellent gifts 1. Cor. 12, verse. 31.
, and to express the Son of God in their manners Ephesians. 5, 1.
.

Nature quickly complains of want and poverty Mat. 6, 32.
: Grace constantly endures need Romans 8, 35 2. Cor. 11. 27
.

Nature refers al to her self, and strives and contendeth for her self:
but Grace refers al things unto the glory of GOD 1. Cor. 10, verse. 31.
Colos. 3, 17
, whence she sprang Iam. 1, 18. 1. John 3, 9. John. 1, 12. 13.
; ascribes no goodness to her self, is not arrogant 1. Cor. 13, verse. 4. 5. 6.
, nor contentious, neither yet prefers her own opinion before others, but
in all study and searching of the truth submits her self to the wisdom,
and judgment of God.

Nature coueteth greedily to know, and to hear news, and secrets, loves
outwardly to appear, and to try much by the senses; and finalie desires to
be known, and to do such things, as may bring her fame and glory of the
world Ioh. 5, 44. John. 12, 43 Matthew. 6, 1. 5. 16.
.

But Grace seeks not after news, and curious knowledge Eccl. 3, 22 23. 24.
Romans 12, 3.
. Both because it proceeds altogether from the old corruption of man Genesis 6,
5.
, and also for that in deed there is no new or durable thing upon earth 1.
Cor. 7, 31 1. John. 2, 15 16. 17.
. And therefore it teaches men to abstain from foolish pleasure Ier. 9, 23.
; to shun vain glory Gal. 5, 26.
: modestly to conceal such things as seem praise-worthie, and to be had in
admiration for their excellency 1. Cor. 13, verse. 4.
; and of every thing, and knowledge to get profit, and to seek the glory of
God Coloss. 3, verse. 17.
. Finalie she desires to have neither her self, nor hirs to be praised 1.
Cor. 4, 6 7.
, but God, who of mere goodwil imparteth al things upon us Iam. 1, 17.
, to be thanked for his benefits 1 Thessalonians. 5, verse. 18.
.

This Grace is a light set above Nature, and a certain singular gift of God, a
note proper to the elect, and pledge of everlasting life, which lifts a man
from earthly to the love of heavenly things Colos 3, 1. 2.
, and of a carnal makes a spiritual man Romans 8, 1. 2. 1. Cor. 2, 10. 11, etc.
Galat. 4, 6.
.

And therefore the more Nature is pressed down, and tied up, the more Grace is
inspired 2. Co. 4, 16 17. 18.
, and the innerman with new gifts after the image of God is renewed every
day Ephesians. 4, 22. 23. 24. Coloss. 3, 9. 10.
.


Chap. 61. Of the corruption of Nature; and power of Gods heavenly Grace.
SERVANT. O Lord, my GOD, who have created me after thy own image Genesis 1, 26.
27. Genesis 5, 1. Wisd. 2, 23. Eccl. 17, 1. 2. 3. 1. Cor. 11, 7. Coloss. 3, 10
, give me such Grace (which is most excellent, and necessary unto salvation as
thou have showen Luke 9, 23
), that I may subdue my wicked Nature, drawing me always unto sin and
destruction Genesis 6, 5.
.

For I see in my flesh the law of sin, rebelling against the law of my
mind Romans 7, 23
, and leading me captive to the satisfieng of my desire in many things, so that
without the assistance of thy most heavenly Grace, powered zelouslie into my
mind, I am unable to resist the assaults thereof.

Yea, Lord, I lack thy Grace, and that much Grace of thine, whereby my Nature
proane unto al impiety even from my youth Genesis 8, 21. Matt. 15, 19.
, may be subdued, and overcome. For Nature being fallen through the offense of
the first man, and defiled through sin, the punishment thereof has redounded
unto al mankind. So that nature, which at the first thou did make good and
righteous, is now counted for the sin, and infirmity of the corrupt Nature,
inasmuch as the motion left unto it tends always unto evil, and inferior
things Wisd. 9, 15 Romans 7, 14. 15. 18.
. For, as touching that little power which abides in ye same John. 1, 5. 2.
Pet. 1* 19.
, that is like a certain sparkle raked up in the ashes.

This is that natural reason, enclosed about with black darkness, yet so that
somewhat still it can discern, and judge between good and evil, between truth
and falsehood Romans 7, ^4 15, etc.
, although it have no power to fulfill that which it allows Phil. 2, 13. 2.
Cor. 3, 5.
, neither enioieth a perfect light of the truth Mat. 6, 22. 23.
, with soundnes of her affections.

Hence, O my God, is it, that, as touching the inward man, I am delighted with
thy law Romans 7, 22
, knowing that thy statutes are good, righteous, holy 1. Tim. 1, 8 Rom 7, 12.
13. 18.
, and that they reprove evil and wickedness, and teach what is to be avoided.
But in my flesh I serve the Romans 7, 23.
law of sin whilst I obeie the appetite more than reason.

Hence it is, that to will is present 18.
with me, but alas I find no means to perform. Hereof it is that oftentimes
I purpose to do many things well; but because thine heavenly favor is wanting
Ps. 104, 29
which may help mine infirmity, by a little resistance I slide back, and
tire. Yea hereof it is, that I know in deed the way of righteousness, and see
as in a glass what my duty is Romans 7, 15
, but through the weight of my sin Wisd. 9, 15
I have no power to arise unto perfection.

O Lord, how greatly do I lack thy Grace both to begin what good is, and
also to proceed thorouglie in goodness Phil. 2, 13.
. For without it can I do nothing John. 15, 4. 5.
; through the help thereof I can do al things in thee Phil. 4, 13.
.

O heavenly grace in deed Romans 5, 20 21.
, without which neither the merits of man Romans 3, 20 Galat. 2, 16 Romans 11, 5.
6.
, nor the gifts of Nature are of price To. 11, 17. 18.
. O Lord, without thy Grace neither learning 1. Cor. 1, 19 20.
, neither riches Luke 12, 16 17, etc. Luke 16, 22. 23.
, neither beauty 2. Sam. 14, verse. 25 2. Sam. 18, 9. 10.
, nor strength 1. Sam. 17, verse. 4. 5. 7. 50.
, nor wit, neither eloquence Acts, 12, 21 22. 23.
is of any weight before thee.

For the gifts of Nature are common to the wicked as well as to the good Iere.
9, 23. Psalm. 73, 2. 3.
: but Grace is a gift peculiar only to the elect Romans 11, 5 6.
, which who so has, are counted meet and worthy eternal life. Finalie it is
so excellent, that without it neither the gift of prophecy, nor the working of
miracles Mat. 7, 22.
, neither the profound knowledge of secret things, is any thing worth: yea
neither faith, nor hope, nor any other virtues are accepted in thy sight
without love and Grace 1. Co. 13, 1 2, etc.
.

O blessed Grace, which make him rich with virtues, who is poor in spirit
Matt. 5, 3.
; and him humble of mind, who is rich for goods To. 11, 20.
: Come, come down to me, fill me early with thy comfort, that my mind for
wearines and hunger do not faint.

O Lord, I beseech thee, impart thy Grace upon me Luke 1, 30. 48.
: that is sufficient for me 2. Cor. 12. verse. 9.
, though I have naught else that Nature would require. Yea, I protest, if that
be with me, I will dread no tentation, nor troble whatsoever Psalm. 23, 4. Romans
8, 35.
, that is my strength Psalm. 18, 2.
, that brings counsel and help Ps. 19, 14.
: yea it is both mightier than al enemies Rom 8, 31
, and wiser than the prudent 1. Cor. 1, verse. 19. 20.
.

It is the mistres of truth, ye teacher of discipline, the light of the mind
Mat. 11, 25. 26. Luke 10, 21.
, the comfort in affliction, the expeller of sadness, the remoouer away of care
Psalm. 80, 3. 4. 7 19
, the nourisher of religion; the mother of tears: at a word, without it what
am I but withered wood, and a root most unprofitable, and to be cast away
John. 15, 4 5. 6.
?

Wherefore, O Lord, let this thy Grace both go before, and also follow me,
whereby I may continualie apply my self* unto well-doing through Jesus Christ
thy Son,


Amen.
Chap. 62. That we ought to deny our selves, and to imitate Christ by the
cross.
LORD. THe more thou leauest thy self Luke 9, 23
, my son, the nigher thou come unto me 2 Co. 4, 16
.

As outwardly to coute nothing, causes inward peace: so inwardly to forsake
ones self, ioineth man to God Luk 9, 24.
.

My mind is that thou learn a perfect denial of thy self in my will, and that
without al contradiction or muttering Matt 9, 9. Matt. 19, 27.
. Follow thou me Ioh. 21, 19. 22.
: I am the way, the truth, and the life Ioh. 14, 6
. Without a way men walk not; without a truth they know not; without a life
they live not. I am ye way wherein thou must walk; the truth whereunto thou
must stick; the life for which thou must hope. I am the way inviolable; the
truth, infallible; the life everlasting. I am the right way; the chiefest
truth; the true life, the blessed life, the life uncreate.

If thou go forward in my way, thou shall know the truth; and the truth shall
so make thee free Ioh. 8, 32. 36.
, that thou shall attain unto everlasting life.

If thou would enter into life, keep the commandments Mat. 19, 17
; If thou would know the truth, believe me John. 8, 31. 32.
; If thou would be perfect, sell al Mat. 19, 21
; Would thou be my disciple? then deny thy self Luke 9, 23.
: Would thou attain unto a blessed life; then despise the life present Ioh.
12, 25
. Would thou be extolled in heaven? then debase thy self on earth Luke 18,
13.
. Would thou reign with me? then suffer with me 2. Tim. 2, verse. 12. Rom
8, 35.
. For only the servants of the cross do find the way of happiness, and of
true life Acts 14, verse. 22.
.


SERVANT. O Lord Jesus Christ, forasmuch as thy way is narow Mat. 7, 13. 14.
and odious to the world Ioh. 15, 18. 19. 20.
, give me grace with thee to despise the world 1. Ioh. 2, 15 16. 17.
. For neither is the servant greater than the Lord, nor the disciple above the
master Matthew. 10, verse. 24. Luke. 6, 40. John. 13, 16. John. 16, 20.
.

Let thy servant be exercised in thy way, because therein my salvation, and
true holiness does consist Psa. 119, 9. Psalm. 25, 12. 14.
. Whatsoever I read, or hear without the same, can never fully recreat or
delight me Ps. 119, 14. 103 111. 127.
.


LORD. Son, seeing thou haste read, and know al these things, blessed
shall thou be, if thou fulfill them Matt. 7. 24 25. James. 1, 25
. He that understands and fulfilleth al my commandments, loves me, and I
will love him again Ioh. 14, 21
, and reveal my self unto him, and bring it so to pass that he shall sit with
me in the kingdom of my Father Matthew. 25, verse. 34.
.


SERVANT. Grant therefore, Lord, that what thou have said and promised, may
come to me Psa. 89, 28. 33.
.

From thine hands I have received the cross, I will bear the same even to the
death, as thou have enioined me Luke 21, 19
.

Doubtless the life of a true Christian, is the cross; but that is the way
into heaven Acts. 14, verse. 22.
: neither backward, nor from our course we may not go Luke 9, 62.
.

Eigh brethren let us proceed together: Jesus will be with us Matthew. 28, verse.
20. Ioh. 16, 22.
; for Jesus sake, we have taken this cross upon us, let us persevere in ye
cross for Jesus sake Mat. 5, 11. John. 15, 19. 20. 1. Pet. 2, 21. 22. 23.
. He will help us, who is our captain, and goes before us Phil. 2, 5. 6. 7. 8.
.

Lo, our King goes in before us fighting on our behalf Heb. 12, 1. 2. 3. 4.
Reu. 17, 14.
. Let us follow manfulie Ps. 27, 14.
, let no man be dismayed; let us even valiantly appoint to die in battle 1.
Tim. 1, verse. 18. 1 Timothy 6, 12 2. Tim. 2, 3.
; never let us stain our honor by flieng from the cross Luke 9, 26
.


Chap. 63. That we should take heed of despair, though we fall sometime.
LORD. Son, patience, and repentance in adversity Esai. 30, 15 Luke 21, 19.
, does more please me than much joy, and devotion in prosperity.

Why art thou vexed at so small a thing spoken against thee? the which were it
greater should not move thee Matt. 5, 11.
.

Care not for this, it is no new thing, nor the first Heb. 12, 3. 1. Pet. 2,
21. 22.
, and shall not be the last, if thou live longer.

Thou art man good enough, while prosperity does last Matthew. 26, verse. 33.
35. Luke 22, 33.
; yea thou can give counsel also to others, and encourage them with words:
but when sudden adversity is at hand, thou art straight way without both
counsel and courage Matthew. 26, verse. 69. 70. Luke 22, 56. 57.
.

Weigh what thy frailty is, of which thou have proof oftentimes in little
chances. Notwithstanding these and such like, are good for thee Pf. 119, 67 71.
Prou. 3, 11. 12. Hebr. 12, 7. 8. 9.
.

Cast these things out of thy mind, as thou know thou should do; and if
they touch thee, endeavor that they never overthrow thee, nor over troble thee:
at the lest wise bear them patiently Romans 12, verse. 12. James. 1, 1. 2.
, if thou can not ioiefulie.

Now if thou hear such things against thy will, and conceauest indignation
thereat, bridle thy self, and take heed that nothing slip out of thy mouth,
wherebie the little ones may be offended Mat. 18, 6. 7. Mark. 9, 42. Luke. 17,
1. 2.
. So will both this perturbation of thine quickly be settled, and the grief of
mind, through the return of Gods grace, be turned into joy.

I yet live, says the Lord, ready to help, and extraordinarily to comfort
thee, if thou call upon me Psa. 50, 15. Psalm. 91, 15. Esaie. 49, 8.
religiously in faith Mat. 21, 22 James. 1, 6.
.

Be thou patient, and prepare thy self to greater trobles Ps. 27, 14. Psalm.
31, 24. 1. Co. 16, 13
. Thou must not therefore be out of heart, though thou see thy self greatly to
be afflicted, and tempted grieuouslie 1. Cor. 10, verse. 13. James. 1, 1. 2.
. Thou art a man, no God; neither Angel, but flesh.

Think thou always to abide in one and the same state of godliness? when
neither the Angel in heaven Job. 4, 18 2. Pet. 2, 4. Jude. 6.
, nor Adam the first man in paradise Genesis 3, 17.
could, for both fell quickly?

I am he who will both strengthen the mourners with health Ps. 113, 7.
, and exalt unto my dignity such as acknowledge their own weakness Ps. 145,
19 Luke. 1, 52.
.


SERVANT. O Lord, for thy words, more sweet to me than honey, and ye
honie-combe Psalm. 119, verse. 103.
, I thank thee.

Alas, in such calamity and trobles what should I do, did not thou
strengthen me with this ghostly speech Psalm. 119, verse. 92.
!

So that at length I may come unto the port of salvation, what skilleth it
what and how great things I endure Romans 8, 18. 35. 36.
?

O Lord, grant me a good end; and a blessed departure out of this life: O my
God, remember me Luke. 23, verse. 42.
, and guide me the right way into thy kingdom,


Amen.
Chap. 64. That high matters, and secret judgments of God should not be
searched after.
OF hard matters, my son, and of the secret judgments of God take heed thou
dispute not Prou. 25, 2 Ecclus. 3, 22 23. 24.
. I say reason not either why this man is so rejected, or that man in such
favor Romans 11, verse. 18. 19.
; why this man is so miserably afflicted, that man so highly advanced.

These things are beyond the reach of man; neither is any reason, or
disputation meet enough to search out the counsel of the Almighty Esa. 40, 28
.

Therefore, when either the enemy does bring these things into thy mind, or
^ls some curious fellows enquire of thee, answer with the Prophet Psalm. 119,
verse. 137.
: Righteous art thou, O Lord, and just are thy judgments. Again, say, Psalm.
19, 9.
The judgments of the Lord are truth, they are righteous altogether.

For my judgments are to be feared, not to be discussed, in as much as they are
above the capacity of man To. 11, 33.
.

Do thou neither enquire, nor dispute touching the merits of saints, who
either was more holy in the world, or is more glorious in heaven. For these
things oftentimes breed strife, and vain contentions 1. Tim. 1, 4
, yea and moreover they nourish pride, and ambition, whereof spring envy, and
discordes 1. Tim. 6, 4 5.
, whiles one does proudly contend one to be more holy, and religious than
another.

The desire to learn, and to find out these things gets no profit at al; but
displeasure of the saints. For I am not the God of dissension, but the God of
peace 1. Cor. 14, verse. 33.
; which peace consists in true modesty Mat. 11, 29
, notin arrogancy of mind Esai 57, 21
.

Some through good will are more inclined toward these than toward those: but
that do they rather of humane affection, than of heavenly 1. Cor. 3, 3 4. 5.
.

I am he who made all the saints Genesis 2, 9,
, who have endowed them with gifts Iam. 1, 17.
, and exalted them to glory Ioh. 17, 22
; I know what every one has deserved, I prevented them with most liberal
blessings Psalm. 21, 3. Matthew. 5, 45.
; I before the world began fore-knew who were to be loved Romans 8, 28 29. 30. 2.
Tim. 1, 9.
; I choase them out of the world Ioh. 15, 16.
, not they me; I, of my great favor, called them Romans 8, 30
, and drew them Iere. 31, 3. John. 6, 44. 65.
mercifulie unto me; I lead them through manifold tentations Heb. 11, 32 33. 34.
, and powered most singular comforts upon them Ps. 94, 19. 2. Cor. 1, 7. 2. Cor.
7, 4. 5. 6. 7.
; I gave them power to persevere Phil. 1, 12. 13. 14. Phili. 2, 30.
, and crowned their patience 2. Tim. 2, verse. 12. Reu. 2, 26.
; I know both the first and the last Mat. 19, 30
; I love al men most wonderfulie Mat. 5, 45. 1. Tim 2, 4.
; I am to be praised in all my saints Psa. 148, 1. 2, etc. Psalm. 150, 1. 2, etc.
and in each of them honored and glorified, who have so gloriously exalted
such as I did predestinate Romans 8, 30 Ephesians. 1, 4. 5.
, and that without any merits at al which they had done 2. Tim. 1, 9
.

Therefore who so despises even the least of my servants, does not honor the
great Mat. 10, 40 Mat. 18, 10. Matt. 25, 45. Luke 10, 16.
. Because I have made the small as well as the great; so that he who derogates
from any of the saints, derogates from me, and from all the partakers of the
celestial kingdom.

For all are one through the band of love, they al think one thing, they mind
one thing, and they love al as one To. 12, 4.
.

Yea, which is far more strange, they love me more than themselves, or any
merits of their own Exo. 32, 32
. For being ravished above themselves, and carried away from al self-love,
they proceed wholly into the love of me, so that nothing can either turn them
away, or keep them down Romans 5, 3. 4. 5. Romans 8, 35. 36.
. For being full of eternal truth, they burn with y^ fire of love unquenchable.

Let therefore carnal, and fleshly men, who know nothing but how to love their
private ioies 1. Co. 13, 5.
, surcesse from prating about the state of the godly 1. Cor. 2, verse. 14.
. For they ad unto, and diminish from their praises according as in affection
they are inclined, not as pleases the eternal truth.

Many are ignorant; but they especialie, who being smalie enlightened, can
seldom love any man with a perfect spiritual affection of love 1. Ioh. 2, 9.
10, etc.
.

Some through natural and humane affection are inclined toward these men and
toward those: and as they think of earthly, so they judge of heavenly things
Wisd. 9, 13 14. 15. John. 8, 15. John. 3, 3. 4. 5.
.

But unspeakable is the difference between those things which imperfect men
do dream of, and between that which men spiritualie enlightened from above 2.
Tim. 3, verse. 16. 2. Pet. 1, 21.
do behold Mat. 13, 11. John. 8, 23. 2. Cor. 2, 14. 15. 16.
.

Therefore my son, wade not curiously in those matters, which pass the
reach of thy wit Eccl. 3, 22. 23. 24.
: but bend thy whole study, that thou may be found the least in the kingdom
of God Matthew. 5, 3.
.

Now in case a man knew who were either more holy for zeal, or in place more
honorable than the rest in the kingdom of heaven, what good would that
knowledge bring him, but only to make him the more humble in my sight thereby
Eccles. 1, verse. 13.
, and to break the oftener into the praise of my Name!

He pleases God better that thinks how great his sins, and how little his
virtues are Mat. 18, 1. 2.
, and how far he is from the perfection of godly men, than he does which
disputes about the highness and baseness of the saints of God.

They glory not of their own merits, in as much as they ascribe no goodness to
themselves, but confess that whatsoever they have comes fro me 1. Cor. 4, 6
7.
who have given them al things Iam. 1, 17.
of mine infinite mercy and love.

And they for their parts are filled with such fulness of the Godhed, and joy
Psa. 16, 11. Ioh. 16, 22. 33.
, that they lack no glory, nor felicity at al.

The saints the more brighter in glory, the more humble are they 2. Cor. 12,
verse. 4. 5. 10.
, and the nigher and deerer to me. Therefore shall you find it written, that
they cast their crowns before the throne of God Reu. 4, 10. 11.
, and, with faces toward ye ground before the lamb Revel. 5, 8. 12. 13.
, worshipped him who lives for ever and ever.

Many reason who is greatest in the kingdom of God Mat. 18, 1. Mark. 9, 34.
Luke. 9, 46.
, which never reckon whether they be themselves to be counted in the number of
ye least.

In heaven to be even the least is a great thing, where al be great: For all
both shall be called Matt. 5, 9. Matthew 6, 9.
and are Mat. 13, 38 Matt. 25, 34.
the children of God.

He that is least shall become as a thousand Esa. 60, 22
; and he that is an hundred years old being a sinner shall die as a young man
Esa. 65, 20
.

For when the disciples demanded who in ye kingdom of heaven should be
greatest, they had this answer made them Matt. 18, 3.
: Except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall not enter into
the kingdom of heaven. Whosoever therefore shall 4.
humble himself as this little child, the same is the greatest in the kingdom
of heaven.

Woe then to them who disdain to humble themselves with little ones. For the
gate of the kingdom of heaven is too low for them to enter in thereat Mat. 7,
13.
. Woe also to the rich Luke 6, 24.
, who have their comforts in this world. For they shall stand howling without
Matt. 25, verse. 41. Luke 16, 23. 24.
, when the poor are entered into the kingdom of God.

But ye meek ones Matthew. 11, verse. 29.
rejoice; and be glad ye poor. For yours is the kingdom of God Matthew. 5, 3
, obeieng or walking in the truth.

Chap. 65. That al our trust, and confidence must be fixed on God alone.
SERVANT. O My Lord, wherein is mine hope fixed in this life? or what is my
greatest comfort of al things which are any where under the coape of heaven?
Is it thou, my Lord and God, whose mercy is infinite Psa. 100, 5. Psa. 103,
11. Lam. 3, 22. 23. Ecclus. 18, 3 4. 5.
?

When was it with me either well if thou were absent; or il, if thou were
present Ps. 104, 27 28. 29.
?

Doubtless I would choose to be rather poor for thee Matt. 5, 3.
, than rich without thee Luke 6, 24. Luke 16, 24.
: and rather with thee to be a pilgrim on earth Luke 9, 58.
, than without thee to possess heaven Esai. 14, 12
.

Where thou art, there is heaven Psalm. 11, 4.
; where thou art not, there is hell, and destruction Ps. 104, 29.
.

Thou alone art the thing which I desire Ps. 119, 174 Psalm. 42, 1.
; therefore need have I to sigh, to cry, to pray unto thee Ps. 50, 15. Psalm.
120, 1.
.

Finalie I can trust none, that can duly assist me in my trobles, but thee
alone my God: thou art mine hope Psalm. 18, 1. 2.
, thou art my confidence, thou art my comforter, in all things most faithful.

Al men seek their own Phil. 2, 4.
: but thou desire naught but my welfare and profit Eze. 18, 31 32.
; and turnest al things for me to good.

In that thou laiest me open to tentations and trobles, it is altogether for my
profit Ps. 119, 67 71.
. For thy wont is a thousand ways to try such as thou love Wisd. 3, 5. 6.
Job. 7, 18. Exo. 20, 18. 19. 20. Deuteronomy. 13, 1. 2. 3. Heb. 12, 3. 4. 5. Acts, 14,
22
. In which trial thou ought no less to be loved, and praised, than if thou
did est replenish me with all celestial comforts Romans 8, 35 36, etc.
.

Wherefore in thee, my Lord and GOD, I place al mine hope, and confidence Psalm.
31, 1. Psalm. 71, 1.
; on thee do I lay al my calamities and trobles Psalm. 61, 2. Psalm. 62, 7.
. For without thee whatsoever I behold is al frail and transitory Ps. 102,
24. 25. 26. 27. Malach. 3, 6. Heb. 1, 10. 11. 12.
.

For neither can friends profit Psa. 118, 8. 9.
; nor strong men, help 2. Mac. 15, verse. 25. 26. 27. Ps. 33. 16, 17
; nor wise men, counsel well Psalm. 2, 1. 2. 3. 4.
; nor learned books, comfort 1. Co. 1, 20
; nor riches, save Luke 16, 24
; nor secret place, hide Ps. 127, 1.
; unless thou be present, and help, strengthen, comfort, instruct and keep.

For whatsoever seems to belong to the attainement of peace and felicity,
without thee is nothing, and brings in deed no felicity at al Ps. 104, 29.
Hos. 13, 10. 11.
.

So that thou art the cheifest end 1. Cor. 15, verse. 28.
, the perfection of life, and the profoundnes of speech; in thee to trust above
al things is the chiefest comfort of thy servants.

On thee do I look Psalm. 25, 1.
; in thee do I trust Psalm. 31, 1. Psalm. 71, 1.
, O my God, and Father of mercy 2. Cor. 1, 3
.

Bless, make my soul holy with celestial happiness, that it may be thy sacred
habitation, and seat of eternal glory, a temple pure from al filthiness 1. Co.
3, 16. 17. 1. Cor. 6, 19 20.
, which may offend the eyes of thy Majesty.

O Lord, according to the greatness of thy mercy, and according to the
multitude of thy compassions Psalm. 51, 1.
look upon me; and hear the supplication of thy poor servant Psalm. 34, 6.
, living far off a banished man in a sauadge contrie Genesis 47, 9. Heb. 11, 13.
14. 15. 16.
.

Protect, and keep the soul of thy poor servant Psalm. 71, 3.
among so many dangers of this mortal life; and bring me by the conduction of
thy favor into the contrie of eternal glory Reu. 21, 23
through the way of peace Luke 1, 79.
,


Amen.
1. Tim. 1, 17. Now unto the King everlasting, immortal, invisible, unto God
only wise, be honor, and glory for ever and ever, Amen.
Faults escaped in the Printing.
Page Line. Fault. Correction. 59 23 lay laid 189 23 gain, it is gave, it
was 262 24 coute covet 264 Chap. 92. Chap. 62.

Certain special prayers contained in this Book.
Use, if thou will
1. Praise God for his benefits, in the third book. chap. 6, page. 121. chap.
10, page. 133. chap. 12, page. 137. chap. 40, page. 198. chap. 47, page. 213.
2. Confess thine own wickedness and Gods righteousness, in ye third book. chapter
16. p. 147. chapter 23, p. 160.
3. Pray unto God, For a quiet conscience, p. 178. grace to call the benefits
of God into mind, in the third book, chap. 25, page 167. grace to contemn the
world, page 209. grace to do the will of God, in ye 1. book, cha. 19, p. 37.
book 3. chap. 18, page 151, 154. grace to hope in God, and to love him above
al things. book 3, chapter 24, page 163. Gods heavenly comfort* page. 153, 247.
deliverance out of troble, in the third book, cha. 35, page 185. chapter 51, page
220. happiness everlasting. chapter 54, page 230. instruction spiritual, pa. 111.
true knowledge, and zeal. page 116. the mercy of God, cha. 65. page. 276.
patience in trobles, page 159, 226, 240, 263. a pure mind, page 183. a quiet
conscience, p. 178. spiritual instruction, page 111. to have thine
understanding opened, pa. 173. zeal, page 116.
to avoid evil thoughts, page 172. sin, page 155. vain glory, page 210.
tentation, page 258.

This discourse is divided into three parts or Books, the first whereof has
25. Chapters, whose contents be these.
Chap. 1 THat al worldly things are vain, and to be contemned. Page. 1. Chap. 2
Against vain glory in spiritual things. Page. 3. Chap. 3 Of true knowledge,
or knowledge of the truth. Page. 6. Chap. 4 Wisdom must be used in all our
dealings. Page. 10. Chap. 5 How to read and study the holy Scriptures with
profit. Page. 11. Chap. 6 That inordinate, and carnal affections must be
mortified. Page. 12. Chap. 7 Against vain hope, and vain glory. Page. 13.
Chap. 8 What company is to be refrained, or followed. Page. 15. Chap. 9 For
obedience and subjection. Page. 16. Chap. 10 Against idle meetings, and vain
talk. Page. 18 Chap. 11 How to come unto quietness in mind, and to a godly
life. Page. 19. Chap. 12 Of the profit gotten by adversity. Page. 22. Chap. 13
That no man either is, or has bin without tentation; and how to suffer, and
resist the same. Page. 23. Chap. 14 Against rash judgment. Page. 27. Chap. 15
Of the works of charity; and how to do good works. Page. 29. Chap. 16 That
men which offend must be borne withal sometime. Page. 30. Chap. 17 The way
unto quietness both temporal and eternal. Page. 32. Chap. 18 The virtuous life
of the holy Fathers. Page. 33. Chap. 19 The exercise of a true Christian.
Page. 36 Chap. 20 Of solitarines, and silence. Page. 40. Chap. 21 Preparatiues
unto godliness. Page. 45. Chap. 22 A view of the misery of mankind. Page. 49.
Chap. 23 That man ought to think upon his end. Page. 52. Chap. 24 Of the last
judgment; and of the punishment of sin. Page. 58. Chap. 25 That we must
earnestly endeavor to amend our lives. Page. 63.
The Chapters of the second Book have these contents.
Chap. 1 OF the inward life of man. Page. 70. Chap. 2 Of patience and
humility, two virtues necessary to be in a Christian. Page. 75. Chap. 3 That
we ought to be at peace both with our selves, and with all men. Page. 76. Chap.
4 Of pureness in mind, and plains in meaning. Page. 79. Chap. 5 Of the
consideration of a man's self. Page. 80. Chap. 6 The joy of a good conscience.
Page. 82. Chap. 7 That our savior Christ is to be loved above al things. Page.
85. Chap. 8 Of the familiarity with Jesus. Page. 87. Chap. 9 Of the want of
comfort. Page. 90. Chap. 10 Of thankfulness unto God for his benefits. Page. 95.
Chap. 11 The small number that love Christ unfeignedly. Page. 98. Chap. 12 Of
patient bearing the cross of Christ. Page. 101.
The Chapters of the last book, have these contents.
Chap. 1 OF the spiritual communication between Christ and the faithful soul.
Page. 110. Chap. 2 That the truth speaks inwardly without noise of words.
Page. 111. Chap. 3 That the words of God with all reverence should be heard;
and that they are not understood of most men. Page. 113. Chap. 4 A prayer for
the attaining of the true knowledge of Gods heavenly will; and for zeal in
religion. Page. 116. Chap. 5 That we must walk syncerelie, and humbly before
God. Page. 118. Chap. 6 A prayer and thanksgiving unto God for his benefits.
Page. 121. Chap. 7 The praise and force of godly love. Page. 122. Chap. 8 How
to try a friend; also how to resist the enemy. Page. 125. Chap. 9 Of modest
concealing the benefits of God. Page. 129. Chap. 10 That man must debase
himself in the sight of God. Page. 133. Chap. 11 That al things are to be
directed unto God, as to the principal end. Page. 135. Chap. 12 That it is a
sweet thing to serve God, and to despise the world. Page. 137. Chap. 13 That
the desire of the mind must be examined, and bridled. Page. 140. Chap. 14 The
way unto patience, and to fight against fleshly desires. Page. 142. Chap. 15
Of obedience to our betters, after the example of Christ. Page. 145. Chap. 16
That we are to consider the secret judgments of God, least we wax proud in
his gifts. Page. 147. Chap. 17 What words and manner we should use in
desiring any thing at the hands of God. Page. 149. Chap. 18 A prayer for grace
to do the will of God. Page. 151. Chap. 19 That the true comfort is to be sought
for in God alone. Page. 152. Chap. 20 That al our cares must be cast upon God.
Page. 154. Chap. 21 That the trobles of this life are patiently to be suffered
after the example of our savior Christ. Page. 155. Chap. 22 Of long suffering,
and who is patient in deed. Page. 157. Chap. 23 A confession of man's weakness
and misery. Page. 160. Chap. 24 That we must repose no confidence in any
creature, but in God alone. Page. 163. Chap. 25 Of the continual calling into
mind the infinite blessings, and benefits of God. Page. 167. Chap. 26 Of the
things in number four which procure quietness. Page. 171. Chap. 27 A prayer
against evil thoughts or cogitations. Page. 172. Chap. 28 A prayer unto
almighty God to have the eyes of our understanding opened. Page. 173 Chap. 29
That we ought not curiously to enquire how other men do live. page. Page.
174. Chap. 30 Wherein the true peace, and profiting of the mind does consist.
Page. 176. Chap. 31 In praise of a quiet, and free mind; with an humble
petition for the attaining of the same. Page. 178. Chap. 32 That self-love is
the cause of perdition. Page. 181. Chap. 33 A prayer to obtain the purity of
mind, with heavenly wisdom. page. Page. 183. Chap. 34 Against il tongues.
Page. 184. Chap. 35 How we ought to call upon God, and to praise him in
adversity. Page. 185. Chap. 36 Of calling for Gods assistance, and of hope to
recover his favor again. Page. 186. Chap. 37 That to find God, our Creator, we
should forsake al things. Page. 190. Chap. 38 That we must deny our selves,
and renounce utterly al carnal desires. Page. 194. Chap. 39 The mutabilitie of
man's heart; and of thinking upon God, before al things. Page. 196. Chap. 40 That
it is a pleasure above al pleasures to love God above al, and in all things.
Page. 198. Chap. 41 That this life is never sure from tentations. Page. 201.
Chap. 42 Against the vain judgment of men. Page. 203. Chap. 43 That we must
wholly resign over our selves unto GOD, if we mind to attain unto the freedom
of mind. Page. 205. Chap. 44 Of y^ right use of outward things; and that we
should fly unto God when we are afflicted. Page. 207. Chap. 45 That man should
not be too importunate in his matters. Page. 209. Chap. 46 That man has
nothing which good is of himself; neither that he should glory of any
worldly thing. Page. 210. Chap. 47 That the praise of this world is to be
contemned. Page. 213. Chap. 48 That we must not rest, or depend upon man. Page.
214. Chap. 49 Against vain, and worldly knowledge. Page. 216. Chap. 50 That
we should not covet after earthly, and outward things. Page. 218. Chap. 51
That every man is not to be credited; and that by words we easily offend.
Page. 220. Chap. 52 That we ought to repose our confidence in the Lord, when
we are pierced with the darts of slandering tongues. Page. 224. Chap. 53 That
for the attaining of everlasting life, al manner trobles must be endured. Page.
227. Chap. 54 Of the happiness of the life to come; and of the miseries of this
present world. Page. 230. Chap. 55 Of the desire of eternal life; and of the
good things promised to such as fight. Page. 234. Chap. 56 How a man oppressed
with trobles, should yield himself to the Lords will. Page. 240. Chap. 57 That
we are to exercise our selves with base works, when we cannot do the best.
Page. 245. Chap. 58 That man should think himself to deserve not comfort at
Gods hand, but condemnation. Page. 247. Chap. 59 Men carnalie minded find not
favor before God. Page. 250. Chap. 60 The diverse working of Nature, and of
Grace. Page. 252. Chap. 61 Of the corruption of Nature; and power of Gods
heavenly Grace. page. Page. 258. Chap. 62 That we ought to deny our selves,
and to imitate Christ by the c^osse. Page. 262. Chap. 63 That we should take
heed of despair, though we fall sometime. Page. 265. Chap. 64 That high
matters, and secret judgments of God should not be searched after. Page. 268.
Chap. 65 That al our trust, and confidence must be fixed on God alone. Page.
274.
FINIS.
1580.

Imprinted at London by Henry Denham, dwelling in Pater noster Row, at the
sign of the Star, being the assign of William ^eres.


