Miracles unmasked. A TREATISE Proving that MIRACLES are not infallible signs
of the true and Orthodoxe FAITH: That POPISH MIRACLES are either counterfeit or
devilish. Evidently confirmed by authorities of holy Scripture, of ancient
Doctors, of grave and learned Spanish Authors, by weighty reasons, manifest
examples, and most true Histories which have happened in Spain, and appear in
Books there Printed. By FERDINANDO TEXEDA, Batchelar in Divinity.

LONDON: Printed by T. S. for EDWARD BLACKAMORE, and are to be sold at his
shop at the South door of Paul's Church, 1625.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, JOHN EGERTON, Lord ELSMERE, Earl of Bridgewater.
Right Honorable:
THis small TREATISE which I composed in my own language, I now set forth in
the English tongue; urged thereunto by the importunate entreaty of some friends
of mine, who persuaded me that it would be no less for the good instruction
of faithful Christians, then the destruction of them which are not so. The
many benefits, and charitable favors which I have received at your Lordships
liberal hands, seem to call upon me, and tell me that I ought (to cumply in
part with the strict obligation wherein I stand bound to your Honor) to
dedicate the same to your Noble self: hoping that the same reason by which I
offer this small manifestation of my grateful heart to your honorable
protection, will be a sufficient motive to your Lordship to accept it, and give
it a favorable aspect: For where a Noble mind has once conferred benefits,
those benefits may lawfully be taken as seals to an obligation of future
favor. Since the sacrifice which Jesus Christ made of his precious blood for
our redemption, is acknowledged by his divine Majesty as a most powerful
inducement whereby we may expect every day new blessings from the same
fountain. And I have a most strong hope that your Lordship will not reject
this piece of service, because small in respect of your greatness; for your
breast is Princely, Et non minus est regium, atque adeo humanum paruula
accipere, quam largiri magna; And your Lordships gracious acceptance hereof
will impose a new bond upon me, to pray the Almighty to enrich your Noble soul
with continual infusions of divine graces, and to power down on your
honorable estate and family, hourly showers of transitory blessings.

Your Lordships devoted in all humble duty, FERDINANDO TEXEDA.

The Books out of which this Treatise is gathered, are these following.
1 OBras del Maestro gracian, impressas en Madrid. Anno 1619. 2 Coronica y
historia de la fundacion y progresso de la prouincia de Castilla del Orden de
san Francisco, etc. por el P. Salazar. En Madrid. Anno 1612. 3 Historia y Anal
relacion de las cosas que hizieron los padres de la Compannia de Jesus, por las
parts de Orient, etc. Por el Doctor Figueroa. En Madrid. Anno 1614. 4
Sermones de Payua. En Madrid. Anno 1617. 5 Discursos para todos los Euangelios
de la Quaresma por el P. Maestro Fonseea. En Madrid. Anno 1614. 6 Tesoro de la
lengua Castellana, o Espannola, por el licenciado Couarruuias. En Madrid. Anno
1611. 7 Desenganno de Sierra. En Madrid. 8 Prado espiritual por el doctor
Sanctoro. En Valladolid. Anno 1614. Relacion de la santidad y llagas de la
Madre Maria de la visitacion, Priora que fue de la Annunciada de Lisboa, y lo
que fue declarado en la sentencia que sedio. En Seuilla. Anno 1589. 9 Historia
de san Antonio de Padua por Mateo Aleman. En Seuilla Anno 1605. 10 Tratados de
Sosa. En Salamanca. Anno 1623. 11 Venida de Christo por el P. ojea. En Medina
del Campo. Anno 1602. 12. Historia de la sagrada Orden de predicadores. En los
remotes Reynos de la Etiopia por el P. Vrreta. En valencia. Anno 1611. 13 Tomo
2. de la Monarchia de Pineda. En Barcelona. Anno 1620. 14 Philosophia moral de
Ecclesiasticos por el Maestro Torres. En Barcelona. Anno 1621. 15 Quarto tomo
de la perfecion, por el P. Puente. En Pamplona Anno 1616. 16 Historia del gran
Reyno de la China por el Maestro Nendoza. En Anucres. Anno 1596. Con
priuilegio. 17 Isagoge in totam sacram Scripturam, Autore Ludeuice de tena
Episcopo Dertusensi. En Huesca, Anno 1622.
The PROLOGVE.
TRue Religion and Faith is a matter of so great consequence, that who so
professes it not, cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven: For (as the
Apostle teaches) we are saved by faith. Ephesians. 2.
The first part whereof is the knowledge and acceptance of sound Doctrine;
according to which, Damas. lib. 4. de orthod. fid. cap. 12.
Damascen learnedly concludes, that it is impossible to be saved without
Faith.

Therefore we ought with great study, care, and diligence, to procure, embrace,
and hold firmly the true Orthodox and Apostolical Religion, seeing without it
we cannot hope for any thing but condemnation and death.

But seeing in these our days there are so many and diverse Religions, it is
requisite we should use a careful and judicious examination, that none may be
so hardy as to preferte unto us, dross in stead of Gold, nor we to admit and
lay hold of Heresy in stead of truth, and so undergo a disastrous shipwreck
of eternal salvation: so Christ the principal Pastor of the Church,
counseled, taught, and charged us; saying, Beware of false Prophets. Math 7.


But because in this Scruteney, seldom times we encounter aright, but often
times we fail; it is most important, and absolutely necessary, to learn and
observe some means by which we may infallibly distinguish that which is
precious, from that which is base, and the truth from falsehood: For as there is
a touchstone to try Metals by, so it is fit we should have some measure and
square by which we may discuss and rule Faith and Doctrine.

This Rule and Square of Faith, we Protestants affirm to be the sacred
Scripture comprised in the Books of the Prophets and Apostles, and this is
evident by many places of the said Scripture, as many of our Doctors have
proved very perspicuously, to whom I refer my self, being content for this
present to confirm this doctrine with the authority which is of no small
account, especially amongst us Spaniards of the learned Doctor, Tena in Isag.
in tot. sacr. script. Vocatur Scriptura instrumentum ab Augustina, quia
probatissrna instructio est de nulla falsitate suspecta; quare, and Canon, vei
Regula dicitur, quoniam ad illam, vtlydium lapiden sum fidoi dogmata examinande.
Tena Bishop of Tortosa: Saint Augustine calls the Scripture an Instrument,
because it is a most approved instruction, and suspected of no falsehood,
therefore it is called also a Canon or Rule, because points of Faith are to be
examined by it as by a Touchstone: The Bishop of Rome is of a far different
opinion from Tortosa; for he casting Scripture aside, because it manifestly
conuinceth his Doctrine, propounds some exterior signs and marks, by which
he would have us to judge of and discern true Religion and Christian Faith;
these are the Antiquity of the succession of Ecclefiasticall Ministers,
Monastical Sanctity, Miracles, and other such like, which are fitter to
obtenebrate, then to enlighten the eyes of the understanding in the way of
salvation.

My scope and purpose is, to make it obuious and plain to the eyes of all who
shut them not as Moles, that they may not see, the incertainty and vanity of
these signs which the Papists do so highly esteem; but in this Treatise I
will only speak of that which concerns Miracles, reserving the remainder
for other discourses, which God willing I will in fit time print.

And because every kind of Doctrine has it is validity from the authority of
him that teaches it, or from reason, that euinceth it, or from those Authors
which uphold it; though there be wanting sufficient authority unto my person,
yet I will endeavor to verify what I have here said, by such Doctors as
cannot easily be rejected in regard of the authenticke reputation they hold
amongst those of my Nation, for whose benefit and good I have undertaken this
labor, and am ready to employ that small Talent which God has given unto me,
for the salvation of their souls; yea, if need so required, to lay down my
own life for them: I beseech the divine Majesty to bless this my small work,
that the faithful may gain profit and benefit by it, and that it may redound
to the glory of his most holy name.

That we cannot, nor ought to judge of Religion only by Miracles.
We deny not but that true Miracles are the seals and testimonials of
Evangelical Faith, but we distinguish between Christian Faith when it was to
be propagated, and now that it is propagated: when it was to be propagated
amongst the Gentiles, Christ endued his Ministers with the gift of Miracles,
because as Saint Paul says, at that time Faith was a scandal to the Jews, and
folly to the Gentiles; and therefore it was greatly countenanced by Miracles,
which increased the number of the faithful; but now they are not necessary,
because Faith is already greatly defused throughout the world, and sufficiently
fortified by the miracles of the first ages, so that now it is not sare, but
rather very dangerous to judge of Religion merely by Miracles.

And that this may clearly appear, we must first observe, that Miracles are
not the perpetual companions of true and Catholic Doctrine; according to the
Assertion of the learned Father Puente, Puente 4. tomo de la perfecion page 619.
in these words: The Doctors and Preachers cannot ordinarily authorize their
persons, nor the Doctrine they teach by Miracles, because they are not now
behoofefull amongst Christians, neither have all power to do them: of the fame
opinion is Doctor Fonseca, Fonseca ensus discursos. page 220.
and proves it by three reasons: the first, because many were and are
converted without them; the second we mentioned formerly; to wit, that the
Primitive Church being in it is minority, had need of Miracles, which the Church
now being in it is full growth requires not; the third is, because where holy
Scripture is, there is no need of Miracles. All which my Author proves by
testimony of the Scripture: Torres ensu Philosophia. Page 155. Chrisoft. in ca.
13 Gene. hom 35. and in Acta hom 19.
Now conformably unto this last reason of Fonseca, Doctor Torres says, with
Saint 10. Chrysostom, that the reading of holy Writ is sufficient to supply
Miracles; and further, we cannot find a means more conduceable unto the end
we aim at, seeing that unto the reading of holy Scripture, Miracles nor
Signs from heaven are of no necessity.

That Miracles are also common to False-Teachers,
THis Doctrine, Fonseca, Fonsecaibid, page 91.
whom we formerly alleged, proves by Miracles, which the Scripture
foretells Antichrist should do, as also by the example of the Witch, which
the devil caused to appear in the shape of Samuel, and by that of the
Pharisees which did cast out devils by unlawful coniurings and exorcifmes.
Father Ojea says with Saint Ioh. Chrysostom, Ojca a Ojea hasta laoja 1602 del
tratado de la venida de Christ.
that to cast out devils out of the bodies of those that are possessed, is common
both to the Ministers of God, and those of Satan: When thou see any (says
Chrysostom) that casts out devils out of bodies, if he preach not truth, and
work not righteousness, such a one is not a Saint, nor true Minister of God:
But if contrarily thou see that he Preaches truch and works
righteousness; such a one, though he cast not out devils, hold him for a man
of God and his true servant and Minister. The same Oiea testifies, that
amongst the Gentiles, there want not Miracles and prodigious signs; The
Emperor Vespatian being in Egypt, restored sight unto a blind man, and to one
that was lame in foot or hand, he rendered his former health and strength, as is
related by great Authors, whereof Father Pineda is one; Pineda in Monarch iom 2
lib. 11 c. 25.. 2.
and those of China, which are notable Idolaters, have amongst infinite other,
three Idols, of which they publish as a certain truth, that they have done,
and daily do many Miracles, as Mendoza relates; who confesses that they
might take effect according to their report.

That the Romish Religion is not Eminent by the glory of true and divine
Miracles.
THis is proved, because the Miracles whereof the Church of Rome so much
boasts, branch themselves into three kinds: the first contains many
fictitious Miracles which never happened; the second contains such Miracles as
happened only by the outward appearance: the third kind has an aspect upon
such prodigies as happened really and truly, but by the illusion and Artifice
of the devil. I will handle these three kinds, and in the first place, the
first. Of this first kind of fained Miracles which never happened, there are
so many publishers in the Church of Rome, that long since it caused a law to be
ennacted in Spain against them, the words whereof are these; L 10. primae
partitae tit. de las Eglesias.
Many discover or make altars in open fields, or in towns, saying, that in
those places there are some of the Relics of the Saints, which as they
pretend, work Miracles, and by this means induce people to come from many
parts thither in pilgrimage, Sierra en su desenganno page 209
that so they might make benefit by them, etc. And presently it sets down a way
to remedy this evil: but how little benefit resulteth from this law, daily
experience shows us, this matter growing every day worse and worse. Father
Sierra lamenteth this Evil, saying; I am much afraid that merchandise will be
made of devotion; and that the truth is not sufficiently examined, because some
are interessed in it, the Miracles which are accounted unto us of the Saints,
not canonized by the Church, are not all of them certain. Primera part de Don
quixote page 543.
Another Spanish Author says, that in divine Comedies, the Authors of them do
invent infinite false Miracles; and also in humane Comedies, they attempt the
doing of Miracles, which is in prejudice of the truth When a Merchandise is
vendable, every one labors to employ his stock in it to enrich himself. In
the Romish Church, Miracles are very vendible, and therefore not only
Clergymen and Friars, but also Camodions traffic in them, and not only
they, but much other secular people, as well men as women practice this
Merchandise; of all which, Gratian en sus Obras page 41.
complained Doctor Gratian, saying, the world for our sins is come to an end,
for there are some which make benefit and gain of sanctity, giving out that
they have revelations, that so they may have gifts and presents. The same
Author says, that he met one day with a notorious thief, whom he bad to amend
his evil life: Vide ibid page 94
he answered, That he had about him a certain printed prayer, which by
Revelation he knew was of such efficacy, that whosoever carried it about him,
could not dye without confessing his sins, and therefore he cared not for
leaving his ill life. Spain is so full of such and the like Prayers, often
times imprinted by permission of the Inquisitors, that it drew from this
Author, these notable words, in these matters of superstitious Nominas, Vbisup.
Couarrubias en el tesoro de la lengua Espannola. Verbo Nomina.
much harm is done amongst the common people. Let us hear Doctor Couarrubias,
who will tell us the Etimology of Nominas, and withal confirm that which we
would prove. They were wont auntiently to carry purses shut, and in them
certain writings and names of Saints, and so long as there was no corruption
nor superstition mixed, they were commonly the Gospels of the four Evangelists,
and the names of Saints from whence they were styled Nominas, and this was very
lawful and religious, but since they did annexe many other Apocriphall
prayers, which they so entitled, that he which hanged them about his neck,
should not dye by fire, water, nor by sword, nor by sentence of Justice, and
that the hour of his death should be revealed unto him. Others have foysted
into the said Nominas a hundred fopperies, which have neither head nor foot; he
proves it by this example: One of these mockers gave a Nomina unto an Hostis
which was ready to be brought to bed, affirming that she should be well and
safely delivered; they made him sup well, and gave Prouender to his Mule, and
on the morning he took his journey; they through curiosity desirous to see
what was written within, found a schedule to this purpose, Coma mi mula, y cene
yo, si quiera, para, si quiera no: that is, let my Mule feed, and me sup, I
care not whether she be delivered or no: It is not remote from my intent to
insert here a famous fiction and deceit, by which a proflygate villain caused
for many ages diverse to weep, and not a few to laugh; he clothed himself in
a very ragged garment which he had stolen from an Hermit, and put about his
neck, a rosarie of Beads as big as Walnuts, that the greatness of them might
make them more visible and occular unto all; (in him is verified the Spanish
proverb, El rosorio al cuello, Y el diable en el cuerpo, which says) Beads
about the neck, and the Devil in the body;) he girt about him a massy chain
of iron, his stockins and shoes were such as he brought with him into the
world, that he might be reputed not only for a Friar, but for a barefooted
Friar; he shau'd off his beard, peradventure to make a brush to sprinckle holy
water when he was in his Hermitage: in conclusion, he so disguised himself,
that his own mother could not know him, though she had viewed him with as many
eyes as Argos had, they which saw him, were so far from taking him for what
he was, that they held him another Saint Hilarion, or one of the Celebrious
penitent Hermits, mentioned in the papisticall Legends: So this holy and
blessed Hermit, fastening his eyes on the earth, as if he were seeking of pins,
began, Con passos de frail combidado, to go as fast as a Friar invited to
dinner toward the Province of Biskaye, resolving to seat himself in a City of
it, called Durango: He made choice of this City and Province, as judging the
people of Biskaye, the most simple and ignorant of any other in Europe, that so
he might with facility make sale of his Pharisaicall hypocrisy, instead of
Apostolical virtue, and his iugling tricks in stead of admirable wonders: He
came to Durante in an unhappy and disastrous hour, for those of Durante who
entertained him, and lodged him with such singleness, humanity, and courtesy
as was worthy of that noble nation, being thereunto obliged by his penitential
habit, that modesty and sanctimony which they saw in his outward actions, the
opinion they conceived of him was such, that they publicly honored him as a
blessed Saint, and said, that God had sent him vntothem, that by his good
example and religious conversation, he might rectify their lines, and reform
their manners: They assigned him an Hermitage not far from the City, that he
might more conveniently deuote himself to his heremetical exercises; the
simple women began to visit him in his Hermitage, every one striving according
to her ability to carry him some thing to supply his want, and mittigate his
poverty: finally, in a short time, this cunning Imposter could so insinuate
himself into these ignorant women, that he thought he could persuade them to
do what he would, such was their simplicity; and seeing that he had no need
of riches, because the gifts and presents which they made him, for adorning of
an Image of the Virgin which he had in his Hermitage, would plenteously suffice
him all his life time, he determined to lay hold on the occasion offered unto
him, causing these women to change that holy and spiritual affection they bare
him, into a flagitious and carnal one; He made no long delay to execute his
purpose, for the day after, he began as well in the conferences which he held
in his Hermitage, as in others which he used among the people, to publish as a
thing known by revelation, authentic, express, true, and communicated by
the spirit of God, that the precept of brotherly charity required, that amongst
neighbors, even women should be common, and persuaded this as a truth, and so
he finally enjoyed his damnable and filthy desire, until his deceit was
manifested, and so he was forced to betake him to his heels, and to relinquish
his habit for being discovered; hence grew the Proverb of la charidad de
Durango, the charity of Durango, used when a woman prostituteth her body and
honor; and because he was call Alonso, they so deadly hated this name, that
though it be a very common name in Spain; not any one in the City is so
called, and if any stranger so called, repair thither, he changes his name,
which if he did not, they would stone him to death. For my part, I never was in
that City, but I testify before God, that I have heard diverse Friars of my
Order, which lived there in a Monastery, to auerre all this for a truth,
whereof the common Proverb formerly mentioned and used throughout all Spain,
is an evident argument.

He that would be further informed concerning the Miracles fained by Friars,
let him see the books quoted in the Margents, the Author of the first being a
Dominican, Historia de la sagrada Orden de preaicaderes en los remotos Reynos
de la Eliopia
pretends to prove, and that by no few Writers, as also by eyewitnesses,
that in Ethiopia, there are many Monasteries of his Order, and that the Friars
of them do daily work great Miracles. The Author of the second book being a
Jesuit, Historia Y Anal relacion de la scesas que hizieron los padres de la
compa^ tia de Jesus, por las parts de Orient, etc.
makes an express Tractate, in which he evidently demonstrateth, and by many
occular witnesses, that whatsoever the Dominican says, is merely false; and
that the Friars which he says are of his Order, are notable Heretics, and
that their Miracles, in case they be deuoyd of true faith, are elusions of the
devil, to persuade them that they have the true faith, etc. And hence we may
conceive what credit is to be given to Papisticall Miracles.

The second sort of Papisticall Miracles, comprehends counterfeit or humane
signs which were seen to happen, but were not true Miracles, though they
seemed to be such to the spectators.
SVch are the Miracles recited euer-and-anone in the Papisticall Legends
concerning Images that sweat blood, whose hair and nails grow, the which
almost all the common people, and many others of better rank, believe really
to happen in some of our Spanish Images: but the truth is, that Friars to
attract the people and the alms of such as give credit to them, to their
Monasteries, do fasten counterfeit hair to some Images of Christ crucified,
and apply false nails also, the which sometimes they take away by night,
placing in their room others differing from them; and by such slight (for
herein they are dextrious Artifts) they persuade the ignorant and simple
people, that the hairs and nails do truly grow, and with semblable iuglings
they counterfeit the sweating of Images: but let us hear a learned person of
Spain what he says, and thinks of such Miracles and the actors of them;
You must not credit, says he, Mateo Aleman en la historia de san Antoniode
Padua page 107.
what ignorant and unconscionable men affirm, saying, there are Images that
sweat blood, whose hairs wax, and nails are cut, it is an untruth, a mere
invention and knavery: he adds, an Image of wood, or other metal, cannot
euacuate sweat, neither does it is hair grow, for it is counterfeit, nor
consequently the nails which are carved by the hands of a wretched man, and in
liuelesse wood: The nails (observe this) which truly grow, are the infernal
avarice of those who invent them for their abominable ends: these and such
like stratagems, acquire to the Friars immunerable riches, to which no Indies
but those of Purgatory, which are the non vltra, are comparable. There are
Images which maintain very opulently a great multitude of Friars; because upon
the brute of Miracles, infinite people resort to them with money in their
hands, for the sight of such Imager is prohibited to such as buy it not: Of
which number is our Lady of Atocha, of Monsarrate, of Puy, the holy Crucifixe
of Burgos; All these are houses which from a mean beginning are by reason of
the Images grown to so an incredible greatness, that now they are the richest
and most splended in all Europe. That of Burgess is of my Order of the
Augustines, of which I can report as an eyewitness, that it may enter into
competicion for riches with a City. When I was there, I diligently labored to
see some Miracle of those infinite ones which the Friars diuulged daily of that
Image, but I could never see any, and it happened alike to many of my
Companions, and therefore one of them was wont to say, that the Miracles of
that Image were as thefts, which for the most part are done by night in the
dark.

To the second sort of Miracles, Salazar en la histo. de la prouincia de
Castilla de san Francisco, page 44.
appertains that which some others relate of a certain religious woman,
which in Bolonia was held for a Saint, and showed the wounds of the holy
passion of our Savior in her feet, hands, and side, and many times the blood
distilled from her head, as if it had been pierced with a crown of thorns;
and in fine, it was all found to be imposture and cousenage: Of this I could
allege many Histories, as this Author acknowledges, but for avoiding
prolixitie I omit them, contenting my self with one most true president, which
not many years since happened in Spain. There was in Valladolid, a famous
City of Spain, a Jesuit, who was so in love with a noble Widow which was
wont to confess unto him, that perceiving by her confession, that she was an
impregnable castle, as being most chaste, and fearing God, resolved to conquer
her by an extraordinary and miraculous way, to which intent, he suborned with
many gifts, one of the said Ladies Gentlewomen, that with all secrecy, she
should put upon, or near the Boulster of the Bed where she slept, a little
schedule, the which she accordingly performed, and her Mistress going to bed,
found it, and much meruailing at it, called her Servant, and asked her if she
had laid the schedule there; she answered no, asseuering it with a thousand
oaths and protestations; this (and because her Lady reputed her for an honest
virtuous maid) caused her to think that she knew nothing of the writing, and
because there was no body else in the house, she was persuaded that it was sent
from heaven: she remaining alone in her lodging, having first charged the
Damsel touching this secret, and reading the schedule, found the contents of
it as follows: Most dear Daughter, I have elected you, that in this
deplorable time, you should be the Mother of a Son, that shall reform the
world, and this must happen by the cooperation of a man, choose whom you will,
but marry not, for my will is that thou remain a widow. If the reading of
this schedule bred admiration in her, it is needelesse to conjecture, it is
sufficient to tell you, that presently after break of day, she went to seek
her Confessor, to whom she declared sub sigillo confessionis, what had befallen
her the former night, and entreated him to counsel her what he thought best;
he persuaded her after large conferences, (note the great subtilty of the
Jesuit) she should not lightly believe it, because Satan is wont to
transfigure himself into an Angel of light, to delude the better sort, and
that she should recommend that business heartily to our Lady, and that he
would also do it, that she might inspire what should be best: and thus the
Lady returned to her house, and spent the greatest part of the day in
recommending unto God the good success of it, and when night approached, she
entered into her chamber to lie down, where she found a second scedule to the
same purpose; presently the next morning she returned unto her Confessor, who
persuaded her to tarry yet another night, and if she found a third, then she
might hold it as a thing ordained by heaven, and should dispose her self to
the accomplishment of it; she found one the next night conveyed thither by the
means above specified, and communicating it unto the Jesuit, both of them
determined, with his no small delight to begin the execution of that which
was contained in the schedule, which was ennacted the same day in the house of
the said Lady, and continued some days, with the great shame and disgrace of
the Lady, and with such impudency and perpetude of the Jesuit, that she
thought it past the bounds, not only of a devout and spiritual man, but of
the most carnal and brutish one in the world, she began to suspect that this
Companion had been the Author of the Miracle, which surmize increased, because
after she had told him that she was with child, and that therefore no further
action was needful, in as much as when the end aimed at is attained unto, the
media conducing thereunto cease; he notwithstanding ceased not to importune
her, and also to force her with small modesty to do that which she would have
excused: These and other considerations, moved her to tell the Jesuit, that
because her neighbors began to murmr and judge ill of his frequent visiting
her, it was meet he should totally forbear her company; of necessity he was
feign to yield though unwillingly: When her time of childe-bearing was come,
she had a fair Daughter, and so perceived that the Jesuit had beguiled her,
she acquainted her kindred with the business, who notwithstanding all the
diligence they used, could not deter the malifactor who was fled away.

There is no other which I know has written this History, but the common fame
of it in Spain implies the truth of it.

To the last kind appertain Diabolical Miracles, which were only iugling
tricks, or did really happen: to this we refer casting out of Devils,
healing of the sick, giving sight to the blind, etc.
THat which Father Ojea says of the Miracles of Vespatian, Ojea en la vida de
Christo page 154.
who restored sight unto a blind man, and healed a lame man, his words are:
The devil could mingle with the spittle of Vespatian, some powders of
particular virtue which might forthwith take away the clouds, and disperse the
other obsticles which were in the eyes of the blind man, that he might recover
his sight; and when he touched with his foot the other which was lame, he
might apply another remedy of those many which are extant in nature, which he
knows well through his long experience, and so he might be healed. We judge
the same of Papisticall Miracles: It cannot be denied but diverse marvelous
effects have bin produced among them, but either by deceit or art of the
devil, sometimes the Friars themselves not knowing it, and sometimes holding
correspondency with the devil: That this is so, the reasons following
conclude, I. Because Papisticall Miracles are to corroborate superstition and
false Doctrine, and therefore cannot be essentially divine; but that they
confirm false doctrine, I prove by this ensuing example; Lib. 4. page 56. del
prado espiritual.
the first whereof is of an Abbot which absolved a Friar after he was dead, and
imposed a punishment upon him that he should be in Purgatory until his body
were buried, as soon as the deceased heard this, he gave a great and fearful
shoute, which was heard all over the Monestary, saying, Oh merciless Father,
why have you enjoined me to abide so long in Purgatory? This example
contains, first, three, and those no small errors of the Romish Church; to
wit, the doctrine of Purgatory, that of humane satisfaction, and the necessity
of auricular confession, and infoldeth also another error not only repugnant
to truth, but also contrary to that which the very Church of Rome it selfer
believes; to wit, that a man may be absolved from his sins after he is dead:
And here I would entreat the first Monk that reads this, to tell me where
that Friar which departed was, until his Abbot came to give him absolution;
for I cannot conceive where he might soiourne during that intervall; for in
Purgatory he could not be, whether (if we give credence unto Papists) none
enters until he has received absolution of his sins, neither by the same
reason could he be in heaven, because the Papists do not send the souls that
have been in heaven unto Purgatory; but contrarily, Nuns can never come out
of the Monestary.
they send those that are in Purgatory unto heaven. As little could it be in
hell; because as schoole-boyes know, there is no redemption; and therefore the
Priests says not, deliver us Lord, ab infero, from hell, but, a porta inferi,
from hell gate, and if once thou entrest there, thou may make full account to
be a Nun of hell: well, if this Friar was neither in heaven, Purgatory, nor in
Hell, where was he? alas I had forgot Limbus, but it is all one, for what had
Limbus (a place destinate to Innocents) to do with this nocent Friar, which
forgave not his own Abbot, even then when he dealt so compassionately with
him? The second example is of a Gentleman, who having vowed to turn Monk, was
condemned for not being complete in his vow, (though at the hour of his death,
Jbid page 45.
he used all the diligence which a good and faithful Christian might use for
acquitting of his conscience: After his decease he appeared unto an Abbot,
which asked him; What does the blessed Saint Vincent for thee, perchance he
does not assist thee in this thy necessity, seeing thou have given so much
money to his Administrators, that they might labor in building of his
Monestary; to whom the Gentleman answered, I resorted to him, but he has made
me wait many days to talk with him, and when I could not do it after many
tedious attendances, I now despair of ever talking with him, or having his
favor; it were frivolous to employ any arguments to persuade the learned, or
those which are not altogether ignorant and blind, that this is one of the
most vain Monastical fables, or ridiculous elusions of Satan; I say, for
satisfaction of the ignorant, that this example has for end and scope, the
authorizing of one of the most pernicious errors of the Church of Rome, (viz)
that the vow of leading a Monastical life, is not only lawful, but also that
he which performs it not, can by no means be saved, how solicitous soever
he be for clearing of his conscience. I would have the Papists tell me, if
those days, which were not a few if we believe the Papists, that Saint Vincent
caused this poor Gentleman to dance attendance, preceded his condemnation yea
or no; for if they did precede, then is it indubitorily false, that every one
hears at his death the sentence of his condemnation or salvation, which I
presume no papist in the world is so impudent as to affirm: if they were
subsequent unto his condemnation, it follows that those which are condemned in
hell, come forth to solicit the Saints of heaven to infranchize them from
thence, and have hope of their enlargement, and that God will revoke the
sentence he pronounced against them; for no man soliciteth a business, knowing
it impossible to compass his intent, all which how erroneous, absurd, and
ridiculous it is let the Pontificies themselves judge.

In the last place I rank the revelations made unto many he and she
Papisticall Saints, Sosa en al tratado de la concepcion Page 86.
especially to Saint Bridget, to confirm the conception of the holy Virgin to
have been without original sin, which have been examined and allowed of as
divine ones, by many Cardinals and Prelates; yea, even by the very Popes
themselves; whether these revelations be reluctous unto holy Scripture yea or
no, I appeal to the judgment of the famous and celebrious Order of Preaching
Friars, so called by way of eminency; the which with many others that
simpathize with them herein, have euidenced in their writings and Pulpits with
luculent authority scited out of holy Writ and ancient Doctors, and with
evident arguments, that the holy Virgin was conceived in sin; and the
authority of this grave order of Dominicans is of such force, that although the
Pope complying with the Franciscan and Jesuitical Orders, great Antagonis to
the former, does ratify the said revelations, yet dares he not define this
question of the conception against them, though it be true, that according to
the tenent of Papisticall doctrine, he being in conscience obliged to do it,
as many Pontificiall Doctors do clearly demonstrate, and amongst them most
elegantly, that renowned Sosa, Bishop of Segouia: Vbi sup.
I will transitorily say, that Cardinal Caietane, a conspicuous Author, as all
know, does many Authors affirm, that Saint Catelyn have a revelation
contradictory to that of Saint Bridget, which the Franciscans and Jesuits say;
he invented of his own head, to ratifye his opinion, whence appears, how
the Friars deride one another concerning the revelations.

The second reason proving the Papisticall Miracles to be diabolical, is,
because the actions which they usually allege for Miracles, are often times
so childish and ridiculous, that every one may with facility perceive that they
proceed not from the holy Ghost; Enel prado, espiritual page 100.
such was that Miracle of the Crow, which for having stolen a Ring, as they
say, did incur sentence of excommunication, and began forthwith to pine away
by little and little, refusing to eat, or crake, nor to continue the other
pastimes and demonstrations of iockondnesse, which irrational creatures are
accustomed to do, until an Abbot had absolved it, from which moment the Crow
began to be iouiall, returning unto it is former habit. Ibid page 24.
Semblable unto this Miracle, is that of a little Bitch, which dyed because it
entered into the holy Cell of Saint Gregory; Ibid page 103.
of like quality is that of Saint Bernard, of whom it goes for current, that he
excommunicated a great number of Flies, which dyed, being stricken with the
arrow of excommunication: but above all these Miracles, that of a Friar is
remarkable, Ibid. page 47.
who kept the Swine of his combent, and on a day assembling them into one
place, made unto them this, no less grave then eloquent oration: you know
brothers, swine, how in the time that I have so carefully kept you, I have
sufficiently taught and instructed you, where you may, and where you may not
feed; therefore I request you, that you roue not out of your bounds, for fear
of causing iarres in the Monastery, through the detriment of their neighbors;
and in confidence that so you will do, I will repair to the Convent,
promising you soon to return: and so he went, and all the swine as if they
had the use of reason, kept themselves in the hills apertayning to the Friars,
insomuch that some laboring men which desired to catch them, could by no
means drive them thence, notwithstanding they gave them many a blow with
cudgels; who is there of sound judgment, that does think God is the Author of
such fopperyes? It is the property of the devil, and not of God, to delude men
with such.

I will put a period unto this discourse, with one very true and domestical
example, that all the world may plainly discry the falsity of Papisticall
Miracles, and so abhor them. A Dominican Nun, called Mary of the
visitation, Prioresse of the Monastery of the Anunciada in Lisboa in Spain,
furnishes us with this example, whose hypocrisy and forged Miracles were
discovered and condemned publicly; diverse have written of this holy Nun,
but a Dominican Friar called Esteuan of Lusignan, has purposely treated of
her, collecting whatsoever he could find to magnify her, and compiled a book
in French, which he dedicated to the Queen of France, and caused it to be
printed at Paris by John Bessaut, in the year 1586. the title whereof is as
follows.

The great Miracles and most holy wounds which happened to the Reverend Matron
for this present year 1586. Prioresse of the Monastery of Anunciada, in the
City of Lisboa in Portugal, of the Order of Preaching Friars, approved of by
the Reverend Father Lewis de Granada, and other credible persons.

I will not here recite all which the Author alleges, but only abreuiate
what he says in his Dedicatory Epistle as follows.

I having found some Writings printed in diverse Cities, have gathered them
together, in which interuiewing the greatest Miracles and effects which in our
age the omnipotent Lord has wrought by a noble, virtuous, and religious
Virgin, called as formerly, most devoted unto the holy Sacrament, and of Saint
Thomas Aquinas, by whose merits and intercessions she has deserved to have
visibly for her spouse, Jesus Christ crucified, and his five most sacred
wounds, by means whereof the divine Majesty continually worked diverse Miracles.

This Lusignan to countenance that which he says, produces three Letters, the
first written by the Provincial, Anthonio de la Cerda, and sent to Fernando
Castor, Procurer in Rome for the said Province of Portugal, that he might show
it to the Pope; the date of it is, from Lisboa the 14. of March 1584. The
purport of the letter is, The Matron Maria de la visitacion, being eleauen
years old, betook her self to a Nunnery, and when she was of the age of
sixteen years, our Lord appeared occularly to this religious woman, to
recompense her merits, and took her for his Bride, and since that time
continues always to appear unto her, granting her many particular favors,
talking familiarly with her, as one friend does with another, after the same
manner that God conferred with Moses, and often times manifested himself to her,
accompanied with she and he Saints, and helped her to pray her canonical
prayers, and at the end of every Psalm, she said, gloria patri, and tibi, and
spiritui sancto, that is, glory be to the Father, and to you, and to the holy
Ghost. In the ninth page he says, when she received the Communion, the other
Nuns perceived her to be ravished in spiritual ecstasy a long while, until
her superior commanded her to go to the Communion with the other Nuns. In
the eleauenth page he says, so often as in the Nunnery she heard the bell
that accompanied the holy Corpse of our Savior carried through the streets to
the sick, she kneeled on the ground with tears, and was extatically
transported, as the Nuns of the said Nunry testifies: He further says, that
two several times, a Chest wherein the Sacrament was, did open of it own
accord, and the Eucharist lept out of it into her mouth: Further, in the 12.
page, when she was at prayers in her Cell, the Nuns saw her environed with
are splendency, and lifted up into the air, great brightness streaming from
her breast and face, which signified the great and fervent charity and love of
God which is in her: One day Jesus Christ appeared unto her, full of splendour,
and crucified with his five holy wounds; out of his feet, hands, and side, he
showed beams of fire, which darted upon the hands, feet, and side of this
holy Nun; the wounds and marks remained in her very beautifully, of sanguine
color, as well on the inside as the outside of the palms of her hands, and
of her feet correspondent the one to the other, and being of a round figure as
of a nail.

The second Letter was written by Lewis de Granada, to the Patriarch of
Valencia, wherein amongst other things he says, as follows. The Prioresse
has told me, that since seven years, she feels in her head, all the pains
of the crown of thorns, in such extremity, that the blood gusheth out, and
she has in her head, small holes and passages made by the said thorns.

The third Letter was written by the same Provincial, Antonio de la Cerda unto
Fernando Castro, Procuror in Rome for the Province of Portugal, therein he
thus says; Since your Reverence departed out of this City, it has pleased our
Lord to show from day to day, how acceptable unto him the Prioresse of
Annunciada is, for infinite are the Miracles, as well corporal as spiritual,
which he does by means of her in these parts, which have caused very many
Gentlemen to turn Friars; anon he says, that three Mores inspired by God,
went to see her, as soon as they had seen her, they fell prostrate to the
ground on their faces: the manner of it was such, that some of those that were
there present, were feign to help them up; being up, and looking on her the
second time, they kneeled down, without saying any word, lamenting incessantly
for a long time; their eyes being fixed on the Pryoresse, when I asked them
wherefore they spoke not to her, they answered, that they saw in her such
admirable things, that they knew not what to say; and then they entreated the
Pryoresse that he that was by her might Baptize them; she answered, that I
should Baptize them; whereof I aduertized the Archbishop, accompanying them
unto him with some other Fathers. They confessed to him in our presence, that
they had seen by the Pryoresse, Jesus Christ in humane shape fastened on the
Cross.

Presently he mentions another Miracle, of a Dame that put upon her lips
which were poisoned, a little piece of linen of the same Nuns, and presently
she was well. He adds another Miracle, of a woman that drinking water, into
which had been cast two pieces of a Cross which this Prioresse had given her,
she was forthwith healed of her infirmity; and adds, that the two pieces
joined themselves together in the water, and made a perfect Cross.

All this is gathered out of the aforementioned book, the fame of the
holiness of this Nun was so renowned, that Cardinal Albertus of Austria,
sent an information of it to Pope Sixtus the sift, to whom the Pope writ this
ensuing Letter, We read with much contentation, the Letter which you caused to
be written unto us of the virtues of the Prioresse, and of the great blessings
which God has conferred upon her; supplicating his divine bounty to make her
from day to day worthy of his grace, and enrich her with his Celestial gifts,
to the glory of his name, and the comfort of his faithful ones; Dated in Rome
in Saint Mary's, with the seal of the Fisher, the 10. of September, 1584.

Antonio Pruchae Badulmi under writ it.

Now that we have heard the pro, let us hear the contra, the true Jesus
Christ, (and not the spouse of this Nun, which was the Devil) was pleased to
unmask this bride of Jesus Christ, reputed so holy and full of charity, and an
actresse of Miracles, and so to manifest all her abominations, superstitions,
and Idolatries, and so at the end of the year, 1588. which was the Admirable
year, she was condemned, as a book witnesses, printed in Civil at the
beginning of the year 1589. following: out of which is taken word for word,
what I will say against her; the title of it is, A relation of the sanctity and
wounds of Mary of the visitation, which was Prioresse of the Annunciada of
Lisboa, and that which was declared in the sentence pronounced against her.
Diverse grave personages being deputed to examine the verity of her wounds, and
sanctimony, repaired to the Nunnery, and found by the testimony of many Nuns
uniformly agreeing, that the sanctity of the Prioresse was counterfeited, and
the wounds painted, notwithstanding the Prioresse denied it, until they took
hard soap and hot water, and washed her hands thoroughly with them, and the
wounds over them; during the which, she feigned the feeling of great pain: in
conclusion, when the wounds vanished away, she fell on the ground, and began to
weep, sigh, and crave mercy; casting her self at the Deputies feet, and
being required to declare the truth, she said that she had painted these
wounds on her hands, and did it ordinarily, and that that one on her side she
had only did it thrice with a penknife, and that the crown of thorns on her
head, she had made it with pricking her self with a knife until the blood
followed, and that she had done this six or seven times: being asked how she
had figured the five drops of blood upon those little clouts which she said
came from the wound of her side; she replied, that she had cunningly painted
some fine Holland cloth with blood, and when they presented her any pieces of
linen to touch the wound she fained to have in her side, she did cut them in
the presence of those that gave them her, shaping them according to the form
of those she carried in her bosom, and putting the pieces she had received
into her bosom, she plucked it out, and gave instead of them those which she
had painted with blood: Being demanded how sheraised her self up, and how the
Nuns often times saw her glitter in her Cell; she answered, that she fiered a
few coals in a Chafing Dish, and did set it before a Looking-glass, and the
beams of it which were in the Looking-glass, did reflect upon her face; and
that she might seem to be elevated and lifted up, she did put her feet into
a high kind of shoes called Chapines, and sometimes upon stilts, which she
had for that purpose; and was so dextriously placed upon them, that she seemed
to be in the air. After these interrogatories, her faults being manifest,
she was condemned the 6. of December, 1588. in the Monestary of the mother of
God of this City, and in her presence was pronounced and read her sentence: She
was not condemned to be burned, but only enjoined certain Monastical
penances, because the fury and rage of the Inquisitors is only satiated with
the blood of the truly faithful, which they call Lutherans, as also because
the Nun was of the Dominican Order, of which Order most of the Inquisitors
are.

About the year of our Lord 1540. there was in the City of Cordoua, another
Nun which was Prioresse of the Nunnery of Saint Francis, who was condemned by
the Inquisitors of the same City for enormous crimes and compacts which she had
made with the Devil; by whose assistance she did such things, that throughout
all Spain she was reputed and adored for a Saint: The History of whom,
Ciprian de Valera truly recounteth in his tractate of the Mass.

We may conclude from the premises, that seeing Miracles do not always
accompany the true and Catholic Faith, and are common to the Ministers of
God, and those of the devil, of whom Scripture witnesses that he shall do
them, to deceive therewith the faithful; experience also teaches us, that he
so does; Payua en sus sermones page 261
we cannot judge by them of Religion, but rather contrarily (as says Saint
Augustine, with whom Doctor Payua concurreth.) Examine and try Miracles by the
pure and holy Doctrine of the Church, and obedience of the Law of God;
whereunto if they be punctually answerable, we may hold them for true and
divine ones; if otherwise, for false and diabolical, yea though they seem to
be the most prodigious Miracles that ever were seen; for what greater Miracles
then those of our Lord Jesus Christ and his Apostles? And yet if the Pharisees
could have imputed unto him or them the least breach of Gods Law, they had
liberty not to believe them; as the said Doctor Payua proves very learnedly,
Ibid.
and this is so pregnant a truth, that it caused Lactantius to say, Torres. en
su Philosophia moral. page 849.
whom Doctor Torres alleges and follows, Non idcirco a nobis creditur
Christus, quia mirabilia fecit, sed quia vidimus facta esse omnia quae nobis
annunciata sunt vaticinio Prophetarum, (that is) Christ is not therefore
believed by us because he wrought Miracles, but because we have seen all
things accomplished which were foretold us by the Prophets. And the ancient
Martyr Ignatius had the courage to say, Jgnacius epist. ad Occeanum and Pamach.
Euangelio se non crediturum, nisi videret in antiquis; that he would not give
credit to the Gospel, unless he saw it in the Prophets, which is the joint
voice of all the Saints and Doctors of the Church, as the said Torres
notifieth: but if it be thus, as thus it is, why should the Pope of Rome
prefer his Miracles before those of Christ's? willing that they should be the
rule of Faith, the others not having been so? and why should we be so foolish
as to undervalue the ancient and Apostolical advise and directions, which do
place Miracles after Doctrine, and follow the new and Apostaticall which does
preferthem? No, no, let us not suffer our selves to be so deluded, principally
in matters of such consequence as this is; let us censure Miracles by Doctrine,
and not contrariwise Doctrine by Miracles; and seeing Papisticall Doctrine is
farced with a thousand superstitions and errors, let us not endure to be
overcome by Miracles, especially seeing they are (as has been copiously
expressed) either counterfeit or feigned, or diabolical. As often therefore as
the Papists shall object them unto us, let us stop their mouths, saying with
Saint. Augustine, August. lib. de vnitate eccae.
Romoueantur ista vel figmenta hominum mendacium, vel portenta Spirituum
fallacium, aut enim non sunt vera quae dicuntur, aut si aliqua mira facta sunt,
magis cauere debemus: quod cum dixisset Dominus, quosdam futuros esse fallaces,
qui nonnulla signa faciendo, etiam electos si fieri posset, fallerent adjecit
vehementer commendans and ait: Ecce praedixi vobis.

Let us remove those fictions of lying men, or prodigies of deceitful spirits,
for either they are not true, which are reported, or if any Miracles have been
done, we ought to be more cautious and wary, seeing our Lord has said, there
shall come deceivers, which by doing of signs, shall deceive even the elect,
if it were possible; he adds, emphatically, saying, Behold I have foretold
it you.

FINIS.

