THE FOLLOWING OF CHRIST.

Divided into four Books.

Written in Latin by the Learned and devout Man, THOMAS A KEMPIS, Canon-Regular
of the Order of S. AUGUSTINE.

Whereunto also is added the golden EPISTLE of S. BERNARD.

And Also certain rules of a Christian life, made by JOHN PICVS the elder,
Earl of MIRANDVLA^

Translated into English by B. F.

Printed with license. 1615.



TO THE HONORABLE AND VIRTUOUS ELIZABETH VAVX, Mother to the Lord HARRODOVVNE.
HOnorable and Right Worthy, the public demonstration which you have lately
given of your true desire to follow the footsteps of our Lord, undergoing so
heavy a Cross for his sake, with so ready and resolved a mind, has moved me
to dedicate this little Book of the IMITATION OF CHRIST unto you: assuring my
self that it will be no less grateful to you to see it appear in light,
purged from many mistaken sentences which were in the former Translation, then
the reading and practice thereof will be profitable to others; it being so
divine and excellent a work, as in the opinion of such as can best judge of
this matter, of all the Books which are written, that treat of Spirit and
Christian Perfection, the holy Scripture excepted, it is inferior to none, if
it excels not all.

No book has bin more approved by general consent, none more often printed
and translated into diverse languages, none more esteemed, commended, yea
commanded also by the chief Masters of Spirit of some religious Orders, to be
often read by every one in private, and once a week publicly to al. So full of
sweet sense is this divine Flower, that the most spiritual Bees may daily draw
from thence great plenty of celestial honey. It is a dish of so divine meat,
that it never satiates the devout mind: but as the Wisdom of God does promise
to all such as sit at that heavenly banquent; so shall they find in this
spiritual food, The more they eat it, the more they shall hunger after it.
Eccles. 4.

And the reason hereof is, for that it contains so great depth of spirit, and
so great store and variety of heavenly documents, that it seems ever new to
the Reader, and like another Manna, affords to every one that delightful
taste which best agrees with the palate of his soul: and none can loath it,
but they whose lusts do carry them to Egyptian slavery. A true Israelite may
feed upon it forty years together, and ever find such pleasing taste and
increasing strength by use thereof, as will sustain him in the desert of this
world, and enable him to go on without fainting, till he arrive at his
promised inheritance of eternal rest.

The practice of that which this book does teach, covers the soul with the
rich garment of grace, and adorneth it with the splendent pearls of Euangelical
perfection, which makes us more pleasing in the sight of God, then can the
deckings of all earthly jewels make the fairest Lady in the Kingdom, where you
are, appear beautiful to the eyes of men. It returns abundant gain for
sustained losses, and enlarges the liberty which is now restrained. It raises
up to cheerful confidence the debased head, and places in a Throne of
endless honor those who in this world do seem imprisoned in the black
cloud of disgrace.

To you therefore who have so willingly endured the loss of your earthly
substance, I have thought good to present this Evangelical Pearl, and
incomparable Treasure contained in a little room. Here you shall find the most
perfect manner of conforming our selves to Christ our heavenly pattern, and see
the virtues set forth in their colors, which did most shine in the life of our
Lord himself; and read in plain and vulgar phrase those Lessons of high
perfection, which are commended unto us by the highest Wisdom, and which have
made as many Saints, as they have had diligent and obseruant followers.

Accept therefore, I beseech you, this little Present, presented by him who
wishes you much more temporal happiness, then your present state affords;
and that endless glory, whereof your present suffering is no uncertain
pledge. This first of November. 1612.

Yours in all duty. B. F.

A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS OF THIS ensuing Book.
THE FIRST BOOK.
OF the imitation of Christ, and contempt of all the vanities of the world.
page 1 Of the humble conceit of our selves. page 4 Of the doctrine of truth.
page 7 Of prudence and foresight in our actions. page 13 Of the reading of holy
Scriptures. page 14 Of inordinate desires, and affections. page 16 Of flying
vain hope and pride. page 17 That too much familiarity is to be shunned. page
19 Of obedience and subjection. page 21 Of avoiding superfluity of words. page
23 Of the obtaining of peace, and zeal of spiritual profit. page 25 Of the
profit of adversity. page 29 Of resisting temptations. page 30 Of avoiding
rash judgment. page 36 Of works done of charity. page 38 Of bearing with the
defects of others. page 40 Of religious life. page 42 Of the examples of the
holy Fathers. page 44 Of the exercise of a good and religious person. page 48
Of the love of solitude and silence. page 54 Of compunction of heart. page 60
Of the consideration of humane misery. page 64 Of the consideration of death.
page 70 Of judgment, and the punishment of sin. page 77 Of the fervent
amendment of our whole life. page 83
THE SECOND BOOK.
OF spiritual conversation. page 93 Of humble submission. page 99 Of a good
and peaceable man. page 101 Of a pure mind and upright intention. page 104 Of
the consideration of ones self. page 106 Of the comfort of a good conscience.
page 108 Of the love of Jesus above all things. page 111 Of familiar
conversation with Jesus. page 114 Of the want of all comfort. page 118 Of
thankefulnes for the grace of God. page 124 How few the the lovers of the
Cross of Christ are. page 128 Of the high way of the holy Cross. page 131
THE THIRD BOOK.
OF the inward speech of Christ unto a faithfull-soule page 143 That truth
speaks inwardly without noise of words. page 145 That the words of God are to
be heard with humility, and that many weigh them not. page 147 That we ought
to live in truth and humility in the sight of God. page 152 Of the wonderful
effect of divine grace. page 156 Of the proof of a true Lover. page 161 That
grace is to be hid under the veil of humility. page 165 Of a mean conceit of
our selves in the sight of God. page 170 That all things are to be referred
unto God, as unto the last end. page 173 That despising the world, it is sweet
to serve God. page 175 That the desires of our heart are to be examined and
moderated. page 179 Of the effects of patience, and of strife against
concupiscence. page 182 Of the humble obedience of a subject, according to the
example of Christ. page 185 Of the secret Judgments of God to be considered,
lest we be extolled in our good deeds. page 188 What we ought to do and say
in every thing which we desire. page 191 That true comfort is to be sought in
God alone. page 194 That all our care is to be placed in God. page 196 That
temporal miseries, by the example of Christ, are to be borne patiently. page
198 Of suffering of injuries, and who is proved to be truly patient. page 201
Of the acknowledging of our own infirmity: and of the miseries of this life.
page 204 That we are to rest in God above all his gifts. page 208 Of the
remembrance of the manifold benefits of God. page 213 Of four things that
bring much peace. page 217 Of flying curious inquiry of the life of others page
221 Wherein does the firm peace of the heart, and true profit consist. page
223 Of the excellency of a free mind, which humble prayer better deserves
then reading. page 226 That private love most hinders from the chiefest good.
page 229 Against the tongue of slanderers. page 432 How we ought to call upon
God, and bless him when tribulation draws near. page 233 Of craving the
divine aid, and confidence of recovering grace. page 235 Of the contempt of
all creatures to find our Creator. page 240 Of the denial of our selves, and
forsaking our affections. page 244 Of inconstancy of heart, and of directing
our final intentions unto God. page 247 That God is sweet above all things,
and in all things to him that loves. page 249 That there is no security from
temptation in this life. page 252 Against the vain judgments of men. page 255
Of a full and pure resignation of our selves for the obtaining freedom of
heart. page 257 Of good government in outward things, and of recourse to God in
dangers. page 260 That a man be not over earnest in his affairs. page 262 That
man has no good of himself, nor any thing whereof he can glory. page 264 Of
the contempt of all temporal honors. page 267 That our peace is not to be
placed in men. page 268 Against vain and secular knowledge. page 271 Of not
drawing outward things to our selves. page 274 That credit is not to be given
to all men: and how prone man is to offend in words. page 275 Of putting our
trust in God, when evil words arise. page 280 That all grievous things are to
be endured for life everlasting. page 284 Of the everlasting day, and
shortness of this life. page 287 Of the desire of everlasting life, and how
great rewards are promised to those that fight valiantly. page 292 How a
desolate person ought to offer himself into the hands of God. page 299 That a
man ought to employ himself in works of humility, when force is wanting for
higher exercises. page 305 That a man ought to esteem himself unworthy of
comfort, and to have deserved stripes. page 307 That the grace of God is not
given to those that savor of earthly things. page 310 Of the different motions
of Nature and Grace. page 313 Of the corruption of nature, and efficacy of
divine grace. page 320 That we ought to deny our selves, and imitate Christ by
the Cross. page 325 That a man be not too much dejected, when he falls into
some defects. page 329 Of not searching into high matters, and into the secret
judgments of God. page 333 That all our hope and trust is to be fixed in God
alone. page 341
THE FOVRTH BOOK.
WIth how great reverence Christ is to be received. page 349 That great goodness
and charity of God is bestowed upon man in this Sacrament. page 356 That it is
profitable to communicate often. page 361 That many benefits are bestowed upon
them that communicate devoutly. page 365 Of the dignity of this Sacrament, and
Priestly function. page 371 An Interrogation of the exercise before Communion.
page 374 Of the discussing of our own conscience, and purpose of amendment.
page 375 Of the oblation of Christ on the Cross, and resignation of our
selves. page 379 That we ought to offer up our selves, and all that is ours
unto God, and to pray for all. page 381 That the holy Communion is not lightly
to be forborne. page 386 That the Body of Christ, and the holy Scripture are
most necessary unto a faithful soul. page 392 That he that is to communicate,
ought to prepare himself with great diligence. page 399 That a devout soul
ought to desire with her whole heart to be united unto Christ in the Sacrament.
page 403 Of the fervent desire of some devout persons to receive the body of
Christ. page 406 That the grace of devotion is obtained by humility and
denial of our selves. page 409 That we ought to manifest our necessities unto
Christ, and to crave his grace. page 412 Of burning love and vehement desire to
receive Christ. page 414 That a man be not a curious searcher of this
Sacrament, but an humble follower of Christ, submitting his sense unto faith.
page 418
OF THE FOLLOWING OF CHRIST. THE FIRST BOOK.
CHAP. I. Of the Imitation of Christ, and contempt of all the vanities of the
world.
HE that follows me* walks not in darkness, says our Lord. Ioh. 8. These
are the words of Christ, by which we are admonished, that we ought to imitate
his life, and manners, if we will be partakers of his divine light, and be
delivered from all blindness of heart. Let therefore our chief care be to
meditate upon the life or Jesus Christ.

2 The doctrine of Christ exceeds all the doctrine of the Saints: and he
that had the light of spirit, would discover therein a secret and hidden Manna.
But it falls out that many, who often hear the Gospel of Christ, do yet
feel in themselves but slender motion of any holy desire, because they are
void of the Spirit of Christ. But whosoever will fully and feelingly
understand the words of Christ, must endeavor to conform his life wholly to
the life of Christ.

3 What will it avail thee to dispute profoundly of the Trinity, if thou be
void of humility, and thereby displeasing to the Trinity? High words surely,
make a man neither holy nor just; but a virtuous life makes him dear to God.
I had rather feel compunction, then understand the definition thereof. 1. Cor.
^^. If thou did know the whole Bible by heart, and the sayings of all the
Philosophers, what would all that profit thee, without charity, and the grace
of God; Vanity of vanities, and al is vanity, but only to love God, and wholly
to serve him. Eccles. 1. This is the highest wisdom, by contempt of the world,
to tend toward the Kingdom of heaven.

4 It is therefore vanity to seek after fading riches, and to repose trust in
them. It is also vanity to gape after honors, and to climb to high degrees. It
is vanity to follow the appetites of the flesh, and to labor for that, for
which thou must afterward suffer more griueuous punishment. Vanity it is to
wish to live long, and to be careless to live well. It is vanity to mind
only this present life, and not to foresee those things which are to come. It
is vanity to set thy love on that which speedily passes away, and not to
hasten thither, where everlasting joy is permanent.

5 Call often to mind this proverb: That the eye is never satisfied with
seeing, nor the ear filled with hearing. Eccles. 1. Endeavor therefore to
withdraw thy heart from the affection of visible things, and to turn thy self
to the invisible. For they that follow their sensuality, do stain their own
consciences, and lose the grace of God.

CHAP. II. Of the humble conceit of our selves.
ALL men by nature desire to know: but what avails knowledge without the
fear of God? Eccles. 1. and Arist. l. 1. Metaph. cap. 1. Surely, an humble
husbandman that fears God, is better then a proud Philosopher that neglecting
himself, labors to understand the course of the heavens. Who so knows
himself well, grows daily more contemptible in his own conceit, and
delights not in the praises of men. If I understood all that is to be known
in the world, and were not in charity, what would that help me in the sight
of God, who will judge me according to my deeds?

2 Give not thy self to inordinat desire of knowledge: for therein is much
distraction and deceit. The learned are willing to seem so to others, and to
be accounted wise. 1. Corinthians. 8. There be many things, which to know, does
little or nothing profit the soul: and he is very unwise, that bestows his
labor about other things, then those that may avail him for the health of his
soul. Many words do not satisfy the desires of the heart: but a good life
comfort the mind, and a pure conscience gives great assurance in the sight
of God.

3 How much the more thou know, and how much the better thou
understand, so much the more grievously shall thou therefore be judged,
unless thy life be also more holy. Be not therefore extolled in thy own mind
for any art or science which thou know; but rather let the knowledge given
thee, make thee more fearful. If thou think that thou understand and
know much; know also that there be many things more, which thou know not.
Think not too well of thy self, but rather confess thine ignorance. Romans 12.
Why will thou prefer thy self before others, since there be many more
learned and skillful in the Law then thou? If thou will know or learn any
thing profitable, desire not to be known, and to be little esteemed of by men.

4 The highest and most profitable reading, is the true knowledge and
consideration of our selves. It is great wisdom and perfection to esteem
nothing of our selves, and to think always well and commendably of others. If
thou should see another openly sin, or commit any heinous offense; yet
ought thou not to esteem the better of thy self, for thou know not how
long thou shall be able to remain in good estate. We are all frail, but
thou ought to esteem none more frail then thy self. Genesis 8.

CHAP. III. Of the doctrine of Truth.
HAppy is he, whom Truth by it self does teach, not by figures, and voices
that pass away; but as it is in it self. Psalm. 93.1. Our own opinion and
sense do often deceive us, and it discernes little. What avails it to
dispute and contend about dark and hidden things; whereas for being ignorant
of them, we shall not so much as once be reprehended at the day of Judgment?
Eccl. 3. It is a great folly to neglect the things that are profitable and
necessary, and give our minds to that which is curious and hurtful: we have
eyes and do not see. Psalm. 113.

2 And what have we to do with the terms and distinctions of Logitians? He
to whom the eternal Word speaks, is delivered from multitudes and
diversities of opinions. By that one Word all things do speak, and all
declare the same: and this is the beginning, and that which speaks unto us.
No man without that Word understands or judges rightly. He to whom all
things are one, who draws all things to one, and sees all things in one,
may enjoy a quiet mind, and remain peaceable in God. O God, the eternal
Truth, make me one with thee in everlasting charity. It is tedious to me often
to read and hear many things. In thee is all that I would have, and can
desire. Let all Doctors hold their peace: let all creatures be silent in thy
sight: speak thou alone unto me.

3 How much the more one is retired within himself, and becomes inwardly
sincere and pure; so much the more, and higher mysteries does he understand
without labor: for that he receives light of understanding from above. Mat.
11. Luke 10. A pure, sincere and stayed spirit is not distracted, though he be
employed in many works: for that he works all to the honor of God, and
labors for inward tranquillity, without seeking himself in any thing he
does. Who hinders and troubles thee more then the unmortified desires of thine
own heart? A good and devout man first of all disposes in himself his
outvvard works: neither do they draw him to the desires of an inordinate
inclination; but he orders them to the prescript of reason. Who has a
greater combat, then he that labors to overcome himself? This ought to be
our endeavor, to conquer our selves daily, to wax stronger, and be more able
to subdue our passions, and always in this way to get some ground.

4* All perfection in this life has some imperfections mixed with it: and no
knowledge of ours is void of darkness and ignorance. An humble knowledge of thy
self is a more secure way to God, then a deep search after learning: yet
learning is not to be blamed, nor the only knowledge of any thing whatsoever is
to be disliked, it being good in it self, and ordained by God: but a good
conscience, and a virtuous life is to be preferred before it. And for that many
endeavor, rather to get knowledge, then to live well: therefore they are often
deceived, and reap either none, or very slender profit of their labors.

5 O, if men bestowed as much labor in the rooting out of vices, and planting
of virtues, as they do in moving doubts and questions; neither would there so
much hurt be done, nor so great scandal be given in the world, nor so much
loosnes be practiced in places erected for virtue! Truly at the day of
Judgment we shall not be examined what we have read, but what we have done:
nor how well we have spoken, but how virtuously we have lived. Math. 23. Tell
me now, where are all those great Doctors and Ministers, with whom thou wast
well acquainted, whilst they lived and flourished in learning? Now others
possess their livings, and perhaps do scarce ever think of them. In their
lifetime they seemed something, and now they are not spoken of.

6 O, how quickly does the glory of this world pass away! Eccl. 2. Would God
their life had been answerable to their learning, then had their study and
reading bin to good purpose. How many perish in this world by reason of vain
learning, who take little care of the service of God? Tit. 1. And because they
rather choose to be great then humble; Romans 1. therefore they vanish away in
their own thoughts. Mat. 18. and 23. He is truly great, that is great in
charity. He is truly great, that is little in himself, and that makes no
account of the height of honor. He is truly wise, that accounts all earthly
things as dung, that he may gain Christ. And he is truly learned that
fulfilleth the will of Christ, and forsakes his own. Phil. 3.

CHAP. IV. Of Prudence and Foresight in our actions.
WE must not give ear to every suggestion or instinct, but ought warily and
leasurely to ponder things according to the will of God. 1. Io. 4. But (alas)
such is our weakness, that we rather often believe, and speak evil of
others, then good. Those that are perfectly virtuous, do not easily give credit
to every thing that is told them, Genesis 8. for they know that humane frailty is
prone to evil, and very subject to fail in words. Iam. 3.

2 It is great wisdom not to be rash in thy proceedings, nor to stand
stiffely in thine own conceits. Proverb. 19. as also not to believe every
thing which thou hear; nor presently to relate again to others, what thou
have heard, or do believe. Prou. 17. Consult with him that is wise, and of a
good conscience, and seek to be instructed by a better then thy self, rather
then to follow thine own inventions. A good life makes a man wise, according
to God, and gives him experience in many things. Prou. 15. and Eccl. 1. How
much the humbler one is in himself, and more subject and resigned unto God; so
much the more prudent shall he be in all his affairs, and enjoy greater
peace and quiet of heart.

CHAP. V. Of the reading of holy Scriptures.
TRuth, not eloquence, is to be sought for in holy Scriptures. Each part of
them is to be read with the same spirit it was made. We should rather search
after spiritual profit in Scriptures, then subtility of speech. Romans 15. We
ought to read devout and simple books, as willingly as high and learned. Let
not the reputation of the writer offend thee, whether he be of great or small
learning: but let the pure word of truth move thee to read. Search not who
spoke this, or that, but mark what is spoken. 1. Cor. 2.

2 Men pass away; but the truth of our Lord remains for ever. Psalm. 110. and
Luke 21. God speaks unto us sundry ways, without respect of persons. Our
own curiosity often hinders us in reading of the Scriptures, when as we will
examine and discuss that which we should rather pass over without more ado.
Romans 2. and 10. and Col. 3. If thou desire to reap profit, read humbly,
plainly and faithfully: never desire the estimation of learning. Inquire
willingly, and hear with silence the words of holy men: dislike not the
Parables of Elders, for they are not recounted without cause. Prou. 1. and 18.

CHAP. VI. Of inordinate desires, and affections.
Whenever a man desires any thing inordinately, he is presently disquieted
in himself. The proud and covetous can never rest. The poor and humble in
spirit, live together in all peace. The man that is not wholly dead in
himself, is quickly tempted, and overcome in small and trifling things. The
weak in spirit, and that is yet in a manner subject to his appetites, and
prone to sensible things, can hardly withdraw himself altogether from earthly
desires. And therefore he is often afflicted, when he goes about to retire
himself from them* and easily falls into indignation, when any opposition is
made against him.

2 And if he has followed therein his appetite, he is presently disquieted
with remorse of conscience; for that he yields to his passion, which
profits him nothing to the obtaining of the peace he sought for. True quiet
of mind therefore, is gotten by resisting our passions, not by obeying them.
There is no peace in the heart of a carnal man, nor of him that is addicted to
outward things, but in the spiritual and fervent.

CHAP. VII. Of flying vain Hope, and Pride.
HE is vain that puts his trust in men, or creatures. Hier. 17.1. Be not
ashamed to serve others for the love of Jesus Christ: nor to be esteemed poor
in this world. Presume not upon thy self, but place thy hope in God. Psalm.
30. Do what lies in thy power, and God will assist thee. Trust not in thine
own knowledge, nor in the wisdom or prudence of any living creature: but
rather in the grace of God, who helps the humble, and humbles the
presumptuous and proud. Hier. 9.

2 Glory not in wealth, if thou have it, nor in the power of thy friends; but
in God, who gives all things, and above all desires to give thee himself.
Extol not thy self for the stature and beauty of thy body, which is dissolved
and disfigured with every little sickness. Take not pleasure in thy natural
gifts, or wit, lest thereby thou displease God, to whom appertains all the
good whatsoever Nature has given thee.

3 Esteem not thy self better then others, lest perhaps in the sight of God,
who knows what is in man, thou be accounted worse then they. Exodus 3. and 12.
Be not proud of thy good works, for the judgments of God are far different
from the judgments of men: and that often offends him, which pleases them.
Job 9. If there be any good in thee, believe that there is much more in others,
that so thou may the better keep within thy heart the precious treasure of
humility. It is no prejudice unto thee to esteem thy self worse then all the
world: but it hurts thee very much, to prefer thy self before any one. The
humble enjoy continual peace; but in the heart of the proud is envy, and often
indignation.

CHAP. VIII. That too much familiarity is to be shunned.
LAy not thy heart open to every one: but treat of thy affairs with the wise,
and such as fear God. Eccl. 8. Converse not much with young people and
strangers. Flatter not the rich; neither do thou appear willingly before
great personages. Keep company with the humble, simple, devout, and virtuous;
and confer with them of those things, that may edify. Be not familiar with
any woman: but in general commend all good women to God. Prou. 5. Desire to
be familiar with God alone, and his Angels, and fly the knowledge of men.

2 We must have charity toward all, but familiarity with all is not
expedient. Sometimes it falls out, that the fame of some person that is not
known, is much esteemed; whose presence notwithstanding is not grateful to
the eyes of the beholders. We think sometimes to please others by our
company, and we rather distate them with our disordered manners, and the evil
customs which they discover in us.

CHAP. IX. Of Obedience, and Subjection.
IT is a great matter to live in Obedience, to be under a Superior, and not to
be at our own disposition. It is much safer to live in the state of
subjection, then of government. Many live under Obedience, rather for
necessity, then for charity: and such are discontented, and do easily repine
and murmr. Neither can they attain to freedom of mind, unless they
willingly and heartily put themselves under Obedience for the love of God. Go
whither thou will, thou shall find no rest, but in humble subjection under the
government of a Superior The imagination and change of places have deceived
many.

2 True it is, that every one willingly does that which agrees with his own
sense and liking; and is apt to effect those most, that are of his own mind:
But if God be amongst us, we must leave our own judgment, that so peace and
quietness may be the better preserved. Who is so wise, that he can fully know
all things? Trust not therefore too much to thine own conceits: but be
willing to hear the judgment of others. If that which thou think be good,
and notwithstanding do leave it for God, and followest the opinion of
another, it shall be better for thee.

3 I have often heard, that it is more secure to hear and take counsel, then
to give it. It may also fall out, that each ones opinion may be good: but to
refuse to yield to others, when as reason, or cause requires it, is a token of
wilfulness and pride.

CHAP. X. Of the avoiding supersluity of words.
FLy the unquietness of men as much as thou can: for the talk of vvorldly
affairs hinders very much, although they be recounted with sincere
intention: Mat. 4. and 14. for we are quickly defiled, and as it were,
enthralled with vanity. Joan. 6. I could vvish that I had often times held my
peace, when I have spoken: and that I had not been in company. Why do we so
willingly speak, and talk one with another, when notwithstanding we seldom
return to silence, without hurt of conscience? The cause wherefore we so
willingly talk, is, for that by discoursing one with another, we seek to
receive comfort one of another: and desire to ease our mind, ouer-wearied with
sundry thoughts: Matthew. 7. and we talk willingly, and think of those things
which we love best, and most desire; or of those, which we feel most contrary
unto us. Romans 2.

2 But alas, oftentimes in vain, and to no end: for this outvvard comfort is
cause of no small loss of inward, and divine consolation. Therefore we must
watch and pray, lest our time pass without any fruit or profit. If it be
lawful and expedient for thee to speak; speak those things that may edify.
An evil custom, and neglect of our own good, does very much slack the
raynes to inconsiderate speech: Yet devout discourses of heavenly things, do
greatly further our progress in spirit, Act. 1. especially where persons of
one mind and spirit be gathered together in God. Romans 15.

CHAP. XI. Of the obtaining of peace, and zeal of spiritual profit.
WE might enjoy peace, if we would not busy our selves with the words and
deeds of other men, which appertain nothing to our charge. How can he live
long in peace, that thrusts himself into the cares of others, or that little
or seldom recollecteth himself within his own breast? Blessed are the simple
and pure minds: for they shall enjoy much peace.

2 What is the reason why some of the Saints were so perfect, and
contemplative; Because they labored to mortify themselves wholly to earthly
desires; and therefore they could with their whole heart, give themselves to
God, and freely attend to their own affairs. We are too much led by our own
passions, and too solicitous for transitory things. We also seldom overcome
any one vice perfectly, and are not inflamed with a fervent desire to profit in
spirit: and therefore we remain cold in devotion, and full of tepiditie.

3 If we were perfectly dead unto our selves, and not entangled within our own
breasts: then we might also have some taste of divine things, and feel the
sweetness of heavenly contemplation. The greatest, and indeed the whole
impediment is, for that we are not free from our passions, and disordered
inclinations: neither do we endeavor to enter into that path of perfection,
which the Saints have walked before us: and when any small adversity befalls
us, we are too quickly dejected, and turn our selves to humane comforts.

4 If we endeavor like men of courage, to stand continually in the battle;
surely we should feel the favorable assistance of God from heaven. For he
who gives us occasion to fight, to the end we may get the victory, is ready to
succor those that fight manfully, and do trust in his grace. If we esteem
our progress in religious life, to consist only in these exterior
observations; our devotion will quickly be at an end. Let us set the axe to the
root, that being freed from passions, we may enjoy true peace of mind.

5 If every year we would root out one vice, we should quickly become perfect
men. But now oftentimes we perceive it goes contrary, and that we were
better, and of a more pure conscience at the beginning of our conversion, then
after many years of our profession. Our fervor and profit should increase
daily; but now it is accounted a great matter, if one can retain but some part
of his first spirit. If we would use but a little violence in the beginning,
then should we be able to perform all things afterward with ease and joy
of heart.

6 It is a hard matter to leave that to which we are accustomed; but harder to
do against our own wills. But if thou do not overcome little and easy
things; how will thou overcome harder matters? Resist thy inclination in the
first motions, and break off evil customs, lest perhaps by little and little
they dravv thee to greater difficulty. O, if thou did consider how much
inward peace to thy self, and joy to others thou should procure by
demeaning thy self well; I suppose thou would be more careful of thy
spiritual profit.

CHAP. XII. Of the profit of Adversity.
IT is good that we have sometimes grief and adversities: for they often make
a man enter into himself, and remember that he is here in banishment, and
ought not to place his trust in any worldly thing. It is good that we be some
times contradicted; and that there be an evil or hard conceit had of us: and
this, although we do, and intend well. These things help often to the
attaining of humility, and defend us from vainglory: for then we chiefly
seek God for our inward witness; when outwardly we be contemned by men, and
when there is no credit given unto us.

2 And therefore a man should settle himself so fully in God, that he needed
not to seek many comforts of men. When a good and virtuous man is afflicted,
tempted, or troubled with evil thoughts; then he understands better the
great need he has of Gods assistance, without whose help he perceives he
can do nothing that is good. Then also he sorroweth, lamenteth, and prays
for the miseries he suffers. Then is he weary of living longer, and wishes
that death would come, that he might be dissolved, and be with Christ. Then
also he well perceives, that complete security, and perfect peace cannot be
had in this world.

CHAP. XIII. Of Resisting Temptations.
SO long as we live in this world we cannot be without tribulation and
temptation: for as it is written in Job: Temptation is the life of man upon
earth. Every one therefore ought to be careful, and diligently to arm
himself with prayer against his temptations, lest the Devil find time and
place to deceive him; who never sleeps, but goes about seeking whom he may
devour. No man is so perfect and holy, but has sometimes temptations: and we
cannot be altogether free from them.

2 Temptations are often profitable unto men; though they be troublesome and
grievous: for in them man is humbled, purged and instructed. All the Saints
have passed and profited through many tribulations and temptations; and they
that could not bear temptations, became reprobate and fell from God. There is
no order so holy, nor place so secret, where there be not temptations or
adversities.

3 There is no man that is altogether free from temptations, whilst he lives
on earth: for in our selves is the cause thereof, being borne with inclination
to evil. When one temptation or tribulation goes away, another comes: and
we shall ever have something to suffer, because we have lost that innocence
with which we were created. Many seek to fly temptations, and do fall more
grievously into them. By flight alone we cannot overcome; but by patience and
true humility, we become stronger then all our enemies.

4 He that only auoideth them outwardly, and does not pluck them up by the
root, shall profit little: yea temptation will the sooner return unto him; and
he shall feel himself in worse case then before. By little and little, and by
patience with longanimitie (through Gods help) thou shall more easily overcome,
then with violence, and thine own importunity. Often take counsel in
temptation, and deal not, roughly with him that is tempted; but give him
comfort, as thou would wish to be done to thy self.

5* The beginning of al evil temptations, is inconstancy of mind, and little
confidence in God: for as a ship without a stern is tosted to and fro with
the waves: so the man that is negligent, and leaves his purpose, is many ways
tempted. Fire tries iron, and temptation a just man. We know not oftentimes
what we are able to do, but temptations do show us what we are. We must be
watchful, especially in the beginning of the temptation, for the enemy is
then more easily overcome, if he be not suffered to enter the door of our
hearts, but be resisted without the gate at his first knock. Wherefore, one
said: Ovid. libr. 1. de remed. amoris. Withstand the beginnings, for an
after-remedie comes often too late. First there comes to the mind an evil
thought, then a strong imagination thereof, afterward delight, and an evil
motion, and then consent: and so by little and little our wicked enemy gets
full entrance, whilst he is not resisted in the beginning. And how much the
longer one is negligent in resisting; so much weaker does he become daily, and
the enemy stronger against him.

6 Some suffer greatest temptations in the beginning of their conversion;
others in the later end; others again are much troubled almost through the
whole time of their life. Some are but easily tempted, according to the
wisdom, and equity of the divine appointment, which weighs the state and
deserts of men; and ordains al things for the saving of his elect and chosen
servants.

7 We ought not therefore to despair when we are tempted; but so much the more
fervently to pray unto God, that he will vouchsafe to help us in all
tribulation; who surely according to the saying of S. Paul, Will make with
temptation such issue, that we may be able to sustain it. Let us therefore
humble our selves under the hand of God in all temptation and tribulation; for
he will save and exalt the humble in spirit.

8 In temptations and afflictions man is proved, how much he has profited; and
his merit is thereby the greater before God, and his virtues do more openly
appear. Neither is it any great matter if a man be devout and fervent, when
he feels no heaviness: but if in time of adversity he bear himself
patiently, there is hope of great good. Some are kept from great temptations,
and are often overcome in small ones, which do daily occur; to the end that
being humbled, they may never presume on themselves in great matters, who in so
small things do see themselves so weak.

CHAP. XIV. Of avoiding rash Judgment.
TVrne thine eyes unto thy self, and beware thou judge not rashly the deeds of
other men. Mat. 7. Romans 25. Eccls. 3. In judging of others a man always
labors in vain, often erreth, and quickly sins; but in judging and
discussing of himself, he always labors fruitfully. We often judge of
things according to our own desire; for private affection bereaues us easily
of true judgment. If God were always the pure intention of our desire, we
should not be so much troubled with the repugnance of our sensuality.

2 But oftentimes some inward secret inclination, or outward affection
occurreth, which draws us after it. Many secretly seek themselves in their
actions, and know it not. They seem also to live in good peace of mind, when
things are done according to their will and opinion; but if it succeed
otherwise then they desire, they are straight ways troubled and much
afflicted. The diversities of judgments and opinions, cause often dissentions
between friends and neighbors; between religious and devout persons. Matthew.
12. Luke 12.

3 An old custom is hardly broken, and no man is willingly led further then
himself likes. If thou do more rely upon thine own reason or industry, then
upon the virtue of obedience to Jesus Christ; Hier. 13. it will be long before
thou be illuminated with grace, for almighty God will have us perfectly subject
unto him, and that we transcend the narrow limits of humane reason, enflamed
with his love.

CHAP. XV. Of Works done of Charity.
FOr no worldly thing, nor for the love of any man, is any evil to be done:
Matthew. 18. but yet for the profit of one that stands in need, a good work is
sometimes to be left off, or changed also for a better. For by doing this, a
good work is not lost, but changed into another of greater merit. The
exterior work without charity profits nothing; 1. Cor. 13. but whatsoever
is done of charity, be it never so little and contemptible in the sight of the
world, it is fruitful, and of great esteem in the sight of God. For God
weighs more with how much love one works, then how much he does. He does
much, that loves much. Luke 7.

2 He does much, that does a thing well: he does well, that rather serves the
common good of others, then his own will. Phil. 2. Oftentimes it seems to
be charity, and it is rather carnality: because natural inclination,
self-will, hope of reward, and desire of our own commodity will seldom be
wanting.

3 He that has true and perfect charity, seeks himself in nothing; but
only desires in all things that the glory of God should be exalted. Phil.
2.3. and 1. Cor. 13. He also enuieth none; because he loves no private good:
neither will he rejoice in himself; but wishes above al things to enjoy God.
Psalm. ^7.24. He attributes nothing that is good to any man, but wholly
refers it unto God, from whom, as from the fountain, all things proceed: in
whom finally all Saints have perfect rest, by fruition of his glory. O, he that
had one spark of perfect charity, how easily would he discern, that all
earthly things be full of vanity!

CHAP. XVI. Of bearing with the defects of others.
THose things that a man cannot amend in himself or in others, he ought to
suffer patiently, until God ordain otherwise. Think that perhaps it is
better so, for thy trial and patience, without which our merits are not much
to be esteemed. Thou ought to pray, notwithstanding, when thou have such
impediments, that God would vouchsafe to help thee, and that thou may bear
them patiently. Matthew. 6. Luke 11.

2 If one that is once or twice warned does not amend, contend not with him;
but commit all to God, that his will may be fulfilled, and his name honored in
all his servants, who knovveth how to turn evil into good. Matthew. 6.
Endeavor to be patient in bearing with the defects and infirmities of others:
for that thy self also have many things, which must be suffered by others.
These. 5. and Ioh. 1. Luke 6. If thou can not make thy self such an one as
thou would; how can thou expect to have another in all things to thy
liking? We would willingly have others perfect, and yet we amend not our
own faults.

3 We will have others severely corrected, and will not be corrected our
selves. The large liberty of others displeases us: and yet we will not have
our desires denied us. We will have others kept under by rigorous laws; but
in no sort will we our selves be restrained. And thus it appears, how seldom
we weigh our neighbor in the same balance with our selves. If all men were
perfect, what should we have to suffer of our neighbor for God?

4 But now God has thus ordained, that we may learn to bear one another
burden: Gal. 6. for no man is without defect, no man without burden, no man
sufficient of himself, no man endued with so much wisdom as he needs: but we
ought to bear with one another, comfort one another, help, instruct, and
admonish one another. 1 Thessalonians. 5. and 1. Cor. 12. Adversity best discovers
how great virtue each one has: for occasions make not a man frail, but do
show what he is.

CHAP. XVII. Of Religious life.
THou must learn to break thy own will in many things, if thou will have
peace and concord with others. It is no small matter to dwell in community, or
in a congregation, and to converse therein without complaint, and to persevere
there faithfully until death. Blessed is he that has there lived well, and
ended happily. If thou will persevere in grace as thou ought, and profit in
virtue, esteem thy self as a banished man, and a pilgrim upon earth. Thou
must be contented for the love of Christ to be esteemed as a fool in this
world, if thou desire to lead a virtuous, and perfect religious life.

2 The wearing of religious habit and shauing of the crown, do little profit;
but change of manners, and perfect mortification of passions make a true
religious man. 1. Pet. 2. He that seeks any thing else but God, and the
health of his soul, shall find nothing but tribulation and sorrow. Eccls. 1.
and 4. Neither can he remain long in peace, that labors not to be in the
meanest place, and subject to all.

3. Thou came to serve, not to be served. Know that thou wast called to
suffer and to labor, not to be idle or to spend thy time in talk. Mat. 20.
Here in the School of Christ men are proved as gold in the furnace. Here no
man can stand, unless he humble himself with his whole heart, for the love
of God.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the examples of the holy Fathers.
COnsider the lively examples of the holy Fathers, in whom true perfection and
religion shined; and thou shall see how little it is, and almost nothing, which
we do now in these days. Heb. 11. Alas, what is our life, if it be compared
to them! The Saints and friends of Christ served our Lord in hunger and thirst,
in cold and nakedness, in labor and weariness, in watching and fasting, in
prayer and holy meditations, in persecutions and many reproaches.

2 O, how many and grievous tribulations suffered the Apostles, Martyrs,
Confessors, Virgins, and all the rest that endeavored to follow the steps of
Christ! They hated their lives in this world, Ioh. 12. that they might possess
their souls in everlasting life. Mat. 7. O, how strait and poor a life led
the holy Fathers in the wilderness! How long and grievous temptations suffered
they! How often and how grievously were they assaulted by their ghostly Enemy!
How fervent prayers offered they daily to God! How rigorous abstinence did they
use! How fervent zeal and care had they of their spiritual profit! How
strong, and continual a combat had they for the ouercomming of vices! How
pure and upright intention kept they unto God! In the day they labored, and in
the night they attended to continual prayer, although when they labored also,
they ceased not from mental prayer.

3 They spent all their time with profit: every hour seemed short for the
service of God: and for the great sweetness they had in contemplation, they
forgot the necessity of corporal refection. They renounced all riches,
dignities, honors, friends and kinsfolks; they desired to have nothing which
appertained to the world; they scarce took things necessary for the sustenance
of life; they grieved to serve their bodies, even it necessity. They were poor
in earthly things, but rich in grace and virtues Outwardly they wanted, but
inwardly they were replenished with grace and spiritual comfort.

4 They were strangers in the world, but near and familiar friends to God.
They seemed to themselves as nothing, and abject to this world: but they were
precious, and beloved in the eyes of God. They were grounded in true humility,
lived in simple obedience, walked in charity and patience: and therefore they
profited daily in spirit, and obtained great grace in Gods sight. They were
given for an example and pattern of perfection in Gods Church, and their
example should more stir us up to a desire of our spiritual profit, then the
number of the lukewarm and dissolute livers draw us to the neglect thereof.

5 O, how great was the fervor of all religious persons in the beginning of
their holy institution! How great was their devotion to prayer! How diligent
emulation of virtue! How exact discipline flourished! How great reverence and
obedience under the rule of their Superior observed they in all things! Their
footsteps yet remaining, do testify that they were indeed holy and perfect
men; who sighting so valiantly trod the world under their feet* Now he is
greatly accounted of, that breaks not the rule, and that can with patience
endure that which he has professed.

6 O coldness and negligence of our time, that we so quickly decline from our
first fervor, and are come to that pass, that very sloth and coldness of
spirit makes our own lives tedious unto us! Would to God the desire to profit
in virtue did not wholly sleep in thee, who have often seen the holy examples
of devout and religious souls.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Exercise of a good and Religious person.
THe life of a religious person ought to shine with all virtues; that he may
inwardly be such, as outwardly he seems to men. Mat. 5. And with reason thou
ought to be much more within, then is perceived without: for God beholds
the heart, Psalm. 33. Heb. 4. Psalm. 15. whom we ought most highly to reverence
wheresoever we are, and walk in purity like Angels in his sight; and to renew
daily our purposes, and stir up our selves to fervor, as though this were the
first day of our conversion; and to say: Help me, my God, in this my good
purpose, and in thy holy service; and grant that I may now this day begin
perfectly: for that which I have done hitherto, is nothing.

2 According to our purpose, shall be the success of our profit, and much
diligence is necessary to him that will profit much. And if he that firmly
purposes, often fails; what shall he do, that seldom purposes any thing,
or with little certainty? It may fall out sundry ways that we leave off our
purpose: and if for light occasions we omit our accustomed exercises, it
seldom passes without some loss. The purpose of just men is rather grounded
upon the grace of God, then on their own wisdom, in whom also they always
have confidence, in whatsoever they take in hand. For man does purpose, but God
disposes: neither is the way of man in his own hands. Prou. 16.

3 If an accustomed exercise be sometimes omitted for some work of charity,
or of intention to profit our neighbor, it may easily afterward be recovered:
Eccles. 7. but if it be lightly left through inconstancy or negligence, it is
an offense, and will prove hurtful. Though we endeavor what we can, yet
shall we fail in many things. But yet me must always purpose something
certain, especially against that which most hinders us. We must examine well,
and order both our exterior and interior actions; for that both are expedient
for our progress in virtue.

4 If thou can not always recollect thy self, yet do it sometimes, and that
at least once every day; to wit, in the morning, or evening. In the morning
make thy good purpose; Deu. 4. in the evening examine thy self what thou have
bin that day in word, deed or thought: for that in these oftentimes perhaps
thou have offended God and thy neighbor. Arm thy self with courage against
the malicious attempts of thine enemy. Refrain gluttony, and thou shall more
easily bridle all the disordered inclinations of the flesh. Never be altogether
idle, but either reading, or writing, or praying, or meditating, or laboring
something of profit for the common good: but bodily exercises are to be
discreetly used, and not to be undertaken equally of all.

5 Those things that be not common, are not to be done in the sight of al: for
private things are best done in secret. But thou must beware, thou neglect not
that to which thou art bound by common rule, and be ready in performing thy
private devotions: but having fully and faithfully accomplished all thy duties,
and those things that were enjoined thee, if thou have further leisure, return
to thy self as thy devotion desires. All cannot use the same exercise, but
one is more convenient for this person, another for that. According to the
diversity of times also, diverse exercises are fitting: for some suite better
with festival days, others with days of labor. We have need of one kind in
temptations, and of others in time of peace and quiet. We desire to think of
other things when we are sorrowful, then we do when we are cheerful in our
Lord.

6 When principal feasts draw near, good exercises are to be renewed; and the
intercessions of Saints more fervently to be implored. From feast to feast, we
should make some good purpose, as though we were then to depart out of this
world, and to come to the everlasting feasts of heaven. And therefore we ought
to prepare our selves carefully at holy times, and to live more devoutly, and
to keep more exactly all things that we are to observe, as though shortly we
were to receive reward of our labor at Gods hands.

7 And if it be differred, let us think that we were not well prepared, nor
worthy as yet of so great glory, as shall be revealed in us at the time
appointed: and let us labor to prepare our selves better for our departure.
Romans 8. Blessed is that servant (says S. Luke the Evangelist) whom when his
Lord comes, he shall find watching: Luke 13. verily I say unto you, he shall
place him over all that he possesses. Mat. 24.

CHAP. XX. Of the love of Solitude and Silence.
Seek a fit time to attend to thy self, and often think of the benefits of
God. Leave curious things. Read over such matters, as may cause rather
compunction, then the labor of much study. If thou withdraw thy self from
superfluous talk, and idle wandering about, as also from hearing of news and
tales; thou shall find sufficient and fit time to think of good things. The
greatest Saints avoided the company of men as much as they could, and chose to
live to God in secret. Hebr. 3.

2 One said: As often as I have bin amongst men, I have returned less man.
Senec. ep. 7. The same we find by experience when we talk long. It is easier
to keep silence altogether, then not to exceed in words. It is easier for a
man to keep home, then to demean himself as he ought in all things abroad. He
therefore that desires to attain to internal, and spiritual graces, ought
with Jesus to withdraw himself from the people. Mat. 4. No man goes safely
abroad, but he that gladly keeps home. Eccl. 3. No man securely governs,
but he that delights to live in subjection. No man securely commands, but
he that has learned readily to obey.

3 No man securely rejoices, unless he has within him the testimony of a
good conscience. And yet the security of Saints was always full of the fear
of God. Neither were they less careful and humble in themselves, for that
they shined outwardly with grace and great virtues. But the security of evil
men rises of pride and presumption, and in the end deceives them. Never
promise to thy self security in this life, although thou seem to be a good
religious man, or devout Hermit.

4 Oftentimes those, who in the judgment of men were of better esteem, have
bin in greatest danger, by reason of their too much confidence. Wherefore it is
more profitable to many, not to be altogether free from temptations, but to be
often assaulted; lest they should be too secure, and so perhaps be lifted up in
pride: lest also they should too freely give themselves to outward comforts. O
how good a conscience should he keep, that would never seek transitory joy!
Would never busy himself with the things of this world! And how great peace
and quietness should he possess, that would cut off al vain solicitude, and
only think of divine things; and such as are profitable for his soul, and
place all his hope in God!

5 No man is worthy of heavenly comfort, unless he have diligently exercised
himself in holy compunction. If thou desire true contrition of heart, retire
thy self into some secret and solitary place, and exclude from thy mind the
tumults and unquietness of the world, as it is written: In your chambers be
ye sorry. Psalm. 4. In thy Cell thou shall find that which abroad thou shall
often lose. The Cell, if thou continue in it, waxes sweet, and if thou love
not to stay in it, it becomes irksome. If in the beginning of thy conversion
thou accustom thy self to remain in it, and keep it well, it will be
afterward unto thee a dear friend, and a most pleasant comfort.

6 In silence and quietness a devout soul perfecteth her self, and learneth
the secrets of holy Scriptures. There she finds floods of tears, with
which she may every night wash and cleanse her self, and be made so much the
more familiar with her Creator, by how much the further off she lives from all
worldly disquiet. Psalm. 6. Who so therefore withdraws himself from his
acquaintance and friends; God with his holy Angels will draw near unto him. It
were better for a man to lie hidden, and have care of himself, then being
careless of his soul, to work miracles in the world. It is commendable for a
religious person to go abroad seldom, to fly to be seen, and to be
unwilling to see men.

7 Why will thou see that which is not lawful for thee to have. The world
passes away, and all his delights. The desires of our sensuality draw us to
walk abroad, but when the hour is past, what bring thou home, but a
burdened conscience, and distracted thoughts? A joyful going abroad, brings
often a sorrowful coming home; and a merry evening makes a sad morning.
Prou. 14. So all carnal joy enters gently, but in the end it causes remorse
and destruction. What is elsewhere to be seen, which thou can not see here?
Eccl. 1. Here thou see heaven and earth, and all the elements, of which all
other things are made.

8 What is there any where to be seen, that can long continue under the Sun?
thou think perhaps to satiate thy self, and have thy fill; but thou shall
never attain it. If it were possible for thee to see all things created,
present before thine eyes, what were it all but a vain and unprofitable sight?
Eccl. 3. Lift up thine eyes to God in heaven, and ask pardon of thy sins and
negligences. Psa. 122. Leave vain things to the vain. Attend thou to that
which God commands. Shut thy door upon thee, and call upon Jesus thy beloved.
Mat. 6. Be thou with him in thy Cell, for thou shall not find so great peace
in any other place. If thou had stayed within, and not given ear to idle
news, thou had kept thy self better in good peace. But now that thou
delightest sometimes to hear novelties, it is fit thou suffer for it some
trouble and disquiet of mind.

CHAP. XXI. Of Compunction of heart.
IF thou will profit any thing, keep thy self always in the fear of God,
and yield not too much scope to liberty. Prou. 19. Contain all thy senses
under the rule of discipline, and give not thy self to foolish mirth. Give thy
self to compunction of heart, and thou shall find devotion. Compunction
discovers much good, which with too much liberty is quickly lost. It is
marvel that a man can ever perfectly rejoice in this life, if he consider his
banishment, and weigh the many perils, wherewith his soul is environed. The
leuity of our minds, and the little care we have of our faults, makes us not to
feel the sorrows of our soul.

2 But oftentimes we vainly laugh, when we have just cause to weep. There is
neither true liberty, nor good mirth, but that which is in the fear of God,
accompanied with a good conscience. Happy is he, that can avoid all cause of
distraction, and draw himself to the union of holy compunction. Happy is he,
that can abandon all that may defile, or burden his conscience. Fight manfully:
one custom ouercomes another. If thou can forbear to intermeddle with that
which belongs to others; they will not hinder thee in that which thou have to
do.

3 Busy not thy self in matters which appertain to others: neither do thou
meddle at all with the affairs of thy betters. Look first of al to thy self,
and have a more especial care to admonish thy self, then who^soeuer thou love
best. If thou have not the favor of men, be not therefore grieved; Gal. 1. but
let this seem unto thee a most just cause of grief, that thou look not to
thy self with that care, which beseems the servant of God, and a devout
religious person. It is oftentimes better and more secure, that a man has not
many consolations in this life, especially such, as are agreeable to the
inclination of our corrupt nature. But that we have none at all, or do seldom
taste divine comforts, the fault is ours, that do not seek for compunction of
heart, nor do wholly forsake the vain comforts of this world.

4 Acknowledge thy self unworthy of divine comforts, and that thou have
deserved great tribulation. When a man has perfect contrition, then is the
whole world grievous and loathsome unto him. Judge. 2. and 20. A good man finds
always sufficient cause of tears and sorrow; for whether he consider himself,
or weigh the estate of his neighbor, he knows that none lives here without
tribulation. 2. King. 13. And how much the more thoroughly he considers
himself; so much the more is his sorrow. Our sins and vices in which we are
so plunged, that we can seldom contemplate the things of heaven, do minister
unto us matter of most just sorrow and hearty contrition.

5 If thou did think more diligently of thy death, then of living long, thou
would without doubt be more careful in the amendment of thy life. Eccles. 7.
And if thou would consider within thy self, the pains of hell, or of
Purgatory. Mat. 25. I am persuaded it would move thee to endure any labor or
pain whatsoever in this world, and not to fear any kind of austerity. But
because these things enter not to the heart, and we still love that which
delights us, therefore we remain cold and void of spiritual vigor.

6 Oftentimes our want of spirit is the cause, that our wretched bodies do so
quickly complain. Pray therefore with all humility to our Lord, that he will
vouchsafe to give thee the spirit of contrition, and say with the Prophet: Feed
me, O Lord, with the bread of tears, and give me to drink with tears in
measure. Ps. 79.

CHAP. XXII. Of the consideration of humane misery.
MIserable thou art wheresoever thou be, and whithersoeuer thou turnest, if
thou turnest not thy self to God. Why art thou troubled when things succeed
not as thou would, and desire? Who is there that has all things as he
will? Eccls. 7. Neither I, nor thou, nor any man upon earth. There is not any
man in this world without some tribulation or affliction, though he be a King,
or a Pope. Who think thou then is in best case? Truly he that willingly
suffers something for God.

2 Many weak and feeble men say: Behold how well such a one lives, how rich,
how powerful, how beautiful, how great a man he is: but lift up thine eyes
to the riches of heaven, Luke 12. and thou shall see that al temporal
prosperity is as nothing, full of uncertainty, and which rather oppresses then
otherwise: for it is never had without solicitude and fear. The felicity of
man consists not in having abundance of temporal riches: a mean suffices.
Prou. 19. Job. 14. It is truly misery enough to live upon earth. How much more
a man desires to be spiritual, so much the more distasteful is this present
life unto him: for he better perceives, and sees more clearly the defects
of humane corruption. Eccls. 2. To eat, to drink, to watch, to sleep, to
labor, to repose, and to be subject to all other necessities of nature, is
doubtless a great misery to a devout mind, that would gladly be free, and
delivered from all sin.

3 The inward man is much oppressed with these corporal necessities, whilst
he is in this world. And therefore the holy Prophet prays with great devotion
to be delivered from them, saying: Deliver me, O Lord, from my necessities.
Psalm. 24. But woe be to them that know not their misery, and much more to them
that love this miserable and corruptible life. For some there be so dotingly
affected unto it, that although with labor and begging, they scarce get bread
to eat, yet if they might live here always, they would care but little for
the kingdom of heaven.

4 O senseless creatures, and infidels in heart, who lie buried so deep in
earth, that they have no taste nor feeling, but of sensual things! Romans 8. But
miserable wretches, they shall in the end feel, to their cost, how vile, and
of no esteem was that which they loved. The Saints of God, and the devout
servants and friends of Christ respected little what pleased their natural
inclinations, or what flourished in this life; but with their whole hopes and
intentions they sought after the riches of heaven. 1. Pet. 51. Heb. 11. Their
whole desire was carried up to those everlasting treasures which are invisible;
lest they might have bin drawn to base affections, by the love of visible
things. Lose not thy hope to profit in spiritual matters: there is yet time:
the hour is not yet past. Romans 13.

5 Why will thou defer thy good purpose? Rise up in this very instant, and
begin, and say: Now is the time to work, the time to fight: now is it a fit
time to amend my self. When any tribulation or affliction does befall thee,
then is the time to merit. Thou must pass thorovv fire and water before thou
come to rest. Psalm. 65. Unless thou use violence to thy self, thou shall not
overcome thy evil inclinations. As long as we carry about with us this
frail body of ours, we can never be without sin, nor live without
tediousnes and grief. We would gladly enjoy quietness, and be delivered
from all misery; but for that we have by sin lost our innocence, we have
together with it lost also our happiness. Romans 7. Genesis 3. and therefore it
behooves us to have patience, and to expect the mercy of God till this
iniquity have an end, and that which is mortal be swallowed up of life. 2.
Cor. 5.

6 O, how great is the frailety of man, always inclined to evil! Genesis 6 To day
thou confessest thy sins, and to morrow thou committest again the same which
thou did confess. Now thou proposest to take heed, and within an hour thou
do as if thou had made no purpose at al. We may therefore with great
reason humble our selves, and never admit any thought of our own esteem,
being so weak as we are, and subject to every change. 2. Match. 9. Full soon
(God-knowes) is that lost by negligence, which with much labor was hardly
gotten by grace.

7 What will become of us in the end, that do so timely begin to wax cold?
Woe be unto us, if we will now give our selves to ease, as if all were already
in peace and security; when as yet there scarce appears so much as any sign
of true sanctity in our conversation. It were needful that we were taught good
manners again like children, if so perhaps there might be some more hope of
our amendment and profit in spirit.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the consideration of death.
THe hour of death will quickly overtake thee, and therefore look how thou
live. To day a man is living, and to morrow he does not appear; and being
once out of sight, he is also quickly out of mind. Job. 9. and 14. Luke 12. O
dulnes and hardness of man's heart, who thinks only on that he sees, and
foreseeth not that which is to come! Hebr. 9. Thou should always so order
thy thoughts and actions, as if this very day thou were to depart this life. If
thou had a good conscience, thou would not much fear death. Luke 12. It
is better to avoid sin, then to fly death. Sap. 4. If thou be not prepared to
day; how will thou be prepared to morrow? Mat. 24. and 25. To morrow-day is
uncertain, and whether thou shall see it or no, thou know not.

2 What does it avail us to live long, when we do so little amend? A long life
does not always make us better, nay rather it oftentimes heapeth upon us a
greater load of sins, O that we had spent one day well in this world! Many do
reckon the years of their conversion, but full slender oftentimes is the fruit
of amendment. If it be a dreadful thing to die, perhaps it will be more
dangerous for thee to live long. Blessed is he, that has always before his
eyes the hour of hia death, and disposes himself daily thereunto. Eccl. 7. If
thou have at any time seen a man die, think with thy self, that thou must one
day pass the same way.

3 When it ts morning, think that perhaps thou shall not live until night; and
when evening comes, do not dare to promise unto thy self the next morning.
Heb. 9. Be always ready, and so order thy self, that death may never take
thee unprepared. Many die suddenly: for the Son of Man will come, when we
least think of it. Luke 21. When that last hour shall come, thou will begin to
think far otherwise of thy life, and much lament that thou have been so slack
and negligent. Matthew. 24. Luke 12.

4 O, how wise and happy is he, that now labors to be such in his life, as
he wishes to be found at the hour of his death! For the perfect contempt of
the world, the fervent desire to profit in virtue, the love of discipline, the
labor of penance, the readiness of obedience, the forsaking of our selves, and
the bearing patiently of all adversity for the love of Christ, will give great
confidence of a happy end. Thou may do much good whilst thou art well; but
when thou art sick, what thou will be able to do, I know not. Few do grow
better, and amend themselves with sickness; as also they that wander much
abroad, seldom become holy.

5 Trust not upon thy friends or neighbors; neither do thou put off to future
time the care of thy souls health: for thou shall sooner be forgotten, then
thou do imagine. Esaias 30. and 31. Hier. 17. and 48. It is better now to
provide in time, and do some good before thou go, then to trust in the
help of others, when thou art gone. Mat. 6. If thou have no care of thy self
now when thou have time, who will be careful for thee hereafter? The time
which now thou have is very precious. Now are the days of health. Now is the
time acceptable. But alas, that thou spendest it so little to thy profit, in
which thou might gain eternal life! The time will come, when thou will
desire one day or one hour to amend, and I cannot assure thee that thou shall
obtain it.

6 O my dearest brother, from how great danger may thou deliver thy self!
From how great fear maeyst thou be freed, if thou do now live fearful,
and careful of thy death! Labor to live in such sort, that at the hour of
death thou may rather rejoice then fear. Learn now to die to the world,
that thou may then begin to live with Christ. Learn now to contemn all
earthly things, that thou may then freely go to Christ. Chastise now thy
body with penance, that thou may then have assured confidence. 1. Cor. 9.

7 Ah fool, why do thou think thou shall live long, being not certain of
so much as one day! Luke 12. How many have been deceived, and taken out of this
world on a sudden, when they least expected it? How often have thou heard, how
such a one was suddenly slain, another was drowned, another falling from some
high place brake his neck, another died at his meat, another when he was
playing: one came to his end by fire, another by sword, another by plague,
another died by the hands of thieves? So as death is the end of al, and the
life of man passes away like a shadow.

8 Who will remember thee; and who will pray for thee after thy death? Job
14* Do now, beloved brother, do now what thou can, for thou know not
how soon thou shall die, nor what shall befall thee after thy death. Now
whilst thou have time, heap together eternal riches. Matthew. 1. Luke 11.
Think on nothing, but on the health of thy soul Gal. 6. Have care only on
that which belongs to God. Luke 16. Make the Saints of God thy friends by
honoring them, and imitating their virtues, that when thou departest this
life, they may receive thee into their everlasting dwellings. Hebr. 11.

9 Esteem thy self as a pilgrim, and stranger upon earth, and as one to whom
the affairs of this world do nothing appertain. 1. Pet. 2. Keep thy heart
free, and lifted up to God: for thou have not here any permanent City. Heb.
13. Send thither thy prayers daily, with sighs and tears; that thy soul may
deserve to pass with much happiness to our Lord after death.

CHAP. XXIV. Of Judgment, and the punishment of sin.
IN all things consider the end, and how thou will be able to stand before that
severe Judge, from whom nothing can be hidden, and is not appeased with gifts,
nor admits excuses, but judges according to justice. Heb. 10. O most
wretched and foolish sinner, that fear sometimes the countenance of an angry
man; what answer will thou make to God to who^ al thy wickedness is known? Job
9. Why prouidest thou not for thy self against that rigorous day of Judgment,
in which no man can be excused, or defended by another, but every one will be
burden enough to himself? Luke 16. Now thy pains are profitable, thy tears
acceptable, thy cries are heard, thy sorrow satisfies for thy sins, and
purges thy soul. 2. Cor. 6.

2 The patient man has a great and healthful purgatory, Iam. 1. who receiving
injuries, grieueth more for the others malice, then for his own wrongs; Luke
23. prays willingly for his adversaries, and from his heart forgiueth their
offenses; Act. 7. delayeth not to ask forgiveness of whomsoever he has
offended; is sooner moved to compassion then to anger; uses often violence to
himself; and labors with his whole force to subdue the flesh in all things
to the spirit. It is better to purge our sins and vices now, then to reserve
them for Purgatory. Verily the inordinate love we bear to our selves deceives
us.

3 What other thing shall that fire feed on, but thy sins? How much the more
thou sparest thy self now, and followest the desires of thy corrupt nature: so
much the more grievously shall thou be punished hereafter: and so much the more
matter do thou keep for that purging fire. In the selfsame wherein a man
has sinned, shall he be more grievously punished. There shall the slothful
be pricked forwards with burning goads. There shall the Gluttons be tormented
with insatiable hunger and thirst. There shall the lascivious and the lovers of
pleasures be covered over with burning pitch and brimston. The envious like
raging dogs, shall there howl for grief.

4 There is no vice that shall not have his proper torment. The proud shall be
full of all shame and confusion. The covetous shall be in miserable want. One
hour of pain there shall be more sharp, then an hundred years of most hard
penance here. There is no rest there, nor comfort for the damned. Job. 40.
Here yet sometimes our labors cease, and we enjoy the comfort of our friends.
Be now solicitous and sorrowful for thy sins; that in the day of judgment
thou may be secure in the company of the blessed souls. For then shall the
just stand in great constancy, against those that afflicted and oppressed them.
Wisd. 5. Then shall he stand to judge, who now does humbly submit himself to
the judgment of men. Then shall the poor and humble have great confidence,
and the proud shall be compassed about on all sides with fear.

5 Then will it appear, that he was wise in this world, who had here
learned to be as a fool, and despised for Christ. Then shall affliction
patiently suffered delight us, and iniquity shall stop her mouth, Then shall
the devout rejoice, and the irreligious mourn. Then shall the chastised flesh
more flourish, then if it had bin always nourished in delights. Psalm. 106.
Then shall the poor garment shine, and the precious robes appear
contemptiple. 2. Cor. 4. Then shall the mean cottage be more commended, then
the sumptuous Palace. Then will constant patience more avail us, then all
earthly power. Then will simple obedience be more esteemed, then all worldly
wisdom. Esaias 29.

6. Then shall a good and pure conscience yield us more comfort, then the
profound learning of Philosophy. Then shall the contempt of riches weigh more
then all the worldlings treasures. Then will thou be more comforted that thou
have prayed devoutly* then that thou have fared daintily. Then will thou be
more joyful that thou have observed silence, then that thou have talked much.
Then will good works appear of much more esteem, then fair words. Then a
strict life and hard penance will be more pleasing, then all earthly delights.
Accustom thy self now to suffer a little, that thou may then be delivered
from more grievous pains. Prove here first what thou can endure hereafter.
If now thou can bear so little, how will thou be able to endure everlasting
torments? If now a little suffering make thee so impatient, what will hell fire
do hereafter? Assure thy self, thou can not have two Paradises. It is
impossible for thee to enjoy delights here in this world, and reign hereafter
with Christ in heaven.

7 If thou had hitherto lived always in honors and delights; what would it
avail thee, if thou should presently die? Luke 12. All is vanity, but to
love God, and only to serve him. Eccles. 1. And he that loves God with his
whole heart, needs to fear neither death, punishment, judgment, nor hell:
for perfect love gives secure access to God. Romans 8. But he that delights
always in sin, what wonder though he always fear death, and be terrified
with the thought of judgment. Yet it is good, that if love be not of force to
withhold thee from sin, that at least the fear of hell may restrain thee.
And he that lays aside the fear of God, can never continue long in good
state, but falls quickly into the snares of the devil.

CHAP. XXV. Of the fervent amendment of our whole life.
BE watchful and diligent in the service of God, and often think with thy
self wherefore thou came, and why thou did leave the world. 2. Tim. 4. Was
it not that thou might live to God, and become a spiritual man? Go on
therefore with courage: thou shall shortly receive the reward of thy labors,
and there shall be no more fear nor sorrow in the confines of thy habitation.
Mat. 5. Apoc. 21. Thou must labor here a while: thou shall afterward have
great rest; yea everlasting joy. Eccles. 51. If thou continuest faithful and
diligent in serving of God, do not doubt but God will be faithful and
liberal in giving thee reward. Apoc. 21. and 22. Matthew. 25. Thou ought to
have a good hope of getting the victory, but thou must not make thy self
assured thereof, lest thou wax negligent, or be puffed up with pride. Romans 5.

2 When one that was in great anxiety of mind, often wavering between fear
and hope, did once, being oppressed with grief, prostrate himself in a Church
in prayer before an Altar, and said within himself: O, if I knew that I should
yet persevere! He presently heard, as it were, a voice from God, which said:
What if thou did know it, what would thou do? Do now what thou
would do then, and thou shall be secure. And being herewith comforted, and
strengthened in mind, he committed himself wholly to the will of God, and
that noysom anxiety ceased, neither had he any mind to search curiously any
further, to know what should befall him; but rather labored to understand what
was the perfect and acceptable will of God, for the beginning and accomplishing
of every good work, Romans 12.

3 Hope in our Lord, and do good, says the Prophet, and inhabit the land, and
thou shall be fed in the riches thereof. Psa. 36. One thing there is that
draws many back from that spiritual good, and the diligent amendment of
their lives: the horror of the difficulty, and the labor of the combat. But
they above others profit most in virtue, that endeavor most to overcome those
things which are grievous, and contrary unto them. For there a man profits
more, and deserves greater grace, where he more overcomes and mortifieth
himself in spirit.

4 But all men have not alike to overcome and mortify: yet he that is zealous
and diligent, though he have more passions, shall profit more in virtue, then
another that is of a more temperate disposition, if he be less fervent in the
pursuit of virtue. Two things chiefly help to our amendment, to wit, to
withdraw our selves violently from that to which nature is viciously inclined,
and to labor earnestly for that virtue, which we most want. Be careful also to
avoid with great diligence, those things in thy self, which do most
displease thee in others.

5 Gather some profit to thy soul out of every occasion and wheresoever thou
be: so as if thou see or hear any good, stir up thy self to the
imitation thereof. But if thou see any thing worthy of reproof, beware thou
do not the same. And if at any time thou have done it, labor quickly to
amend it. As thine eye observes others, so art thou also noted again by
others. O, how sweet and comfortable a thing it is, to see the servants of
Christ fervent and devout, endued with virtuous and decent manners! And on the
contrary, how pitiful and grievous a thing it is, to see them that live in a
dissolute and disordered sort, not applying themselves to that, for which they
were called! O, how great damage and great danger it is, to neglect the good
purposes of their vocation, and to busy themselves in that which appertains
not unto them, nor is committed to their care!

6 Be mindful of the purpose thou have made, and have always before the
eyes of thy soul, the picture of thy Savior crucified. Thou have good cause
to be ashamed, looking upon the life of Christ, seeing thou have so slackly
endeavored to conform thy self unto him, though thou have walked a long time
in the way of the service of God. A religious person that exercises himself
seriously and devoutly in the most holy life and passion of our Lord, shall
there abundantly find whatsoever is necessary and profitable for him; neither
shall he need to seek any thing elsewhere, but only in Jesus. O, if Jesus
crucified would come into our hearts, how quickly and fully should we be
instructed in all truth! Gal. 2. and 6.

7 A fervent religious person takes and bears all well that is commanded
him: but he that is negligent and cold, has tribulation upon tribulation, and
on all sides is afflicted: for he is void of inward consolation, and is
forbidden to seek external comforts. A religious person that lives not
according to discipline, is in great danger of the ruin of his soul. He that
seeks liberty and ease, shall ever live in disquiet: for one thing or other
will always displease him.

8 How do so many other religious persons, who live under the strict rule of
Monastical discipline? They seldom go abroad, they live retiredly, they
feed meanly, they are clothed coursely, they labor much, speak little,
watch long, rise early, spend much time in prayer, read often, and keep
themselves in all kind of discipline. Consider the Carthusians, Cistercians,
and the Religious men and women of diverse Orders, how they rise every night to
sing praises unto God. And how unseemly then it is for thee to be slothful
in so holy a work, when as so great multitudes of religious persons do
begin to glorify God.

9 O, that we had nothing else to do, but always with our mouth, and whole
heart to praise our Lord God! O, that thou might never have need to eat,
nor drink, nor sleep, but might always praise God, and only employ thy
self in the exercises of spirit: thou should then be much more happy, then
now thou art, when for so many necessities, thou art constrained to serve thy
body. Would God these necessities were not at all, but only the spiritual
refections of the soul, which (alas) we taste of too seldom.

10 When a man comes to that estate, that he seeks no comfort of any
creature, then does he begin to take perfect contentment and delight in God.
Then shall he be contented with whatsoever does befall him in this world. Then
shall he neither rejoice in great matters, nor be sorrowful for small, but
with great integrity and confidence commit himself to God; who shall be unto
him al in all: to whom nothing does perish, nor die, but all things do live
unto him, and serve him at a beck without delay. Romans 11.

11 Remember always the end, and how that time lost never returns. Eccles.
7. Without care and diligence thou shall never get virtues. If thou beginnest
to wax cold, it will be evil with thee: but if thou give thy self to fervor
of spirit; thou shall find much peace, and feel less labor, through the
assistance of Gods grace, and love of virtue. Apocal. 3. The fervent and
diligent man is ready, and prepared for all things. It is harder to resist
vices and passions, then to toil in bodily labors. Eccls. 19. He that
auoideth not small faults, by little and little falls into greater. Thou will
always rejoice in the evening, if thou spend the day profitably. Be watchful
over thy self, stir up thy self, warm thy self, and whatsoever becomes of
others, neglect not thy self. The greater violence thou use against thy
self, the more thou shall profit.

THE END OF THE FIRST BOOK.
OF THE FOLLOWING OF CHRIST. THE SECOND BOOK.
CHAP. I. Of spiritual conversation.
THe Kingdom of God is within you, says our Lord. Luke 7. Turn thee with thy
whole heart unto our Lord, and forsake this miserable world, and thy soul
shall find rest. Joel. 2. Learn to despise exterior things, and to give thy
self to the interior, and thou shall perceive the Kingdom of God to come into
thee. To. 19. For the kingdom of God is peace, and joy in the holy Ghost,
which is not given to the wicked. Christ will come unto thee, and show thee his
divine comfort, if thou prepare for him a worthy mansion within thee. Psalm. 44.
Al his glory and beauty is within, and there he pleases himself. The inward
man he often visits, and has with him sweet discourses, pleasant comfort, much
peace, wonderful familiarity.

2 O faithful soul, make ready thy heart for this Bridegroom, that he may
vouchsafe to come unto thee; and dwell within thee. For he says: If any love
me, he will keep my Word, and we will come unto him, and will make our abode
with him. Ioh. 14. Give therefore unto Christ a place in thy heart, and deny
entrance to all others. When thou have Christ, thou art rich, and he will
suffice thee. He will be thy faithful and provident helper in all things, so
as thou shall not need to trust in men. For men are soon changed, and quickly
decay; but Christ remains for ever, and stands firmly unto the end. Ioh.
12.

3 There is little trust to be put in a frail and mortal man, though he be
profitable and dear unto thee: neither ought thou much to be grieved, if
sometimes he cross and contradict thee. Hier. 17. They that to day take thy
part, to morrow may be against thee; and so on the contrary, they often turn
like unto the wind. Put all thy trust in God, and fear and love him: 1. Pet.
5. He will answer for thee, and do in all things what is best. Heb. 13. Thou
have not here a dwelling City: and wheresoever thou be, thou art a stranger
and pilgrim: neither shall thou ever have rest, unless thou be perfectly
united unto Christ.

4 Why do thou linger and make delays here, since this is not the place of
thy rest? Phil. 3. In heaven ought to be thy dwelling, and al earthly things
are to be regarded, as it were, in the way. Sap. 5. Al things pass away, and
thou together with them. Beware thou cleave not unto them, lest thou be
enthralled; and so do perish. Let thy thought be on the highest, and thy
prayer directed unto Christ without ceasing. If thou can not contemplate high
and heavenly things, rest thy self in the passion of Ch^^^^, and dwell
willingly in the wounds of his sacred body. For if thou fly devoutly unto his
holy wounds, and to the (...) marks of his passion, thou ^hal^ feel great
comfort in tribulation* neither will thou much care for being despised of men,
and wilt easily be^re the words of slanderous tongues.

5 Christ was also in the world despised, and in great necessity: forsaken by
his acquaintance and friends in the midst of slanders. Matthew. 1.12.5.26. and
Ioh. 15. Christ would suffer, and be contemned; and dare thou complain?
Christ had adversaries and backbiters; and will thou have all men thy friends
and benefactors? For what shall thy patience be crowned, if no adversity
happen unto thee? 2. Tim. 21. If thou will suffer no adversity, how will thou
be the friend of Christ? Suffer with Christ, and for Christ, if thou desire to
reign with Chr^^^*

6 If thou (...) perfectly entered into the heart of Jesus, and tasted a little
of his burning love: then would thou not weigh thy own commodity or
discommodity* but would rather rejoice at slanders, when they should chance
to the cast upon (...) for the love of Jesus makes a man to despise himself.
A lover of Jesus, and of truth, and a true spiritual person, and free from
inordinat affections, can freely turn himself unto God, and lift himself
above himself in spirit, and with great joy of his soul rest in God.

7 He that judges of all things as they are, and not as they are said, and
esteemed to be, is truly wise, and taught rather by God then men. Esa. 54. He
that can live spiritually, and make small reckoning of outward things: neither
requires places, nor attends times for performing of devout exercises. A
spiritual man quickly recollecteth himself: because he never yields over
himself wholly to outward things. He is not hindered by outward labor or
business, which may be necessary for the time: but as things fall out, so he
frames himself unto them. He that has well ordered and disposed all things
within, cares little for the vain inventions and perverse inclinations of
men. So much is a man hindered and distracted, how much he draws matters unto
himself.

8 If all went well with thee, and thou had thy heart well purged, all
things would fall out to thy good and profit. But many things displease and
often trouble thee, because thou art not yet perfectly dead unto thy self, nor
free from the affection of earthly things. Romans 8. and 1. Cor. 4. Nothing so
defiles and intangleth the heart of man, as the impure love to creatures. If
thou refuse outward comfort; thou will be able to contemplate the things of
heaven, and often receive internal joy.

CHAP. II. Of humble submission.
REspect not much who is with thee, or who is against thee. Endeavor, and take
care, that God may be for thee in every thing thou do. Psalm. 27. Have a good
conscience, and God will defend thee. For whom God will help, no malice of man
can hurt. If thou can hold thy peace and suffer, without doubt thou shall see
that our Lord will help thee. He knows the time, and manner how to deliver
thee, and therefore thou ought to resign thy self unto him. It belongs to
God to help, and to deliver from all shame. Oftentimes it is very profitable,
for the better keeping of humility, that others know, and reprehend our faults.

2 When a man humbles himself for his faults, then he easily pacifieth
others, and quickly satisfies those that are offended with him. God protecteth
and delivers the humble: he loves and comfort the humble: unto the humble
man he inclines himself: unto the humble he gives great grace, and after his
humiliation, he raises him unto glory. Unto the humble he reuealeth his
secrets, and sweetly draws and inuiteth him unto himself. Matthew. 12. The
humble, when he has received confusion, is in peace, for that he rests in
God, and relieth not on the world. Do not think that thou have profited any
thing, unless thou esteem thy self inferior to all.

CHAP. III. Of a good and peaceable man.
FIrst keep thy self in peace, and then may thou pacify others. A
peaceable man does more good, then he that is well learned. A passionate man
turns good into evil, and easily believes the worst. A good peaceable man
turns all things into good. He that is well in peace, is not suspicious of
any. 1. Cor. 15. But he that is discontented, and troubled, is tossed with
diverse suspicions: he is neither quiet himself, nor suffers others to be
quiet. He often speaks that which he ought not to speak; and omitteth that
which were more expedient for him to do. He considers what others are bound
to do: and neglects that which he is bound to himself. Ma. 7. First
therefore have a careful zeal over thy self, and then thou may justly
show thy self zealous of thy neighbors good. Act. 1.

2 Thou know well how to excuse and color thine own deeds, and thou will
not receive the excuses of others. It were more meet that thou did accuse
thy self, and excusedst thy brother. Gal. 6. If thou will be borne withal,
bear also with another. 1. Cor. 13. Behold how far off thou art as yet from
true charity and humility, which knows not how to be angry with any, or to
be moved with indignation, but only against himself. It is no great matter to
converse with the good, and those that are of a gentle disposition, for that is
naturally pleasing to all, and every one willingly enjoys peace, and loves
those best that agree with him. But to be able to live peaceably with the
unquiet and perverse minds, or with the disorderly, or such as contradict us,
is a great grace, and very commendable.

3 Some there are, that keep themselves in peace, and are in peace also with
others. And there are some, that neither are in peace themselves, nor suffer
others to be in peace: they are troublesome to others, but always more
troublesome to themselves. And others there are that keep themselves in peace,
and labor to bring others unto peace. Our whole peace in this miserable life,
consists rather in humble suffering, then in not feeling adversities. He that
can best tell how to suffer, will best keep himself in peace. He is a
conqueror of himself, a Lord of the world, friend of Christ, and heir of
heaven.

CHAP. IV. Of a pure mind and upright intention.
WIth two wings man is lifted up from earthly vanities, that is, with
simplicity and purity. Simplicity ought to be in our intention. Purity in our
affection. Simplicity fixes the eyes of the soul in God. Purity apprehends
and tastes his sweetness. No good action will hinder thee, if thou be inwardly
free from inordinate affection. If thou intend and seek nothing else but the
will of God, and the profit of thy neighbor, thou shall enjoy eternal
liberty. If thy heart were sincere and upright, then every creature would be
unto thee a looking-glass of life, and a book of holy doctrine. There is no
creature so little and abject, that represents not the goodness of God.

2 If in thine own heart thou were good and pure, then thou would be able
to see and understand all things without any impediment. Romans 1. Prou. 3. A
pure heart penetrateth heaven, and pierces the depth of hell. Psalm. 118. Such
as every one is inwardly: so he judges outwardly. If there be joy in the
world, surely a man of a pure heart possesses it. And if there be any where
tribulation and affliction, an evil conscience feels it. As iron put into the
fire leeseth his rust, and becomes bright like fire: so he that wholly
turning himself unto God, becomes fervent, and is changed into a new man.

3 When one begins to wax cold: then he is afraid of a small labor, and
willingly receaueth external comfort. But when he once begins to overcome
himself perfectly, and to walk manfully in the way of God: then he esteems
those things to be light, which before seemed grievous unto him.

CHAP. V. Of the consideration of ones self.
WE cannot trust much to our selves, for that grace oftentimes and
understanding is wanting. There is but little light in us, and that which we
have, we quickly lose by our negligence. And oftentimes we do not perceive
our own inward blindness. We often do evil, and excuse it worse. Matthew. 7. We
are sometimes moved with passion, and we think it to be zeal. We reprehend
small things in others, and pass over greater matters in our selves. We
quickly feel, and weigh what we suffer at the hands of others; but we
mind not what others suffer from us. He that does well and deeply consider
his own works, will find little cause to judge hardly of another.

2 A spiritual man prefers the care of himself, before all other cares.
Mat. 16. And he that diligently attends unto himself, does seldom speak
much of others. Thou will never be recollected and devout, unless thou pass
over other men's matters with silence, and look especially to thy self. If
thou attend wholly unto God and thy self, thou will be little moved with
whatsoever thou see abroad. 1. Cor. 4. Where art thou, when thou art not with
thy self? Galat. 1. And when thou have run over all, what have thou
profited, if thou do neglect thy self? If thou desire peace of mind and
true union, thou must esteem little of all earthly things, and look only to
thy self.

3 Thou shall therefore profit much, if thou keep thy self free from all
temporal cares. Thou shall hinder thy self greatly, if thou esteem any thing
of this world. Let nothing be great unto thee, nothing high, nothing
grateful, nothing acceptable, but only God himself purely, or that which is
for God. Esteem all comfort vain which thou receiuest from any creature.
Eccles. 1. A soul that loves God, despises all things that be inferior unto
God. God alone is everlasting, and of infinite greatness, filling all creatures:
the comfort of the soul, and the true joy of the heart.

CHAP. VI. Of the confort of a good Conscience.
THe glory of a good man, is the testimony of a good conscience. 2. Cor. 1.
Have a good conscience, and thou shall ever have joy. A good conscience is able
to bear much, and is cheerful in adversities. An evil conscience is always
fearful and unquiet. Thou shall rest sweetly, if thy heart does not reprehend
thee. Wisd. 17. Do thou never rejoice, but when thou have done well. Sinners
have never true mirth, nor feel inward peace: because there is no peace to the
impious, says our Lord. And if they should say: We are in peace, no evil
shall fall upon us, and who shall dare to hurt us? Luke 12. Esaias. 27. Believe
them not: for upon a sudden will arise the wrath of God, and their deeds shall
be turned into nothing, and their conceits shall perish.

2 To glory in tribulation is no hard thing for him that loves. Romans 8. For to
glory so, is to glory in the Cross of our Lord. That glory is short, which is
given and received from men. Galath. 6. Sorrow always accompanies the glory
of the world. The glory of the good is in their consciences, and not in the
tongues of men. 2. Cor. 2. The gladness of the just is of God, and in God: and
their joy is of the truth. He that desires true and everlasting glory, cares
not for that which passes away with time. And he that seeks temporal
glory, or contemns it not from his heart, shows himself but little to
esteem of the glory of heaven. He enjoys great tranquillity and peace of
mind, that cares neither for the praises, nor dispraises of men.

3 He will easily be content and pacified, whose conscience is pure. He is not
the more holy, though thou commend him: nor the more, abject though thou
dispraise him. What thou art, that thou art: neither can thou be truly said
to be greater, then what thou art in the sight of God. If thou consider what
thou art within thee, thou will not care what men say of thee. Man sees in the
face, but God looks into the heart. 1. King. 16. Man considers the deeds,
but God weighs the intentions. To do always well, and to esteem little of
himself, is a token of an humble mind. To refuse to be comforted by any
creature, is a sign of great purity, and inward confidence.

4 He that seeks no outward witness for himself, does show that he has
wholly committed himself unto God. For not he that commends himself, the
same is approved (says S. Paul) but whom God commends. 2. Cor. 10. To walk
inwardly with God, and not to be possessed with any outward affection, is the
state of an inward and spiritual man.

CHAP. VII. Of the love of JESUS above all things.
BLessed is he that understands what it is to love Jesus: and to despise
himself for Jesus. Psalm. 116. Thou ought to leave thy beloved, for thy
beloved; for that Jesus will be beloved alone above all things. Deuteronomy. 6. The
love of things created is deceitful and unconstant: the love of Jesus is
faithful and constant. Mat. 22. He that cleaves unto creatures, shall fall
with that which is subject to fall. He that imbraceth Jesus shall stand firmly
for ever. Love him, and keep him for thy friend, who when all go away, will
not forsake thee, nor suffer thee to perish in the end. Thou must once be left
of men, whether thou vvilt or no.

2 Live and die with Jesus; and commit thy self unto his trust, who when all
fail, can alone help thee. Thy beloved is of that nature, that he will none
of that which appertains to others: but will have thy heart alone, and sit
like a King in his own throne. If thou could purge thy self perfectly of
all creatures, Jesus would willingly dwell with thee. Whatsoever thou
put in men, out of Jesus, is all no better then lost. Trust not, nor rely
upon a reedefull of vvinde: for that all flesh is as hay, and all the glory
thereof shall wither away as the flower of the field. Esaias 4.

3 Thou shall quickly be deceived, if thou look only to the outvvard show of
men. And if in them thou seek thy comfort and profit: thou shall often feel
loss. If thou seek Jesus in all things, thou shall surely find Jesus. But
if thou seek thy self, thou shall also find thy self, but to thy own
harm. For man does more hurt himself, if he seek not Jesus, then the whole
world, and all his adversaries could annoy him.

CHAP. VIII. Of familiar conversation with JESUS.
WHen Jesus is present, all is well, and nothing seems difficult: but when
Jesus is absent, every thing is hard. When Jesus speaks not inwardly unto us,
our comfort is nothing worth: but if Jesus speak but one word, we feel much
consolation. Did not Mary Magdalen presently rise from the place where she
wept, when Martha said unto her: Thy Master is here, and calls thee. Ioh. 11.
Happy is the hour when Jesus calls from tears to spiritual joy. How dry and
hard art thou without Jesus? How foolish and vain, if thou desire any thing
out of Jesus? Is not this a greater loss, then if thou should lose the
whole world? Matthew. 16.

2 What can the world profit thee without Jesus? To be without Jesus is a
grievous hell; and to be with Jesus is a sweet Paradise. If Jesus be with thee,
no enemy can hurt thee. Romans 8. He that finds Jesus, finds a good treasure:
yea a good above al goods. Mat. 13. And he that leeseth Jesus, leeseth too
much, and more then the whole world. He is most poor that lives without
Jesus: and he most rich that is well with Jesus. Luke 12.

3 It is a great skill to know how to converse with Jesus, and a great wisdom
to know how to keep Jesus. Prou. 8. Be humble and peaceable, and Jesus will be
with thee. Be devout and quiet, and Jesus will stay with thee. Thou may
drive away Jesus and lose his grace, if thou give thy self to outward
things. And if thou should drive him from thee, and leese him, unto whom
will thou fly, and what friend will thou then seek? Without a friend thou
can not well live: and if Jesus be not above al a friend unto thee; thou
shall be too too sorrowful and desolate. Thou do therefore foolishly, if
thou do trust or rejoice in any other. It is better for thee to have all the
world against thee, then Jesus offended with thee. Gal. 6. Amongst al things
therefore that be dear unto thee, let Jesus alone be thy chiefest beloved.

4 Love all for Jesus, but Jesus for himself, Jesus Christ alone is especially
to be beloved; who alone is found to be good, and faithful above all friends.
For him, and in him, let as well friends as foes be dear unto thee: Mat. 5.
and all these are to be prayed for, that all may know and love him. Luke 6.
Never desire to be singularly commended or beloved, for that appertains only
unto God, who has none like unto himself. Neither do thou desire that the
heart of any should be set on thee; nor do thou set thy heart on the love of
any: but let Jesus be in thee, and in every virtuous and good man.

5 Be pure and free within, and entangle not thy heart with any creature. Thou
ought to be, as it were, naked, and carry a pure heart to God, if thou will
consider; and prove, and see how sweet our Lord is. And truly unless thou be
prevented, and drawn by his grace, thou shall never attain to that happiness,
to forsake and cast away all, that (...) may be united to him (...). For
when the grace of God comes unto a man, then he is strong, and nothing is
hard unto him. And when it goes away, he is poor and weak, and as it
were, left unto the will of whomsoever will afflict him. In this thou
ought not to be dejected, nor despair, but to resign thy self with all
indifferency unto the will of God, and to bear all things that befall thee for
the glory of Christ: for after winter follows summer: after night comes
day, and after a tempest, fair weather.

CHAP. IX. Of the want of all comfort.
IT is no great matter to despise humane comfort, when we have divine. It is
much, and very much, to be able to want both humane and divine comfort: and for
the honor and glory of God, to be willing to endure desolation of heart; and to
seek himself in nothing, nor to regard his own merit. What great matter is
it, if thou be cheerful and devout at the coming of heavenly grace? This
hour is wished for of all men. He rides easily whom the grace of God carries.
And what marvel if he feel not his burden, who is borne up by the Almighty,
and led by the greatest guide?

2 We are always willing to have something for our comfort; and a man does
hardly put off, and forsake himself. The holy Martyr S. Laurence overcame the
world with his Prelate: because he despised whatsoever seemed delightsome in
the world: and for the love of Christ he patiently suffered the high Priest of
God, S. Syxtus, to be taken from him, whom he most loved. He overcame therefore
the love of man, by the love of the Creator; and he rather chose the divine
pleasure, then humane comfort. See thou also learn to forsake some necessary
thing, and a beloved friend for the love of God. Be not grieved when thou art
forsaken by a friend, knowing that we al at length must be separated one from
another.

3 A man must fight long, and with a constant mind, before he get the
victory, and be able to place his whole heart in God. When a man confideth in
himself, he easily slideth unto humane comforts. But a true lover of Christ,
and a diligent follower of virtue, gives not himself to such solace, nor
seeks sensible sweetness: but rather forcible exercises, and to sustain hard
labors for Christ.

4 When therefore spiritual comfort is given thee from God, receive it
thankfully: but know that it is the gift of God, not any desert of thine. Be
not puffed up, joy not too much, neither do thou presume vainly: but be rather
the more humble for that grace, and more wary and fearful in all thy actions:
for that hour will pass away, and temptation will succeed. When consolation is
taken from thee, despair not presently; but with humility and patience attend
the heavenly visitation: for God is able again to give thee greater
consolation. This is not new nor strange unto them, that have experience in the
way of God: for in the great Saints and ancient Prophets, there was oftentimes
such kind of alteration.

5 For which cause, one when he had grace, said: I said in my plenty, I will
not be moved everlastingly. Psalm. 29. But when this was gone from him, he
adds what he found in himself, saying: Thou turnedst thy face from me, and
I became troubled. Ibid. Yet does he not despair in the midst of these
changes, but more earnestly prays unto our Lord, and says: Unto thee (O
Lord) I will cry, and I will pray unto my God. Ibid. Lastly, he receives the
fruit of his prayer, and witnesses that he was heard, saying: Our Lord has
heard me, and taken pity on me: our Lord is become my helper. Ibid. But
wherein? Thou have turned (says he) my sorrow into joy, and thou have
compassed me about with gladness. Ibid. If great Saints have been so dealt
withal, we that are poor and weak ought not to despair, if we be sometimes
fervent, and sometimes cold: for the spirit comes and goes, according to the
good pleasure of his will. Ioh. 3. For which cause blessed Job says, Thou
visitest him early in the morning, and suddenly thou prouest him. Job 7.

6 Whereupon therefore can I hope, or wherein ought I to trust, but in the great
mercy of God alone, and in the only hope of heavenly grace? For whether I enjoy
the presence of good men, or devout brethren, or faithful friends, or holy
books, or learned treatises, or sweet songs and hymns: all these help
little, and have little savor, when grace forsakes me, and I remain left in
my own poverty. At such a time there is no better remedy then patience, and
the resigning of my self unto the will of God. Luke 9.

7 I never found any so religious and devout, that has not had sometimes a
withdrawing of grace, or felt not a decrease of fervor. There was never Saint
so highly wrapped, and illuminated, who first or last was not tempted. For he is
not worthy of the high contemplation of God, who has not bin exercised with
some tribulation for God sake. For temptation going before, is wont to be a
sign of ensuing comfort. And unto those that are proved by temptations,
heavenly comfort is promised. He that shall overcome, says he, I will give him
to eat of the wood of life. Apocal. 21.

8 But divine comfort is given, that a man may be stronger to bear
adversities. There follows also temptation, lest we should wax proud of that
good. The devil sleeps not, neither is our flesh as yet dead: 1. Pet. 5.
therefore cease not to prepare thy self to the battle: for on thy right
hand, and on thy left, are enemies that never rest.

CHAP. X. Of thankfulness for the grace of God.
WHy seek thou rest, since thou art borne to labor? Job* 3. Dispose thy
self to patience, rather then to comforts: and to the bearing of the Cross,
rather then to gladness. What secular person is there, that would not willingly
receive spiritual joy and comfort, if he could always have it? Luke 14.
Spiritual comforts exceed all the delights of the world, and all the pleasures
of the flesh. All worldly delights are either vain, or unclean: but
spiritual delights are only pleasant and honest, produced by virtues, and
infused by God into pure hearts. But no man can always enjoy these divine
comforts, according to his desire: for the time of temptation is not long away.

2 False freedom of mind, and great trust of our selves, is very contrary to
heavenly visitation. God does well in giving grace: but man does evil in not
returning it again wholly unto God, with thanksgiving. And therefore the gifts
of grace cannot flow in us, because we are ungrateful to the giver: and
return them not wholly to the head-fountaine. Eccles. 1. For grace is ever due
to him that is thankful: and from the proud shall be taken that which is wont
to be given to the humble.

3 I desire not that consolation that takes from me compunction: nor that
contemplation which breeds a haughty mind. For all that is high, is not
holy: nor all that is sweet, good: nor every desire, pure: nor every thing that
is dear unto us, is grateful to God. I do willingly accept of that grace,
whereby I may ever become more humble and fearful, and be made more ready and
able to forsake my self. He that is taught by the gift of grace, and by the
scourge of the withdrawing thereof; will not dare to attribute any good to
himself; but will rather acknowledge himself poor and naked. Give unto God
that which is Gods; Mat. 22. and ascribe unto thy self that which is thine
own: that is, give thanks unto God for his grace, and acknowledge that
nothing is to be attributed to thee, but only sin, and the punishment due
thereunto.

4 Content thy self, and desire always the meanest and lowest things, and the
highest shall be given thee: for the highest stand not without the lowest. The
highest Saints before God, are the least in their own judgments. Luke 14. And
how much the more glorious, so much the humbler within themselves. Those that
are full of truth, and heavenly glory, are not desirous of the vainglory of
this world. Those that are firmly settled and grounded in God, can no way be
proud. And they that ascribe all unto God, what good soever they have received,
seek not glory one of another: Ioh. 5. but would have that glory which is from
God alone: and desire above all things to praise God in himself, and in all
the Saints, and always tend unto the same.

5 Be therefore grateful for the least gift, and thou shall be made worthy
to receive greater. Let the least be unto thee also as the greatest: and the
most contemptible as an especial gift. If thou consider the worth of the
giver, no gift will seem little, or of mean esteem. For it is not little that
is given by the sovereign Majesty of God. Yea if he should give punishment
and stripes, it ought to be grateful, for that he does it always for our
salvation, whatsoever he permits to happen unto us. He that desires to keep
the grace of God, let him be thankful for the grace given, and patient for
the taking away thereof. Let him pray that it may return. Let him be wary and
humble, lest he leese it.

CHAP. XI. How few the lovers of the Cross of Christ are.
Jesus has now many lovers of his heavenly kingdom, but few bearers of his
Cross. He has many desirous of comfort, but few of tribulation. He finds
many companions of his Table, but few of his abstinence. Al desire to rejoice
with him, few will suffer any thing for him, or with him. Many follow Jesus
unto the breaking of bread; but few to the drinking of the Chalice of his
Passion. Many reverence his miracles, few follow the ignominy of his Cross.
Luke 9.22. Many love Jesus, as long as adversities happen not. Many praise and
bless him, as long as they receive any comfort from him. But if Jesus hide
himself, and leave them but a while, they fall either into complaint, or into
too much deiection of mind.

2 But they that love Jesus, for Jesus, and not for some comfort of their own,
bless him in all tribulation and anguish of heart, as well as in the greatest
comfort. And although he should never give them comfort, they notwithstanding
would ever praise him, and always give him thanks.

3 O how powerful is the pure love of Jesus, which is mixed with no self-love
nor proper interest! Phil. 2. Are they not all to be called hirelings that ever
seek comforts? Do they not show themselves to be rather lovers of themselves,
then of Christ, that always think of their commodity and gain? Where may one
be found that will serve God, without looking for reward?

4 It is hard to find any one so spiritual, that is free from the love of all
earthly things. For where is any that is indeed poor in spirit, and free from
all affection of creatures? Far hence, and from the end of the world is his
price. Prou. 31. If a man should give all his wealth, yet is it nothing. And if
he should do great penance, yet is it little. And if he should attain to all
knowledge, he is yet far off. And if he should have great virtue, and very
fervent devotion, yet there is much wanting: to wit, one thing which is most
necessary for him. What is that? That leaving all, he forsake himself and go
perfectly from himself, and retain nothing of self-love. Matthew. 16. And
when he has done all that he knows to be done, let him think that he
has done nothing.

3 Let him not weigh that much, which might be much esteemed, but according to
truth, let him affirm himself to be an unprofitable servant, as our Savior
has said: When you shall have done all things that are commanded you, say: We
are unprofitable servants. Luke 17. Then may he be truly poor in spirit, and
naked, and say with the Prophet: I am alone and poor: yet no man more
powerful, no man more free then he that can leave himself and all things, and
put himself in the meanest and lowest place. Psalm. 24.

CHAP. XII. Of the high way of the holy Cross.
UNTO many seems hard this speech: Deny thy self, take up thy cross, and
follow Jesus, Mat. 16. But it will be much harder to hear that last word: Get
ye away from me; ye cursed, into everlasting fire. For they that now willingly
hear and follow the word of the Cross, shall not then fear to hear the
sentence of everlasting damnation. This sign of the Cross shall be in heaven,
when our Lord shall come to judgment. Then all the servants of the Cross, who
in their life time conformed themselves unto Christ crucified, shall draw near
unto our Lord with great confidence.

2 Why therefore fear thou to take up the Cross, which leads thee to a
Kingdom? In the Cross is health, in the Cross is life, in the Cross is
protection against our enemies, in the Cross is infusion of heavenly
sweetness, in the Cross is strength of mind, in the Cross is joy of spirit,
in the Cross is the height of virtue, in the Cross is the perfection of
sanctity. There is no health of the soul, nor hope of everlasting life but in
the Cross. Take up therefore thy cross and follow Jesus, and thou shall go
into life everlasting. He is gone before, bearing his Cross, Luc. 14. and is
dead for thee on the Cross; Ioh. 19. that thou may also bear thy Cross,
and desire to die on the Cross, with him. For if thou die with him, thou
shall also live with him. And if thou be his companion in pain, thou shall
be partaker with him also in glory. 2. Cor. 1.

3 Behold in the Cross all does consist, and all lies in ending our life upon
it: for there is no other way unto life, and unto true inward peace, but the
way of the Holy Cross, and of daily mortification. Go where thou will, seek
whatsoever thou will: thou shall not find a higher way above, nor a safer way
below, then the way of the holy Cross. Dispose and order all things
according to thy will and judgment: yet thou shall ever find, that of
necessity thou must suffer somewhat, either willingly or against thy will, so as
thou shall never fully avoid the Cross. For either thou shall feel pain in
thy body, or in thy soul thou shall suffer tribulation of spirit.

4 Sometimes thou shall be forsaken of God, sometimes thou shall be troubled by
thy neighbors, and which is more, oftentimes thou shall be irksome to thy
self: neither can thou be delivered or eased by any remedy or comfort: but
so long as pleases God, thou ought to bear it. For God will have thee learn
to suffer tribulation without comfort; and that thou submit thy self wholly to
him, and become more humble by tribulation. No man has so lively a feeling of
the Passion of Christ, as he who has chanced to suffer the like. The Cross
therefore is always ready, and every where attends thee. Thou can not
escape it, whither soever thou flyest: for wheresoever thou go, thou cariest
thy self with thee, and shall ever find thy self both above and below,
without and within: which way soever thou do turn thee, always thou shall
find the Cross: and every where of necessity thou must have patience, if thou will have inward peace, and deserve an everlasting Crown.

5 If thou bear the cross willingly, it will bear thee, and lead thee to thy
desired end: to wit, where there shall be an end of suffering, though here
there shall not. If thou bear it unwillingly, thou make for thy self a new
burden, and encreasest thy load, and yet notwithstanding thou must bear it. If
thou cast away one cross, without doubt thou shall find another, and that
perhaps a more heavy.

6 Think thou to escape that which no man could ever avoid? Which of the
Saints in the world was without crosses and tribulations? Verily Jesus Christ
our Lord was never one hour without pain of suffering, so long as he lived.
Christ (says he) ought to suffer, and rise again from death, and so to enter
into his glory: and how do thou seek any other way, then this high way,
which is the way of the holy Cross? Luke 24.

7 The whole life of Christ was a Cross and Martyrdom: and do thou seek
rest and joy? Thou art deceived, thou art deceived, if thou seek any other
thing, then to suffer tribulations: for this whole mortal life is full of
miseries, and environed on every side with Crosses. Job. 7. And how much the
more one has profited in spirit; so much the heavier Crosses he oftentimes
finds: for the love he bears to God increases the grief which he
endures for his banishment.

8 But yet this man; though so many ways afflicted, is not without the remedy
of spiritual consolation, for the great good which he perceives to grow unto
him by the bearing of his Cross. For whilst he willingly puts himself
under it, all the burden of tribulation is turned into the confidence of
divine comfort. And how much the more the flesh is waste by affliction, so
much the more is the spirit strengthened by inward grace. 2. Cor. 11. and 12.
And sometimes he is so comforted with the desire of tribulation, and
adversity, for the love of conforming himself to the Cross of Christ, that
he would not wish at any time to be without sorrow and tribulation: because
he believes, that so much the more grateful he shall be unto God, how much
the more he can suffer for him. This is not a work of humane virtue; but it
is the grace of Christ, that can, and does so much in frail flesh: that what
naturally it always abhors and flies, that, by fervor of spirit, it
takes hold on, and loves.

9 It is not according to man's inclination to bear the cross, to love the
cross, to chastise and subdue the body, to fly honors, to suffer contumelies
with a joyful heart, to despise himself and to wish to be despised, to bear
al adversities, and domages, and to desire no prosperity in this world. If thou
considerest thy self, thou shall be able to perform no such matter of thy
self. 2. Cor. 3. But if thou trustest in our Lord, strength shall be given
thee from heaven, and the world and flesh shall be made subject to thy
command. Neither shall thou fear thy enemy the Devil, if thou be armed with
faith, and signed with the Cross of Christ.

10 Resolve therefore with thy self, like a good and faithful servant of
Christ, to bear manfully the Cross of thy Lord, who was crucified for thy
love. Prepare thy self to bear many adversities and diverse kinds of troubles
in this miserable life: for so it will be with thee, whersoeuer thou be: and so
surely thou will find it, whersoeuer thou hide thy self. So it must be, and
there is no remedy, or means to avoid tribulation and sorrow but to bear them.
Drink of the chalice of our Lord willingly, if thou will be his friend, and
desire to have part with him. Mat. 20. Leave the desire of comforts to God:
let him do therein as shall best please him. Io. 28. Set thou thy heart upon the
suffering of tribulations, and account them the greatest comforts: for that the
passions of this life are not according to future glory, although thou alone
could suffer them all. Romans 8.

11 When thou shall come to this estate, that tribulation shall seem sweet,
and pleasant unto thee for Christ: then thou may think it is well with
thee, for thou have found a Paradise upon earth. Galath. 6. As long as it is
grievous unto thee to suffer, and that thou desire to fly it; so long shall
thou be ill at ease: and the tribulation thou fliest will follow thee every
where.

12 If thou setlest thy self to that thou ought, to wit, to suffer, and to
die to thy self, it will quickly be better with thee, and thou shall find
peace. Although thou should have been rapt even unto the third heaven with
Paul, 1. Cor. 12. thou art not for this assured, that thou shall suffer no
contradiction. I (says Jesus) will show him how great things he must suffer
for my name. Act. 9. It rests therefore, that thou suffer, if thou will love
Jesus, and perpetually serve him.

13 O, would to God thou were worthy to suffer something for Jesus! How great
glory would it be unto thee, what joy to all the Saints of God, how great
edification also to thy neighbor! For all do commend patience, though few
desire to suffer. With great reason thou ought to be willing to suffer a
little for Christ; since many suffer far greater things for the love of the
world. Psalm. 43.

14 Know for certain that thou ought to lead a dying life. And how much
the more every one dies to himself; so much the more does he begin to live
to God. No man is fit to attain unto heavenly things, unless he submit
himself to the bearing of adversities for Christ. Nothing is more grateful
unto God, nothing more wholesome to thee in this world, then to suffer
willingly for Christ. And if it were in thy choice, thou should rather wish
to suffer adversities for Christ, then to enjoy the delight of many comforts:
because by these means thou should be more like unto Christ, and more
conformable to all the Saints. For our merit, and the perfection of our estate
consists not in much sweetness and comforts: but rather in suffering great
afflictions and tribulations.

15 If there had been any better thing, and more profitable to the health of
man then suffering, surely Christ would have showed it by word and example. But
he plainly exhorted all the disciples that followed him, and all that desire to
follow him, to the bearing of the Cross, and says: If any man will come after
me, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross and follow me. Luke 9. So as
when we have read and searched all, let this be the last conclusion: That by
many tribulations we must enter into the Kingdom of God. Act. 14.

The end of the second Book.
OF THE FOLLOWING OF CHRIST. THE THIRD BOOK.
CHAP. I. Of the inward speech of Christ unto a faithful soul.
I Will hear what our Lord God will speak in me. Psalm. 84. Blessed is the
soul that hears our Lord speaking in her: and receives from his mouth the
word of comfort. 1. King. 3. Blessed are those ears that receive the sound of
the divine voice, and listen not to the whispering of the world. Blessed indeed
are those ears that harken not to the voice which sounds outwardly, but unto
truth which teaceth inwardly. Matthew. 13. Blessed are the eyes that being shut
up to outward things, are attentive to those things that are internal. Blessed
are they that enter into the inward things, and endeavor to prepare themselves
more and more by daily exercises to the attaining of heavenly secrets. Blessed
be they that delight to attend to the service of God, and cast from them all
impediments of this world.

2 Consider these things my soul, and shut up the doors of thy sensual
desires: that thou may hear what thy Lord God speaks in thee. Psalm. 84.
Thus says thy beloved: I am thy safety, thy peace, and thy life. Keep thy
self with me, and thou shall find peace. Forsake all transitory things, and
seek those that be everlasting. Psalm. 34. What are temporal things, but
deceiving snares? And what do all creatures avail thee, if thou be forsaken
by the Creator? Forsake therefore all earthly things, and labor to please thy
Creator, and be faithful unto him, that thou may attain unto true
happiness.

CHAP. II. That truth speaks inwardly without noise of Words.
THE SERVANT. Speak Lord, for thy Servant hears. I am thy Servant, grant me
understanding, that I may know thy testimonies. Stir up my heart to hear
the words of thy mouth. 1. King. 3. Psalm. 118. Let thy speech descend as the
dew into my soul. The children of Israel in times past said unto Moses:
Speak thou unto us, and we shall hear thee: Let not our Lord speak unto us,
lest perhaps we die. Exodus 20. Not so Lord, not so, I beseech thee. But rather
with the Prophet Samuel, I humbly and earnestly entreat: speak Lord, for thy
servant hears. 1. Reg. 3. Let not Moses speak unto me, nor any of the
Prophets: but thou rather speak, my Lord God, the inspirer and inlightner of
all the Prophets: for thou alone without them can perfectly instruct me, but
they without thee can profit nothing.

2 They can pronounce words, but they give not spirit. They speak marvelous
well, but if thou hold thy peace, they inflame not the heart. They deliver the
letters, but thou openest the sense. They bring forth mysteries, but thou
disclosest the understanding of sealed things. They declare thy Commandments,
but thou helpest to fulfill them. They show the way, but thou give strength
to walk it. They work only exteriourly, but thou instructest and enlightnest
the hearts. They water outwardly, but thou give fruitfulnes. They sound
forth words, but thou give understanding to the hearing.

3 Let not therefore Moses speak unto me, but thou my Lord God, the
everlasting truth; lest perhaps I should die, and become without fruit, if I be
warned outwardly only and not inflamed within: lest the word heard and not
fulfilled, known and not loved, believed and not observed, should increase my
judgment. Speak therefore Lord, for thy servant hears, for thou have the
words of everlasting life. 1. King. 3. Speak unto me to the comfort of my
soul, and to the ame^dme^t of my whole life, and to thy praise and glory, and
everlasting honor. Ioh. 6.


CHAP. III. That the words of God are to be heard with humility, and that many
weigh them not.
OUR LORD. Son hear my words, words of great comfort, excelling all the
knowledge of the Philosophers and wise men of this world. My words are spirit
and life, not to be weighed by the understanding of man. Ioh. 6. They are not
to be drawn to vain liking, but to be heard with silence, and to be received
with all humility and great affection.


SER. And I said: Blessed is the man whom thou shall instruct, O Lord, and
shall teach thy Law, that thou may give him quietness from evil days, and
that he be not destroyed upon earth. Psalm. 93.


LORD. 2 I (says our Lord) have taught the Prophets from the beginning, and
cease not continually to speak to every one: but many are deaf and give no
ear to my speech. Heb. 1. The greater number do more willingly listen to the
world, then to God: and follow sooner the desires of their flesh, then the will
of God. The world promises temporal and small things, and is served with
great diligence: I promise most high and eternal things, and the hearts of men
are nothing moved with it. Who is he that serves and obeys me with equal
care, to that, with which the world, and the Lords thereof are served? Blush
Sidon, says the sea. Esa. 23. And if thou ask the cause, hear whereof. For
a little prebend a long jorney is undertaken: for everlasting life many will
scarce once lift a foot from the ground. A thing of small value is sought after
greedily: for a penny sometimes there is great contention: for a vain thing and
slight promise, men doubt not to toil day and night.

3 But alas, for an unchangeable good, for an inestimable revvard, for the
highest honor and glory without end, they are loath to take the least pains.
Blush therefore slothful and complaining Servant, that they are found more
ready to destruction, then thou to life. They rejoice more at vanity, then thou
at truth. And yet they are sometimes frustrated of their hope, but my promise
deceives none, nor sends him away empty that trusts in me. Romans 1. Matthew.
24. I will give that which I have promised. I will fulfill that which I have
said, but to him that remains faithful in my love to the end. Apoc. 2. I am
the reward of all good, and do try my devout servants in forcible proofs. Mat.
5.15.

4 Write my words in thy heart, and think diligently of them: for they will
be necessary in time of temptation. What thou understand not when thou
read, thou shall know in the day of visitation. I am wont to visit my elect
two several ways, to wit, with temptation, and comfort. And I daily read two
lessons unto them, one reprehending their vices, another exhorting them to the
increase of virtues. He that has my words and despises them, has within him
that shall judge him at the last day.


A prayer to implore the grace of devotion.
SER. 5 Lord my God, thou art all that I can desire. Who am I, that dare speak
unto thee? I am thy poorest servant, and a most vile worm: much more poor and
contemptible then I can or dare express. Genesis 18. Remember Lord, that I am
nothing, have nothing, and can do nothing. Thou alone art good, just, and
holy; thou can do all things, performest all things, leaving only a sinner
void of al good. Call to mind thy mercies, and fill my heart with thy grace, who
wilt not that thy works be void.

6 How can I support my self in this miserable life; unless thy mercy and
grace comfort me? Turn not thy face from me: delay not thy visitation; draw
not away thy comfort, lest my soul become as earth without water unto thee.
Psalm. 68. Lord teach me to fulfill thy will; teach me to live worthily and
humbly in thy sight; for thou art my wisdom, thou do perfectly know me, and
did know me before the world was made, and before I was borne in the world.
Psalm. 142.


CHAP. IV. That we ought to live in truth and humility in the sight of God.
OUR LORD. Son, walk in my sight in sincerity and truth; and ever seek me
in plainness of heart. He that walks in my sight in truth; shall be defended
from evil incursions, and truth shall deliver him from seducers, and from the
detractions of the wicked. Genesis 17. Wisd. 1. If truth shall have delivered
thee, thou shall be truly free, and shall not care for vain speeches of men.
1. Ioh. 8.


SER. Lord it is true. According as thou say, so I beseech thee let it be
done with me, and keep me, and bring me to a happy end. Let thy truth teach
me, and let it deliver me from all evil affection and inordinat love: and I
shall walk with thee in great freedom of heart.


LORD. 2 I will teach thee (says the Truth) those things that are right and
pleasing in my sight. Think of thy sins with great sorrow and grief; and
never esteem thy self any thing for thy good works. Thou art in very deed a
sinner, and subject to many passions. Of thy self thou always tendest to
nothing, and art quickly cast down and overcome: quickly troubled, quickly
dissolved. Thou have nothing wherein thou can glory. 2. Cor. 4. But many
things for which thou ought to humble, and despise thy self: for thou art
much weaker then thou art able to comprehend.

3 And therefore let nothing seem much unto thee whatsoever thou do. Let
nothing seem great, nothing precious, and wonderful, nothing worthy of
estimation: nothing high, nothing truly commendable, and to be desired, but
that which is everlasting. Let the eternal truth above al things please thee.
Let thy own great unworthiness always displease thee. Fear nothing, blame,
and fly nothing so much, as thy sins and vices: which ought to displease more
then the loss of any thing whatsoever. Some walk not sincerely in my sight,
but led by a certain curiosity and pride, will know my secrets, and understand
the high mysteries of God, neglecting themselves and their own salvation.
Eccles. 3. and 2. Cor. 3. These oftentimes (for that I resist them) do fall
into great temptations and sins, for their pride and curiosity.

4 Fear the judgments of God, dread the wrath of the almighty. But discuss
not the works of the Highest. Search thine own iniquities, in how much thou
have offended, and how much good thou have neglected. Some carry their devotion
only in books, some in pictures, sone in outward signs and figures, some have
me in their mouths, but little in their hearts. There are others that being
illuminated in their understanding, and purged in their affection* do always
aspire with an earnest mind to everlasting happiness: Esa. 29. and are unwilling
to hear of the things of this world, and to serve the necessities of nature
with grief; and these perceive what the Spirit of truth speaks in them.
Psalm. 24 Because it teaches them to despise earthly, and love heavenly things:
to neglect the world, and day and night to desire heaven.


CHAP. V. Of the wonderful effect of divine grace.
THE SERVANT. I Praise thee, O heavenly Father, Father of my Lord Jesus Christ,
for that thou have vouchsafed to remember me a poor and wretched creature. O
Father of mercies, and God of all comfort, thanks be unto thee, who sometimes
with thy comfort refreshest me unworthy of all comfort. 2. Cor. 1. I ever
bless and glorify thee with thy only begotten Son, and the holy Ghost for all
worlds. O God my Lord, the holy lover of my soul, when thou shall come into my
heart, all that is within me will rejoice. Thou art my glory, and the
exultation of my heart. Psalm. 3. Thou art my hope, and my refuge in the day of
my tribulation. Psalm. 31.

2 But for that I am yet weak in love, and imperfect in virtue, I have need to
be comforted by thee: visit me therefore often, and instruct me with thy holy
discipline. Deliver me from evil passions, and heal my heart of al inordinate
affections: that being cured within, and well purged, I may be made fit to love,
strong to suffer, and constant to persevere.

3 Love is a great matter, in very truth a great good: which alone makes every
thing that is heavy light; and bears equally unequal burdens. Mat. 11. For
it carries a burden without a burden, and makes every thing that is bitter
sweet, and delightsome. The noble love of Jesus enforces man to work great
things, and stirs him up to desire always the most perfect. Love will be
aloft, and not kept down with any base things. Love will be free from all
worldly affection, to the end his inward sight be not obscured, that he be not
entangled with the desire of any transitory gain, or troubled with the want
thereof. Nothing is sweeter then love, nothing stronger, nothing higher,
nothing more ample, nothing more pleasant, nothing fuller nor better in heaven
or in earth: for that love has his beginning from God, and cannot rest but in
God above all creatures.

4 He that loves, flies, runs, and rejoices, he is free, and not held in.
He gives all for all, and has all in all, for that he rests in one Highest
above all, from which all good flows and proceeds. He respects not the
gifts, but turns himself above all goods unto the giver. Love oftentimes
knows no measure, but inflameth above al measure. Love feels no burden,
weighs no pains, desires above it strength, complains not of
impossibility, for that it thinks all things lawful and possible. It is
therefore able to undertake all things, and performs and brings many things
to effect: whereas he that does not love, faints and can do nothing.

5 Love always watches, and sleeping, sleeps not: being wearied, is not
tired: straightened, is not pressed: frighted, is not troubled: but like a lively
flame, and burning torch, breaks upwards, and passes through al with great
security. Romans 8. If any one loves, he knows what this voice cries. A loud
cry in the ears of God, is the burning love of the soul, which says: My God,
my love, thou art wholly mine, and I wholly thine.

6 Enlarge me in love, that my heart may taste how sweet it is to love, and
to be dissolved, and swim in thy love. Let me be possessed by love, mounting
above my self, with excessive fervor and admiration. Let me sing the song of
love, let me follow thee on high my beloved, let my soul faint in thy praises
rejoicing with love. Let me love thee more then my self, and not my self but
for thee, and al in thee, and truly love thee, as the law of love commands
which shines in thee.

7. Love is swift, sincere, pious, sweet and delightful: strong, patient,
faithful, prudent, suffering, full of courage, and never seeking it self. 1.
Cor. 13. For where one seeks himself, there he falls from love. 1. Cor. 10.
Love is circumspect, humble, and upright: not remiss, not mutable, nor
attending unto vain things; sober, chaste, constant, quiet, and guarded in all
the senses. Psalm. 2. Love is subject and obedient to Superiors, mean and
abject to it self, devout and thankful unto God, trusting and hoping always
in him, even then, when God imparteth no sweetness unto it: for without sorrow
none lives in love.

8 He that is not ready to suffer al things, and stand to the will of his
beloved, is not worthy to be called a lover. A lover ought to embrace willingly
all that is hard, and distastefull for his beloved; and not to turn away from
him, for any contrary accidents.


CHAP. VI. Of the proof of a true Lover.
OUR LORD. Son, thou art not yet a strong and prudent lover.


SER. Wherefore, Lord?


LORD. Because thou give over for a small adversity, and too earnestly
seek comfort. A constant lover stands firmly in temptations, and gives
not credit to the crafty persuasions of the enemy. As I please him in
prosperity, so I am not unpleasant to him in adversity. Phil. 4.

2 A prudent lover considers not so much the gift of his lover, as the love
of the giver. He rather esteems the good will, then the value, and places
all gifts under his beloved. A noble lover rests not in the gift, but in me
above any gift. All therefore is not left, if sometimes thou have less taste of
me, and my Saints then thou would. That good and sweet desire which thou
sometimes feel, is the effect of present grace, and a certain taste of the
heavenly Country: whereon thou must not rely too much, for it goes and
comes. But to fight against evil motions of the mind which may happen unto
thee, and to despise the suggestion of the devil, is a sign of virtue and
great merit. Matthew. 4.

3 Let not therefore strange fancies forced into thee, of any matter
whatsoever, trouble thee. Retain a firm purpose and upright intention to God.
Neither is it an illusion, that sometimes thou art suddenly rapt on high, and
presently returnest again unto the accustomed vanities of thy heart. For thou
do rather unwillingly suffer them, then commit them: and as long as they
displease thee, and thou striuest against them, it is a merit and no loss.

4 Know that thy ancient enemy does ever strive to hinder thy desire to good;
and to divert thee from all devout exercise: to wit, from the worshipping of
Saints, from the devout memory of my passion, from the profitable remembrance
of thy sins, from the guard of thine own heart, and from the firm purpose of
profiting in virtue. He thrusts many evil thoughts into thy mind; that he
may cause a wearisomnes and horror in thee, to draw thee from devout prayer and
reading. Humble confession is displeasing unto him, and if he could, he would
cause thee to cease from receiving the Sacrament of my Body. Trust him not, nor
care for him, although he should often set snars of deceit to entrap thee.
Charge him with it, when he suggesteth evil and unclean thoughts unto thee:
Say unto him: Auant filthy spirit: blush miserable wretch, thou art filthy that
bring such things into mine ears. Away from me wicked deceiuer, thou shall
have no part in me: but Jesus shall be with me as a strong warrior, and thou
shall remain confounded. Mat. 4. and 16. I had rather die and undergo any
torment, then to consent unto thee. hold thy peace and be silent. I will hear
thee no more, though thou should work me many troubles. My Lord is my light
and salvation, whom shall I fear? Ps. 26. If whole armies should stand
together against me, my heart shall not fear. Our Lord is my helper, and my
Redeemer.

5 Fight like a good Soldier: and if thou sometimes fall through frailetie,
recover greater forces then before, trusting in my more abundant grace: and
take great heed of vain pleasing of thy self, and pride. Psalm. 26. and 1.
Tim. 6. This brings many into error, and makes them sometimes fall into almost
incurable blindness. Let the fall of the proud, foolishly presuming of
themselves, serve thee for a warning, and a perpetual humiliation.


CHAP. VII. That grace is to be hid under the veil of humility.
OUR LORD. Son, it is more profitable and safe for thee to hide the grace of
devotion, not to extol thy self, nor to speak much, nor to esteem much
thereof: but rather to despise thy self, and fear it, as given to one
unworthy thereof. This affection is not to be cleaued unto, which may be
quickly changed into the contrary. Think when thou art in grace, how miserable
and needy thou art wont to be without it? Neither does therein only consist the
profit of spiritual life, when thou have the grace of comfort; but when thou
humbly, resignedly, and patiently suffer the withdrawing thereof: so that
thou be not then less diligent in the exercise of prayer, nor suffer thy self
to pass over the rest of thy accustomed good works: but that thou willingly
perform what lies in thee, according as thou art able and understand to be
fit: not neglecting thy self wholly for the drines, and trouble of mind, which
thou feel.

2 There are many, that when it succeeds not well with them, presently they
become impatient or slothful. The way of man is not always in his power, but
it belongs to God, to give, and to comfort when he will, how much he will,
and whom he will, as it shall please him and no more. Hier. 10. and Romans 9.
Some unadvised persons have overthrown themselves, for the greedy desire which
they had of the grace of devotion: attempting more then they were able to
perform, not weighing the measure of their weakness, but following rather
the desire of their heart, then the judgment of reason. And because they
presumed on greater matters then was pleasing to God, they quickly lost their
grace. They were made needy, and left in a dejected estate that built
themselves nests in heaven; to the end that being humbled and impouerished,
they may learn not to fly with their own wings, but to live in hope under my
feathers. Esaias 24. They that are yet new, and unacquainted in the way of our
Lord, unless they govern themselves by the counsel of discreet persons, may
easily be deceived and overthrown.

3 And if they will rather follow their own judgment, then give credit to
others that are experienced, their end will be dangerous, if they cannot be
drawn from their own conceit. Seldom those that are wise in their own
opinion, suffer themselves humbly to be governed by others. A little knowledge
with humility, and a slender understanding, is better then great treasures of
learning with a vain selfe-liking. Psalm. 15. and 16. It is better for thee to
have less, then much of that whereof thou may be proud. He does not
discreetly, that wholly gives himself over to mirth, forgetting his former
poverty and the chaste fear of God, which fears to lose the grace which he
has obtained. Neither is he virtuously wise, that in time of adversity or any
tribulation whatsoever, yields to despairing thoughts, and thinks and
imagines of me less confidently then he ought.

4 He that will be over secure in time of peace, shall be often found in time
of war too dejected and fearful. 1 Thessalonians. 5. If thou could always
continue humble and lowly within thy self, and temper and govern thy soul
well, thou should not so soon fall into danger and offense. It is good
counsel, that when thou conceiuest fervor of spirit, thou should think
what will become of thee, when that light shall leave thee. And when that does
happen, remember the light may return again, which for thy instruction and my
glory I have withdrawn for a time. Job 17.

5 Such proof is often more profitable, then if thou should always enjoy
prosperity according to thy desire. For merits are not to be weighed in a man
by the number of visions and comforts which he has, or by his knowledge in
Scriptures, or by his being placed in high degree: but in that he is grounded
in true humility, and replenished with divine charity: if he always purely and
entirely seek the honor of God, if he esteem himself nothing, and with a
sincere heart despise himself, and rejoice more to be despised and humbled by
others, then to be honored. Psalm. 83.


CHAP. VIII. Of a mean conceit of our selves in the sight of God.
THE SERVANT. SHall I speak unto my Lord, since I am dust and ashes? If I
esteem better of my self, behold thou stand against me, and my iniquities
bear true witness, neither can I speak against it. Genesis 18. But if I abase and
esteem nothing of my self, and cast off all self-conceit, and (as I am)
account my self to be dust, thy grace will be favorable unto me, and thy
light will be near unto my heart: and all estimation how little soever, shall
be swallowed up in the depth of my nothing, and perish everlastingly. There
thou show my self unto me, what I am, what I have bin, and whither I am
come: for alas I am nothing, and I knew it not. And if I be left to my self,
behold I become nothing, and a mass of infirmyty. But if thou suddenly look
upon me, I am presently made strong, and filled with new joy. And it is a great
marvel, that I am so suddenly lifted up, and so graciously embraced by thee,
that of mine own weight always sink downward.

2 Thy love is cause hereof, freely preventing me, and releeuing me in so many
necessities, preserving me also from grievous dangers, and (as I may truly
say) delivering me from innumerable evils. For surely by evil loving my self,
I lost my self: and by seeking thee alone, and sincerely loving thee, I have
found both my self and thee, and for thy love have more deeply brought my
self to nothing. Ioh. 12. For that thou, O most sweet Jesus, dealest with me
above all desert, and above all that I dare hope and request.

3 Blessed be thou my God, for although I be unworthy of all good, yet the
noblenes of thy bounty and thy infinite goodness, never cease to do good even
to the ungrateful, and to them that be turned away far from thee. Matthew. 5.
Turn us unto thee, O Lord, that we may be grateful, humble and devout: for
thou art our safety, our power, and our strength.


CHAP. IX. That all things are to be referred unto God, as unto the last end.
OUR LORD. Son, I ought to be thy chiefest and last end, if thou desire to
be truly blessed. With this intention thy affection shall be purified, which
is oftentimes inclined inordinately to it self, and unto creatures. For if in
any thing thou seek thy self, thou presently faintest and driest up within
thy self. Direct therefore al things chiefly unto me, for I am he that have
given all. Consider every thing as flowing from the highest good: and therefore
all things are to be reduced unto me, as unto their first beginning. Eccles. 1.

2 Out of me, as out of living fountains, the little and the great, the poor
and the rich, do draw the water of life: and they that willingly and freely
serve me, shall receive grace for grace. Ioh. 4. But he that will glory out
of me, or be delighted in any particular good, shall not be grounded in true
joy, nor enlarged in his heart, but shall be many ways hindered and straightened.
1. Cor. 1. Thou ought therefore to ascribe no good unto thy self, nor
attribute the praise of virtue unto any man: but give all unto God. without
whom man has nothing. I have bestowed all, and will that al be returned to me
again: and with great severity I require thanks. 1. Cor. 4.

3 This is the truth that puts to flight vainglory. And if heavenly grace,
and true charity enter in, there shall be no envy nor grudging of heart,
neither shall there be any place for self-love. For divine charity
overcomes all, and enlarges all the forces of the soul. If thou understand
aright, in me alone thou will rejoice, in me alone thou will hope: for none
is good, but God alone, who is to be praised above all things, and to be
blessed in all. Mat. 19. and Luke 18.


CHAP. X. That despising the world, it is sweet to serve God.
THE SERVANT. NOw I will speak again, Lord, and will not be silent. I will say
in the ears of my God, my Lord, and my King that is on high: O how great is
the multitude of thy sweetness Lord, which thou have hidden for those that fear
thee! Psalm. 30. But what art thou to the^ that love thee? What to them that
serve thee with their whole heart? Truly unspeakable is the sweetness of thy
contemplation, which thou bestowest on them that love thee. In this chiefly
thou have showed me the sweetness of thy charity, Genesis 1. for that when I was
not, thou made me: and when I went astray far off from thee, thou broughtest
me back again, that I might serve thee: and have commanded me to love thee.
Psalm. 118. and Matthew. 15.

2 O fountain of everlasting love, what shall I say of thee? How can I forget
thee, that have vouchsafed to remember me, even when I whithered away and
perished! Thou have used mercy with thy servant beyond all the expectation of
my heart: and have bestowed thy grace and friendship beyond all merit. What
shall I return unto thee for this grace? Psalm. 115. For it is not granted to
every one to forsake all things, to renounce the world, and to undertake a life
of religion and perfection. Is it much that I serve thee, whom all creatures
are bound to serve? It ought not to seem much unto me to serve thee: but this
rather seems much, and marvelous unto me, that thou vouchsafest to receive
into thy service one so poor and unworthy, and to join him with thy beloved
servants. Judge. 16.

3 Behold all is thine which I have and whereby I serve thee. And yet in very
deed thou rather seruest me then I thee. 1. Cor. 4. Behold heaven and earth,
which thou have created for the service of man are ready at hand, and do daily
perform whatsoever thou do command; and this is little: yea thou have also
appointed the Angels to the service of man. Psa. 90. and Heb. 1. But that which
exceeds all, is that thou thy self have vouchsafed to serve man, and
promised to give thy self unto him.

4 What shall I give thee for all these thousands of benefits? I would I could
serve thee all the days of my life! I would I were able at least for one day to
do thee some worthy and acceptable service! Thou art truly worthy of all
service, of all honor and everlasting praise. Thou art my Lord, and I thy poor
servant, that am bound to serve thee with all my forces, neither ought I ever
to cease to praise thee. And this I wish to do, this I desire: and whatsoever
is wanting unto me, vouchsafe I beseech thee to supply.

5 It is a great honor, a very great glory to serve thee, and to despise all
things for thee. For great grace shall be given to them that shall willingly
submit themselves unto thy most holy service. They shall receive most sweet
comfort of the holy Ghost, that for thy love shall renounce all carnal
delights. Mat. 19. They shall attain great freedom of mind, that for thy
names sake shall enter into the narrow way, and shall have left off all care of
this world. Matthew. 7.

6 O sweet and delightful servitude of God, by which man is truly made free
and holy! Mat. 11. and 1. Ioh. 5. O sacred state of religious bondage, which
makes man equal to Angels, pleasing to God, terrible to devils, and grateful,
and of great esteem to all the faithful! O service to be embraced, and
always wished for, by which we obtain the greatest good, and attain to that
joy which never shall have end!


CHAP. XI. That the desires of our heart are to be examined and moderated.
OUR LORD. Son, thou ought to learn many things more, which thou have not
yet well learned.


SER. What are those Lord?


LORD. That thou frame thy desire wholly according to my pleasure: and be not a
lover of thy self* but a diligent follower of my will. Thy desires oftentimes
do stir thee up, and drive thee forwards with violence: but consider whether
thou art moved rather for my honor, then for thine own profit. If I be the
cause, thou will be well content with whatsoever I shall ordain: but if there
lurk in thee any self inclination, behold this is it that hinders thee, and
weighs thee down. Phil. 2.

2 Beware therefore thou incline not too much upon any desire that comes to
thy mind, before thou ask my counsel; lest perhaps afterward it repent
thee, and that thou begin now to dislike that which before did please thee,
and which thou earnestly desiredst as the best. For every affection that
seems good, is not presently to be-followed: nor every contrary affection at
the first to be fled. It is expedient sometimes to use a restraint even in good
desires and endeauours: lest by importunity thou incur distraction of mind,
and by evil example become a scandal unto others: or being gaine-said by
others, thou be suddenly troubled and fall.

3 Yet sometimes thou ought to use violence, and resist manfully thy
sensual appetites, Philip. 2. and respect not what thy body would, or would
not: but rather to labor, that even perforce it be subject to the spirit.
Romans 8. and 2. Cor. 4. And it is to be chastised so long, and to be forced
under servitude, 2. Cor. 10. until it readily obey in all things, and learn
to be content with a little, and to be pleased with ordinary things, and not
to murmr against any inconvenience. 1. Cor. 9.


CHAP. XII. Of the effect of Patience, and of strife against Concupiscence.
THE SERVANT. LOrd God, I perceive patience is very necessary unto me: for that
many adversities do happen in this life. Heb. 10. Howsoever I shall dispose of
my peace, my life cannot be without war and affliction. Job 7.


LORD. So it is Son. And my will is not that thou seek after that peace which is
void of temptation, or that feels no contrarieties: but then think that thou
have found peace, when thou art exercised with sundry tribulations, and tried
in many adversities. Iam. 1.

2 If thou say that thou art not able to suffer much, how then will thou endure
the fire of Purgatory? Of two evils the less is always to be chosen. That
thou may therefore avoid everlasting punishments in the next world, endeavor
to suffer patiently for God the present evils of this. Do thou think that
men of this world suffer little or nothing? Thou art deceived. Look into the
life even of them that live in greatest delicacies, and thou shall find it
otherwise. But thou will say they have many delights, and follow their own
wills, and therefore they make small account of their tribulations. Be it so,
that they have whatsoever they will; but how long do thou think it will last?

3 Behold the vvealthy of this world vanish away like smoke, and there shall
be no memory of their joys past. Psalm. 67. Yea even while they live also,
they rest not in them without grief, irksomnes and fear. For the selfsame
thing in which they take their delight, is oftentimes the cause of sorrow unto
them, and much affliction. They have their desert, who, for that they
immoderately seek and follow delights, they do not obtain them, but with
shame and sorrow.

4 O how short and deceitful, how inordinate, and filthy are those pleasures!
Yea so senseless and blind are men that they understand it not: but like dumb
beasts, for a little pleasure of a corruptible life, they incur the eternal
death of their soul. Do not thou therefore, my Son, follow the disordinate
inclinations of thy corrupt nature, but forsake thine own will. Delight in our
Lord, and he will give thee the desires of thy heart. Eccls. 28. Psalm. 36.

5 If thou desire true light, and to be more plentifully comforted by me:
behold in the contempt of all worldly things, and in the cutting off of all
base delights: shall be thy blessing, and abundant comfort shall be given
thee. And how much the more thou withdrawest thy self from all comfort of
creatures, so much the sweeter and more forcible consolations shall thou find
in me. But at first thou can not attain unto them without a certain grief,
labor and strife. The old custom will make resistance, and thou must overcome
it with another custom that is better. Thy flesh will murmr; but thou must
bridle it with fervor of spirit. The old Serpent will sting and trouble thee:
but by prayer he shall be put to flight: and with profitable labor thou shall
shut the door against him.


CHAP. XIII. Of the humble obedience of a subject, according to the example of
Christ.
OUR LORD. Son, he that endeavors to withdraw himself from obedience,
withdraws himself from grace. And he that seeks to have things in
private, shall lose the common. Mat. 16. He that does not willingly and freely
submit himself to his Superior, it is a sign that his flesh is not yet
perfectly obedient unto him, but oftentimes rebelleth and murmureth against
him. Learn therefore readily to submit thy self to thy Superior, if thou
desire to subdue thine own passions. For the outward enemy is sooner
overcome, if the inward man be in good estate. There is no worse enemy, nor
more troublesome to the soul, then thou unto thy self, not agreeing well with
the spirit. Thou must of necessity have a true contempt of thy self, if thou will prevail against flesh and blood.

2 Because thou love thy self as yet too inordinatly, therefore thou art
afraid to resign thy self wholly to the will of others. But what great matter
is it if thou that art dust, and nothing submittest thy self to a man for God:
when I the Almighty and highest sovereign, who created all things of nothing,
humbly submitted my self unto man for thee? Luke 2. and Ioh. 12. I became the
most humble and abject of all men, that thou might overcome thy pride with
my humility. Learn to obey, thou that art dust. Learn to humble thy self,
thou earth and clay, and put thy self under the feet of all men. Learn to
break thine own will, and to yield thy self to all subjection.

3 Take courage against thy self, and suffer not pride to live in thee: but
humble and submit thy self to all, that every one may go over thee, and tread
thee as dirt of the streets under their feet. Vain man, what can thou
complain of? what can thou answer foul sinner to them that reprove thee,
who have so often offended God, and so many times deserved hell? But mine eye
has spared thee, because thy soul was precious in my sight: that thou
might know my love, and always remain grateful for my benefits: that thou
might continually give thy self to true subjection and humility, and
might bear patiently the contempt of thy self.


CHAP. XIV. Of the secret Judgments of God to be considered, lest we be
extolled in our good deeds.
THE SERVANT. THou thundrest thy judgments over me, Lord, and shakest all my
bones with fear and trembling, and my soul is sore afraid. I stand
astonished, and consider; for that heavens are not pure in thy sight. Job 15.
If thou have found wickedness in Angels, and have not pardoned them, what shall
become of me? Job 4. Stars fell from heaven, and what do I presume that am
dust? Apoc. 8. They whose works seemed laudable, fell into the lowest: and I
have seen them, that did eat bread of Angels, to be delighted with the husks
of swine.

2 There is no sanctity, if thou, O Lord, withdrawest thy hand. No wisdom
avails, if thou ceasest to govern. No strength helps, if thou leauest to
defend. No chastity secure, if thou do not protect it. No custody of our
own profitable, if thy sacred watchfulnes be not present. For if thou leauest
us, we sink, and perish; but if thou vouchsafest to visit us, we are raised
up, and do enjoy life. We are inconstant, but by thee we are strengthened: we
wax could, but by thee we receive heat.

3 O how meanly and basely ought I to think of my self! How little, yea
nothing ought I to esteem it, if I seem to have any good! O Lord, how ought I
to submit my self under thy unsearchable judgments: where I find my self to
be nothing else, but nothing, and nothing! O unmeasurable weight! O sea that
can never be passed over: where I find my self only and wholly nothing!
Where then is the lurking hole of glory? Whrre is the confidence conceived of
virtue? All vainglory is swallowed up in the depth of thy judgments, which
hang over my head.

4 What is all flesh in thy sight? Shall clay glory against him that frames
it? Eccls. 23. and Esaias 29. How can he be lifted up with vain words, whose
heart is truly subject to God? All the world cannot move him to any elation of
mind, whom truth has subjected unto it, neither shall he be moved with the
tongues of all his praisers, that has settled his whole hope in God. For they
also that speak, behold, are nothing: they shall pass away with the sound of
the words: but the truth of our Lord remains for ever. Psalm. 116.


CHAP. XV. What we ought to do, and say in every thing which we desire.
OUR LORD. SOn, say thus in every thing: Lord if it be pleasing unto thee, let
this be done in this sort. Lord if it be to thy honor, let this be done in
thy name. Iam. 3. Lord if thou see it expedient for me, and allowest it to be
profitable, then grant unto me, that I may use this unto thine honor. But if
thou know it will be hurtful unto me, and not profitable to the health of my
soul, take from me al such desire. For every desire proceeds not from the holy
Ghost, though it seem unto man right and good. It is hard to judge whether a
good spirit, or the contrary drive thee to desire this or that: or whether also
by thine own spirit thou be moved thereunto. Many are deceived in the end, who
at the first seemed to be led by a good spirit.

2 Always therefore, whatsoever occurreth unto thy mind to be desired, let it
be desired with the fear of God, and with humility of heart: and above al thou
ought to commit it unto me with full resignation of thy self: and thou
ought to say: Lord thou know what is best, do this, or that, as thou
please. Give what thou will, and how much thou will, and when thou will. Do
with me as thou know, and as best pleases thee, and is most for thy honor.
Set me where thou will, and deal with me in all things according to thy will,
I am in thy hand, turn me, and turn me again which way soever thou please.
Behold I am thy servant, ready to obey thee in all things: for I desire not to
live unto my self, but unto thee: and would to God it might be in some worthy
and perfect manner.


A prayer for the fulfilling of the will of God.
SER. 3 Grant me thy grace, sweet Jesus, that it may be with me, and labor
with me, and persevere with me until the end. Grant me always to desire and
will that which is most acceptable unto thee, and best pleases thee. Sap. 9.
Let thy will be mine, and let my will ever follow thine, and agree perfectly
with it. Let my will and nill be all one with thine: and not to be able to
will, or refuse any thing else, but what thou will, or reiectest.

4 Grant that I may die to all things that are in the world, and to love for
thy sake to be contemned, and not to be known in this world. Grant that above
all things that can be desired, I may rest in thee, and make my heart to enjoy
peace in thee. Thou art the true peace of the heart, thou art the only rest:
out of thee all things are troublesome and unquiet. In peace, in the
selfsame: that is, in thee, one chiefest, eternal good, I will sleep and
rest. Amen. Psalm. 4.


CHAP. XVI. That true comfort is to be sought in God alone.
THE SERVANT. Whatsoever I can desire, or imagine for my comfort, I look not
for it in this life, but hereafter. For if I should alone have all the comforts
of the world, and might enjoy all the delights thereof, it is certain that they
could not long endure. Mat. 16. Wherefore, my soul, thou can not be fully
comforted, nor have perfect delight but in God, the co^forter of the poor, and
the receiver of the humble. Ps. 76. Expect a while my soul, expect the divine
promise, and thou shall have abundance of al good things in heaven. If thou
desire inordinately the things that are present, thou shall lose the celestial
and eternal. Have temporal things in use, and the eternal in desire. Thou
can not be filled with any temporal goods, because thou art not created to
enjoy them.

2 Although thou enioyest all that is created, yet can thou not be happy
thereby nor blessed: but in God that has created all things, thy whole
beatitude and happiness consists: Sap. 2. not such as is seen, and
commended by the foolish lovers of the world; but such as the good faithful
servants of Christ expect, and the spiritual, and clean of heart, whose
conversation is in heaven, sometimes take a taste of. Phil. 3. Vain and short
is al humane comfort. Blessed and true is the comfort which is received
inwardly from truth. A devout man every where carries with him Jesus, his
comforter, and says unto him: Be present with me Lord Jesus in every place and
time. Let this be my comfort, to be always willing to want all humane
comfort. And if thy comfort be wanting, let thy will and just proof be unto
me, as the greatest comfort: for thou will not be angry always, neither will thou threaten for ever. Psalm. 102.


CHAP. XVII. That all our care is to be placed in God.
OUR LORD. Son, suffer me to do with thee what I please. I know what is
expedient for thee. Thou think as man: thou judge in many things as humane
affection persuades thee.


SER. Lord, what thou say is true. Thy solicitude for me is greater, then
all the care that I can take for my self. Matthew. 6. and Ioh. 6. For he
stands at too great a hazard, that casts not his whole care upon thee.
Lord, so that my will may remain right and firm in thee, do with me
whatsoever it shall please thee. For it cannot be but good, whatsoever, thou
do with me.

2 If it be thy will, I should be in darkness, be thou blessed: and if it be thy
will, I should be in light, be thou again blessed. If thou vouchsafest to
comfort me, be thou blessed: and if thou will afflict me, be thou also ever
blessed.


LORD. Son, so thou ought to be, as ready to suffer, as to receive joy.
Thou ought to be as willing to be poor and needy, as plentiful and rich.


SER. 3 Lord, I will willingly suffer for thee, whatsoever thy pleasure is shall
befall me. I will receive indifferently from thy hand, good and evil, sweet
and sower, delightful and sorrowful: and give thee thanks for all that
happens unto me. Job 2. Keep me from all sin, and I will neither fear death
nor hell: so as thou do not for ever cast me from thee, and blot me out of
the book of life, what tribulation soever befall me, shall not hurt me. Psalm.
22.


CHAP. XVIII. That temporal miseries, by the example of Christ, are to be borne
patiently.
OUR LORD. Son, I descended from heaven for thy health: I took upon me thy
miseries, my charity, and not any necessity drawing me thereunto: that thou
might learn patience, and not refuse to bear temporal miseries. Ioh. 8.
For from the hour of my birth, until my death on the Cross, I was not
without suffering of grief. Esa. 53. I suffered great want of temporal things:
I often heard many complaints against me: I bare patiently shame and reproaches
for benefits I received ingratitude; for miracles, blasphemies, for heavenly
doctrine, reprehensions. Luke 2.


SER. 2 Lord, for that thou were patient in thy lifetime, chiefly in
fulfilling the commandment of thy Father, it is reason that I miserable sinner
should have patience in all things according to thy will, and for mine own
health bear the burden of this corruptible life, as long as thou will. Ioh. 5.
For although this present life be burdensome, yet notwithstanding it is now by
thy grace made very meritorious: and by thy example, and the footsteps of thy
Saints, more plain and tolerable to the weak. Yea, much more comfortable also,
then it was in times past in the old Law, when the gate of heaven remained
shut: and the way also to heaven seemed darker, when so few took care to seek
after thy Kingdom. Neither they also that then were just, and were ordained to
be saved, could enter into the heavenly glory before thy Passion, and the debt
of thy sacred death was discharged. Mat. 7.

3 O how great thanks am I bound to give thee, that thou have vouchsafed to
show unto me, and to al faithful souls, a direct and sure way to thy
everlasting Kingdom! For thy life is our way, and by holy patience we go unto
thee, that art our Crown. If thou had not gone before us, and taught us, who
would have taken care to follow? Alas, how many would stay behind, and remain
far off, if they beheld not thy excellent examples! Behold we are yet cold,
although we have heard of so many of thy wonders, and thy heavenly docume^ts!
What would become of us if we had not so great light to follow thee? Ioh. 12.


CHAP. XIX. Of suffering of injuries, and who is proved to be truly patient.
OUR LORD. WHat is it thou say, Son? Cease to complain, considering my
passion, and that of my other Saints. Thou have not yet made resistance to the
shedding of blood. Heb. 12. It is but little thou suffrest, in comparison of
them that have suffered so much, so strongly tempted, so grievously afflicted,
so many ways tried and exercised. Heb. 11. Thou ought therefore to call to
mind the heavy sufferings of others, that thou may easier bear the little
adversities which thou suffer. And if they seem not little, beware lest thy
impatience be cause thereof. Yet whether they be little or great, endeavor to
bear all patiently.

2 How much the better thou disposest thy self to suffering, so much the more
wisely thou do, and so much the more do thou merit: thou shall more easily
also endure it, if thy mind be prepared, and thy self accustomed thereunto.
Do not say; I cannot suffer these things of such a one, at the hands of such a
person, nor such things are not to be suffered by me, for he has done me
great wrong, and vpbraided me with those things which I never thought of: but
of another I will willingly suffer, and as I shall see cause. Such a thought is
foolish, it considers not the virtue of patience, nor by whom it shall be
crowned; but rather weighs the persons, and the injuries offered.

3 He is not truly patient, that will not suffer but as much as he thinks
good, and by whom he lists. But he that is indeed patient, minds not by
whom he is exercised, whether by his superior, or some of his equals, or by
his inferior: whether by a good and holy man, or by a perverse and unworthy
person. But indifferently from al creatures, how much soever, or how often
soever any adversity happens unto him, he takes all thankefully, as from
the hands of God, and esteems it a great gain: for that nothing before God,
how little soever, so it be suffered for God, can be without merit.

4 Be thou therefore always prepared for the fight, if thou will have the
victory. Without combat thou can not attain unto the crown of patience. If
thou will not suffer, thou refusest to be crowned. But if thou desire to be
crowned, fight manfully, and endure patiently: without labor there is no
coming to rest; nor without fight can the victory be obtained. 2. Tim. 2.


SER. Lord, let that be made possible to me by thy grace, which seems
impossible to me by nature. Thou know that I can suffer little, and that I
am quickly dismayed, when a small adversity arises. Let all exercise of
tribulation be made pleasing unto me, and be welcome for thy name: for to
suffer, and to be troubled for thee, is very profitable for my soul.


CHAP. XX. Of the acknowledging of our own infirmity: and of the miseries of
this life.
THE SERVANT. I Will confess against me my injustice: I will confess unto
thee, O Lord, my infirmity. Oftentimes it is a small matter that discomforteth
and grieueth me. Psalm. 31. I purpose to resist with courage, but when a small
temptation comes, it brings me into very narrow straits. It is sometimes a
very trifle, from whence great temptations do proceed. And whilst I think my
self somewhat safe, when I least expect it, I find my self sometimes overcome
with a small blast.

2 Behold therefore, Lord, my humility, and my frailty every way known unto
thee. Psalm. 24. Have mercy on me, and deliver me out of the mire of my
infirmities, that I stick not fast therein: let me not for ever remain
dejected. Psalm. 68. This is that which oftentimes bears me back, and
confounds me in thy sight: for that I am so subject to fall, and weak in
resisting of my passions. And though I do not altogether consent, yet their
continual assaults are troublesome and grievous unto me: and it is tedious and
a very irksome thing to live thus daily in strife. Hereby my infirmity is made
known unto me: for that wicked fancies do always much more easily enter in
upon me, then they can be cast out again.

3 O mighty God of Israel, the zealous lover of faithful souls; let it
please thee to consider the labor and sorrow of thy servant, and assist him in
all whatsoever he undertakes. Strengthen me with heavenly force, lest my old
man, my miserable flesh, not fully as yet subject to the spirit, prevail and
get the upper hand: against which I ought to fight, as long as I breath in this
miserable life. Alas, what a kind of life is this, where tribulations and
miseries are never wanting! where al is set with snares, and compassed with
enemies! For when one tribulation or temptation goes away, another comes,
yea and during the first conflict also, many others come unlooked for one after
another.

4 And how can a life be loved that has so many afflictions, and is subject
to so many calamities and miseries? How is it called a life, that begets so
many deaths, and plagues? And yet it is loved, and many seek to delight
themselves therein. The world is oftentimes blamed, that it is deceitful and
vain, and yet it is not easily forsaken, because the inclinations of our flesh
do too much ouerrule us. Some things draw us to love it, others to contemn it.
To the love of the world do draw us the concupiscence of the flesh, the
concupiscence of the eyes, and the pride of life: but the pains and miseries
that do justly follow them, causes a hatred and loathsomenesse thereof. 1.
Ioh. 2.

5 But alas, wicked pleasure overcomes the mind which is given over to the
world, and she esteems it a delight to be under thorns: because she has
neither seen nor tasted the sweetness of God, and the inward delight of virtue.
Job. 30. But they that perfectly contemn the world, and endeavor to live to
God under holy discipline, these are not ignorant of the divine sweetness,
promised to the true forsakers of the world, and do more clearly see how
grievously the world erreth, and how it is many ways deceived.


CHAP. XXI. That we are to rest in God above all his gifts.
THE SERVANT. Above all things, and in all things, my soul, thou shall ever
rest in God, for he is the everlasting rest of the Saints. Grant me most sweet
and loving Jesus, to rest in thee above all creatures, above all health and
beauty, above all glory and honor, above all power and dignity, above all
knowledge and learning, above all riches and arts, above all joy and gladness,
above all fame and praise, above all sweetness and comfort, above all hope and
promise, above all merit and desire, above all gifts and presents that thou
can give and impart unto us, above all joy and jubily that the mind of man
can receive and feel: lastly, above Angels and Archangels, and above all the
heavenly Host, above all visible and invisible things, and above all that, that
thou art not, my God. Romans 8.

2 For that thou, my Lord God, surpassest all, thou alone most high, thou alone
most powerful, thou alone most full and sufficient, thou alone most sweet,
and comfortable, thou alone most beautiful and loving, thou alone most noble
and glorious above all things: in whom all good things together both are
perfectly, and ever have been and shall be: and therefore it is too little and
not sufficient, whatsoever thou bestowest on me besides thy self, or reuealest
unto me of thy self, or promisest whilst thou art not seen, and not fully
obtained: for surely my heart cannot rest, nor be fully contented unless it
rest in thee, and surmount all gifts and creatures whatsoever.

3 O my most beloved Spouse Christ Jesus, the most chaste lover, the governor
of all creatures: who will give me wings of true liberty to fly and rest in
thee! Psalm. 53. O when shall it be fully granted me to consider in quietness of
mind, and see how sweet thou art, my Lord God! When shall I fully recollect my
self in thee, that for thy love I may not feel my self, but thee alone, above
all sense, and feeling, in a manner not known unto al. But now I oftentimes
lament and bear my infelicity with grief. Dan. 13. For that many evils
occur in this vale of miseries, which do often trouble, grieve, and darken
me, often hinder and distract me, allure and entangle me, to the end I should
not have free access unto thee, and that I should not enjoy those sweet and
heavenly imbracings, which thou always gives to the blessed and celestial
spirits. Let my sighs and manifold desolation on earth move thee.

4 O Jesus, splendour of eternal glory, and comfort of the pilgrim soul! With
thee is my tongue without voice, and my silence speaks unto thee. How long
does my Lord delay to come! Let him come unto me his poor servant, and make me
glad. Let him put out his hand, and deliver me miserable wretch from all
anguish. Come, come blessed Lord: for without thee I shall have no joyful day,
nor hour. Thou art my joy, and without thee there is nothing but want. A
wretched creature I am, and in a manner imprisoned, and laden with irons:
until thou comfortest me with the light of thy presence, and give me
liberty, and show a favorable countenance unto me.

5 Let others seek what they please instead of thee: but for me, nothing else
does, nor shall delight me, but thou only my God, my hope, my everlasting
health. I will not hold my peace, nor cease to pray, until thy grace return
again, and thou speak inwardly unto me.


LORD. Behold I am here, behold I come unto thee, because thou have called upon
me, thy tears, and the desire of thy foul, thy humility, and the contrition
of thy heart, have inclined and brought me unto thee.


SER. And I said: Lord, I have called thee, and have desired to enjoy thee
being ready to forsake all things for thee. For thou first have stirred me up
that I might seek thee. Blessed be thou therefore, O Lord, that have showed
this goodness to thy servant, according to the multitude of thy mercies.

6 What has thy servant more to say before thee, but that he do greatly humble
himself in thy sight, always mindful of his own iniquity and baseness? For
there is none like unto thee in all whatsoever is wonderful, in heaven and
earth. Psalm. 85. Thy words are good, thy judgments true, and by thy providence
all things are governed. Praise therefore and glory be unto thee, O wisdom of
the eternal Father: let my tongue, my soul, and all creatures together praise
and bless thee.


CHAP. XXII. Of the remembrance of the manifold benefits of God.
THE SERVANT. OPen, O Lord, my heart in thy Law, and teach me to walk in thy
Commandments. Grant me to understand thy will, and to remember thy benefits,
as well in general, as in particular, with great reverence and diligent
consideration: that hence forvvard I may be able worthily to give thee
thanks. Psalm. 118. But I know and confess, that I am not able to give thee
due thanks for the favors which thou bestowest upon me, even in the least
moment. I am less then the least of thy benefits: and when I consider the
excellency of thy Majesty, the greatness thereof makes my spirit to faint.

2 All that we have in our soul and body, and whatsoever we possess
outwardly or inwardly, naturally or spiritually, are thy benefits, and do
praise thee as bountiful, pious, and good, from whom we have received all that
is good. Although one has received more, another less, all not withstanding
are thine, and without thee even the least cannot be had. He that has received
greater, cannot glory of his own desert, nor extol himself above others, nor
insult over the lesser: for he is greater and better that ascribes least unto
himself, and is more humble and devout in rendering thanks. And he that
esteems himself basest of all men, and judges himself most unworthy, is
fittest to receive greater blessings.

3 And he that has received fewer, ought not to be sorry, nor bear it
impatiently, nor envy them that are enriched with greater store, but attend
rather unto thee, and chiefly praise thy goodness, for that thou bestowest thy
gifts so bountifully, so freely, and so willingly, without respect of persons.
All things proceed from thee, and therefore in all things thou art to be
praised. Thou know what is fit to be given to every one: and why this man
has less, and he mo^e, it is not ours, but thine to determine, who do
weigh in just measure the deserts of every one.

4 Wherefore my Lord God, I esteem it as a great benefit not to have much,
whereby outwardly and before men I might seem worthy of praise and glory: so
that he, who considers his own poverty and baseness, ought not therefore to
conceive grief or sorrow, or to be therefore troubled, but rather to take great
comfort, and to be glad: for that thou, O God, have chosen the poor and
humble, and the despised of this world for thy self, and for thy familiar and
domestical friends. 1. Cor. 1. Psalm. 44. Witnesses are thy Apostles
themselves, whom thou have appointed Princes over all the earth. 1 Thessalonians. 2.
And yet they lived without complaint in the world, so humble and simple, mean
to the eyes of men, without all malice and deceit, that they rejoiced to
receive contumelies for thy name: and what the world abhors, they embraced
with great affection. Act. 5.

5 Nothing therefore ought so to rejoice him that loves thee, and
acknowledges thy benefits, as the accomplishment of thy will in himself, and
the pleasure of thy eternal appointment: wherewith he ought to be so contented
and comforted, that he would as willingly be the least, as any would wish to be
the greatest: and as peaceable and content in the last, as in the first place:
and as willing to be despised and contemned, and to be of no esteem or
account, as to be preferred in honor before al others, and to be greater in the
world. For thy will and the love of thy glory, ought to be preferred before all
things: and to comfort him more, and please him better, then all the benefits
which he has received, or can desire.


CHAP. XXIII. Of four things that bring much peace.
OUR LORD. Son, now I will teach thee the way of peace and true liberty.


SER. Do Lord, I beseech thee, as thou say, for I shall be very glad to
hear it.


LORD. Endeavor, my Son, to do rather the will of another, then thine own.
Ever choose rather to have less then more. Matthew. 26. and Ioh. 5.6. Always
seek the lowest place, and to be inferior to every one. 1. Cor. 10. Wish
always, and pray, that the will of God may be wholly fulfilled in thee. Luke
14. Behold such a man enters into the limits of peace and most quiet rest.
Matthew. 6.


SER. 2 Lord, this thy short speech contains much perfection. It is little in
words, but full in sense, and abundant in fruit. Mat. 5. For if it could
exactly be kept by me, then should I not so easily be troubled. For as often
as I feel my self unquiet, and afflicted, I find that I have strayed from
this doctrine. But thou that can all things, and ever love the good and
profit of my soul, increase in me thy grace, that I may fulfill thy words,
and perfect mine own health.


A prayer against evil thoughts.
SER. 3 My Lord God, be not far from me: my God have regard to help me, for
sundry thoughts have risen up against me, and great fears afflicting my soul.
Psalm. 70. How shall I pass through them without hurt? How shall I break them?


LORD. I, says he, will go before thee, and will humble the glorious of the
earth. I will open the doors of the prison, and reveal unto thee the hidden
secrets. Esaias 45.


SER. Do Lord as thou say, and let all evil thoughts fly from before thy
face. This is my hope, and my only comfort, to fly unto thee in all
tribulation, to trust in thee, to call upon thee from my heart, and to expect
patiently thy comfort.


A prayer for enlightening of the mind.
SER. 4 Enlighten me, good Jesus, with the clearnes of inward light, and expel
al darkness of my heart. Repress the many wandering thoughts, and beat down the
fury of the temptations which violently assault me. Fight strongly for me, and
vanquish the evil beasts, that is, the alluring concupiscence, that peace may
be made in thy virtue, and abundance of thy praise sound in thy holy Court,
which is a pure conscience. Command the winds and tempests; say unto the Sea,
Be still; and to the North-winde, Blow not; and a great calm shall ensue.
Mat. 8.

5 Send forth thy light and thy truth, that they may shine upon the earth, for
I am empty and unprofitable earth, until thou impartest thy light unto me.
Psalm. 42. Power out thy grace from above, wash my heart with heavenly dew, give
waters of devotion, to wash the face of the earth, to bring forth good and
perfect fruit. Lift up my mind, ouercharged with the weight of sin: draw up
my whole desire to heavenly treasures, that having tasted the sweetness of
celestial happiness, it may loath to think of earthly vanities.

6 Take me violently to thee, and deliver me from all unstable comfort of
creatures: for no created thing can fully quiet and satisfy my desire. Join
me unto thee with an unspeakable band of love: for thou only fillest the mind
of him that loves thee, and without thee all things are distastefull.


CHAP. XXIV. Of flying curious enquiry of the life of others.
OUR LORD. Son, be not curious: trouble not thy self with idle cares. What
is this or that to thee? Do thou follow me. Eccls. 3. and 1. Tim. 5. For what
is it to thee, whether that man be such or no, or whether this man do, or speak
this or that? Thou shall not need to answer for others, but shall give
account. of thy self. Io. 21. Why therefore do thou trouble thy self?
Behold, I know every one what he is, and do see all things that are under the
Sun: and do understand how it is with every one, what he thinks, what he
would, and at what his intention aims. Gal. 6. Al things therefore are to be
committed unto me: but do thou keep thy self in good peace, and suffer the
unquiet to do as they will. Whatsoever they shall have done, or said, shall fall
upon themselves, for they cannot deceive me.

2 Desire not too great fame in this world, nor to be known to many, nor to
have the private love of men: for these things breed distractions, and cause
great darkness of heart. I would willingly utter my words, and reveal my
secrets unto thee, if thou did diligently observe my coming: and did open
the door of thy heart unto me. Be careful and watch in prayer and humble thy
self in all things.


CHAP. XXV. Wherein does the firm peace of the heart, and true profit consist.
OUR LORD. Son, I have said: Peace I leave to you, my peace I give to you:
not as the world gives, do I give to you. All do desire peace, but all care
not for those things that appertain unto true peace. My peace is with the
humble and meek of heart. Ioh. 4. Thy peace shall be in much patience. If thou will hear me and follow my voice, thou may enjoy much peace.


SER. What then shall I do?


LORD. In every thing attend unto thy self what thou do, and what thou
say: and direct thy whole intention unto this, that thou may please me
alone, and desire or seek nothing out of me, Of the sayings and doings of
others judge nothing rashly: neither do thou entangle thy self with things not
committed unto thee: and doing thus, it may be thou shall be little or seldom
troubled.

2 But never to feel any trouble at all, nor to suffer any grief of heart or
body, is not the state of this life, but of everlasting rest. Think not
therefore that thou have found true peace, if thou feel no sorrow, nor that
then all is well, if thou have no adversary: nor that it is perfect, if all
things be done according to thy desire. Neither do thou then esteem highly of
thy self, or imagine thy self to be especially beloved, if thou be in great
devotion, and sweetness: for in these things a true lover of virtue is not
tried: neither does the profit and perfection of man consist in having them.


SER. 3 Wherein then, Lord?


LORD. In offering thy self from the very bottom of thy heart, unto the divine
service, not seeking thine own interest or commodity, neither in great nor
little, neither in time nor eternity: so that with equal countenance, thou
may persist in thanksgiving, both in prosperity and adversity, weighing all
things with an equal balance. If thou be of such courage, and so patient in
hope, that when inward comfort is withdrawn from thee, thou prepare thy heart
to suffer greater matters, and not justify thy self, as though thou ought
not to suffer these, and so great afflictions, but justify me in whatsoever I
appoint, and praise my holy name; then thou walk in the true and right way
of peace: and thou shall have undoubted hope to see my face again with great
joy. And if thou attain to the full contempt of thy self; then shall thou
enjoy as great abundance of peace, as thy banishment may permit.


CHAP. XXVI. Of the excellency of a free mind, which humble prayer better
deserves, then reading.
THE SERVANT. LOrd, it is the work of a perfect man, never to slack his mind
from the attentive thought of heavenly things, and as it were, to pass without
care through many cares: not faintingly, but with a certain privilege of a
free mind, adhering by inordinate affection to no creature.

2 I beseech thee, most merciful God, preserve me from the cares of this life:
lest I should be too much entangled thereby: and from the many necessities of
the body, lest I should be enthralled by pleasure from all hindrances of the
soul, lest broken with troubles, I should be dejected and dismayed. I mean not
from those things that worldly vanity so greatly desires: but from those
miseries, that as punishments, do weigh down and hinder the soul of thy
servant, with the general curse of mortality, that it cannot enter into liberty
of spirit, as often as I would. Genesis 3. and Romans 7.

3 O my God, the unspeakable sweetness, make bitter unto me all carnal
comfort, which may draw me away from the love of everlasting happiness, and
wickedly allure me to it self with the force of a certain present delight.
Romans 12. Let not flesh and blood overcome me, O Lord. Let not the world, and
the short glory thereof deceive me. Let not the Devil and his subtle fraud
supplant me. Give me force to resist, patience to suffer, and constancy to
persevere. Give me instead of all the comforts of the world, the most sweet
unction of thy Spirit: and in lieu of carnal love, power into my soul the
love of thy name.

2 Behold, meat, drink, clothes, and other necessaries for the maintenance of
the body, are burdensome unto a fervent spirit. Grant me to affect such
nourishments in due measure, and not to be entangled with an over great
desire of them. It is not lawful to renounce them wholly, for that nature is to
be maintained: but to desire superfluities, and those things that do rather
delight, then sustain, the Law of God forbids: for otherwise the flesh
would rebel against the spirit. Herein I beseech thee, let thy hand govern
me, and teach me, that I may not exceed.


CHAP. XXVII. That private love most hinders from the chiefest good.
OUR LORD. Son, thou ought to give all for all, and to retain nothing of
thy self. Know that the love of thy self does hurt thee more, then any thing
in the world. According to the love and affection thou bear them, so does
every thing cleave unto thee more or less. If thy love be pure, simple, and
well ordered, thou shall be free from bondage. Covet not that which thou
may not have. Mat. 6. Be not willing to have that which may hinder thee,
and deprive thee of inward liberty. It is a wonderful thing that thou
committest not thy self wholly unto me, from the bottom of thy heart, with all
things that thou can desire, or have.

2 Why do thou consume thy self with vain grief? Why tyrest thou thy mind
with needless cares? Resign thy self to me, and thou shall feel no loss at
al. Exo. 18. and Mic. 4. If thou seek this or that, and would be here or
there, to enjoy thine own commodity and pleasure, thou shall never be in quiet,
nor free from trouble of mind, for in every thing somewhat will be wanting, and
in every place there will be some that will cross thee.

3 Not every external thing therefore attained, and heaped together helps
thee: but it rather avails, if thou despise it, and do root it out from
thy heart, which thou must not understand only of thy revenues and wealth,
but of the desire of honor also, and vain praise; all which do pass away with
this fading world. The place avails little, if the spirit of fervor be
wanting: Esa. 4.8. neither shall that peace which is sought abroad long
continue, if the state of thy heart be destitute of a true foundation: that is,
unless thou persist in me, thou may change, but not better thy self. For
when occasion does happen, thou shall find that which thou soughtest to fly,
and perhaps more.


A prayer for cleansing the heart, and obtaining of heavenly wisdom.
SER. 4 Confirm me, Lord, with the grace of thy holy Spirit. Ps. 50. Give me
force to strengthen my inward man, and to purge my heart from all unprofitable
care and grief; Ephesians. 3. not to be drawn away with sundry desires of any thing
either little or great: Mat. 6. but to consider all things, how they are
transitory, and do quickly fade, and that my self do also pass away together
with the^: for nothing is permanent under the Sun, where all things are vanity
and affliction of mind. O, how wise is he that so co^sidereth them! Eccl. 1.
and 2.

5 Grant me, Lord, heavenly wisdom, that I may learn above all things to seek
and find thee, above al things to delight in thee, and to love thee; and to
think of all created things as they are, according to the disposition of thy
wisdom. Grant me prudently to avoid him that flatters me, and to suffer
patiently him that co^tradicts me. Ephesians. 4. It is great wisdom not to be moved
with every blast of words; nor to give ear to dangerous flattery: for so we
shall go on securely in the way which we have begun.


CHAP. XXVIII. Against the tongue of Slanderers.
OUR LORD. Son, be not grieved if some think evil of thee, and speak that
which thou do not willingly hear. Thou ought to judge the worst of thy
self, and to think no man weaker then thy self. 1. Cor. 4. If thou walk
according to spirit, thou will not much esteem of flying words. It is no small
wisdom to be silent in time of evil, and inwardly to turn to me, and not to
be troubled with the judgment of men.

2 Let not thy peace be in the tongues of men: for whether they judge well or
evil, thou art nevertheless always the same. Where is true peace and true
glory? Is it not in me? and he that coueteth not to please men, nor fears to
displease them, shall enjoy much peace. From inordinate love and vain fear
arises all disquiet of heart, and distraction of the senses.


CHAP. XXIX. How we ought to call upon God, and bless him, when tribulation
draws near.
THE SERVANT. BLessed (O Lord) be thy name for ever: since it pleases thee
that this temptation and tribulation should fall upon me. Job 1. and Psalm. 112.
I cannot fly it: but have need to fly to thee, that thou may help me, and
turn it to my good. Lord, I am now afflicted, and it is not well with me, I
am much troubled with this present grief. And now, beloved Father, what shall
I say? I am taken in narrow straits, save me in this hour. Mat. 26. Yea
therefore I am fallen in this hour, that thou may be glorified, when I shall
be greatly humbled and by thee delivered. Let it please thee, Lord, to deliver
me: for poor wretch that I am, what can I do, and whither shall I go without
thee? Grant patience, Lord, even this time also. Help me my God, and then I will
not fear how much soever I be oppressed.

2 And now in this, what shall I say? Lord, thy will be done. Mat. 6. I have
well deserved to be afflicted and grieved. Surely I ought to bear it; and I
would to God I might bear it with patience, until the tempest be passed over,
and it become calm. But thy omnipotent hand is able to take this temptation
from me, and to assuage the violence thereof, that I utterly sink not under
it, as oftentimes heretofore thou have done unto me, my Lord, my Mercy. And
how much the more hard it is to me, so much the more easy is this change of
thy mighty hand to thee.


CHAP. XXX. Of craving the divine aid, and confidence of recovering grace.
OUR LORD. Son, I am thy Lord, who do use to give comfort in the day of
tribulation. Come unto me when it is not well with thee. Nahum. 1. This is that
which most of all hinders heavenly consolation, that thou art slow in turning
thy self unto prayer. Mat. 11. For before thou do earnestly commend thy self
to me, thou seek many comforts, and delightest thy self in outward things.
And hence it proceeds that al does little profit thee until thou consider
that I am he, that deliver those that trust in me: and that out of me there is
neither powerful help, nor profitable counsel, nor remedy that can continue.
But now thou having recovered breath after the tempest, gather strength again
in the light of my mercies: for I am at hand, says our Lord, to repair al,
not only entirely, but also abundantly. Mat. 23.

2 Is there any thing hard to me? or am I like unto him that promises and
performs not? Where is thy faith? Be firm and constant. Take courage and be
patient, comfort will be given thee in due time. Attend me, expect, I will come
and cure thee. It is a temptation that vexes thee: and a vain fear that
affrighteth thee. What else does the care for future incertainties bring thee,
but sorrow upon sorrow? Sufficient for the day is the evil thereof. It is a vain
and unprofitable thing to be grieved, or to rejoice for future things, that
perhaps will never happen. Mat. 6.

3 But it is incident to man, to be deluded with such imaginations: and a sign
of little courage to be so easily drawn away by the suggestion of the enemy.
For he cares not, so he delude and deceive thee, whether it be true or false
which he proposes: whether he overthrow thee with the love of present, or the
fear of future things. Let not therefore thy heart be troubled, neither do
thou fear. Psalm. 90. Believe in me, and put thy trust in my mercy. When thou
think thy self furthest off from me, oftentimes I am nearest unto thee.
When thou judge that almost all is lost, then oftentimes greatest gain of
merit is at hand. All is not lost, when any thing falls out contrary unto
thee. Thou must not judge according to that which thou feel for the present;
nor give thy self over to any grief, from whence soever it comes, as though
all hope of delivery were quite gone.

4 Think not thy self wholly left, although for a time I have sent thee some
tribulation, or withdrawn thy desired comfort; for this is the way to the
kingdom of heaven. And without doubt it is more expedient for thee, and the
rest of my servants, that ye be exercised with many adversities, then that ye
should have all things according to your desires. I know the secret thoughts of
thy heart and that it is very expedient for thy souls health, that thou be left
sometimes without taste and feeling of spiritual sweetness, lest perhaps thou
should be puffed up with good success, and should please thy self in
that which thou art not. That which I have given, I can take away, and restore
it again when I please.

5 When I give it, it is mine; when I withdraw it, I take not any thing that is
thine: for mine is every good, and every perfect gift. If I send thee
affliction, or any cross whatsoever, repine not, nor be not dismayed: I can
quickly lift thee up again, and turn al thy sorrow into joy. Nevertheless I
am just, and greatly to be praised, when I do all this unto thee. Iam. 1.

6 If thou be wise, and consider well thy case, thou will never yield so
cowardly to grief, for any adversity that befalles thee, but rather rejoice
and give thanks; yea to account this thy only joy, that afflicting thee with
sorrowe^, I do not spare thee. As my Father has loved me, I also love you,
said I unto my beloved Disciples, whom certainly I sent not to temporal joys,
but to great co^flicts: Io. 15. not to honors, but to contempts: not to
idleness, but to labors: not to rest, but to bring much fruit in patience. My
Son remember these words.


CHAP. XXXI. Of the contempt of all creatures to find our Creator.
THE SERVANT. LOrd, I stand yet in need of great grace, if I must go so far, as
that no man or creature can hinder me. For as long as any thing holds me, I
cannot fly freely unto thee. He desired to fly with great liberty, that said,
Who will give me wings like a dove, and I will fly and rest? Psa. 54. What
thing more quiet then a simple eye? Mat. 6. And what more free then he that
desires nothing upon earth? Man ought therefore to ascend above all creatures,
and perfectly to forsake himself, and to remain in excess of mind: and
consider that thou, who art the maker of al things, have nothing amongst
creatures like unto thee. And unless a man be free from the affection of all
creatures, he cannot with freedom of mind attend unto divine things. And for
this cause there are so few contemplative men to be found, for that few can
wholly sequester themselves from fading creatures.

2 Much grace is necessary to lift up a soul, and to carry it above it self.
And unless a man be lifted up in spirit, and delivered from all creatures, and
wholly united unto God: whatsoever he knows, and whatsoever he has, is of
little account. Long shall he be little, and lie in earthly baseness, that
esteems any thing great, but the one only unmeasurable and eternal good. For
whatsoever is not God, is nothing, and ought to be accounted as nothing. There
is great difference between the wisdom of a spiritual and devout person, and
the knowledge of a learned and studious Clerk. Far more noble is that
learning which flows from above, from the divine influence, then that which
is painfully gotten by the wit of man.

3 There are many that desire contemplation, but they endeavor not to exercise
those things that are required thereunto. It is a great hinderance that we rest
in signs and sensible things, and have little true mortification. I know not
what it is, nor by what spirit we are led, nor what we pretend, we that seem
to be called spiritual, that we take so much pains, and so great care for
transitory and base things, and scarce or seldom think of our own inward
profit, with full recollection of our senses.

4 Alas, presently after a slight recollection, we break forth: and weigh
not our works with diligent examination. We mind not where our affections
lie: nor bewail the impurity and many faults that are in all our actions. For
all flesh had corrupted her way, and therefore did that general flood ensue.
Genesis 6. and 7. Since our inward affection then is much corrupted, it must needs
be that our action proceeding thereof, be corrupted, as a sign of the want of
inward vigor. From a pure heart proceeds the fruit of good life.

5 We ask how much one has done; but how virtuous his actions are, is not so
diligently considered. We enquire whether he be strong, rich, beautiful,
handsome, a good writer, a good singer, or a good laborer: but how poor he is
in spirit, how patient and meek, how devout and spiritual, is seldom spoken
of. Nature respects outward things, grace turns her self to the inward
virtues. That is often deceived: this has her trust in God, to the end she be
not deceived.


CHAP. XXXII. Of the denial of our selves, and forsaking all our affections.
OUR LORD. Son, thou can not possess perfect liberty, unless thou wholly
deny thy self. All such as be lovers of themselves are bound in fetters,
they are covetous, curious, wanderers, seekers of ease, and not of those things
that appertain to Jesus Christ; but oftentimes devising and framing that
which will not continue. Matthew. 16. and 19. For all shall perish that
proceeds not From God. Keep this short and complete word, Forsake al, and
thou shall find all. Leave thy inordinate desires, and thou shall find rest.
Consider this well: and when thou have fulfilled it, thou shall understand all.


SER. 2 Lord, this is not one days work, nor childrens sport: yea in this
short sentence all the perfection of Religious persons is included.


LORD. Son, thou must not go back, nor straight ways be dejected, when thou
hear the way of the perfect; but rather be stirred up to more worthy and
noble attempts, or at least to conceive an earnest desire thereof. I would it
were so well with thee, and thou were come so far, that thou were no longer a
lover of thy self, but did stand merely at my beck, and at his whom I have
appointed a Father over thee; then thou should exceedingly please me, and
all thy life would pass away in joy and peace. Thou have yet many things to
forsake, which unless thou wholly resign over unto me, thou shall not attain
to that which thou desire. I counsel thee to buy of me purified gold, that
thou may become rich, that is, heavenly wisdom, which treads under foot
all base and earthly things. Apoc. 3. Set little by the wisdom of this world,
and esteem not of the contentment of men, nor thine own fancies.

3 I said, that thou should buy the mean and base things, with the
precious, and those that were with men of great esteem. For true heavenly
wisdom seems very base, and of small account, and is scarce thought of by
men: for that esteems not highly of it self, nor seeks to be magnified
upon earth, which many praise from the teeth outward, but in their life they
are far from it: yet is it the precious pearl which is hidden from many.
Mat. 13.


CHAP. XXXIII. Of inconstancy of heart, and of directing our small intentions
unto God.
OUR LORD. SOn, trust not to thy affection: that which now is, will quickly
change into another. As long as thou live thou art subject to mutability,
even against thy will: so that now thou art merry, now sad, now quiet, now
troubled, now devout, now distracted, now diligent, now idle, now heavy, now
light: But he that is wise, and well instructed in spirit, remains always one
in the midst of these changes, not heeding what he seeks in himself, or
which way the wind of mutability blows: but that the whole intention of his
mind, may tend as it ought, to the most perfect and best end. For so he may
continue one, and the selfsame, without any change in the midst of so many
sundry chances, directing always the sincere eye of his intention unto me.

2 And how much purer the eye of the intention is, so much the more constantly
does he pass through the variety of many contrary waves. Matthew. 6. But in
many things the eye of a sincere intention waxes blind, for it quickly
looks upon some delight, some object that occurreth. And it is rare to find
one that is wholly free from all blemish of seeking himself. So the Jews in
times past came into Bethania to Martha and Mary, not for Jesus alone, but to
see Lazarus also. Ioh. 11. The eye of our intention therefore, is to be
purged, that it may be sincere and pure, and to be directed unto me,
neglecting the multitude and variety of earthly objects. Mat. 6.


CHAP. XXXIV. That God is sweet above all things, and in all things to him
that loves.
THE SERVANT. BEhold, my God, and all things! What would I have more, and what
can I desire more happy? O sweet and comfortable word! but to him that loves
the word, not the world, nor those things that are in the world. My God, and
all things! Enough is said to him that understands; and it is pleasant to him
that loves, to repeat it often. For when thou art present, all things do
yield delight, but when thou art absent, all becomes irksome. Thou give
quiet of heart and much peace, and pleasant joy. Thou make men think well of
all, and praise thee in all things: neither can anything please us long without
thee: but if it be pleasant and delightsome, thy grace must be present, and it
must be seasoned with the sweetness of thy wisdom.

2 What can be distastefull unto him, to whom thou art pleasing? And whom thou
delightest not, what can be pleasant? But the wise of the world and that have
their contentment in sensual things, cannot attain to thy wisdom, for in the
world is much vanity, and in the flesh is death. 1. Cor. 1. Romans 8. and 1. Io.
2. But they that follow thee by the contempt of worldly things, and
mortification of the flesh, are proved to be truly wise; for they are changed
from vanity to truth, from flesh to spirit. To these God is sweet, and what
good soever is found in creatures, they wholly refer unto the praise of their
Maker. Notwithstanding, great, yea very great is the difference between the
sweetness of the Creator, and of the creature, of eternity and of time, of
uncreated and created light.

3 O everlasting light, surpassing al created lights, cast forth the beams of
thy brightness from above, and pierce the most inward corners of my heart:
purify, rejoice, clarify and quicken my spirit with all the powers thereof,
that I may cleave unto thee with excess of unspeakable joy. O when will that
blessed and desired hour come, that I may be filled with thy presence, and
thou may be unto me all, in all things: as long as this is not granted me, I
shall not have full nor perfect joy. Alas! my old man yet lives in me, he is not
wholly crucified, he is not perfectly dead. Romans 7. He does yet covet strongly
against the spirit, and moves civil wars, and suffers not the kingdom of
my soul to be in peace.

4 But thou that rulest the powers of the sea, and asswagest the motion of the
waves, rise and help me: Psa. 88. dissipate the people that desire war, and
destroy them in thy might, and let thy hand be glorified: Psalm. 72. for there
is no hope nor refuge for me, but in thee my Lord God. Psalm. 30.


CHAP. XXXV. That there is no security from temptation in this life.
OUR LORD. Son, there is no security in this life: as long as thou live
thou shall always have need of spiritual armor. Thou live among enemies,
and art assaulted on all sides: Job 7. if therefore thou defendest not thy
self on every side with the shield of patience, thou can not be long
unwounded. 2. Cor. 6. Moreover, if thou fix not thy heart on me, with a sincere
will to suffer all things for me, thou can not sustain the heat of this
battle, nor get that victorious crown which they have that are in glory.
Thou ought therefore manfully to go through all, and to use a strong hand
against whatsoever withstandeth thee. For to him that overcomes is given
Manna; and to the negligent is left much woe. Apoc. 2.

2 If thou seek rest in this world, how will thou then attain to everlasting
rest? Give not thy self to much ease, but to much patience. Seek true peace,
not in earth, but in heaven; not in men, nor in any creature, but in God alone.
Thou ought for the love of God willingly to undergo whatsoever labors, to
endure whatsoever griefs, temptations, vexations, anxieties, necessities,
infirmities, injuries, detractions, reprehensions, humiliations, confusions,
corrections and contempts; these help to the attaining of virtue; these try a
Nouice of Christ, these make a heavenly Crown. I will give an everlasting
reward for a short labor, and infinite glory for transitory confusion.

3 Think thou, that thou shall always have spiritual consolations at will?
My Saints had not so, but many afflictions, and sundry temptations, and many
discomforts: all which they endured patiently, and trusted rather in God, then
in themselves: knowing that the sufferings of this time are not condign to the
deserving of future glory. Romans 8. Will thou have that straight ways, which
many after tears, and great labors have hardly attained? Expect the coming
of thy Lord, do manfully, be of good courage: fear not, do not fly, but
offer both body and soul for the glory of God. Psalm. 26. I will revvard
thee in most plentiful manner, and I will be with thee in all thy
tribulations.


CHAP. XXXVI. Against the vain Judgments of men.
OUR LORD. Son, fix thy heart steadfastly on God, and fear not the
judgments of men, when thy conscience gives testimony of thy justice and
innocence. It is a good and happy thing to suffer in that sort: neither will it
be burdensome to an humble mind, nor to him that trusts rather in God, then
in himself. The most part of men are given to talk much, and therefore little
care is to be had of their words: neither is it possible to satisfy all. 1.
Cor. 9. Though the Apostle endeavored to please all in our Lord, and made
himself all unto all, 2. Cor. 4. yet he little regarded that he was judged
by humane day. Coloss. 1.

2 He did for the edification and health of others as much as he could and lay
in him: yet could he not hinder, but that he was sometimes judged, and despised
by others. Therefore he committed all to God, who knew all, and defended
himself with patience and humility against evil tongues and such as thought
vanities and lies, and spoke what they listed: Yet sometimes notwithstanding he
answered, lest the weak might have received scandal by his silence.

3 Who art thou, that fear a mortal man? To day he is, and to morrow he is
not seen. Fear God, and the terror of men shall not trouble thee. 2. Mac. 2.
What harm can the words or injuries of any do thee? he rather hurts himself
then thee: neither can he avoid the judgments of God, be he what he will. Romans
2. Have thou God before thine eyes, and contend not with complaining words. 1.
Cor. 11. And if for the present thou seem to be trodden down, and to suffer
shame and confusion, without desert, do not repine, neither do thou lessen thy
crown by thy impatience; but rather lift up thine eyes to me in heaven. Hebr.
12. I am able to deliver thee from all shame and wrong, and to repay every one
according to their works.


CHAP. XXXVII. Of a full and pure resignation of our selves for the obtaining
freedom of heart.
OUR LORD. Son, leave thy self, and thou shall find me. Make choice of
nothing, appropriate nothing to thy self, and thou shall ever gain. For
greater grace shall always be given thee, when thou do perfectly resign thy
self, and not turn back to take thy self again.


SER. Lord, how often shall I resign my self? And wherein shall I forsake my
self?


LORD. Always, and in every thing, as well in little as in great. I do except
nothing, but do require that thou be, as it were, naked and void of al things.
Otherwise, how can thou be perfectly mine, and I thine, unless both within
and without thou be free from all self-will? And how much the sooner thou do
this, so much the better shall thou find thy self, and how much the more fully
and sincerely thou do it, so much the more shall thou please me, and so much
the more shall thou gain.

2 Some there are that resign themselves, but with some exception. For they
put not their whole trust in God, and therefore do labor to provide for
themselves. Some also at the first do offer all, but afterward being assailed
with temptations, do return again to that which they had left, and therefore
they go not forwards in the way of virtue. These shall not attain to the true
liberty of a pure heart, nor to the grace of my divine familiarity, unless
they first make an entire resignation, and offer themselves a daily sacrifice
unto me. For without this can never be obtained the union with me, wherewith
my Saints enjoy me.

3 I have often said unto thee, and now again I say the same: Forsake thy
self, resign thy self, and thou shall enjoy internal peace. Mat. 16. Give
all for all, seek nothing, require nothing, repose thy self purely and with a
full confidence in me, and I will give my self unto thee, and darkness shall
not cover thee. Let this be thy whole endeavor, let this be thy prayer, let
this be thy desire, that casting off all propriety, thou may al naked follow
thy naked Savior Jesus: and dying to thy self, may live eternally to me.
Then shall vain fantasies, evil perturbations, and all superfluos cares fly
away: then shall immoderate fear leave thee, and inordinate love shall die.


CHAP. XXXVIII. Of good government in outward things, and of recourse to God in
dangers.
OUR LORD. Son, thou ought with all diligence to procure, that in every
place and action, or external business, thou be inwardly free, and master of thy
self, and that all things be under thy disposition, and thou not subject to
them; that thou may be Lord and Master of thy actions, not a servant or a
hireling, but rather a freeman, and a true Hebrew, belonging to the lot and
freedom of the sons of God, who put the things that are present under their
feet, and place their thoughts on that which is eternal: who look on
transitory things with the left eye, and with the right do behold the things
of heaven: who suffer not themselves to be drawn to cleave unto them, but
rather dispose and use them, as they are ordained by God, and appointed by the
Creator of all, who has left nothing in his creatures without due order.

2 If thou remain firm and steadfast in all events, and do not weigh by the
outward appearance, nor with a carnal eye, the things which thou see and
hear; but presently in every occasion do enter with Moses into the
Tabernacle, to ask counsel of our Lord, Exodus 33. thou shall sometimes hear
the divine and celestial Oracle, and shall return instructed of many things
both present and to come. Moses had always recourse to the Tabernacle, for the
deciding of all doubts and obscure questions, and fled to the help of prayer,
for the remedy of the iniquity and dangers of men. So ought thou in like
manner to fly to the closet of thy heart, earnestly craving the divine favor.
For the Scripture testifies, that therefore was Iosue and the children of
Israel deceived by the Gabaonites, because they consulted not first with God,
but giving too lightly credit to fair words, were deluded with counterfeit
piety. Iosue 9.


CHAP. XXXIX. That a man be not over earnest in his affairs.
OUR LORD. Son, always commit thy cause to me, I will dispose well of it in
due time: expect my ordination, and thou shall find it will be for thy good.


SER. Lord, I do most willingly commit al unto thee, for my care can profit
little. O that I cleaued not too much to future events, but offered my self
with all readiness of mind to thy divine pleasure!


LORD. 2 Son, oftentimes a man does earnestly labor for that which he
desires: and when he has gotten it, he begins to be of another mind, and
not to esteem so much of it, as before he did: for man's affections do not
long continue fixed on one thing, but do pass from one to another. It is
therefore a matter, not of least moment, to forsake our selves even in the
least things.

3 The true spiritual profit of man, consists in denying and forsaking of
himself: and he that is resigned, lives in great freedom and security. But
the ancient enemy, who always labors to withstand the servants of God,
omitteth at no time his wonted temptations, but day and night lies still in
wait, to cast the unwary, if he can, into the snare of deceit. 1. Pet. 5.
Watch therefore and pray, says our Lord, that you enter not into temptation.
Matthew. 26.


CHAP. XL. That man has no good of himself, nor any thing whereof he can glory.
THE SERVANT. LOrd, what is man, that thou art mindful of him, or the son
of man, that thou vouchsafest to visit him? Psalm. 8. What has man deserved,
that thou should give him thy grace? Lord, what cause have I to complain,
if thou forsake me? Or if thou do not that which I desire, what can I justly
say against it? Surely, this I may truly think and say: Lord, I am nothing, I
can do nothing, I have nothing that is good of my self: but in all things I do
fail, and am defective, and do ever tend to nothing: and unless thou help
me, and do interiourly instruct me, I become cold, and am dissolved.

2 But thou, O Lord, art always the same, and endurest for ever, always good,
just and holy, doing all things well, just, and holily, and disposing al things
with wisdom. Psa. 101. But I that am more inclined to fall, then to go
forwards, do never continue in one estate: for seven different times are
changed over me, yet does it soon turn to the better, when it so pleases
thee, and when thou vouchsafest to stretch forth thy helping hand. For thou
alone can help me without the favor of man, and so strengthen me, that my
countenance shall be no more changed, but my heart shall be converted, and rest
in thee alone.

3 Wherefore, if I could once perfectly forsake all humane comfort, either for
the love of devotion, or for mine own necessity, which inforceth me to seek
after thee (for none else can comfort me) then might I well hope in thy grace,
and rejoice in the gift of new consolation.

4 Thanks by unto thee, from whence all proceeds, as often as it goes well
with me: but I am mere vanity, and nothing before thee, an unconstant and
weak man. Whereof then can I glory? Or why do I desire to be esteemed of? Is
it not of nothing? and this is most vain. Truly vainglory is an evil plague,
and very great vanity: because it draws from true glory, and robs the
soul of heavenly grace. For whilst a man pleases himself, he displeases
thee: whilst he gapeth after the praise of men, he is deprived of true virtue.

5 But true glory, and holy exultation and joy, is for a man to glory in thee,
and not in himself; Abac. 3. to rejoice in thy name, and not in his own
virtue, nor to delight in any creature, but for thee. Praised be thy name, not
mine: magnified be thy work, not mine: let thy holy name be for ever blessed,
but to me let no part of men's praises be given. Ps. 112. and 113. Thou art my
glory, thou art the joy of my heart. In thee will I glory and rejoice all the day;
but for my self I will not joy, but in my infirmities.

6 Let the Jews seek the glory, which one man gives to another: I will
desire this, which is from God alone. Ioh. 5. For all humane glory, all
temporal honor, al wordly highness, compared to thy eternal glory, is vanity
and folly. O my truth, my mercy, my God, most blessed Trinity, to thee alone be
all praise, honor, virtue, and glory for all eternity.


CHAP. XLI. Of the contempt of all temporal honors.
OUR LORD. Son, trouble not thy self, if thou see others honored and
advanced, and thy self contemned and debased. Lift up thy heart unto me in
heaven, and the contempt of men in earth will not grieve thee.


SER. Lord, we are blind, and quickly seduced with vanity. If I look well into
my self, I cannot say, that any creature has done me wrong, and therefore I
cannot justly complain of thee.

2 But because I have often and grievously sinned against thee, all creatures
do justly take arms against me: for shame and contempt is due unto me, but unto
thee praise, honor, and glory. And unless I do so prepare my self, that I be
willing, and do rejoice to be despised and forsaken of all creatures, and to be
esteemed nothing at all, I cannot obtain internal strength and peace, nor be
spiritually enlightened, nor wholly united unto thee.


CHAP. XLII. That our peace is not to be placed in men.
OUR LORD. Son, if the peace thou have with any be grounded on the opinion
which thou have of him, or on the contentment thou receiuest in his company,
thou shall ever be unconstant and subject to disquiet: but if thou have
recourse unto the everliving and eternal Truth, a friend going from thee, or
dying, shall not grieve thee. The love of thy friend ought to rest in me, and
for me is he to be beloved, whosoever he be, whom thou think well of, and
is verily dear unto thee in this life. No friendship can avail, or continue
without me; neither is the love true and pure, which they have, whose hearts
are not joined together by me. Thou ought to be so dead to such affections
of beloved friends, that (for as much as appertains unto thee) thou should
wish to be without all company of men. Man approaches so much the nearer unto
God, how much the further off he departs from all earthly comfort: so much
the higher also he ascends unto God, by how much lower he descends into
himself, and how much the baser he is in his own conceit.

2 But he that attributes any good unto himself, hinders the coming of
Gods grace unto him. For the grace of the holy Ghost ever seeks an humble
heart. If thou could perfectly annihilate thy self, and purge thy self of
all created love, then should there flow into thee great abundance of my grace.
When thou castest thy eyes on creatures, the sight of thy Creator is taken from
thee. Learn to overcome thy self in all things, for the love of thy Creator;
and then shall thou be able to attain to heavenly knowledge. How little soever
it be, if it be inordinately loved and regarded, it defiles the soul, and
hinders the enjoying of the chiefest good.


CHAP. XLIII. Against vain and secular knowledge.
OUR LORD. SOn, let not the fair speeches and subtle sayings of men move
thee. For the Kingdom of God consists not in words, but in virtue. 1. Cor. 4.
Observe well the words which I speak; for they inflame the heart, and enlighten
the mind, induce compunction, and bring sundry comforts. Do thou never read to
show thy self learned or wise: but labor to mortify thy vices, for that will
profit thee more, then the knowledge of many hard and difficult questions.

2 When thou shall have read and known many things, thou ought ever to
return to one beginning. I am he that teaches man all knowledge: and do give
to little ones a more clear understanding, then can be taught by man. He
therefore to whom I speak, shall quickly be wise, and shall profit much in
spirit. Woe be to them, that inquire many curious things of men, and do little
desire to know the way how to serve me. The time will come, when the Master of
Masters shall appear, Christ the Lord of Angels, to hear the lessons of all,
that is, to examine the consciences of every one: and then he will search
Jerusalem with a candle, and the hidden things of darkness shall be laid
open, and the invention of tongues shall be silent. 1. Cor. 4.

3 I am he that in an instant do raise up the humble mind, to understand more
reasons of the everlasting truth, then can be gotten by ten years study in
schools. I teach without noise of words, without confusion of opinions,
without ambition of honor, without contention of arguments. I am he that
teaches to despise earthly things, to loath things present, to seek the
everlasting, to delight in the things that are eternal, to fly honors, to
suffer scandals, to place all hope in me, to desire nothing out of me, and
above all things fervently to love me.

4 For one by loving me entirely, learned divine things, and spoke wonders: he
profited more in forsaking all things, then in studying subtilties. To some I
speak ordinary things, to others, things more especial: to some I appear
sweetly by signs and figures, but to some I reveal mysteries with much light.
The voice of books is one, but it teaches not all men alike. For I am the
internal Teacher, I am the Truth, the Searcher of the heart, the Understander
of thoughts, the Setter forwards of good works, distributing to every one
according to my will.


CHAP. XLIV. Of not drawing outward things to our selves.
OUR LORD. SOn, in many things thou ought to be ignorant, and to esteem thy
self as dead upon earth; and as one to whom the whole world is crucified. Thou
must also pass over many things with a deaf ear, and rather think of that,
which appertains to thy peace. It is more profitable to turn thine eyes from
the sight of unpleasing things, and to leave unto every one his own opinion,
then to strive with contentious words. If thou stand well with God, and
considerest his judgments, thou shall the more easily yield to the will of
others.


SER. 2 O Lord, to what an estate are we come! Behold, we bewail a temporal
loss, and for a little gain we toil and spare no labor, and the spiritual
damage of our soul is forgotten, and hardly at length called to mind. That
which little or nothing profits, is always remembered, and that which is
chiefly necessary, is negligently passed over, because man's nature carries
him to external things; and unless he quickly return unto himself, he lies
drowned in them with delight.


CHAP. XLV. That credit is not to be given to all men: and how prone man is to
offend in words.
THE SERVANT. Help me, Lord, in my tribulation, for vain is the defense of
man. How often have I bin deceived, finding want of faith, where I thought it
sure? Psalm. 59. And how often have I found faith, where I least expected it? It
is vain therefore to trust in men; but the safety of the just, O Lord, is in
thee. Blessed be thou my God, in all things that befall us. We are weak and
inconstant, quickly deceived, and soon changed.

2 Who is he that is able so warily to keep himself, that he never fall into
any deceit or doubt? But he that trusts in thee, O Lord, and seeks thee
with a pure heart, does not easily fall; and if he fall into any tribulation, be
he never so much inthralled, yet he shall quickly be delivered or comforted by
thee. Pro. 10. For thou will not forsake him for ever that trusts in thee.
The friend is rare to be found, that continues faithful in his friends
distress, but thou, O Lord, thou alone art faithful at all times, and there
is none like unto thee.

3 O how wise was that holy soul that said: My mind is firmly settled and
grounded in Christ! If it were so with me, then would not humane fear so
easily trouble me, nor words move me. Who can foresee all things? Who is able
to beware beforehand of future evils? If things even foreseen do oftentimes
hurt us, how can things unlooked for choose but wound us grievously? But why
did I not provide better for my self, miserable wretch? Why also have I so
easily given credit to others? But alas we are men, and God knows, weak and
frail men, although by many we are reputed and called Angels. To whom shall I
give credit, Lord? To whom but to thee? Thou art the truth that neither do
deceive, nor can be deceived. And on the otherside, every man is a liar,
weak, unconstant, and subject to fall, especially in words: and therefore we must
not easily give credit even to that, which in outward show seems at the first
a certain truth.

4 O with how great wisdom have thou warned us to take heed of me^! and because
the enemies of man are his familiar and domestical acquaintance, not to trust
if one should say: Behold here, or behold there. Mat. 7. I am tought to my
cost, and I would to God I might thereby increase my care, and not my folly. Be
wary, says one, be wary, keep unto thy self what I tell thee; and whilst I
hold my peace, and think it is secret, he cannot keep that secret, which he
desired should be secret, but presently discloseth me and himself, and goes
his way. From such tales, and such improuident people, protect me Lord, that I
fall not into their hands, nor ever commit such errors. Give me grace, my God,
to observe truth and constancy in my words, and remove far from me a deceitful
tongue. What I am not willing to suffer, I ought by all means to avoid.

5. O how good and quiet a thing it is to be silent, and not to talk of
others, nor to believe all that is said, nor easily to report what we have
heard; Prou. 25. to lay ones self open to few; Esa. 24. always to seek after
thee, the beholder of the heart; not to be carried away with every wind of
words, but to desire that all things both within and without, be accomplished
according to thy will and pleasure. How secure is it for the keeping of
heavenly grace, to fly the sight of men? And not to seek those things, that
seem to cause admiration abroad, but to follow that with all diligence, which
brings amendment of life, and increase of fervor.

6 To how many has virtue, known and over hastily commended, bin hurtful? how
profitable has grace been kept with silence in this mortal life, which is
nothing but a perpetual temptation, and a warfare?


CHAP. XLVI. Of putting our trust in God, when evil words arise
OUR LORD. SOn, be constant, and put thy trust in me. For what are words, but
words? They pass through the air, but hurt not. Psa. 36. If thou be guilty,
determine willingly to amend thy self: if thou be innocent, resolve to suffer
this willingly, at least for God. It is a small matter to suffer sometimes a
fevv words, if thou have not yet the courage to endure stripes. And why do
small matters go to thy heart, but for that thou art yet carnal, and regardest
men more then thou ought? Because thou art afraid to be despised, therefore
wilt not be reprehended for thy faults, and therefore seek shadows of
excuses.

2 But look better into thy self, and thou shall see that the world yet lives
in thee, and a vain desire to please men. For when thou refusest to be humbled,
and reproved for thy faults, it is surely evident, that thou art neither truly
humble, nor dead to the world, nor the world perfectly crucified to thee. But
give diligent ear to my words, and thou shall little respect ten thousand
words spoken by men. Behold, if al should be spoken against thee that could be
maliciously invented, what would it hurt thee, if thou suffredst it to pass,
and made no reckoning at all of it? Could all those words pluck as much as
one hair from thy head? Mat. 10. Luke 11.

3 But he that has not his heart within him, nor God before his eyes, is
easily moved with every little dispraise, when as he that trusts in me, and
confideth not in his own judgment, shall be free from human fears. For I am the
Judge and the discerner of all secrets. I know how the matter passed, I know
him that offers the injury, and him that suffers it. Psalm. 7. From me has
this word proceeded: this has happened by my permission, that out of many
hearts thoughts may be revealed. I shall judge the guilty and the innocent,
but by a secret judgment I would beforehand try them both. Luke 2.

4 The testimony of men oftentimes deceives: my judgment is always true, it
shall stand, and not be ouerthrown. It is commonly hidden and secret, and not
known in every thing but to few: notwithstanding it never erreth, neither can
it err, although to the eyes of the foolish it seems not right. Men ought
therefore to return to me in every judgment, and not to stand in their own
opinions. For the just man will not be troubled, whatsoever happens unto him
for God: Pro. 12. and if any thing be wrongfully brought forth against him, he
will not much care, neither will he vainly be glad, if by others he be with
reason excused. For he considers that I am he that searches the heart and
reins, and do judge, not according to the outward face, nor humane appearance.
For that is oftentimes found culpable in my sight, that in the judgment of men
is commendable.


SER. 5 O Lord my God, the just Judge, strong and patient, thou know the
frailty and peruersity of man, be thou my strength, and all my trust, for mine
own conscience suffices me not. Thou know that which I cannot reach unto,
and therefore in every reprehension I ought to have submitted my self, and to
have borne it patiently: vouchsafe mercifully to pardon me, as often as I have
failed herein, and give me again grace of greater sufferance. For thy
bountiful mercy is more available to me for the obtaining of pardon, then my
conceived justice for the defense of my hidden conscience. Although my
conscience accuse me not, yet I cannot hereby justify my self; 1. Cor. 4. for
if thy mercy be away, no man living shall be justified in thy sight. Psalm. 142.


CHAP. XLVII. That all grievous things are to be endured for life everlasting.
OUR LORD. SOn, let not the pains dismay thee which thou have undertaken for
me, neither be thou discomforted for the tribulatio^s which do befall thee; but
let my promise strengthen and comfort thee in all events. I am able to reward
thee above all measure. Thou shall not long toil here, nor always be
oppressed with grief. Attend a while, and thou shall see a speedy end of thy
evils. There will come an hour when all labor and trouble shall cease. Little
and short is all that passes away with time.

2 Do as thou do, labor faithfully in my Vineyard, I will be thy reward.
Write, read, sing, mourn, observe silence, pray, suffer crosses manfully:
Matthew. 20. life everlasting is worthy of all these, and greater combats. Peace
shall come in the day which is known unto our Lord, and it shall not be day nor
night, to wit, of this time, but everlasting light, infinite brightness,
steadfast peace, and secure rest. Then thou shall not say, Who shall deliver me
from the body of this death? Romans 7. nor cry, Woe be unto me, for that my
dwelling in a strange Country is prolonged! Psalm. 119. For death shall be
thrown down, and health shall be without decay, no anxietie, blessed joy,
sweet and glorious company.

3 O if thou had seen the everlasting crowns of the Saints in heaven, and
with how great glory they now rejoice, who in times past were contemptible to
this world, and esteemed unworthy of life it self: Sap. 3. and 5. truly thou
would presently humble thy self even unto the earth: and would rather
seek to be under the feet of al, then to have command, so much as over one:
neither would thou desire pleasant days of this life, but rather rejoice to
be afflicted for God, and esteem it thy greatest gain to be reputed as
nothing amongst men.

4 O if thou had a feeling of these things, and did suffer them to enter
into the depth of thy heart, how durst thou so much as once to complain! Are
not all painful labors to be endured for everlasting life? It is no small
matter to leese or to gain the Kingdom of heaven. Lift up thine eyes therefore
unto heaven: behold I, and all my Saints with me, who in this world had great
conflicts, do now rejoice, now are comforted, now are secure, now do rest, and
shall remain with me everlastingly in the kingdom of my Father.


CHAP. XLVIII. Of the everlasting day, and shortness of this life.
THE SERVANT. O Most blessed mansion of the heavenly City! O most clear day of
eternity, which night obscureth not, but the highest truth ever enlightneth,
day ever pleasant, ever secure, and never changing into contrary state! Apoc.
21. O that, that day would once appear, and all these temporal things were at
an end! To the Saints it shines glistering with everlasting brightness, but to
those that are Pilgrims upon earth, it appears only a far off, and as it
were through a glass.

2 The inhabitants of heaven do know how joyful that day is: but the banished
children of Eve bewail the bitterness and tediousnes of this. The days of
this life are short and evil, full of sorrow and anguish, where man is defiled
with many sins, encumbered with many passions, disquieted with many fears,
filled with many cares, distracted with many curiosities, entangled with many
vanities, compassed about with many errors, worn away with many labors, vexed
with temptations, weakened with delights, tormented with want. Job 7.

3 O when shall these evils be at an end! Romans 7. When shall I be delivered
from the miserable bondage of sin! Psalm. 70. When shall I think, O Lord, of
thee alone! When shall I perfectly rejoice in thee! When shall I be free from
all impediments in true liberty, without al grief of mind and body! When shall
I have firm peace, peace secure and without trouble, peace without and within,
peace every way assured* O good Jesus, when shall I stand to behold thee! When
shall I contemplate the glory of thy Kingdom! When will thou be unto me all in
all things! O when shall I be with thee in thy Kingdom, which thou have
prepared for thy beloved, from before all worlds! I am left a poor and
banished man in the Land of mine enemies, where there are daily wars, and
great misfortunes.

4 Comfort my banishment, assuage my sorrow: for my whole desire sends up
sighs unto thee. For all is burdensome to me, whatsoever this world offers
for my comfort. I desire familiarly to enjoy thee, but I cannot attain unto
it. I would gladly fix my heart to the things of heaven, but temporal cares
and unmortified passions weigh me down. In mind I would be above al things,
but to my flesh I am enforced to be subject against my will. To. 7. and 8. Thus
unhappy man that I am, I fight against my self, and am become grievous to my
self, whilst my spirit seeks after the things that are above, and my flesh
that which is below.

5 O what do I inwardly suffer, when in mind I consider heavenly things, and
presently in my prayers a multitude of fleshly fantasies present themselves
before me! My God, be not far from me, depart not in thy wrath from thy
servant. Psa. 70. Cast forth thy lightning, and disperse them: send out thy
darts, and break all the fantasies of my enemy. Gather my senses together unto
thee, make me forget the things of this world: grant me grace to cast away
speedily the fantasies of vices. Succor me, O everlasting truth, that no
vanity may move me. Come heavenly sweetness, and let al impurity fly from thy
face. Pardon me also, and mercifully forgive me as often as I think upon any
thing else, besides thee, in prayer. I truly confess, that I am wont to be
subject to many distractions: for oftentimes I am not there, where I do
corporally stand or sit, but rather there, whither my thoughts do carry me.
Where my thought is, there am I: there is oftentimes my thought, where my
affection is. That quickly occurreth unto me, which is naturally delightsome,
and by custom pleasing.

6 And for this cause, thou that art truth it self, have plainly said: Where
thy treasure is, there is also thy heart. Mat. 6. If I love heaven, I willingly
think of heavenly things. If I love the world, I rejoice at the felicity of
the world, and grieve for the adversity thereof. If I love the flesh, I imagine
oftentimes those things that are pleasing to the flesh. If I love the spirit, I
delight to think of spiritual things. For whatsoever I love, thereof do I
willingly speak, and hear, and carry home with me the forms and
representations thereof. O blessed is that man, that for thee (O Lord)
forsakes all creatures; that violently resists nature, and out of the
fervor of spirit crucifieth the concupiscence of the flesh; that with a clear
conscience he may offer sincere prayers unto thee, and be worthy of the company
of the Angelical quiers, all earthly things outwardly and inwardly being
excluded.


CHAP. XLIX. Of the desire of everlasting life, and how great rewards are
promised to those that fight valiantly.
OUR LORD. SOn, when thou perceiuest the desire of everlasting bliss to be
given thee from above, and desire to depart out of the Tabernacle of this
body, that thou may without shadow of any enterchange behold my light; open
thy heart, and receive this holy inspiration with thy whole desire. Give great
thanks to the heavenly goodness, that deals with thee so favorably, visits
thee mercifully, stirs thee up fervently, holds thee up powerfully, lest
through thine own weight thou fall down to the vanities of the earth. Neither
do thou obtain this by thine own thought or endeavor, but by the only
favor of heavenly grace and divine bounty, that thou may profit in virtue,
and obtain greater humility, and prepare thy self to future battles, and
endeavor to cleave unto me with the whole affection of thy heart, and serve me
with a fervent desire.

2 Son, fire often burns, but the flame ascends not up without smoke: so
likewise the desires of some men are earnestly carried to heavenly things, and
yet they are not free from temptation of carnal affection: and therefore it is
not altogether purely for the honor of God, that which they so earnestly
request of him. Such is also oftentimes thy desire, which with such importunity
thou presentest unto me. For that is not pure and perfect, which is infected
and defiled with the love of thine own proper commodity and interest.

3 Ask not that which is delightsome and profitable to thee, but that which is
grateful to me, and appertains to my honor, for if thou judge aright, thou
ought to prefer and follow my appointment, rather then thine own desire,
or any desired thing. I know thy desire, and have heard thy often groans. Now
thou would be in the freedom of the glory of the sons of God: now does the
everlasting habitation, and the heavenly Country full of joy delight thee, but
this hour is not yet come: it is yet another time, to wit, of war, time of
labor and trial. Thou desire to be filled with the chiefest good, but thou
can not attain it for the present. I am he (says our Lord) expect until
the Kingdom of God does come. Job 7.

4 Thou art yet to be tried upon earth, and to be exercised in many things.
Comfort shall be sometimes given thee, but abundant fulness thereof shall not be
granted. Take courage therefore, and be constant as well in doing, as in suffering
things contrary to nature. Iosue 1. Thou ought to put on a new man, and to
be changed into another. Ephesians. 4. Thou must oftentimes do that which thou
would not, and leave undone that thou would do. That which is pleasing to
others, shall go well forwards, that which thou wishest, shall not speed. That
which others say, shall be heard, what thou say shall be nothing regarded.
Others shall ask, and shall receive, thou shall ask and not obtain.

5 Others shall be great in the praises of men, but of thee there shall be no
speech; to others this or that shall be committed, but thou shall be accounted
fit for nothing. At this nature will sometimes repine, and it is much if thou
endurest it with silence. In these and such like a faithful servant of our
Lord is wont to be tried, how he can deny and overcome himself in all things.
There is scarce any thing, wherein thou have such need to mortify thy self,
as in seeing and suffering those things that are contrary to thy will,
especially when that is commanded, which seems unto thee inconvenient, or to
little purpose. And for that thou being placed under authority, dare not
resist a higher power, therefore it seems hard unto thee, to walk at the
beck of another, and to leave wholly thine own opinion.

6 But consider, Son, the fruit of these labors, the end near at hand, and
the reward above all measure, and thou shall receive no grief thereby, but
great comfort of thy patience. For in regard of that little of thy will, which
now thou willingly forsakest, thou shall always have thy will in heaven. There
thou shall have all that thou will, or can desire: there thou shall enjoy all
good without fear of loosing it, there shall thy will be ever one with me; it
shall desire nothing, strange or private; there no man shall withstand thee, no
man complain of thee, no man hinder thee, nothing come against thee: but all
things desired shall be there together present, and delight thy whole desire,
and fulfill it to the highest degree: there I will give thee glory for the
reproach which here thou sufferedst, a garment of praise for former grief,
for the lowest place, a seat of an everlasting Kingdom; there shall the fruit
of obedience appear, the labor of penance rejoice, and humble subjection
shall be gloriously crowned.

7 Now therefore bow thy self with great humility under the hands of all, and
regard not who said, or commanded this; but take great heed, that whether thy
Superior, or thy Inferior, or thine equal require any thing of thee, or do
insinuate their desire, thou take it all in good part, and endeavor to fulfill
it with a sincere intention. Let one seek this, another that, let him glory
in this, the other in that, and be praised a thousand thousand times; but do
thou neither rejoice in this, nor in that, but in the contempt of thy self,
and in my pleasure and honor a lone. This art thou to wish, that whether by
life or death, God may be always glorified in thee.


CHAP. L. How a desolate person ought to offer himself into the hands of God.
THE SERVANT. LOrd God, holy Father, thy holy name be now and for ever blessed;
because as thou will, so is it done, and what thou do, is good. Let thy
servant rejoice in thee, not in himself, nor any thing else, for thou alone
art the true gladness, thou art my hope and my crown, thou art my joy and my
honor, O Lord. What has thy servant, but what he received from thee, even
without any desert of his? 1. Cor. 4. Thine is all that thou have given, and
whatsoever thou have made. I am poor, and in labors from my youth: and
sometimes my soul is heavy unto tears, sometimes also it is troubled in it
self, by reason of passions which rise against her. Psalm. 87.

2 I desire the joy of peace, I crave the peace of thy children, that are fed
by thee in the light of comfort. If thou give peace, if thou infuse holy joy,
the soul of thy servant shall be full of heavenly sweetness, and shall become
devout in thy praise, but if thou withdraw thy self, as very often thou art
wont, he will not be able to run the ways of thy Commandments, but rather
he boweth his knees, and knocks his breast, for that it is not with him, as
it was yesterday, and the day before, when thy light shined upon his head, and
he was protected under the shadow of thy wings, from the temptations which
violently assault him.

3 O righteous Father, and ever to be praised, the hour is come, that thy
servant is to be proved! Behold, Father, it is fit, that in this hour thy
servant suffer something for thee. O Father worthy of eternal honor, the
hour is come, which from all eternity thou did foreknow should come: that
for a short time thy servant should outwardly be oppressed, but inwardly live
for ever with thee: he should be a little despised, and humbled, and made as an
abject in the sight of men, and much afflicted with passions and infirmities,
that he may rise again with thee, in the rising of new light, and be clarified
in heaven. Holy Father, thou have so appointed it, and wilt have it so: and
this is fulfilled which thy self have commanded.

4 It is a grace and a favor to thy friend to suffer, and to be afflicted in
the world for the love of thee, how often soever, and by whom soever thou
permittest it to fall upon him. Without thy counsel and providence, and
without cause nothing is done in earth. Psalm. 118. It is good for me, Lord,
that thou have humbled me, that I may learn thy righteous judgments, and cast
away al haughtines of heart and presumption. It is profitable to me, that shame
has covered my face, that I may rather seek to thee for comfort, then to men.
I have learned also hereby to dread thy inscrutable judgment, that afflictest
the just with the wicked, but not without equity and justice.

5 I give thee thanks, that thou have not spared my sins, but have worn me
away with bitter stripes, inflicting sorows, and sending griefs within and
without. There is none under heaven that can comfort me, but thou my Lord God.
Tob. 13. the heavenly Physician of souls, that strikest and healest, bring
into hell, and drawest out again: Psalm. 17. let thy correction be upon me and
let thy rod instruct me.

6 Behold beloved Father, I am in thy hands, I bow my self under the rod of
thy correction: let my neck and shoulders feel the stripes of thy chastisement,
that my crookednes may be conformed to thy will. Make me a devout and humble
disciple of thine, as thou art wo^t well to do, that I may be ready at every
beck of thy divine pleasure. I commend my self and all mine unto thee to be
corrected. It is better to be rebuked here, then hereafter. Thou know all
and every thing, and there is nothing hidden in the conscience of man, which
can be hidden from thee. Before things are done, thou know that they will
happen, and have no need that any should teach thee, or admonish thee of those
things, which are done on earth. Thou know what is expedient for my good,
and how much tribulation is fit for purging the rust of my sins. Do with me
according to thy desired pleasure, and despise not my sinful life, better and
more clearly known to none then to thee alone.

7 Grant me, Lord, to know that which is to be known: to love that which is to
be beloved: to praise that which pleases thee most: to esteem that which is
precious unto thee: to despise that which is contemptible in thy sight: suffer
me not to judge according to the sight of the exterior eyes, nor to give
sentence according to the hearing of the ears of ignorant men; but to
determine of visible and spiritual things with a true judgment, and above all
things, ever to search after thy will and pleasure.

8 The senses of men are often deceived in their judgments, the lovers of the
world are also deceived, in loving only visible things. What is a man the
better, for that he is esteemed great by man? The deceitful man deceives the
deceitful, the vain, the vain, the blind deceives the blind, and one
feeble likewise another, whilst he exalts and praises him. For how much
every one is in thy sight, so much he is, and no more, says humble Saint
Francis.


CHAP. LI. That a man ought to employ himself in the works of humility, when
force is wanting for higher exercises.
OUR LORD. Son, thou art not able always to continue in the fervent desire
of virtue, nor to persist in the high pitch of contemplation, but thou must
sometimes of necessity, by reason of original corruption, descend to
inferior things, and bear the burden of this corruptible life even against
thy will, and with irkesomenes. As long as thou carriest a mortal body, thou
shall feel trouble and heaviness of heart. Thou ought therefore in flesh
oftentimes to bewail the burden of flesh: for that thou can not always
persevere in spiritual exercises, and divine contemplation.

2 It is then expedient for thee to fly to humble and exterior works, and to
refresh thy self with good and virtuous actions, to expect with a firm
confidence my coming, and heavenly visitation, to bear patiently thy
banishment, and the dryness of thy mind, till thou be visited again by me,
and delivered from all anxietie. For I will make thee forget thy former pains,
and enjoy inward quietness. I will lay open before thee the pleasant fields of
holy Scripture, that with an enlarged heart thou may begin to run the
way of my Commandments. And thou shall say, that the sufferings of this time
are not condign to the glory to come, that shall be revealed in us. Romans 8.


CHAP. LII. That a man ought to esteem himself unworthy of comfort, and to
have deserved stripes.
THE SERVANT. LOrd I am not worthy of thy comfort, nor of any spiritual
visitation, and therefore thou dealest justly with me, when thou leauest me
poor and desolate. For if I could sheed tears like a sea, yet I were not
worthy of thy comfort. For (alas) I deserve nothing, but to be scourged and
punished, in that I have grievously and often offended thee, and sinned in many
things. All things therefore duly considered, I am not worthy even of the
least comfort. But thou mild and merciful God, who wilt not that thy works do
perish, to show the riches of thy goodness in the vessels of mercy, even beyond
his desert, vouchsafest to comfort thy servant above humane measure. For thy
comforts are not like to the vain words of men.

2 What have I done, O Lord, that thou should impart any heavenly comfort
unto me? I remember not, that I have ever done any good, but have been always
prone to sin, and slothful in my amendment. It is true, and I cannot deny it.
If I should say otherwise, thou would stand against me, and there would be
none to defend me. Job 9. What have I deserved for my sins, but hell and
everlasting fire? I confess in the truth of my heart, that I am worthy of all
scorn and contempt, and it is unfit that I should be remembered amongst thy
devout servants. And although I be unwilling to hear this, yet notwithstanding
for the love of truth, I will lay open my sins against my self, that I may the
better deserve to obtain thy mercy.

3 What shall I say, being guilty, and full of confusion? I can utter out of my
mouth no other word but this: I have sinned, Lord, I have sinned, have mercy on
me: Psa. 50. Pardon me, suffer me a little, that I may bewail my grief,
before I go unto the land of darkness, and be covered with the shadow of death.
Job 20. What do thou require of a guilty and miserable sinner, but that he
be contrite and sorrowful, and do humble himself for his offenses? In true
contrition and humbleness of heart, is bred a ^ope of forgiveness, a troubled
conscience is reconciled again, grace lost is restored, man is defended from
future wrath, and God and the penitent soul meet together in the holy kiss of
peace.

4 Humble contrition for sins, is an acceptable sacrifice to thee, O Lord,
sauouring much sweeter in thy sight then burning frankincense. Psalm. 50. This
is also the pleasant ointment, which thou would have powered upon thy sacred
feet, Luke 7. for thou never despisest a contrite and humble heart. Psalm. 50.
There is a place of refuge from the face of the wrath of our enemy: there is
amended, and washed away whatsoever uncleanness has been elsewhere gathered,
and whatsoever is defiled.


CHAP. LIII. That the grace of God is not given to those that savor of earthly
things.
OUR LORD. SOn, my grace is precious, it suffers not itself to be mingled
with external things, nor earthly comforts. Thou ought therefore to cast
away al hindrances of grace, if thou desire to receive the infusion thereof.
Choose therefore a secret place to thy self, love to live alone with thy self,
desire the conversation of none: but rather power out devout prayers unto God,
that thou may keep thy mind compunct and thy conscience pure. Esteem the
whole world as nothing: prefer my service before al outward things; for thou
can not attend unto me, and be delighted also in tra^sitory vanities. Mat.
19. Thou ought to sequester thy self from thy acquaintance and friends, and
to keep thy mind deprived of all temporal comfort. So the blessed Apostle
Peter required, that the faithful of Christ should keep themselves as
strangers and pilgrims in this world. 1. Pet. 2.

2 O how great a confidence shall he have at the hour of death, whom no
affection to any earthly thing detaineth in the world. But the weak mind is
not yet capable of so retired a heart; neither does the fleshly person
understand the freedom of a recollected mind. Notwithstanding, if he will be
truly spiritual, he ought to renounce as well that which is far off, as that
which is nearest unto him, and to beware of no man more then of himself. It
thou perfectly overcome thy self, thou shall with more ease subdue the rest.
It is a glorious victory to triumph over our selves. For he that keeps
himself subject in such sort, that his sensuality be subdued to reason, and
reason in all things be obedient to me, he is truly a conqueror of himself,
and Lord of the world.

3 If thou desire to mount unto this height of perfection, thou must begin
manfully, and set the axe to the root, that thou may pluck up and destroy thy
hidden and inordinat inclination to thy self, and unto al private and earthly
good. Of this vice (that man too inordinatly loves himself) almost all
depends, whatsoever is wholly to be overcome: which being once overcome and
subdued, there will presently ensue great peace and tranquillity. But for that
few endeavor perfectly to die unto themselves, and to forsake themselves
wholly, therefore they remain entangled in themselves, and cannot be lifted up
in spirit above themselves: but he that desires to walk freely with me, it
is necessary that he mortify all his inordinate affections, and not adhere
unto any creature by private love.


CHAP. LIVE. Of the different motions of Nature and Grace.
OUR LORD. Son, mark diligently the motions of thine own nature, and my
grace, for in very contrary and secret manner these are moved, and can hardly
be discerned, but by him that is spiritual and inwardly enlightened. All men
desire that which is good, and pretend some good in all their words and deeds,
and therefore under pretense of good, many are deceived. Nature is deceitful
and seduceth, intangleth, and deceives many, and always proposes her self
for her end, but grace walks with great sincerity, and auoideth all show of
evil, pretends not deceits, and does all things purely for God, in whom also
she finally rests.

2 Nature will not willingly die, nor be kept in, nor overcome, nor be
subject to any, nor be subdued: but Grace labors to mortify her self,
resists sensuality, seeks to be subject, is willing to be overcome, and
will not use her own liberty, she loves to be kept under discipline, and
desires not to rule any, but always to live and remain wholly subject unto
God, and for God, is ready humbly to bow unto all men. Nature strives for her
own commodity, and considers what profit she may reap by another: but
Grace considers not what is profitable and commodious unto her self, but
rather what is profitable to many. Nature willingly receives honor and
reverence: but Grace faithfully attributes all honor and glory unto God.

3 Nature fears shame and contempt, but Grace rejoices to suffer reproach
for the name of Jesus. Nature loves idleness, and bodily rest, but Grace
cannot be idle, but willingly embraces labor. Nature seeks to have those
things that be curious and precious, abhors that which is mean and base:
but Grace delights in plain and humble things, despises not course and
mean, nor refuses to wear that which is old and torn. Nature respects the
things of this world, rejoices at earthly gain, sorroweth for loss, is moved
with every little injurious word; but Grace thinks on that, which is
everlasting, and cleaves not to that which fades with time; she is not
troubled with loss, nor exasperated with injuries, for that she has placed
her treasure and joy in heaven, where nothing perishes.

4 Nature is covetous, and does more willingly receive then give, she loves
proper and private things: but Grace is pitiful and liberal to all, auoydeth
singularity, is content with a little, thinks it happier to give, then to
receive. Nature inclines to creatures, yields to her own flesh, follows
vanities, and listneth to discourses: but grace draws unto God, and seeks
after virtues, renounceth creatures, flies the world, hates the desires of
the flesh, restrains wanderings abroad, blusheth to be seen in public.
Nature is willing to have some outward comfort, wherein she may delight her
senses, but grace seeks comfort in God alone, and delights above all
visible things in the highest good.

5 Nature works all for her own gain and profit, she can do nothing
freely, but for bestowed benefits: she hops to obtain either that which is
equal, or better, either praise or favor, and coueteth to have her works and
gifts much esteemed: but Grace seeks no temporal thing, nor asks any other
reward for her deserts then God alone, nor desires more of temporal
necessaries, then what may serve her for the obtaining of everlasting glory.

6 Nature rejoices to have many friends, and kinsfolks, she glories of
Noble birth and descent, pleases the powerful, fawneth upon the rich,
applaudeth those that are like her self: but grace loves her enemies, and is
not puffed up with multitude of friends, nor esteems place or birth, but
where it is joined with greater virtue, she rather favors the poor, then
the rich, has more compassion of the innocent, then the powerful, rejoices
in the simple, and respects not the deceitful, exhorts ever the good to
labor for the better gifts, and by virtue to resemble the Son of God. Nature
quickly complains of any want and trouble: Grace constantly suffers all
kind of need.

7 Nature turns all things to her self, strives and contendeth for her
self: but Grace reduces all to God, from whence originally they proceed:
she ascribes no good to her self, neither does she arrogantly presume of
her self: she contendeth not, nor prefers her opinion before others, but in
every sense and understanding submits her self unto the eternal Wisdom,
and to the divine Judgment. Nature coueteth to know secrets, and to hear
news: she will appear abroad, and make proof of many things by the
experience of her own senses, she desires to be known, and to do those
things, for which she may be praised and admired: But Grace cares not for
hearing news, nor to understand curious matters, for that all this springs
from the ancient disorder of our corrupt nature, seeing nothing that is new is
durable upon earth. She teaches therefore to restrain the senses, to avoid
vaine-pleasing and ostentation, humbly to hide those things that are worthy of
praise and admiration, and of every thing and every knowledge to seek
profitable fruit, and the praise and honor of God: she will not have her self,
nor hers, publicly praised, but desires that God should be blessed in his
gifts, who of mere charity bestows all things.

8 Thus Grace is a supernatural light, and a certain special gift of God,
and the proper mark of the elect, and pledge of everlasting salvation, which
lifts up a man from earthly baseness to love things of heaven, and of a
carnal, makes him a spiritual person. How much the more therefore Nature is
depressed and subdued, so much the greater grace is infused, and the inward man
daily by new visitations more perfected according to the Image of God.


CHAP. LV. Of the corruption of Nature, and efficacy of divine Grace.
THE SERVANT. MY God, who of thy mere goodness have created me to thy Image
and likeness, Genes. 1. grant me this grace which thou have showed to be so
great, and so necessary to salvation, that I may overcome my wicked nature,
which draws me to sin, and to the loss of my soul. For I feel in my
flesh the law of sin, contradicting the law of my mind, and leading me
captive, to obey sensuality in many things: neither can I resist the passions
thereof, unless thy holy grace, fervently infused into my heart, do assist
me. Romans 7.

2 Thy grace, O Lord, and great grace is needful, that nature may be overcome,
which is ever prone to evil from her youth. For by Adam the first man, in
falling and being corrupted by sin, the penalty of this stain has descended
upon all mankind in such sort, that Nature it self, which by thee was created
good, and without defect, is now accounted for vice, and for the infirmity of
a corrupted nature, for that the motion thereof left unto it self, draws to
evil and abject things. For the little force which remains, is like a
certain spark, lying hidden in ashes. This is natural reason it self,
compassed about with great darkness, still retaining power to discern good
and evil, and the distance between true and false, although it be unable to
fulfill all, that it approves and enjoys not now the full light of truth,
nor the former integrity of her affections.

3 Hence it is, my God, that according to my inward man, I delight in thy law,
knowing thy Commandments to be good, just and holy, reproving also all evil
and sin, and do know that it is to be fled. Romans 7. But in my flesh I serve
the law of sin, whilst I rather obey sensuality then reason. Hence it is,
that I have a will to do good, but know not how to perform it. For this cause
I often purpose many good things, but for that I want grace to help my
infirmity, for a light resistance I go back, and faint. I know the way of
perfection, and see clearly enough what I ought to do, but pressed with the
weight of mine own corruption, I rise not unto it.

4 O Lord, how needful is thy grace for me, to begin any good work, to go
forward, and to accomplish it. Ioh. 13. For without it I can do nothing, but in
thee I can do all things, when thy grace does comfort me. O heavenly grace,
without which our own merits are nothing, and no gifts of nature are to be
esteemed. Arts, riches, beauty, and strength, wit, or eloquence, are of no
worth with thee, O Lord, without thy grace. For gifts of nature are common to
good and evil, but the peculiar gift of the elect is grace and love, wherewith
being marked, they are esteemed worthy of everlasting life. This grace so much
excels, that neither the gift of prophecy, nor the working of miracles, nor
any speculation; how high soever, is of any esteem without it. Neither faith,
nor hope, nor other virtues are acceptable unto thee without charity and
grace. 1. Cor. 13.

5 O most blessed grace, that make the poor in spirit rich with virtues, and
the rich in many blessings, humble in heart, come down unto me, replenish me
in the morning with thy comfort, lest my soul should faint with wearines, and
wither away with drines of mind. I beseech the Lord, that I may find grace in
thy sight, for thy grace suffices, though other things that nature desires be
wanting. Psalm. 22. If I be tempted and vexed with many tribulations, I will not
fear evils whilst thy grace is with me: she is my strength, she gives
advice and help: she is stronger then all enemies, and wiser then all the wise.

6 Thy grace is the mistress of truth, the teacher of discipline, the light of
the heart, the solace in affliction: she drives away sorrow, she expels
fear, she is the nurse of devotion, the bringer forth of tears. What am I
without it, but a rotten piece of wood, and an unprofitable stalk, only meet
for the fire? Let thy grace therefore, Lord, always prevent me, and follow
me, and make me ever diligent in good works, through Jesus Christ thy Son,
Amen.


CHAP. LVI. That we ought to deny our selves, and imitate Christ, by the Cross.
OUR LORD. Son, look how much thou can go out of thy self, so much
may thou enter into me. As to be void of all desire of external things,
makes inward peace; so the forsaking of our selves joyneth us internally to
God. I will have thee learn the perfect leaving of thy self unto my will,
without contradiction and complaint. Follow me, I am the way, the truth, and
the life. Ioh. 14. Without the way there is no going, without truth there is no
knowledge, without life there is no living. I am the way which thou ought to
follow, the truth which thou ought to trust, the life for which thou
ought to hope. I am the way which cannot lead amiss, the truth which cannot
err, the life which cannot end. I am a most strait way, a supreme truth, a
true life, a blessed life, an increated life, if thou remain in me, thou
shall know the truth, and truth shall deliver thee, and thou shall apprehend
everlasting life.

2 If thou will enter into life, keep the Commandments: if thou will know the
truth, believe me. Mat. 19. If thou will be perfect, sell al. If thou will be
my disciple, deny thy self. Luke 9. If thou will possess a blessed life, deny
this present life. Ioh. 12. If thou will be exalted in heaven, humble thy self
upon earth. Luke 14. If thou will reign with me, bear the Cross with me.
For only the servants of the Cross find the way of bliss and true light.


SER. 3 Lord Jesus, for as much as thy way is narrow, strait and contemptible
unto the world, grant me grace to imitate thee in suffering willingly all
worldly contempt. For the servant is not greater then his Lord, nor the
Disciple above his Master. Mat. 7. Let thy servant be exercised in thy holy
life, for there is the health and the true sanctity of my soul: whatsoever I
read or hear besides, does not recreate or delight me fully. Luke 6.


LORD. 4 Son, now that thou know and have read these things, happy shall
thou be, if thou fulfill them. He that has my Commandments and keeps them,
he it is that loves me, and I will love him, and will manifest my self unto
him, and will make him sit with me in the Kingdom of my Father.


SER. Lord Jesus, as thou have said and promised, so give me grace to deserve,
that it be fulfilled. I have received the Cross, I have received it from thy
hand, and I will bear it, and bear it till death, as thou have laid it upon
me. Truly the life of a good religious person is the Cross, and it is a sure
guide to heaven. It is now begun, it is not lawful to go back, neither is
it fit to leave that which I have undertaken.

5 Let us then take courage, my brethren, and go forwards together. Jesus will
be with us, for Jesus sake we have undertaken this Cross: for the love of
Jesus let us persevere in the Cross. He will be our helper, who is our guide
and forerunner. Behold our King goes before us, who also will fight for us:
let us follow him cheerfully, let us not be dismayed, but be ready to die
with courage in the battle, and let us not blemish our glory by flying from
the Cross.


CHAP. LVII. That a man be not too much dejected, when he falls into some
defects.
OUR LORD. Son, patience and humility in time of adversity, are more
pleasing to me, then much comfort and devotion in prosperity. Why art thou
grieved for every little trifle spoken and done against thee? Although it had
been much more, thou ought not to have been moved. But now let it pass, it
is not the first that has happened, nor any new thing, neither shall it be
the last, if thou live long. Thou art cheerful enough as long as no adversity
occurreth. Thou can give good counsel also, and can strengthen others with
thy words, but when any tribulation suddenly knocks at thy door, thou art
destitute of counsel, and void of force. See therefore thy great frailty,
which thou often prouest in very small occasions. It is notwithstanding
permitted for thy good, when these and such like occasions befall thee.

2 Put it out of thy heart the best thou can, and if it touch thee, yet let
it not deiect thee, nor trouble thee long: bear it at least patiently, if thou
can not joyfully. Although thou be unwilling to hear it, and feel in thy
heart some motion of disdain, yet repress thy self, and suffer no inordinate
word to pass out of thy mouth, which may be a scandal to the weak. The
storm which now is raised, shall quickly be appeased, and inward grief shall
be assuaged by the return of grace. I do yet live (says our Lord) and am
ready to help thee, and to give thee greater comfort then before, if thou put
thy trust in me, and call devoutly upon me. Esaias 49.

3 Be more patient, and prepare thy self to greater suffering. All is not
lost, if thou feel thy self often afflicted, or grievously tempted. Thou art
a man, and not God: thou art flesh, not an Angel. How can thou look to
continue ever in the same state of virtue, when an Angel in heaven has
fallen, and the first man in Paradise lost his standing? I am he that do give
healthful comfort to them that mourn, and do raise up unto my Godhead those
that know their own frailty. Genesis 3.


SER. 4 Lord, blessed be thy sacred Word, more sweet unto my mouth then the
honey, and the hony-combe. What should I do in these my so great tribulations
and anguishes, unless thou did comfort me with thy holy, sweet, and
heavenly speeches? Psalm. 118. What matter is it, how much, and what I suffer,
so as at length I may attain to the haven of bliss? Grant me a good end,
grant me a happy passage out of this world. Be mindful of me, my God, and
direct me the straight and ready way to the everlasting Kingdom, Amen.


CHAP. LVIII. Of not searching into high matters, and into the secret
judgments of God.
OUR LORD. Son, beware thou dispute not of high matters, not of the secret
judgments of God, why this man is forsaken, and he assumed to so great grace:
why also this man is so much afflicted, and he so greatly advanced. These
things exceed all humane power, neither can any reason, or discourse of any
man, search out the judgment of God. When the enemy therefore suggesteth these
things unto thee, or some envious people demand them of thee, answer that of
the Prophet: Thou art just, O Lord, and thy judgment is right. Psa. 218. And
again: The judgments of our Lord are true and justified in themselves Psa.
18. My judgments are to be fearead, not to be discussed, for they are such as
cannot be comprehended by the understanding of man.

2 In like manner I advise thee not to enquire, nor dispute of the merits of the
Saints, which of them is holier then the other, and which is greater in the
Kingdom of heaven. These things oftentimes breed strife and unprofitable
contentions, they nourish also pride and vainglory, from whence do usually
spring envy and dissensions, whilst one will needs foolishly have this Saint
preferred, and the other another. 1. Tim. 2. To desire to know and search out
such things, is to no purpose, but to displease the Saints, of whom they
speak. For I am not the God of dissensio^, but of peace, which peace
consists rather in true humility, then in exalting our selves.

3 Some are carried with zeal of affection, to love these, or those most, but
this love is rather humane then divine. I have made all the Saints, and have
given them grace: I have made them partakers of my glory. I know the merits of
every one, I have prevented them in the benedictions of my sweetness. I foreknew
my beloved before the beginning of the world. I chose the^ out of the world,
they chose not me first. Ioh. 15. I called them by grace, I drew them by mercy,
I led them through sundry temptations. I have sent the^ great inward co^forts,
I have given the^ perseuera^ce, I have crowned their patience.

4 I know the first and last: I embrace all with inestimable love. I am to be
praised in all my Saints, I am to be blessed above al things, and to be honored
in every one, whom I have thus gloriously exalted, and predestined without
any precedent merits of their own. He therefore that conte^neth one of the
least of my Saints, honoreth not the greatest, for that I made both the less
and the greater. Iam. 2. Wisd. 6. And he that dispraiseth any of my Saints,
dispraiseth also me, and all the rest in the Kingdom of heaven. All are one by
the band of Charity, they think the same, they will the same, and are all knit
together in one perfect-band of love.

5 But yet (which is much more high) they love me more then themselves, and
more then their own merits. For being ravished above themselves, and drawn
out of the affection of themselves, they tend wholly unto the love of me, in
which also they rest, enjoying me with unspeakable glory. Nothing can put them
back, nothing press them down; for being full of everlasting truth, they
burn with the fire of unquenchable charity. Let therefore carnal and earthly
me^, that can affect no other but private joys, forbear to dispute of the
state of Saints. They add and take away according to their own fancies, not
as it pleases the everlasting Truth.

6 There is in many great ignorance, specially in those that be slenderly
enlightened, and these can seldom love any with perfect spiritual love. They are
always much drawn by a natural affection and humane friendship, to this man
or to that, and according to the experience they have of themselves in their
earthly affections, so they frame an imagination of heavenly things. But there
is an incomparable distance between the things, which the imperfect frame in
their conceits, and those which illuminated persons do see by revelation from
above.

7 Beware therefore, my Son, that thou treat not curiously of these things,
which exceed thy knowledge, but rather so apply thy endeauours, that thou may
at least have the meanest place in the Kingdom of heaven. Eccles. 3. And if any
one did know which of the Saints exceeded others in sanctity, or is esteemed
greater in the kingdom of heaven, what would this knowledge avail him, unless
he should thereby humble himself the more in my sight, and stir up his mind
to praise my name with greater fervor. His labor is much more acceptable unto
God, that thinks of the greatness of his sins, and his want of virtues, and
how far off he is from the perfection of the Saints; then he that disputes of
their greatness. It is better to pray to the Saints with devotion and tears,
and to crave their glorious suffrages with an humble mind, then to search their
secrets with a vain curiosity.

8 They are well, and right well contented, if men could content themselves,
and refrain from these vain discourses. They glory not of their own merits
for they ascribe no good unto themselves, but attribute all to me, who of my
infinite charity have bestowed my blessings upon them. They are replenished
with so great love of my Godhead, and so superabundant joy, that there is no
glory nor happiness, that is, or can be wanting unto them. All the Saints, how
much the higher they be in glory, so much the more humble they are in
themselves, and nearer and dearer unto me. And therefore thou have it written,
That they did cast their crowns before God, and fell down upon their faces
before the Lamb, and adored him that lives for ever. Apocal. 4.

9 Many enquire who is greatest in the Kingdom of God, that know not whether
they shall ever be numbered there amongst the least. It is no small matter to
be even the least in heaven, where all are great, for that all there shall be
called, and shall be indeed the Sons of God. The least there shall be great
among thousands, and the sinner of an hundred years shall die. For when the
Disciples asked who was the greater in the Kingdom of heaven, they received
this answer. Matthew. 18. Unless you be converted, and become as little
children, you shall not enter into the Kingdom of heaven. Whosoever therefore
shall humble himself as this little child, he is the greater in the Kingdom
of heaven.

10 Woe be unto them that disdain to humble themselves willingly with little
children. Mat. 6. For the low gate of the Kingdom of heaven, will not give them
entrance. And woe be to the rich, that have their comforts here, for whilst the
poor enter into the Kingdom of God, they shall be waiting without. Rejoice you
that be humble; and you that be poor, be you glad, for yours is the Kingdom
of God, if you walk according unto truth. Mat. 5.


CHAP. LIX. That all our hope and trust is to be fixed in God alone.
THE SERVANT. LOrd, what trust have I in this world? Or what is the greatest
comfort, that all things under heaven do yield me? Is it not thou, my Lord
God, whose mercies are without number? Where has it been well with me
without thee? Or when could it be ill with me, when thou were present? I had
rather be poor for thee, then rich without thee. I rather choose to be a
Pilgrim in earth with thee, then to possess heaven without thee. Where thou
art, there is heaven: and there is death and hell, where thou art not. Thou art
my desire, and therefore it behooves me to send forth deep sighs from my
heart, and cry and pray unto thee. For I have none to trust unto, none that
can help me in time of necessity, but thee alone, my God. Thou art my hope,
and my trust; thou art my comforter, and most faithful unto me in all my
distresses.

2 All men seek their own gain, thou only seek my salvation, and my
profit, and turnest all things to my good. Phil. 2. Although thou permittest
many temptations to assault me, and many adversities to befall me, yet thou
ordainest all this to my good and profit, who art wont to prove thy beloved
servants a thousand ways. In which proof thou ought no less to be loved
and praised, then if thou did replenish me with heavenly comforts.

3 In thee therefore, my Lord God, I put my whole hope and refuge: in thee I
place my tribulation and anguish, for I find all to be weak and unconstant,
whatsoever I behold out of thee. For neither can many friends avail, nor
forcible helpers aid, nor wise counselors give profitable answer, nor the
books of the learned comfort, nor any wealth deliver, nor any secret or
pleasant place defend, if thou thy self do not assist, help, comfort,
instruct, and keep us.

4 For all things that seem to be ordained for the rest and solace of man,
when thou art absent, are nothing, and do bring indeed no joy, nor comfort at
all. Thou therefore art the end of all that is good, the light of life, the
depth of wisdom: and the most forcible comfort of thy servants, is to trust in
thee above all things. To thee therefore do I lift up mine eyes: In thee my God
the Father of mercies, I put my whole trust. Bless and sanctify my soul with
thy heavenly blessings, that it may be made thy holy habitation, and the seat
of thy eternal glory: and that nothing may be found in the Temple of thy
greatness, that may offend the eyes of thy Majesty. According to the greatness
of thy goodness, and multitude of thy mercies, take pity upon me, and hear
the prayer of thy poor servant, who is far exiled from thee in the land of
the shadow of death. Protect and keep the soul of thy servant, amidst so many
dangers of this corruptible life, and by the assistance of thy grace, direct it
in the way of peace, to the Country of everlasting light, AMEN.


The end of the third Book.
OF THE FOLLOWING OF CHRIST. THE FOVRTH BOOK. A devout Exhortation unto the
blessed Sacrament. The voice of Christ.
COme unto me all ye that labor and are burdened, and I will refresh you,
says our Lord. Matthew. 11. The bread which I will give, is my flesh, for the
life of the world. Ioh. 6. Take ye and eat, this is my body that shall be
delivered for you. Matthew. 26. Do this for the commemoration of me. He that
eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, remains in me, and I in him. 1. Cor.
11. The words which I have spoken unto you, are Spirit and life. Ioh. 6.

CHAP. I. With how great reverence Christ ought to be received.
THese are thy words, O Christ, everlasting Truth, though not spoken all at one
time, nor written in one and the selfsame place. Because therefore they are
thine and true, they are al thankfully and faithfully to be received by me.
They are thine, and thou have spoken them, and they are mine also, because thou
have spoken them for my salvation. I willingly receive them from thy mouth,
that they may be the deeper imprinted in my heart. These devout words so full
of sweetness and love, do stir me up, but mine own offenses do amaze me, and
my impure conscience drives me back from the receiving of so great mysteries.
The sweetness of thy words does encourage me, but the multitude of my sins
do oppress me.

2 Thou command me to come confidently unto thee, if I will have part with
thee: and to receive the food of immortality, if I desire to obtain
everlasting life and glory. Come (say thou) unto me, all ye that labor and
are burdened, and I will refresh you. Mat. 11. O sweet and lovely word in the
ear of a sinner, that thou, my Lord God, should inuit the poor and needy
to receive thy most blessed body. But who am I, Lord, that I may presume to
approach unto thee? Behold the heavens cannot contain thee, and thou say:
Come ye all unto me. Mat. 11.

3 What means this most pious benignity, and so loving inuitation? How shall I
dare to come, that know not any good in me, whereupon I may presume? How shall
I bring thee into my house, that have often offended thy most gracious
countenance? The Angels and the Archangels honor thee, the Saints and just men
do fear thee; and thou say, Come ye all unto me. Mat. 11. Unless thou, O
Lord, did say it, who would believe it to be true? And unless thou did
command it, who would dare to come unto thee? Behold, Noe, a just man, labored
an hundred years in building of the Arc, that he might be saved with a few:
and how can I in one hours space prepare my self to receive with reverence
the Maker of the world? Genesis 6.

4 Moses thy great servant, and especial friend, made an Arc of incorruptible
wood, which also he covered with most pure gold, to put the Tables of the Law
therein: and I a rotten creature, how shall I so lightly dare to receive the
Maker of the Law, and the giver of life? Solomon the wisest of the Kings of
Israel, bestowed seven years in building a magnificent Temple, in praise of
thy name, and celebrated the feast of the Dedication thereof eight days
together: 3. King. 6. he offered a thousand peaceable sacrifices, and set the
Arc in the place prepared for it, with the sound of trumpets, and joy: 3.
King. 8. and I the most unhappy and poorest of men, how shall I bring thee
into my house, that I can scarce spend one half hour devoutly? And I would to
God it were once almost one half hour, in worthy and due manner!

5 O my God, how much did they endeavor to please thee, and alas how little is
that which I do? How short time do I spend, when I prepare my self to
receive? I am seldom wholly recollected, very seldom altogether free from
distraction; and yet surely no indecent thought should occur in the presence
of thy Deity, nor any creature draw me unto it: for I am not to harbor an
Angel, but the Lord of Angels.

6 And yet there is great difference between the Arc and the Relics thereof,
and thy most pure body with his unspeakable virtues: between those legal
Sacrifices, figures of future things, and the true sacrifice of thy body, the
complement of all ancient Sacrifices. Why therefore do I not become more
fervent in thy venerable presence? Wherefore do I not prepare my self with
greater care to receive thy sacred gifts, since those holy ancient Patriarchs
and Prophets, yea Kings also and Princes with the whole people have showed so
great zeal of devotion to thy divine service?

7 The most devout King David danced before the Ark of God with all his force,
calling to mind the benefits bestowed in times past upon his forefathers. 2.
King. 6. He made Instruments of sundry kinds, he published Psalms, and
appointed them to be sung with joy: himself also oftentimes played upon the
Harp. Being inspired with the grace of the holy Ghost, he taught the people of
Israel to praise God with their whole heart, and with pleasant voices every
day to bless and praise him. If so great devotion was then used, and such
memory of divine praise before the Arc of the Testament, what reverence and
devotion is now to be performed by me, and al Christian people in the presence
of this Sacrament, in receiving the most precious body of Christ?

8 Many go to sundry places to visit the Relics of Saints, and are
astonished when they hear of their miraculous works: they behold the spacious
buildings of their Churches, and kiss their sacred bones, wrapped in silk and
gold: And behold thou art here present with me on the Altar, my God, the Holy
of Holies, the Maker of all things, and Lord of Angels. Oftentimes in those
devotions there is but curiosity of men, and nouelty of the beholders in the
seeing of such sights, and little fruit of amendment is gotten thereby,
especially where there is so unconstant wandering, without true contrition. But
here in the Sacrament of the Altar, thou art present, my Lord, God and Man,
Christ Jesus, where also plentiful fruit of everlasting salvation is obtained,
as often as thou art worthily and devoutly received. No leuity, no curiosity,
or sensuality draws unto this, but firm faith, devout hope, and sincere
charity.

9 O God the invisible Creator of the world, how wonderfully do thou deal
with us! How sweetly and graciously do thou dispose of all things with thy
Elect, to whom thou offerest thy self to be received in the Sacrament! O this
exceeds all understanding of man: this chiefly draws the hearts of the
devout, and inflameth their desire. For thy true faithful servants that
dispose their whole life to amendment, by this most worthy Sacrament,
oftentimes receive great grace of devotion, and love of virtue.

10 O admirable and hidden grace of this Sacrament, which only the faithful
of Christ do know: but the unfaithful, and such as are slaves unto sin,
cannot conceive nor feel. In this Sacrament spiritual grace is given, and
lost virtue is restored in the soul: and beauty disfigured by sin,
returns again. This grace is sometimes so great, that with the fullness of
devotion, which is here given, not only the mind, but the weak body also
feels great increase of strength.

11 Our coldness and negligence surely is much to be bewailed and pitied, that
we are not drawn with greater affection to receive Christ in whom all the hope
and merit of those that are to be saved does consist. For he is our
sanctification and redemption: he is the comfort of passengers, and the
everlasting fruition of Saints. It is much therefore to be lamented, that many
do so little consider this comfortable mystery, which rejoices heaven, and
preserves the whole world. O blindness and hardness of man's heart, that does
not more deeply weigh the greatness of so unspeakable a gift, but rather comes
by the daily use thereof, to regard it little or nothing.

12 For if this most holy Sacrament should be celebrated in one place only, and
consecrated by one only Priest in the world: with how great desire, do thou
think, would men be affected to that place: and what esteem would they have of
such a Priest of almighty God, by whom they might enjoy the consolation of
these divine mysteries? But now there are many Priests, and Christ is offered up
in many places, that so the grace and love of God to man may appear so much
the greater, how much the more this sacred Communion is common through the
world. Thanks be unto thee, good Jesus, everlasting Pastor of our souls, that
have vouchsafed to refresh us poor and banished men, with thy precious Body
and Blood, and to inuit us to that receiving of these mysteries, with the
words of thy own mouth, saying: Come unto me all ye that labor and are
burdened, and I will refresh you. Mat. 11.

CHAP. II. That great goodness and charity of God is bestowed upon man in this
Sacrament.
The voice of the Disciple.
PResuming of thy goodness and great mercy (O Lord) being sick, I approach
unto my Savior, hungry and thirsty to the Fountain of life, needy to the
King of heaven, a servant unto my Lord, a creature to my Creator, desolate to
my merciful Comforter. But whence is this to me, that thou vouchsafest to come
unto me? Who am I, that thou should give thy self unto me? Luke 1. How
dare a sinner presume to appear before thee? And thou, how do thou
vouchsafe to come unto a sinner? Thou know thy servant, and see that he
has no good thing in him, for which thou should bestow this benefit upon
him. I confess therefore my unworthiness, and I acknowledge thy goodness: I
praise thy mercy, and give thee thanks for this thy unspeakable charity. For
thou do this for thine own goodness, not for any merits of mine, to the end
that thy goodness may be better known unto me, thy charity more abundantly
showed, and thy humility more highly commended. Since therefore it is thy
pleasure, and have commanded that it should be so, this thy bounty is also
pleasing to me, and do wish that my offenses may be no hinderance.

2 O most sweet and bountiful Jesus, how great reverence and thanks with
perpetual praise is due unto thee for the receiving of thy sacred Body, whose
worth and dignity no man is able to express! But what shall I think of at
this time, now that I am to receive this divine Sacrament, and to approach unto
my Lord, to whom I am not able to give due reverence, and yet I desire to
receive him devoutly? What can I think better, and more profitable, then to
humble my self wholly before thee, and to exalt thy infinite goodness above me?
I praise thee my God, and will exalt thee for ever: and I do despise, and submit
my self unto thee, even into the depth of my unworthiness.

3 Behold thou art the Holy of Holies, and I the skumme of sinners! Behold thou
bowest thy self down unto me, who am not worthy so much as to look up unto
thee! Behold thou come unto me: it is thy will to be with me, thou inuitest
me to thy banquet. Ps. 77. Thou will give me the food of heaven, and bread of
Angels to eat, which is no other truly then thy self, the lively bread, that
descendest from heaven, and give life unto the world. Ioh. 6.

4 Behold from whence this love proceedth! What kind of favor and benignity is
this which shines upon us! What thanks and praises are due unto thee for these
benefits! O how good and profitable was thy counsel, when thou ordainedst it!
How sweet and pleasant the banquet, when thou gave thy self to be our food!
How wonderful thy work, O Lord, how powerful thy virtue, how unspeakable thy
truth! For thou said the word, and all things were made; and this was done
which thou command. Genesis 1. and Psalm. 148.

5 A thing of great admiration, and worthy of faith, and surpassing the
understanding of man, that thou, my Lord God, true God and Man, should be
wholly contained under a small form of bread and wine, and should be eaten
by the receiver without being consumed. Thou who art the Lord of all things,
and stand in need of none, have pleased to dwell in us by means of this thy
Sacrament: preserve my heart and body unspotted, that with a cheerful and
pure conscience I may often celebrate thy mysteries, and receive them to my
everlasting health, which thou have chiefly ordained and instituted for thy
honor, and perpetual memory.

6 Rejoice my soul, and give thanks unto God for so noble a gift, and singular
comfort left unto thee in this vale of tears. For as often as thou call to
mind this mystery; and receiuest the body of Christ; so often do thou work
the work of thy redemption, and art made partaker of all the merits of Christ.
For the charity of Christ is never diminished, and the greatness of his mercy is
never lessened. Therefore thou ought always to dispose thy self hereunto,
by a fresh renewing of thy mind, and to weigh with attentive consideration this
great mystery of thy salvation. So great, new, and joyful it ought to seem
unto thee, when thou say or hear Mass, as if the same day Christ first
descending into the womb of the Virgin, were become man, or hanging on the
Cross, did suffer and die for the salvation of mankind.

CHAP. III. That it is profitable to Communicate often.
BEhold, O Lord, I come unto thee, that I may be comforted in thy gift, and be
delighted in thy holy banquet, which thou, O Lord, have prepared in thy
sweetness, for the poor. Psalm. 67. Behold in thee is all whatsoever I can, or
ought to desire: thou art my health and my redemption, my hope, and my
strength, my honor, and my glory. Make joyful therefore this day, the soul of
thy servant, for that I have lifted it up to thee, my sweet Jesus. Psalm. 85.
I desire to receive thee now with devotion, and reverence. I do long to bring
thee into my house, that with Zachaeus I may deserve to be blessed by thee, and
numbered amongst the children of Abraham. My soul thirsts to receive thy
Body, my heart desires to be united with thee.

2 Give thy self to me, and it suffices. For besides thee no comfort is
auailable. I cannot be without thee, nor live without thy visitation. And
therefore I must often come unto thee, and receive thee as the only remedy of my
health, lest perhaps I faint in the way, if I be deprived of thy heavenly food.
For so, most merciful Jesus, thou once did say, preaching to the people, and
curing sundry diseases: I will not send them home fasting, lest they faint by
the way. Matthew. 15. Mat. 8. Deal thou therefore in like manner now with me,
who have vouchsafed to leave thy self in the Sacrament for the comfort of the
faithful. For thou art the sweet refection of the soul, and he that eats
thee worthily, shall be partaker, and heir of everlasting glory. It is
necessary for me, that do so often fall and sin, so quickly wax dull and
faint, that by often prayers and confession, and receiving of thy sacred body,
I renew, cleanse, and inflame my self, lest perhaps by long abstaining I fall
from my holy purpose.

3 For man is prone unto evil from his youth, and unless this divine remedy
help him, he quickly slideth to worse. Genesis 8. This holy Communion therefore
draws back from evil, and comfort in good. For if I be now so often
slack and negligent when I communicate, or say Mass, what would become of me,
if I received not this remedy, and sought not after so great a help? Though
every day I be not fit, nor well prepared to say Mass, I will endeavor
notwithstanding at convenient times to receive the Divine Mysteries, and make
my self partaker of so great a grace. For this is the only chief comfort of
a faithful soul, whilst she wandreth from thee in this mortal body, that
being mindful of her God, she often receive her Beloved with a devout mind.

4 O wonderful benignity of thy mercy toward us, that thou, Lord God, the
Creator and giver of life to all spirits, do vouchsafe to come unto a poor
soul, and with thy whole Godhead and humanity to replenish her hunger. O happy
mind and blessed soul, that deserves to receive thee, her Lord God, with
devout affection, and in receiving of thee, to be filled with spiritual joy! O
how great a Lord does she entertain! How beloved a guest does she harbor!
How pleasant a companion does she receive! How faithful a friend does she
accept! How beautiful and noble a Spouse does she embrace! She embraces him
who is to be loved above all that is beloved, and above al things that may be
desired. Let Heaven and Earth and all their beauty be silent in thy presence.
For what beauty and praise soever they have, it is received from thy bounty,
and shall not equal the beauty of thy name, of whose wisdom there is no end.
Psalm. 146.

CHAP. IV. That many benefits are bestowed upon them that Communicate devoutly.
The voice of the Disciple.
MY Lord God, prevent thy servant in the blessings of thy sweetness, that I
may deserve to approach worthily and devoutly to thy holy Sacrament: stir up
my heart unto thee, and deliver me from all heaviness and sloth: Ps. 20. visit
me with thy comfort, that I may taste in spirit thy sweetness, which plentifully
lies hid in this Sacrament, as a fountain. Ps. 105. Give light also to mine
eyes to behold so great a mystery, and strengthen me to believe it with
undoubted faith. For it is thy work, and not man's power, thy sacred
institution, not man's invention. For no man is of himself able to comprehend
and understand these things, which surpass the understanding even of Angels.
What therefore shall I unworthy sinner, earth and ashes, be able to search and
comprehend of so high and sacred a mystery?

2 O Lord, in sincerity of heart, with a good and firm faith, and at thy
commandment, I come unto thee with hope and reverence, and do verily believe,
that thou art here present in the Sacrament, God and Man. Thy holy pleasure
is, that I receive thee, and by charity do unite my self unto thee. Wherefore I
do recurre unto thy Clemency, and do crave special grace, that I may wholly
melt in thee, and abound with love, and hereafter never admit any external
comfort. For this most high and worthy Sacrament is the health of the soul and
body, the remedy of al spiritual sickness: by it my vices are cured, my
passions bridled, temptations overcome or weakened, greater grace infused,
virtue increased, faith confirmed, hope strengthened, and charity inflamed and
enlarged.

3 For thou have bestowed, and still oftentimes do bestow many benefits in
this Sacrament upon thy beloved that receive it devoutly, my God the protector
of my soul, the stre^gthner of humane frailty, and the giver of all inward
comfort. Thou impartest unto them much comfort against sundry tribulations, and
liftest them up from the depth of their own baseness, to the hope of thy
protection, and do inwardly refresh and illustrat them with a certain new
grace, in such sort, that they who before Communion felt themselves heavy and
indisposed, afterward being stre^gthened with heavenly meat and drink, do
find in themselves a great change to the better: which thou do so dispose to
thy Elect, that they may truly acknowledge, and patiently prove how great their
own infirmity is, and what benefit and grace they receive from thee. For they
of themselves are cold, dull, and undevout; but by thee they are made fervent,
agile, and full of devotion. For who is there, that approaching humbly unto the
Fountain of sweetness, does not carry away from thence at least some little
sweetness? Or who standing by a great fire, receives not some small heat
thereby? Thou art a Fountain always full, and ouerflowing, a fire ever
burning, and never decaying. Esa. 12. Leuit. 6.

4 Wherefore if I cannot draw at the full out of this Fountain, nor drink my
fill, I will notwithstanding set my lips to the mouth of this heavenly
conduite, that I may draw from thence at least some small drop to refresh my
thirst, to the end I wither not wholly away and perish. And though I be not
altogether celestial, nor so inflamed as the Cherubims and Seraphims,
notwithstanding I will endeavor to apply my self to devotion, and dispose my
heart to obtain some small spark of divine fire by humbly receiving of this
Life-giuing Sacrament. And whatsoever is hereunto wanting in me, good Jesus,
most blessed Savior, do thou supply for me, most benign and gracious Lord,
who have vouchsafed to call us unto thee, saying: Come unto me all ye that
labor and are burdened, and I will refresh you. Mat. 11.

5 I labor in the sweat of my brows, I am vexed with grief of heart, I am
burdened with sins, I am troubled with temptations, I am entangled and
oppressed with many evil passions, and there is none to help me, none to
deliver and save me, but thou, Lord God, my Savior, to whom I commit my
self, and all mine, that thou may keep me, and bring me to life
everlasting. Receive me to the honor and glory of thy name, who have prepared
thy Body and Blood to be my meat and my drink. Gran^, Lord God, my Savior,
that by frequenting thy mysteries, my zeal and devotion may increase.

CHAP. V. Of the dignity of this Sacrament, and Priestly function.
The voice of Christ.
IF thou had angelical purity, and the sanctity of Saint John Baptist, thou
were not worthy to receive, nor handle this Sacrament. Mat. 11. For it is not
within the compass of the deserts of men, that man should consecrate and
handle the sacrament of Christ, and receive for food the bread of Angels. A
great mystery, and great is the dignity of Priests, to whom is granted that,
which is not permitted to the Angels. Psalm. 77. For Priests only instituted in
the Church, have power to celebrate, and consecrate the Body of Christ. The
Priest is the Minister of God, using the words of God, by Gods commandment and
appointment; but God is there the principal Actor, and invisible worker, to
whom is subject all that he pleases, and all that he commands, does obey.
Genesis 1. Psalm. 148. Romans 9.

2 Thou ought therefore to give more credit to God Almighty in this most
excellent Sacrament, then to thine own sense, or to any visible sign. And
therefore thou art to come unto this Mystery with fear and reverence.
Consider attentively with thy self, what that is, whereof the Ministry is
delivered unto thee by the imposition of hands of the Bishop. Behold thou art
made a Priest, and consecrated to say Mass: see now that in due time thou
offer Sacrifice unto God faithfully and devoutly, and carry thy self so, as
thou may be without reproof. 1. Tim. 4. Thou have not lightened thy burden,
but art now bound with a straiter band of discipline, and art obliged to a more
perfect degree of sanctity. A Priest ought to be adorned with all kind of
virtues, and to give example of good life to others. His conversation should
not be according to the ordinary and common proceedings of men, but like to
the Angels in heaven, or to perfect men on earth. Philip. 3.

3 A Priest clothed in sacred garments is the Vicegerent of Christ, to pray
humbly, and with a prostrate mind unto God for himself and the whole people.
Heb. 5. He has before and behind the sign of the Cross of our Lord, to the
end he may ever remember the Passion of Christ: he bears the Cross before
him in the Vestement, that he may diligently behold the foote-steps of Christ,
and fervently endeavor to follow them. He is behind marked with the Cross,
that he may patiently suffer for God, whatsoever adversities shall be laid
upon him for others. He bears the cross before, that he may lament his own
sins, and the same he has also behind, that he may with a compassionate
heart bewail the offenses of others, and know that he is placed as a mediator
between God and the sinner. Neither ought he to cease from prayer and holy
oblation, till he deserve to obtain grace and mercy. When a Priest does
celebrate, he honoreth God, rejoices the Angels, edifieth the Church, helps
the living, gives rest to the dead, and makes himself partaker of all good
deeds.

CHAP. VI. An Interrogation of the exercise before Communion.
The voice of the Disciple.
WHen I weigh thy greatness, O Lord, and my unworthiness, I tremble, and am
confounded in my self. For if I come not unto thee, I fly from life, and if I
unworthily intrude my self, I incur thy displeasure. What therefore shall I
do, my God, my helper, and my counselor in necessity?

2 Teach me the right way, appoint me some brief exercise suitable to this
holy mystery of sacred Communion. For it is good for me to know, how I should
reverently and devoutly prepare my heart unto thee, for the profitable
receiving of thy Sacrament, or for the celebrating of so great and divine a
Sacrifice.

CHAP. VII. Of the discussing of our own conscience, and purpose of amendment.
The voice of the Beloved.
Above al things, the Priest of God ought to come to celebrate, handle, and
receive this Sacrament with great humility of heart, and lowly reverence, with a
full faith, and a godly desire of the honor of the divine Majesty. Examine
diligently thy conscience, and to thy power, purge and cleanse it with true
contrition, and humble confession: so as there may be nothing in thee, that may
be burde^some unto thee, or that may breed thee remorse of conscience, and
hinder thy free access to these heavenly mysteries. Repent thee of all thy
sins in general, and in particular bewail thy daily offenses. And if thou
have time, confess unto God in the secret of thy heart, all the miseries of
thy disordered passions.

2 Lament and grieve, that thou art yet so subject to sensuality, and so
addicted to the world, so unmortified in thy passions, so full of the motions
of concupiscence, so vnwatchfull over thy outward senses, so often entangled
with many vain fantasies so vehemently inclined to outward things, so
negligent in the interior, so prone to laughter and immodesty, so hard to
tears and compunction, so prompt to ease and pleasures of the flesh, so dull to
austerity and fervor, so curious to hear news and see vain sights, so
slack to embrace that which tends to thine own humiliation and contempt, so
covetous of abundance, so niggardly giving, so fast in keeping, so
inconsiderate in speech, so unbridled to silence, so loose in manners, so
outrageous in deeds, so greedy to meat, so deaf to the word of God, so
hasty to rest, so slow to labor, so watchful to tales, so drowsy to watch in
the service of God, so hasty to the end thereof, so inconstant in attention, so
negligent in saying thy office, so undevout in saying Mass, so dry in
receiving, so quickly distracted, so seldom wholly recollected, so suddenly
moved to anger, so apt to take displeasure against another, so prone to judge,
so severe to reprehend, so joyful in prosperity, so weak in adversity, so
often purposing much good, and performing little.

3 These and other thy defects confessed, and bewailed with sorrow, and great
dislike of thine own infirmity, make a firm purpose always to amend thy
self, and to go forwards in virtue. Then with full resignation, and with thy
whole will offer thy self up to the honor of my name, a perpetual sacrifice
in the altar of thy heart, faithfully committing thy body and soul unto me,
that thou may so also deserve to come worthily to offer sacrifice unto God,
and to receive profitably the Sacrament of my body.

4 For there is no oblation more worthy, nor satisfaction greater, for the
washing away of sins, then to offer up our selves unto God purely and wholly
with the oblation of the Body of Christ in the Mass, and in Communion. And
when a man shall have done what lies in him, and shall be truly penitent, As I
live, says our Lord, who will not the death of a sinner, but rather that he be
converted and live, I will not remember his sins any more, but they shall be
all forgiven him, and fully pardoned. Ezec. 18.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Oblation of Christ on the Cross, and resignation of our
selves.
The voice of the Beloved.
AS I willingly offered up my self unto God my Father, with my hands stretched
forth on the Cross, and my body naked for thy sins, so that nothing remained
in me that was not turned into a sacrifice, for the appeasing of the divine
wrath: so ought thou also to offer up thy self willingly unto me daily in
the Mass, as a pure and holy oblation, with thy whole force, and desire, in as
hearty a manner as thou can. What do I require of thee more, then that thou
resign thy self wholly unto me? Prou. 23. Whatsoever thou give besides thy
self, is of little account in my sight, for I seek not thy gift, but thee.

2 As it would not suffice thee to have all things whatsoever besides me; so
neither can it please me, whatsoever thou give, if thou offerest not up thy
self. Offer thy self unto me, and give thy self, all that thou art, for God,
and thy offering shall be grateful. Behold I offered up my self wholly unto my
Father for thee, and gave my whole body and blood for thy food, that I might be
wholly thine, and thou remain mine. But if thou abidest in thy self, and do
not offer thy self up freely unto my will, thy oblation is not entire, neither
shall the union between us be perfect. Therefore a free offering up of thy
self into the hands of God, ought to go before all thy actions, if thou will
obtain freedom and grace. For this cause so few become inwardly illuminated,
and enjoy true liberty of heart, for that they do not resolve wholly to deny
themselves. My saying is undoubtedly true: Unless one forsake all, he cannot
be my Disciple. Ioh. 14. If thou therefore wish to be mine, offer up thy
self unto me with thy whole desires.

CHAP. IX. That we ought to offer up our selves, and all that is ours unto God,
and to pray for all.
The voice of the Disciple.
THine, O Lord, are all things that are in heaven and in earth. Ps. 23. I
desire to offer up my self unto thee is a free oblation, and to remain always
thine. O Lord, in sincerity of my heart, I offer my self unto thee this day, in
sacrifice of perpetual praise, to be thy servant for ever. Receive me with
this holy oblation of thy precious body, which in the presence of the Angels
inuisibly attending here upon thee, I offer up this day unto thee, that it may
be to the health of my soul, and the salvation of all thy people.

2 I offer unto thee, O Lord, al my sins and offenses, which I have committed
in the sight of thee, and thy holy Angels, from the day wherein I first could
sin, to this hour, upon thy holy Altar, that thou may consume and burn them
all with the fire of thy charity, and wash out all the stains of my sins, and
cleanse my conscience from all offense, and restore to me again thy grace,
which I lost by sin, forgiving me all my offenses, and receiving me mercifvlly
in the kiss of peace.

3 What can I do for my sins, but humbly confess and bewail them, and entreat
always for mercy without intermission? Psalm. 31. I beseech thee, hear me in
thy abundant mercy, when I stand before thee my God. All my sins are very
displeasing unto me; I will never commit them any more, but I am sorry, and will
be sorry for them as long as I live, and am ready to do penance, and to satisfy
for them to the uttermost of my power. Forgive me, O God, forgive me my
sins, for thy holy names sake: save my soul, which ^^ou have redeemed with
thy precious blood. Behold I commit my self unto thy mercy, I resign my self
over into thy hands. Do with me according to thy goodness, not according to my
wickedness, and manifold iniquities.

4 I offer up also unto thee, all whatsoever is good in me, although it be very
little and imperfect, that thou may amend and sanctify it, that thou may
make it grateful and acceptable unto thee, and always perfect more and more
that which thou have begun, and bring me also, who am the slothful and
unprofitable creature, to a good and blessed end.

5 I offer up also unto thee all the godly desires of devout persons, the
necessities of my parents and friends, my brethren and sisters, and of all
those that are dear unto me, and that have done good either to my self or
others for thy love, and that have desired me to say Mass and pray for them,
and all theirs, whether they be yet alive, or already dead: that they all may
receive the help of thy grace and comfort, protection from dangers, delivery
from pain, and being freed from all evils, may joyfully give worthy thanks to
thee.

6 I offer up also unto thee my prayers, and sacrifices, especially for them
who have in any thing wronged, grieved, or slaundered me, or have done me any
damage or displeasure, and for those also, whom I have at any time grieved,
troubled, and scandalized by words, or deeds, wittingly, or at unawares: that
it may please thee to forgive us all our sins and offenses, one against the
other. Take, O Lord, from our hearts all jealousy, all indignation, wrath and
contention, and whatsoever may hurt Charity, and weaken brotherly love. Have
mercy, O Lord, have mercy on those, that crave thy mercy: give grace unto
them, that stand in need thereof, and grant that we may be worthy to enjoy
thy grace, and attain to life everlasting, Amen.

CHAP. X. That the holy Communion is not lightly to be forborne.
The voice of the Beloved.
THou ought often to have recourse to the Fountain of grace, and of divine
mercy, to the Fountain of goodness, and of all piety, that thou may be
cured of thy sins and passions, and deserve to be made more strong and
vigilant against all temptations and deceits of the Devil. The enemy knowing
the greatest profit, and remedy to consist in the holy Communion, endeavors
by all means and occasions to withdraw and hinder faithful and devout persons
from it.

2 Some when they purpose to receive the sacred Communion, suffer greatest
assaults of the Devil. For that wicked spirit (as is written in Job) comes
amongst the Sons of God, to trouble them with his accustomed malice and
impiety, or to make them over fearful and perplexed, that so he may diminish
their affection, or by his subtle assaults, take away their faith, to the end
they may either altogether abstain from this divine food, or at least come
unto it with less devotion. But there is no heed to be taken of his frauds and
malicious suggestions, be they never so filthy and hideous, but all is to be
turned back upon his own head. We ought to contemn and scorn him miserable
wretch, and not to omit the sacred Communion for his assaults, and the troubles
which he raises.

3 Oftentimes also an excessive care for the obtaining of devotion, and a
certain anxiety for the making of our Confession hinders us. Follow in these
occasions the counsel of the wise, and put away all anxiety and scruple, for
it hinders the grace of God, and overthrows devotion. Omit not (for every
vexation of the mind which happens) to receive this holy Sacrament, but go
presently to confession, and willingly forgive others, whatsoever offenses they
have done against thee: and if thou have offended any, humbly crave pardon, and
God will willingly forgive thee.

4 What avails it to delay confession, and to defer receiving? Purge thy
self with speed, spit out the venom presently, make have to take a remedy, and
thou shall find it better, then if thou deferredst it long. If thou omittest it
to day for this cause, perhaps to morrow some greater will fall out, and so thou
may be hindered a long time from these divine Mysteries, and become more
unfit. Stir up thy self, and shake off all heaviness and sloth, with the
greatest force and speed thou can. For it profits nothing to continue long
in disquietnes and trouble of mind, and for daily incurring impediments to
withdraw thy self from the Sacraments. Yea it hurts very much to defer
Communion long, for it is wont to breed a great and dangerous dulnes. Alas,
some cold and dissolute people, do willingly delay their confession, and do
therefore defer the sacred Communion, lest they should be bound to greater
watch over themselves.

5 O how little charity and weak devotion have they, that so easily omit the
receiving of these holy mysteries! How happy is he, and grateful to God, who
orders so his life, and keeps his conscience in such purity, that he may
be ready and fit to communicate every day, if it were convenient, and might
be done without note. If any one sometimes abstain of humility, or by reason
of some lawful impediment, he is to be commended for the reverence which
therein he shows. But if it proceeds of coldness, he must stir himself
up, and do what lies in him, and God will prosper his desire, for the good
will he has to do it, which God does chiefly respect.

6 And when any lawful hinderance does happen, he must always have yet a good
will, and loving desire to communicate, and so shall he not lose the fruit of
the Sacrament. For a devout person may every day and hour profitably and
without let, receive Christ spiritually: and yet on certain days, and at time
appointed, he ought to receive Sacramentally with a reverend desire, the Body
of his Redeemer, and rather seek the honor and glory of God, then his own
comfort. For he communicates mystically, and is inuisibly fed, as often as he
devoutly calls to mind the mystery of the Incarnation, and the Passion of
Christ, and is inflamed with his love. 1. Cor. 11.

7 He that prepares not himself, but when a Feast draws near, and when
custom compels him thereunto, shall often be unprepared. Blessed is he that
offers himself up as an Holocaust and burnt offering to our Lord, as often
as he does celebrate or communicate. Be not too long nor too short in saying
Mass, but keep the accustomed manner of those, with whom thou live. Thou
ought not to be tedious and troublesome to others, but to observe the common
course according to the appointment of thy Superiors: and rather frame thy
self to the profit of others, then to thine own devotion or desire.

CHAP. XI. That the Body of Christ, and the holy Scripture are most necessary
unto a faithful soul.
The voice of the Disciple.
O Most sweet Lord Jesus, how great is the delight of a devout soul that
feasteth with thee in thy banquet, where there is no other meat offered to be
eaten, but thy self her only beloved, and most to be desired above all the
desires of her heart. And verily it would be a great comfort unto me, to power
out tears from the bottom of my heart in thy presence, and with devout
Magdalen, to wash thy feet with the tears of mine eyes. Luke 7. But where is
this devotion? Where is so plentiful shedding of holy tears? Surely in the
sight of thee and thy holy Angels, my whole heart should be inflamed, and
dissolve into tears for joy. For I enjoy thee in the Sacrament really present,
although hidden under another form.

2 For to behold thee in thine own divine brightness, mine eyes would not be
able to endure it, neither could the whole world stand in the clearenes of the
glory of thy Majesty. Thou therefore prouidest for my weakness, in that thou
couerest thy self under the Sacrament. I do really enjoy and adore him, whom
the Angels adore in heaven; but I as yet for the time, in faith, they in his
proper form, and without shadow. I ought to be contented with the light of
true faith, and to walk therein, until the day of everlasting brightness
break forth, and the shadows of figures pass away. But when that shall come
which is perfect, the use of Sacraments shall cease. 1. Cor. 13. For the blessed
in heavenly glory need not the remedy of Sacraments, who rejoice without end
in the presence of God, beholding his glory face to face, and being transformed
by his brightness into the brightness of the incomprehensible Deity, they
taste the word of God made flesh, as he was from the beginning, and as he
remains for ever.

3 Whilst I remember these thy wonderful works, all spiritual comfort
whatsoever becomes very tedious unto me: for that as long as I behold not my
Lord openly in his glory, I make no account of whatsoever I see or hear in
this life. Thou art my witness, O God, that nothing can confort me, no
creature give me rest, but thou, my God, whom I desire to behold
everlastingly. But this is not possible whilst I remain in this mortal life.
Therefore I must frame my self to much patience, and submit my self to thee in
all my desires. For thy Saints also, O Lord, who now rejoice with thee in the
Kingdom of heaven, whilst they lived expected in faith and great patience the
coming of thy glory. Heb. 10. and 11. What they believed, I believe; what they
hoped for, I expect; whither they are come, I trust I shall come by thy grace.
In the mean time I will go forward in faith, strengthened by the examples of
the Saints. I have also devout books for my comfort, and for the guide of my
life, and above all these, thy most holy Body for a singular remedy and refuge.

4 For I perceive two things to be chiefly necessary for me in this life,
without which this miserable life would be insupportable unto me. Whilst I am
kept in the prison of this body, I acknowledge my self to stand in need of two
things, to wit, food and light. Thou have therefore given unto me, weak
creature, thy sacred Body, for the refection of my soul and body, Ioh. 6. and
have set thy word as a light unto my feet. Ps. 118. without these two I could
not well live. For the word of God is the light of the soul, and thy Sacrament
the bread of life. These also may be called the two Tables set on the one side
and the other, in the storehouse of the holy Church. Psalm. 22. Heb. 9. and 13.
One is the Table of the holy Altar, containing the Sacred bread, that is, the
precious Body of Christ: the other is of the divine law, containing holy
doctrine, teaching true faith, and certainly leading to the part of the Temple
within the veil, where are the Holy of Holies. Thanks be unto thee* Lord
Jesus, light of everlasting light, for thy table of holy doctrine, at which thou
seruest us by thy servants, the Prophets and Apostles, and other Doctors.

5 Thanks be unto thee Creator and Redeemer of man, who to manifest thy charity
to the whole world, have prepared a great Supper, Luke 14. wherein thou have
offered to be eaten, not the mystical Lamb, but thine own most sacred Body
and Blood, Ioh. 6. rejoicing all the faithful with thy holy banquet, and
replenishing them to the full with thy heavenly Cup, Psalm. 22. in which are all
the delights of heaven, and the holy Angels do feast with us, but with a more
happy sweetness. Wisd. 16.

6 O how great and honorable is the office of Priests, to whom it is granted
with sacred words to consecrate the Lord of Majesty, with their lips to
bless him, with their hands to hold him, with their own mouth to receive him,
and to administer him to others! O how clean ought to be those hands! How pure
that mouth! How holy the body! How unspotted the heart of the Priest, into
whom the Author of purity so often enters! Nothing but holy, no word but
chaste and profitable ought to proceed from the mouth of the Priest, which so
often receives the Sacrament of Christ.

7 Simple and chaste ought to be the eyes, that are wont to behold the body of
Christ, the hands pure and lifted up to heaven, that use to handle the Creator
of heaven and earth. Unto the Priests especially it is said in the Law: Be yet
holy, for that I your Lord God am holy. Leuit. 19. and 20.

8 Assist us Almighty God with thy grace, that we, who have undertaken the
office of Priesthood, may serve thee worthily and devoutly in all purity, and
with a sincere conscience. And if we cannot live in so great innocence as we
ought to do, grant us notwithstanding in due manner to bewail the sins
which we have committed, and in the spirit of humility, and sincere intention
to serve thee hereafter with more fervor.

CHAP. XII. That he that is to Communicate, ought to prepare himself with
great diligence.
The voice of the Beloved.
I Am the lover of purity, and the giver of all sanctity, I seek a pure heart,
and there is the place of my rest. Psalm. 23. and Mat. 5. Make ready and adorn
for me a great chamber, and I will make with thee the Pasch with my Disciples.
Mark. 14. Luke 22. If thou will have me come unto thee, and remain with thee,
purge the old leven, and make clean the dwelling of thy heart: 1. Cor. 5. shut
out the whole world, and all tumult of vices: sit like a sparow solitary upon
the house top, and think of thy offenses in the bitterness of thy soul. For
every lover prepares the best and fairest room for his beloved, and herein is
known the affection of him that entertaineth his beloved.

2 Know thou notwithstanding that the worth of no action of thine, is able to
make this preparation sufficient, although thou should prepare thy self a
whole year together, and think on nothing else: but of my mercy and grace
only, thou art suffered to come to my Table, like a beggar invited to dinner to
a rich man, who has nothing else to return him for his benefits, but to
humble himself, and give him thanks. Do what lies in thee, and do it
diligently, not for custom, nor for necessity, but with fear and reverence,
and hearty affection receive the Body of thy beloved Lord and God, who
vouchsafes to come unto thee. I am he that have called thee, I have commanded
it to be done, I will supply what is wanting in thee, come and receive me.

3 When I bestow the grace of devotion on thee, give thanks to God, for it is
given thee, not for that thou deseruest it, but because I have mercy on thee.
If thou have it not, but rathere feel thy self dry, continue in prayer, sigh
and knock, and give not over until thou deserve to receive some crumme or
drop of grace. Thou have need of me, not I of thee, neither come thou to
sanctify me, but I come to sanctify and make thee better. Thou come, that
thou may be sanctified by me, and united unto me, that thou may receive
new grace, and be stirred up again to amendment. Neglect not this grace, but
prepare thy heart with all diligence, and receive thy beloved into thy soul.

4 But thou ought not only to prepare thy self to devotion before
Communion, but carefully also to conserve thy self therein, after thou have
received the Sacrament. Neither is the careful guard of thy self after, less
exacted, then devout preparation before. For a good guard afterward is the
best preparation thou can make for the obtaining again of greater grace,
because that man's mind becomes very indisposed, if he presently power
himself out to outward comforts. Beware of much talk, remain in some secret
place, and enjoy thy God. For thou have him whom all the world cannot take
from thee. I am he, to whom thou ought wholly to give thy self, that so
thou may live hereafter, not in thy self, but in me, without all care.

CHAP. XIII. That a devout soul ought to desire with her whole heart to be
united unto Christ in the Sacrament.
The voice of the Disciple.
HOw may I obtain this, O Lord, that I may find thee alone, and open my whole
heart unto thee, and enjoy thee as my soul desires? And that no man may look
upon me, nor any creature moan me or respect me, but thou alone may speak
unto me, and I to thee, as the Beloved is wont to speak to his Beloved, and a
friend to banquet with his friend. Exodus 33. and Cant. 8. This I pray for, this
I desire, that I may be wholly united unto thee, and may withdraw my heart from
all created things, and more and more, by sacred Communion and often
celebrating, learn to taste of heavenly and everlasting sweetness. O Lord God,
when shall I be wholly united and absorpt by thee, and altogether forgetful of
my self! Thou in me, and I in thee, and so grant us both to continue in one.
Ioh. 15.

2 Thou art my Beloved, the choicest amongst thousands, in whom my soul has
taken pleasure to dwell all the days of her life. Cant. 5. Thou art my
Peacemaker, in whom is greatest peace, and true rest, without whom is labor
and sorrow, and infinite misery. Thou art a hidden God, and thy counsel is not
with the wicked, but thy speech is with the humble and simple of heart. Prou.
3. O Lord, how sweet is thy Spirit, who to the end thou might show thy
sweetness toward thy children, vouchsafest to feed them with the most
delightsome bread which descends from heaven, and is full of all sweetness.
Wisd. 12. Surely there is no other Nation so great, that has Gods approaching
unto them, as thou our God art present to all thy faithful, unto whom for
their daily comfort, and for the lifting up of their hearts to heaven, thou
give thy self to be eaten and enjoyed. Deuteronomy. 4.

3 For what other Nation is there so famous, as the Christian people? Or what
creature under heaven so beloved, as a devout soul, to whom God himself
comes to feed her with his glorious flesh? O unspeakable grace! O admirable
favor! O infinite love, singularly bestowed upon man! But what shall I give
unto our Lord in return of this grace, for so singular a charity? Psalm. 115.
There is no other thing more grateful that I am able to give, then to bestow
my heart wholly on my God, and to unite it perfectly unto him. Then shall all my
bowels rejoice, when my soul shall be perfectly united unto God. Then he will
say unto me: if thou will be with me, I will be with thee. And I will answer
him: Vouchsafe, O Lord, to remain with me, and I will be with thee: This is my
whole desire, that my heart be united unto thee.

CHAP. XIV. Of the fervent desire of some devout persons to receive the Body of
Christ.
The voice of the Disciple.
O How great is the store of thy sweetness, O Lord, which thou have hidden
for them that fear thee! Psalm. 30. When I remember some devout persons, who
come unto thy Sacrament, O Lord, with great devotion and affection, I am
oftentimes confounded, and blush within my self, that I come so negligently
and coldly to thy Altar, to the Table of holy Communion, that I remain so
dry, and without spiritual motion or feeling, that I am not wholly inflamed in
thy presence, my God, nor so earnestly drawn and moved, as many devout persons
have been, who out of a vehement desire of receiving, and a feeling affection
of heart, could not contain themselves from weeping, but with the desire both
of soul and body, they earnestly longed after thee, O God, the lively
Fountain, being not otherwise able to temper nor satisfy their hunger, but by
receiving thy Body with all joy and spiritual greediness.

2 O most ardent faith of those persons, a probable argument of thy sacred
presence. For these truly know their Lord in the breaking of bread, whose
heart burns so within them, whilst thou, O blessed Jesus, walk with them.
Luke 24. Such desire and devotion, so vehement love and feruencie, is
oftentimes far off from me. Be merciful unto me, good Jesus. sweet and benign
Lord, and grant me, thy poor needy creature, to feel sometimes at least, in
this holy Sacrament, a little cordial desire of thy love, that my faith may be
more strengthened, my hope in thy goodness increased, and that my charity once
perfectly inflamed, after the tasting of heavenly Manna, may never decay.

3 Thy mercy, O Lord, is able to give me the grace I desire, and to visit me in
thy bounteous clemency with the spirit of fervor, when it shall please thee.
For although I burn not with so great desire as those that are so especially
devoted unto thee: yet notwithstanding by thy grace, I desire to have this
great inflamed desire, praying and craving that I may participate with all such
thy fervent lovers, and be numbered among them in their holy company.

CHAP. XV. That the grace of devotion is obtained by humility and denial of
our selves.
The voice of the Beloved.
THou ought to seek the grace of devotion instantly, to ask it earnestly,
to expect it patiently and considently, to receive it joyfully, to keep it
humbly, to work with it diligently, and to commit the time and manner of this
heavenly visitation to God, until it shall be his pleasure to come. Thou
ought chiefly to humble thy self, when thou feel inwardly little or no
devotion, and yet not to be too much dejected, nor to grieve inordinately for
it. God often gives in a short moment that, which he has long time denied: he
gives sometimes in the end that, which in the beginning of prayer he differred
to grant.

2 If grace should be always presently given, and at hand ever with a wish, it
could not be well endured by a weak man. Therefore devotion is to be expected
with good hope, and humble patience: yet impute it to thy self, and thy
sins, when it is not given thee, or when it is secretly taken from thee. It
is sometimes a small matter that hinders and hides grace from us, if it be
to be called small, and not rather a great matter, that hinders so great a
good. And if thou remove this, be it great or small, and perfectly overcome
it, thou shall have thy desire.

3 For presently, as soon as thou give thy self to God, and seek not
this, nor that, for thine own pleasure or will, but setlest thy self wholly in
me, thou shall find thy self united unto him, and quiet. For nothing will
taste so well, and please thee so much, as the will and pleasure of God.
Whosoever therefore with a sincere heart directs his intention to God, and
purges himself from all in ordinate love, or dislike of any creature, shall
be most fit to receive grace, and worthy of the gift of devotion. For our Lord
bestows his blessing there, where he finds his vessels empty. And how much
the more perfectly one forsakes these basest things, and dies to himself by
contempt of himself; so much the more speedily grace comes, and enters in
more plentifully, and lifts up the heart that is free, to a higher state of
grace.

4 Then shall he see, and abound, and wonder, and his heart shall be enlarged,
because the hand of our Lord is with him, and he has put himself wholly into
his hand for ever. Esa. 60. Behold so shall the man be blessed, that seeks
Almighty God with his whole heart, and takes not his soul in vain. This man
deserves great grace of divine union, in receiving the holy Eucharist, for
that he regards not his own devotion and comfort, but above all devotion
and comfort, he prizeth the honor and glory of God.

CHAP. XVI. That we ought to manifest our necessities unto Christ, and to
crave his grace.
The voice of the Disciple.
O Most sweet and loving Lord, whom I now desire to receive devoutly, thou
know my infirmity, and the necessity which I endure, with how many sins I
am oppressed, how often I am grieved, tempted, troubled and defiled. I come
unto thee for remedy, I crave of thee thy heavenly comfort, and the ease of my
pain. I speak to him that knows all things, to whom all my secrets are
open, and who can only perfectly comfort and help me. Thou know what it
is, whereof above all things I stand in most need, and how poor I am in
virtues.

2 Behold I stand before thee, poor and naked, calling for grace, and craving
mercy. Refresh this thy hungry and needy creature, give heat unto my coldness
with the fire of thy love, give light unto my blindness with the brightness of
thy presence. Turn al earthly things unto me, into bitterness, all things
grievous and contrary, into patience, all base and created things, into
contempt and oblivion. Lift up my heart to thee in heaven, and suffer me not to
wander upon earth: be thou only sweet and delightsome unto me, from
henceforth for evermore, for thou only art my meat, and my drink, my love and
my joy, my delight and all my good.

3 O that with thy presence thou would wholly inflame, burn, and change me
into thee, that I might be made one spirit with thee, by the grace of inward
union, and melting of burning love. Suffer me not to go from thee hungry and
dry, but deal mercifully with me, as thou have oftentimes dealt wonderfully
with thy Saints. What marvel if I should be wholly inflamed by thee, and die
in my self, since thou art fire ever burning, and never decaying, love
purifying the heart, and enlightening the understanding.

CHAP. XVII. Of burning love and vehement desire to receive Christ.
The voice of the Disciple.
WIth great devotion and burning love, with most hearty affection and fervor I
desire to receive thee, O Lord, as many Saints and devout persons have desired
thee, when they received thy Sacrament, who were most pleasing unto thee in
holiness of life, and most fervent in devotion. O my God, the everlasting love,
my whole good, my happiness without end, I would gladly receive thee with the
most vehement desire, and worthy reverence, that any of the Saints ever had, or
could feel.

2 And although I be unworthy to have all those feelings of devotion, yet I
offer unto thee the whole affection of my heart, as if I alone had those most
sweet inflamed desires: yea whatsoever also a devout mind can conceive and
desire, all that, with greatest reverence, and most inward affection I offer
and present unto thee. I wish to reserve nothing to my self, but freely and
most willingly to sacrifice my self and all mine unto thee, my Lord God, my
Creator, and my Redeemer. I desire to receive thee this day with such
affection, reverence, praise and honor, with such gratitude, worthiness and
love, with such faith, hope and purity, as thy most blessed Mother the glorious
Virgin Mary received, and desired thee, when she humbly and devoutly answered
the Angel, who declared unto her the mystery of the Incarnation, and said:
Behold the Handmaid of our Lord, let it be done unto me according to thy word.
Luke 1.

3 And as thy blessed Forerunner, the most excellent amongst the Saints, John
Baptist, cheerfully leaped with joy of the holy Ghost, whilst he was yet shut
up in his mothers womb: and afterward seeing Jesus walking amongst men,
humbling himself very much, said with devout affection: The friend of the
Bridegroom that stands and hears him, rejoices with joy for the voice of
the Bridegroom: Ioh. 3. so I also wish to be inflamed with great and holy
desires, and to offer my self up unto thee with my whole heart. Wherefore I
offer also and present unto thee the joys, fervent desires, excesses of mind,
spiritual illuminations, and heavenly visions of all devout hearts, with all
the virtues and praises exercised, and to be exercised by all creatures in
heaven and earth, for my self and all such as are commended to me in prayer,
that by all thou may be worthily praised, and glorified for ever.

4 Receive, my Lord God, the affections of my heart and desires, which I have
to give thee, infinite praise and thanks, which according to the measure of
thy unspeakable greatness are due unto thee. These I yield thee, and desire to
yield thee every day and moment, and I do entreat and inuit all the heavenly
Spirits, and all thy devout servants to give thanks and praises together with
me.

5 Let all People, Tribes, and Tongues praise thee, and magnify thy holy and
sweet name with great joy and fervent devotion: and let all that reverently and
devoutly celebrate thy most high Sacrament, and receive it with full faith,
deserve to find grace, and mercy at thy hands, and pray humbly for me sinful
creature. And when they shall have obtained their desired devotion and joyful
union, and depart from thy sacred heavenly Table well comforted and
meruailously refreshed, let them vouchsafe to remember my poor and needy soul.

CHAP. XVIII. That a man be not a curious searcher of this Sacrament, but an
humble follower of Christ, submitting his sense unto faith.
The voice of the Beloved.
THou ought to beware of curious and unprofitable searching into this most
profound Sacrament, if thou will not sink into the depth of doubt. He that is
a searcher of Majesty, shall be oppressed by Glory. Prou. 25. God is able to
work more then man can understand. A pious and humble inquiry of truth is
tolerable, so he be always ready to be taught, and do endeavor to walk in
the sound paths of the ancient Fathers doctrine.

2 Blessed is that simplicity, that forsakes the difficult ways of questions,
and goes on in the plain and assured path of Gods Commandments. Many have
lost devotion, whilst they would search after high things. Faith and sincere
life are exacted at thy hands, not height of understanding, nor the depth of
the mysteries of God. If thou do not understand, nor conceive those things
that are under thee, how shall thou be able to comprehend those that are above
thee? Submit thy self to God, and let thy sense be subject to faith, and the
light of knowledge shall be given thee in that degree, as shall be profitable
and necessary for thee.

3 Some are grievously tempted about Faith and the Sacrament, but this is not
to be imputed to them, but rather to the enemy. Do not regard nor dispute
with thy thoughts, neither do thou give answer to the doubts moved by the
enemy, but believe the words of God, believe his Saints and Prophets, and the
wicked Serpent will fly from thee. It is oftentimes very profitable to the
servant of God to suffer such things: for he tempts not Infidels and sinners,
whom he already securely possesses, but he sundry ways tempts and vexes
the faithful and devout.

4 Go forward therefore with a sincere and undoubted faith, and come to the
Sacrament with unfeigned reverence. And whatsoever thou art not able to
understand, commit securely to Almighty God. God deceives thee not: he is
deceived that trusts too much to himself. Psalm. 18. and 118. God walks
with the simple, reuealeth himself to the humble, gives understanding to
little ones, opens the senses of pure minds, and hides grace from the
curious and proud. Mat. 11. Humane reason is weak, and may be deceived, but
true faith cannot be deceived.

5 All reason and natural search ought to follow faith, not to go before it,
nor impugn it. For faith and love do chiefly excel, and work in a hidden
manner in this most blessed and excellent Sacrament. God, who is everlasting,
and of infinite power, does great and inscrutable things in heaven and in
earth, and there is no searching of his wonderful works. If the works of God
were such, as might be easily comprehended by humane reason, they were not to
be called wonderful and unspeakable.

Here ends the fourth and last book of the following of Christ, the which
fourth book treats most principally of the blessed Sacrament of the Altar.
HERE BEGINS A GODLY TREAtise, and it is called a notable Lesson, otherwise
it is called the Golden Epistle.
The exposition of the name of this little book.
A Right good and wholesome Lesson, profitable unto al Christians, ascribed
unto S. Bernard, and put among his Works, I think by some virtuous man, that
would it should thereby have the more authority, and the rather be read, and
better be borne away: for doubtless, it is a good matter, and edificatiue
unto all them that have zeal and care to their souls health, and desire of
salvation. It is called in the Title ( Notabile documentum) that is to say; A
notable Lesson: And some do call it the Golden Epistle. It follows
immediately after a little work called Formula honestae vitae, the form and
manner of an honest life, or of honest living.

THE GOLDEN EPISTLE.
IF you intend to please God, and would obtain grace to fulfill the same, two
things be unto you very necessary. The first, you must withdraw your mind from
all worldly and transitory things, in such manner, as though you cared not
whether any such things were in this world or no. The second is, that you give
and apply your self so wholly to God, and behave your self in such sort, that
you never do, say, or think that you know, suppose, or believe should offend
or displease God, for by this means you may soonest and most readily obtain
and win his favor and grace. In all things esteem and account your self
most vile, and most simple, and as very naught, in respect and regard of
virtue: and think, suppose, and believe, that all persons be good and better
then you be, for so shall you much please our Lord. Whatsoever you see, or
seem to perceive in any person, or yet hear of any Christian, take you no
occasion therein, but rather ascribe and apply you all unto the best, and
think or suppose all is done or said for a good intent or purpose, though it
seem contrary: for man's supposition and light judgments be soon and
lightly deceived, or beguiled. Despise no person willingly, nor ever speak
evil of any person, though it were never so true that you say. For it is not
lawful to show in confession the vice or default of any person, except you
might not otherwise show and declare your own offense. Speak little or
nothing unto your proper and self laud or praise, though it were true, and
unto your familier fellow or faithful friend, but study to keep secret and
privy your virtue, rather then your vice: yet were it a cruel deed for any
persons to defame themselves. Be more glad to give your ear and hearing unto
the praise, rather then unto the dispraise of any person, and ever beware as
well of hearing, as speaking of detraction, and when you speak, take good
deliberation, and have few words, and let those be true and good, sadly set,
and wisely ordered. If any words be spoken unto you of vice or vanity, as soon
as you may break off, and leave that talk or communication. And ever return
and apply your self unto some appointed good and godly occupation, bodily or
ghostly. If any sudden chance fall or happen unto you, or unto any of yours,
lean not too lightly thereunto, or care much therefore. If it be of
prosperity, rejoice not much therein, or be over glad thereof: If it be
adversity, be not overcome or overthrown therewith, or brought to sorrow or
sadness, thank God for all, and set little thereby. Repute all things
transitory as of little price or value. Give ever most thought and care unto
those things, that may profit and promote the soul. Fly and avoid the
persons, and the places of much speech, for better it is to keep silence, then
to speak. Keep the times, and places of silence precisely, so that you speak
not without reasonable and unfeigned cause. The times of silence in religion be
these. From Collation until Mass be ended, after the hour of Tierce: from
the first Grace in the Fratour until the end of the latter Grace. And from the
beginning of Euensong, until Grace be ended after supper, or else
(Benedicite) after the common beuer. The places of silence be the Church and
Cloister, the Fratour and the Dortour. If you be slandered, and do take
occasion at the fault or offense of any person, then look well upon your
self, whether you be in the same default sometime your self, and then have
compassion upon your brother or sister. If there be no such default in you,
think verily and believe there may be, and then do as (in like case) you would
be done unto. And thus, as in a glass, you may see and behold your self.
Grudge not, neither complain upon any person for any manner of cause, except
you see and perceive by large conjecture, that you may profit and edify
thereby. Neither deny, nor affirm your mind or opinion stiffely or extremely,
but that your affirmation, denegation, or doubt be ever powdered with salt, that
is to say, wisdom, discretion and patience. Use not in any wise to mock,
check, or scorn, neither yet to laugh or smile but right seldom. And that
always to show reverence or loving manner, light countenance or loose behavior
becomes not a sad person. Let your communication be short, and with few
persons, always of virtue, learning, or good and Christian edification, and
ever with such wariness, that no person in things doubtful may take any
authority of your words or sentence. Let all your pastime be spent in bodily
labors, good and profitable, or else godly in study, or that passes all, in
holy and devout prayer, so that the heart and mind be occupied with the same
you speak. And when you pray for any certain persons, remember their degree,
estate and condition. For a form and order of your prayer, this may be a good
and ready way, to follow the order of the six Gramaticall cases: The
nominative, the genitive, the dative, the accusative, the vocative, and the
ablative. The nominative, that is, first to pray for your self, that you may
have ghostly strength and constancy, that you fall not into any deadly offense
by frailty, and that you may have right knowledge of God by faith, and of your
self, by due consideration of your estate and condition, and of the laws of
God for your conduct and countenance: and thirdly, that you may have grace and
good will, according to the same strength and knowledge, and that having unto
God a reverend dread, you never offend in thought, word, or deed, but that you
may ever love him for himself, and all his creatures in due order for him, and
in him. The second is the genitive case. Then must you pray for your genitours,
your progenitors and parents, that is to say, your fathers and mothers,
spiritual and carnal, as your ghostly fathers, or spiritual sovereigns,
your godfathers, your godmothers, your natural father and mother, your
grandfathers and grandmothers, your brothers and sisters, and all your kindred.
In the third place is the dative case. There must you pray for benefactors,
good doers, of whom you have received any manner of gifts spiritual or
temporal, unto the wealth of your soul or body. In the fourth place is the
accusative case, where you should pray for your enemies, such persons as by any
means have annoyed, hurt, or grieved you, either ghostly or bodily, that is to
say, in your soul or manners by any suggestion, intising, evil counsel, or
evil example. In your fame or good name, by detraction, backbiting, or
slandering, or yet by familier company. For a person commonly is reputed and
supposed to be of such condition, as they be, with whom he has conversation
and company. And for them that hurt your body, either by strokes, or by any
other occasion have hindered the state and health thereof. And likewise of your
worldly goods or possessions. For all these manner of enemies must you pray,
that our Lord God would forgive them as you do, and as you would be forgiven,
and that they may come to right charity and peace. The fifth case is called
vocative, that is to say, the calling case, where you conveniently may call,
cry, and pray unto our Lord for all manner of persons that be out of the state
of grace, either by infidelity, as Turks, Sarazens, and such other: or else by
error, as all manner of Heretics: or else by any deadly sin or offense to
God. Pray for all these manner of persons, that they may come unto the right
way of their salvation. In the sixth and last place is the ablative case, where
thou must pray for all those that be taken out of this life, and that died or
passed the same life in charity, and now have need of prayer. In the which you
may keep a form of the same order that is before, that is to say: In stead of
the nominative, where you prayed for your self, you may now pray for all those
that do abide in pain for any default or offense done by your example or
occasion: and for the genitive in the second place, for your parents, and all
your kindred departed this life: and in the third place for the dative, pray
for your benefactors passed: and for the accusative in the fourth place, you
may pray for them that live in pain, for any occosion or example that they
gave unto you: and in the fifth place for the vocative, pray for all them that
have greatest pains in Purgatory, and least help here by the suffrage of
prayers: and for the ablative in the sixth and last place, pray for all souls
in general. And that you may be the more apt to pray, call three things often
times to remembrance, that is to say, what you have been, what you be, and
what you shall be. First, by reason of your body, you were conceived of the
most filthy abominable matter of man, shameful to be spoken, far more vile
then the slime of the earth, and after borne in a sinful soul, and purged
only by grace. And now (as unto the body) you be a muckheape or dunghill of
filth, more vile then any upon earth if you remember what does issue daily, and
come forth out of the meats of your body. And your soul is daily in some sin,
or (at the least) full like to be. What you shall be, as unto your body, you
may see by experience, worms meat, and earth again. And what shall become of
your soul, no man in this world can assure you. To remember then the joys of
heaven and pains of hell, and that both be infinite, endless, and without
rebate, but both ever increasing, and never ceasing, never have ease nor rest,
but ever continue and everlasting. To remember then, I say, these things may
greatly move you to behave your self in a good sort, and to study how you
may avoid the one, and obtain the other. Remember specially how great a loss
it is to lose heaven, and how uncomfortable gains to win hell, and how soon
and how lightly either of them may be gotten or lost. When any thing then, of
adversity, hurt or displeasure, happen unto you, think then, or imagine, that
if you were in hell, you should have the same displeasure, and many worse. And
so to avoid those, you shall here the better suffer, and for our Lord the more
patiently bear al these that now be present, or any that may come hereafter.
And in like manner, if any good prosperity or pleasure happen unto you, think
then that if you were in heaven, you should have that pleasure, and many mo
excellent joys. And so for the fervent desire of those joys, you shall set
little by any worldly comfort or pleasure. A good contemplation therefore may
it be unto you in feasts of holy Saints, to think and record how great pains
they suffered here for the love of our Lord, and how short these were, and how
soon passed: and then again, how marvelous reward they had therefore in
bliss and joy everlasting. So the troubles and torments of good persons be
soon and shortly gone and ended, and the joys and pleasures of sinful
persons do soon fade and fly for ever. The good persons, for their troubles
suffered here upon earth, do get and win eternal and everlasting glory,
which the evil persons do lose. And contrary, these evil and sinful persons,
for their joy and pleasure here, do receive by exchange eternal and
everlasting shame and rebuke, with pain and woe unspeakable. Whenever then
you be disposed to sluggishnesse, or to be drowsy, remiss in prayers, or
dull in devotion, then take this little work, or else some other good Treatise,
and read therein, and ever note well the contents thereof, and what is meant
thereby. And if you be not thereby delivered or eased thereof, then shift unto
some other work or occupatio^, so that ever you avoid idleness, and al vain
pastimes, which indeed is loss of time. And then remember, that those that now
abide in pain, either in hell, or yet in Purgatory, for such times so passed
or lost, had rather then all the world have such time to redeem their pains
by, as you may have if you will. Time then unto all persons well occupied, is
very precious and dear. Take good heed therefore, how you spend it or pass
it, for you can never revoke it or call it back. If the time pass you by
trouble and vexation, think they be happy and gracious, that be past this
wretched life, and now in bliss, for they shall never have any such misery.
And when you feel a comfort or consolation spiritual, thank God thereof, and
think the damned souls shall never have any such pleasure. And thus let this
be for your exercise in the dative. At night when you go to rest, first make
account with your self, and remember how you have spent or passed the day and
time that was given you to be used in virtue, and how you have bestowed your
thoughts your words, and your works. And if you find no great thing amiss,
give the whole laud and praise unto our Lord God. And if you perceive
contrary, that you have misspent any part thereof, be sorry therefore, and
beseech our Lord of mercy and forgiveness, and promise, and verily purpose to
make amends the next day. And if you have opportunity thereupon, it shall be
very convenient for you to be confessed the next morning, and especially, if
the matter done, said, or thought, by deliberate consent, do grievously weigh
and work with a grudge in your conscience, then would I advise you never to
eat nor drink, till you be discharged thereof, if you may conveniently get a
ghostly father. Now for a conclusion of this work, put before you, as by case
or imagination, two large Cities, one full of trouble, turmoile and misery, and
let that be hell. The other City full of joy, gladness, comfort, and
pleasure, and let that be heaven. Look well on them both, for in both be many
dwellers and great company. Then cast and think within your self, what thing
here might so please you, that you should choose the worse City, or what
thing should displease you on the other part, whereby you should withdraw your
self from that virtue that might convey and bring you unto the other City.
And when you have studied well hereupon, and can nothing find, I dare well
assure you, if you keep well the precepts and counsels of this little
Lesson, you shall find the right way, for the holy Ghost will instruct and
teach you, where you be not sufficient of your selves, so you endeavor and
give diligence to bear away and follow that which here is taught. Read it
every week once or twice, or oftener if you will. And where you profit, give
the thanks, laud and praise unto our Lord God, and most sweet Savior Jesus
Christ, who send you his mercy and grace, that always lives God world without
end. Amen.

THis Lesson was brought unto me in English, of an old translation, rough and
rude, with request to amend it. I thought less labor to write new the whole,
which I have done according to the meaning of the Author, though not word for
word: and in diverse places added some things following upon the same, to make
the matter more sententious and full. I beseech you take all unto the best, and
pray for the old wretched brother of Sion, RICHARD WHITFORD.

A SPIRITVALL GLASS.
Read distinctly, pray devoutly, sigh deeply, suffer patiently, humble your
self lowly, give no sentence hastily, speak but seldom, and that truly,
prevent your speech discreetly, do your deeds in charity, temptations resist
strongly, break he head speedily, weep bitterly, have compassion tenderly, do
good works busily, love perseuerantly, love heartily, love faithfully, love God
all-only, and all other for him charitably, love in adversity, love in
prosperity, think always of love, for love is none other but God himself.
Thus to love, brings the lover to love without end. Amen.

THE RVLES OF A CHRISTIAN LIFE, made by JOHN PICVS the elder, Earl of
Mirandula.
FIrst, if to man or woman the way of virtue does seem hard or painful,
because we must needs fight against the flesh, the devil, and the world, let
him or her call to remembrance, that whatsoever life they will choose according
to the world, many adversities, incommodities, much heaviness and labor are to
be suffered.

Moreover, let them have in remembrance, that in wealth and worldly possessions
is much and long contention, laborious also, and therewith unfruitful, wherein
travail is the conclusion or end of labor, and finally, pain everlasting, if
those things be not well ordered, and charitably disposed.

Remember also, that it is very foolishness, to think to come unto heaven by
any other means, then by the said battle, considering that our head and
Master Christ did not ascend unto heaven, but by his passion: and the servant
ought not to be in better estate or condition then his Master or Sovereign.

Furthermore, consider that this battle ought not to be grudged at, but to be
desired and wished for, although thereof no price or reward might ensue or
happen, but only that thereby we might be conformed or joined to Christ our
God and Master. Wherefore as often as in resisting any temptation, thou do
withstand any of thy senses or wits, think unto what part of Christ's passion
thou may apply thy self, or make thy self like: As resisting gluttony,
whilst thou do punish thy taste or appetite: remember that Christ received
in his drink, aysell mixed with the gall of a beast, a drink most unsavory
and loathsome.

When thou vvithdrawest thine hand from unlawful taking or keeping of any
thing, which likes thine appetite, remember Christ's hands, as they were fast
nailed unto the tree of the Cross. And resisting of pride, think upon him,
who being very God almighty, for thy sake received the form of a subject, and
humbled himself unto the most vile and reproachful death of the Cross. And
when thou art tempted with wrath: Remember that he, which was God, and of all
men the most just and righteous, when he beheld himself mocked, spit on,
scourged, and punished with all dispites and rebukes, and set on the Cross
between two thieves, as if he himself were a false harlot, he
notwithstanding showed never token of indignation, or that he were grieved, but
suffering all things with wonderful patience, answered all men most gently. In
this wise, if thou peruse all things one after another, thou may find, that
there is no passion or trouble, that shall not make thee in some part
conformable or like unto Christ.

Also put not thy trust in man's help, but in the only virtue of Christ Jesus,
which said: Trust well, for I have vanquished the world. and in another place
he says: The Prince of this world is cast out thereof. Wherefore, let us
trust by his only virtue, to vanquish the world, and to subdue the Devil. And
therefore ought we to ask his help by our own prayers, and by the prayers
of his blessed Saints.

Remember also, that as soon as thou have vanquished one temptation, always
another is to be looked for: The Devil goes always about and seeks for him
whom he would devour. Wherefore we ought to serve diligently and be ever in
fear, and to say with the Prophet: I will stand always at my defense.

Take heed moreover, that not only thou be not vanquished of the Devil, that
tempts thee, but also that thou vanquish and overcome him. And that is not
only when thou do not sin, but also when of that thing wherein he
tempted thee, thou take occasion for to do good. As if he offers to thee
some good act to be done, to the intent that thereby thou may fall into
vainglory: forthwith thou thinking it, not to be thy deed or work, but
the benefit or reward of God, humble thou thy self, and judge thee to be
unkind unto God in respect of his manifold benefits.

As often as thou do fight, fight as in hope to vanquish, and to have at the
last perpetual peace. For that peradventure God of his abundant grace shall
give unto thee, and the Devil being confused of thy victory, shall return no
more again. But yet when thou have vanquished, bear thy self so, as if thou
should fight again shortly. Thus always in battle, thou must think on
victory; and after victory, thou must prepare thee to battle immediately
again.

Although thou feel thy self well armed and ready, yet fly
(notwithstanding) all occasions to sin. For as the Wiseman says: Who loves
peril, shall therein perish.

In all temptations resist the beginning, and beat the children of Babylon
against the stone, which stone is Christ, and the children be evil thoughts
and imaginations. For in long continuing of sin, seldom works any medicine
or remedy.

Remember, that although in the said conflict of temptation the battle
seems to be very dangerous: yet consider how much sweeter it is to vanquish
temptation, then to follow sin, whereto she inclines thee, whereof the end
is repentance. And herein many be foulely deceived, which compare not the
sweetness of victory to the sweetness of sin, but only compares battle
to pleasure. Notwithstanding, a man or woman, which has a thousand times known
what it is to give place to temptation, should once assay, what it is to
vanquish temptation.

If thou be tempted, think thou not therefore that God has forsaken thee, or
that he sets but little by thee, or that thou art not in the sight of God,
good or perfect: but remember, that after Saint Paul had seen God, as he was
in his Divinity, and such secret mysteries as be not lawful for any man to
speak or rehearse, he for all that suffered temptation of the flesh,
wherewith God suffered him to be tempted, lest he should be assaulted with
pride. Wherein a man ought to consider, that Saint Paul, which was the pure
vessel of election, and rapt into the third heaven, was notwithstanding in
peril to be proud of his virtues, as he says of himself. Wherefore above
all temptations men or women ought to arm themselves most strongly against the
temptations of pride, since pride is the root of all mischief, against the
which, the only remedy is to think always that God humbled himself for us
unto the Cross. And moreover that death has so humbled us, whether we will
or no, that our bodies shall be the meat of worms loathsome and venomous.

FINIS.



