THE FOLLOWING OF CHRIST, TRANSLATED OVT of Latin into English, newly
corrected and amended.

Whereunto also is added the golden Epistle of Saint Bernarde.

And now lastelie the rules of a Christian life, made by John Picus the elder
earl of mira^dula.



Anno. 1585. Cum Priuilegio.

The introduction.
HEreafter follows a book called in Latin Imitatio Christi, that is in
English, the following of Christ, wherein be contained four little books.
Which book, as some men affirm, was first made and compyled in Latin by the
famous Clerk master John Gerson, Chancellor of Paris. And the said four
books be now of late newly translated into English in such manner as hereafter
appears. And though three of the first books of the said four books have
been before this time right well and devoutly translated into English by a
famous Clerk called master William Atkinson which was a doctor of divinity,
Yet for as much as the said translatour for some cause him mouinge) in diverse
places left out much part of some of the Chapters, and sometime varied from
the letter, as in the third chapter, and in the. 18 and. 19. chapters of the
first book, and also in diverse other chapiters of the said three books will
appear to them that will examine the Latin and the said first translation
together: Therefore the said. 3. books be eftsoon translated into English,
in such manner as hereafter follows, to the intent that they that list may at
their pleasure be occupied with the one or the other, after as their devotion
shall stir them when they have seen the^ both. And after the said three
books follows the fourth book, which was first translated out of French
into English, by the right noble and excellent Princes Margaret late Countess
of Richmondo and Darbye, mother unto the noble Prince of blessed memory King
Henry the. 7. father unto our late Ioueraine Lord King Henry the. 8. And for
as much as it was translated by the said noble Princes out of French, it
could not follow the Latin so nigh nor so directly as if it had been
translated out of Latin. And therefore it is now translated out of Latin, and
yet nevertheless it keeps the substance and the effect of the first
translation out of French, though sometime it vary in words, as to the
Reader will appear. And in the latter end, after the fourth book, is a short
moral doctrine, which is called The spiritual glass of the soul. And it is
right good and profitable to every person often times to look upon it.

A preface to the book folovvinge.
Among many Treatises, which have been put out both in Latin and English, in
this perilous world, to seduce the simple people, and to bring them from the
unity of the Catholic Church into peruers and abominable errors, there
has been also in time past before made by diverse learned and virtuous men many
good Treatises, which if men would be so diligent to look upon, as they are
curious to look on the other they should not so soon fall from the true
knowledge of Christ's doctrine, and the right sense of holy Scripture, which
ever has been taught by continual succession in his holy Church, of the
holy ghost, the spirit of truth, who shall ever remain with it. And among
many of these good Treatises, there is one called, the Imitation or folowinge
of Christ, which in my judgment is excellent: and the more it is seriously
and advisedly read and looked upon, the more it shall like every Christian
Reader, who will set his mind earnestly to follow Christ his steps. Let them
prove by reading every day a chapter when they have best leisure; and I doubt
not, but they shall find my sayings true. I have read it over very many
times, and the more I read, the more I like it and find profit to my soul
health. It teaches the true mortification of the flesh to the spirit,
according to the right sense of holy Scripture, and the doctrine of 5. Paul.
Which I consideringe desired the Queens highness printer to take the pains
e^^sones to imprint it, seeinge the other is worn away, which was very
faulty in many places. And in this he has done his diligence in correction
thereof, as you shall well perceive in conferring them together. Thus fare you
well in Christ, and pray for them that have taken pains in this behalf.

Hereafter follows the chapters. of this present book.
OF the Imitation or folowinge of Christ, and of the despisinge of all
vanities of the world. Cap. 1. Fol. 1. Against vain seculor cunning, and of a
meek knowinge of our self. Cap. 2. fol. 2. Of the teachinge of truth. cap. 3.
fol. 3. That light credence is not to be given to words. cap. 4. fol. 5. Of
the reading of holy Scripture. cap. 5. fol. 6. Of inordinate affections. cap.
6, fo. 6. That vain hope and elation of mind are to be fled and avoided. cap.
7. fo. 7. That much familiarity is to be fled. cap. 8. fo. 7. Of meek
subjection and obedience, and that we shall gladlye follow the counsel of
other. cap. 9. fo. 8. That we should avoid superfluite of words, and the
company of worldly lyuinge people. cap. 10. fo. 9. The means to get peace,
and of desire to profit in virtues. cap. 11. fo. 9. Of the profit of
adversity. cap. 12. fo. 11. Of temptations to be resisted. cap. 13. fo. 11.
That we shall not judge lightlye other men's deeds, nor cleave much to our
own will. cap. 14. fo. 14. Of works done in charity. cap. 15. fo. 14. Of the
sufferinge of other men's defaultes. cap. 16. fo. 15. What should be the life
of a true religious person. cap. 17. fo. 16. Of the examples of holy fathers.
cap. 18. fo. 17. Of the exercises of good religious persons. cap. 19. fo. 18.
Of he love of onelines and silence. cap. 20. fo. 20. Of compunction of the
heart. cap. 21. fo. 22. Of the consideringe of the misery of mankind and
wherein the felicity of man stands. cap. 22. fol. 24. Of the remembrance of
death. cap. 23. fo. 26. Of the judgment, and of the pain that is ordained for
sin. cap. 24. fol. 28. Of the fervent amending of all our life, and that we
shall specially take heed of our own soul health before all other. cap. 25.
fo. 31.
The Chapters of the second book.
OF inward conversation. cap. 1. fo. 34. Of a meek knowinge of our own
defaultes. cap. 2. fo. 37. How good it is for a man to be peaceful. cap. 3.
fo. 38. Of a pure mind and a simple intent. cap. 4. fo. 39. Of the knowing of
our selves. cap. 5. fo. 39. Of the gladness of a clean conscience. cap. 6. fo.
40. Of the love of Jesus above all things. cap. 7. fo. 42. Of the familier
freendship of Jesus. cap. 8. fo. 42. Of the wanting of all solace and comfort.
cap. 9. fo. 44. Of yelding of thanks to God for his manyfolde graces. cap. 10.
fo. 47. Of the small number of lovers of the cross. cap. 11. fo. 48. Of the
way of the cross, and how profitable patience is in adversity. cap. 12. fo.
50.
The chapters of the third book.
OF the inward speaking of Christ to a faithful soul. cap. 1. fo. 54. How
almighty God speaks inwardlye to man's soul without sound of words. cap.
2. fo. 55. That the words of God are to be heard with great meekenes, and that
there be but few that ponder them as they ought to do. cap. 3. fo. 56. A
prayer to obtain the grace of devotion cap. 4. fo. 57. How we ought to be
conversant in truth and meekenes before God. cap. 5. fo. 58. Of the merucious
effect of the love of gods cap. 6. fo. 60. Of the proof of a true lover of
God. cap. 7. fo. 62. How grace is to be kept close through the virtue of
mookenos. cap. 8. fo. 63. How we shall think through mekenes our self vile
and abject in the sight of God. cap. 9. fo. 65. How all things are to be
referred to God at end of every work. cap. 10. fo. 66. That it is sweet and
delectable to serve God, and to forsake the world. cap. 11. fo. 67. That the
desires of the heart ought to be well examined and well to be moderated. cap.
12. fo. 69. How we should keep patience, and continually strive against all
concupiscence. cap. 13. fo. 69. Of the obedience of a meek subject after the
example of our Lord Jesus Christ. cap. 14. fo. 71. Of the feeret and hid
judgments of God to be considered, that we be not proud of our good deeds.
cap. 15. fo. 72. How a man shall order him self in his desires. cap. 16. fo.
73. A prayer that the will of God be always fulfilled. cap. 17. fo. 74. That
the very true solace and comfort is in God. cap. 18. fo. 74. That all our
study and business of mind ought to be put in God. cap. 19. fo. 75. That all
temporal miseries are gladly to be borne through the example of Christ. cap.
20. fo. 76. Of pacient suffering of injuries and wrongs and who is truly
pacient. cap. 21. fo. 77. Of the knowledge of our own infirmities, and of the
miseries of this life. cap. 22. fo. 78. How a man should rest in God above
all thing. cap. 23. fo. 79. Of the remembringe of the great and manifold
benefits of God. cap. 24. fo. 81. Of four things that bring peace into the
soul. cap. 25. fo. 83. A prayer against evil thoughts. cap. 26. fo. 83. A
prayer for the clearinge of man's mind. cap. 27. fo. 84. That it is not good to
search curiouslye an other man's life. cap. 28. fo. 85. In what thing peace of
heart and greatest profit of man stands. cap. 29. fo. 85. Of the liberty,
excellency, and worthiness of a free mind. cap. 30. fo. 86. That private love
most lets a man from God. cap. 31. fo. 87. A prayer for the purginge of man's
soul. and for heavenly wisdom, and the grace of god to be obtained and had.
cap. 32. fo. 88. Against the evil saying of detractours. cap. 33. fo. 89.
How almighty God is to be inwardly called unto in time of tribulation. cap.
34. fo. 89. Of the help of God to be asked, and of a full trust to recover
through devout prayer our former grace. cap. 35. fo. 90. How we should forget
all creatures that we might find out creator. cap. 36. fo. 92. How we
should forsake our self and thrust down: all couetoushes out of our hearts.
cap. 37. fo. 93. Of the unstableness of man's heart, and that our final intent in
all things should be to God. cap. 38. fo. 94. How our Lord God sauoureth to
his lover sweet above all things. cap. 39. fo. 95. That there is no full
surety fro temptation in this life. cap. 40. fo. 96. Against the vain
judgments of man. cap. 41. fo. 97. Of a pure and whole forsaking of our self
and of our own will, that we might get the freedom of spirit, and follow the
will of God. cap. 42. fo. 98. How a man shall rule him self in outward
things, and how he ought to call to God for help in all perils and dangers.
cap. 43. fo. 99. That a man should not be importune in his business. cap. 44.
fo. 100. That a man has no goodness of him self, and that he may not
rightfully glorify him self in any thing. cap. 45. fo. 101. How all
temporal honor is to be despised, cap. 46. fo. 102. That our trast is not to
be put in worldly people. cap. 47. fo. 103. That we should eschew vain
seculer cunning. cap. 48. fo. 104. That we should not regard much outward
things, ne ponder but little the judgment of man. cap. 49. fo. 105. That man
he not always to be beloved, for that they so lightlye offend in words. cap.
50. fo. 106. That we shall put all our confidence in God, when evil words be
spoken to us. cap. 51. fo. 107 How all grievous things in this life are
gladly to be suffered, for winning of the life that is to come. cap. 52. fo.
109. Of the day of eternity, and of the miseries of this life. cap. 53. fo.
110. Of the desire of everlasting life, and of the great reward that is
promised to the^ that strongly fight against sin. cap. 54. fo. 112. How a
man that is desolate ought to offer him self wholly to God. cap. 55. fo 114.
That it is good that a man give bim self to meek bodelie labors, when he
feels not him self disposed to high works of devotion. cap. 56. fo. 117.
That a man shall not think him self worthy to have comfort, but rather to
have sorrow and pain, and of the profit of contrition. cap. 57. fo. 117. That
grace will not be mixte with love of worldly things. cap. 58. fo. 119. Of the
diversities and diverse motions between Nature and grace. cap. 59. fo. 120. Of
the corruption of nature, and of the worthiness of grace. cap. 60 fo. 123. That
we ought to forsake our self, and to follow Christ by bearinge of his cross.
cap. 61. fo. 125. That a man shall not be overmuch cast into heauynes, though
he happen to fall into some defaultes. cap. 62. fo. 126. That a man shall not
search the judgments of God. cap. 63. fo. 127. That all our hope and trust
is to be put in God only. cap. 64. fo. 130.
The chapters of the fourth book.
With how great reverence Christ is to be received. cap. 1. fo. 132. That
the great goodness and charity of God is given to man in this blessed
Sacrement. cap. 2. fo. 136. That it is very profitable often to be housled. cap.
3. fo. 137. That many commodities be given to them that deuoutlye receive this
holy Sacrament. cap. 4. fo. 139. Of the worthiness of the Sacrament of the
Altar, and of the state of Priesthood. cap. 5. fo. 141. Of the inward
remembrance and exercise that a man ought to have before the receuinge of the
body of Christ. cap. 6. fo. 142. Of the discussing of our own conscience,
and of the purpose of amendment. cap. 7. fo. 142. Of the oblation of Christ on
the Cross, and of a full forsaking of our self. cap. 8. fo. 144. That we
ought to offer our self and all ours to God, and to pray for all people. cap.
9. fo. 144. That the holy communion is not lightly to be forborne. cap. 10.
fo. 146. That the body of Christ and holy Scripture are most necessary for
the health of man's soul. cap. 11. fo. 148. That he that shall be housled ought
to prepare him self thereto with great diligence. cap. 12. fo. 150. That a
devout soul should greatly desire with all his heart to be united to Christ
in this b^essed Sacrament. cap. 13. fo. 151. Of the burning desire that some
devout persons have had to the body of Christ. cap. 14. fo. 153. That the grace
of devotion is gotten through mekenes and forsaking of our self. cap. 15. fo.
154 That we should open all our necessities to Christ, and ask his grace.
cap. 16. fo. 155. Of the burning love and great affection that we should have
to receive Christ. cap. 19. fo. 161 That a man shall not be a curious searcher
of this holy Sacrament, but a meek follower of Christ, subduing always his
reason to the faith. cap. 18. fo. 157.
Here ends the Table.
Of the Imitation or following of Christ, and of the despising of all vanities
of the world. The first Chapter.
HE that follows me (says Christ our Savior) walks not in darkness, but
he shall have the light of life These be the words of our Lord Jesus Christ,
whereby we be admonished and warned, that we shall follow his teachinges, and
his manner of living, if we will truly be illumined, and be delivered from all
blindness of heart. Let all the study of our heart be therefore from he^ceforth,
to have our meditation wholly fixed in the life, and in the holy teachinges of
Jesus Christ: for his teach inges are of more virtue, and of more ghostlye
strength, then are the teachinges of all Angels and Saints. And he that
thorough grace might have the inner eye of his soul opened into the soothfast
beholdinge of the Gospels of Christ, should find in the^ Manna, that is to
say, spiritual food of the soul: but it is often times seen, that some
persons which often hear the Gospelles of Christ, have little sweetenes therein,
and that is, for that they have not the spirit of Christ. Wherefore, if we
will have the true understanding of Christ's Gospels, we must study to conform
our life to his life as nigh as we can. What avails it a man to reason high
secret mysteries of the Trinity, if he lack meekenes, whereby he displeases
the Trinity? Truly nothing. For high curious reasons make not a man holy
nor rightwise, but a good life makes him beloved with God. I had rather feel
compunction of heart for my sins, then only to know the diffinitio^ of
compunctio^. If thou could all the Bible without the book, and also the
sayings of all Philosophers by heart, what should it profit thee without grace
and charity? All that is in this world is vanity, but to love God, and only
to serve him. This is the most noble and the most excellent wisdom that may
be in any creature, by despisinge of this world to draw daily nearer and
nearer to the kingedome of heaven. It is therefore a great vanity to labor
inordinatlie for worldly riches, which shortly shall perish, and to covet
honor, or any other inordinate pleasures or fleshly delights in this life;
whereby a man after this life shall be sore and greeuouslye punished. How great
a vanity is it also to desire a long life, and little to care for a good life:
to heed things present, and not to provide for things that are to come: to
love things that shortly shall pass away, and not to haste thither where is
joy everlasting. Also have this common proverb often in thy mind, That the
eye is not satisfied nor fullye pleased with the sight of any bodilye thing,
ne the ear with hearing: and therefore study to withdraw the love of thy
soul from all things that be visible, and turn it to things that be
invisible. For they that follow their sensuality, hurt their own conscience,
and leese the grace of God.

Against vain seculer cunning, and of a meek knovvinge of our self. The 2.
Chapter.
EVery man naturallye desires to know: but what avails knowledge without
the dread of God? A meek husband man that serves god; is much more
acceptable to him, the^ is a curious Philosopher, which consideringe the course
of heaven, wilfully forgets him self: He that well knows him self, is
vile and abject in his own sight, and has no delight in the vain praisinges
of man. If I knew all things that be in this world without charity, what
should it avail me before God, that judges every man after his deeds? Let us
therefore cease from the desire of such vain knowledge: for often times is
found therein great destruction and deceit of the enemy, whereby the soul is
much hindered and let from the perfect and true love of God. They that have
great cunninge, desire commonly to be seen, and to be holden wise in the
world, and there be many things, that the knowledge of them bring but little
profit and fruit to the soul, and he is very unwise that takes heed to any
other thing, then to that which shall profit him to the health of his soul.
Words feed not the soul, but a good life refreshes the mind, and a clean
conscience brings a man to a firm and stable trust in God. The more cunninge
thou haste, if thou live not thereafter, the more greeuouslie shalt thou
therefore be judged, for the misusinge thereof. Therefore raise not thy self
into pride, for any craft or cunninge that is given unto thee, but have
therefore the more fear and dread in thy heart: for certain it is, that thou
must hereafter yield therefore the strayter account. If thou think that thou
know many things, and have great cunninge, yet know it for certain, that
there be many mo things that thou know not: and so thou may not
rightwisely think thy self cunning, but ought rather to confess thine
ignorance and vncunninge. Why will thou prefer thy felfe in cunning before
other, since there be many other more excellent and more cunning then thou, and
better learned in the law? If thou will any thing learn and know, profitably
to the health of thy soul, learn to be unknown, and be glad to be holden
vile and naught, and vncunninge as thou art. The most high and the most
profitable cunninge is this, a man to have a soothfast knowledge, and a full
despisinge of him self. Also a man not to presume of himself, but always to
judge and think well and blessedly of other, is a sign and a token of great
wisdom, and of great perfection and singular grace. If thou see any person
sin, or commit any great crime openly before thee, yet judge not thy self to
be better then he, for thou know not how long thou shall persevere in
goodness. We be all frail: but thou shall judge no man more frail then thy
self.

Of the teaching of truth. The.3. Chapter.
Happy and blessed is that person whom truth teaches and enformeth, not by
figures, or by deceitful voices, but as the truth is: our opinion and our wit
many times deceives us, for we see not the truth. What avails us the
knowledge of such things as shall neither help us at the day of judgment if
we know them, nor hurt us if we know them not. It is therefore great folly to
be negligent in such things as be profitable and necessary to us, and to
labor for such things that be but curious and damnable. Truly if we do so,
we have eyes but we see not. And what avails us the knowledge of the kind
and working of creatures? truly nothing. He to whom the everlasting word
(that is Jesus) speaks ^is discharged of many vain opinions, and of that
word al things proceed, and all things openly show and cry, that he is
God. No man without him understands the truth, ne rightfully judges, but he
to whom al things is one, and he that all things draws into one, and all
things sets in one, and desires nothing but one, may quickly be
established in heart, and be fully pacifyed in God. O truth that God art, make
me one with thee in perfect charity, for all that I read, hear, or see
without thee, is grievous to me, for in thee is all that I will or may desire.
Let all Doctors be still in thy presence, and let all creatures keep them in
silence, and thou only Lord speak to my soul. The more that man is joined to
thee, and the more that he is gathered together in thee, the more he
understands without labor high secret mysteries: for he has received from
above the light of understanding. A clean, pure, and a stable heart is not
broken ne lightly overcome with ghostely labors, for he does al thing to the
honor of God: and for that he is clearly mortifyed to him self, therefore he
coueteth to be free from following his own will. What hinders thee more then
thy affections not fully mortifyed to the wl of the spirit? truly nothing
more. A good devout man so orders his outward business, that it draws not
him to the love of it, but that he compel it to be obedient to the will of the
spirit, and to the right judgment of reason. Who has a stronger battle
then he that labors for to overcome him self? and that should be our daily
labor and our daily desire to overcome our self, that we may be made stronger
in spirit, and increase daily from better to better. Every perfection in this
life has some imperfection annexed unto it, and there is no knowledge in this
world but that it is mixed with some blindens of ignorance. And therefore a
meek knowing of our self is a more surer way to God; then is the searching
for highness of cunning. Cunning well ordered is not to be blamed, for it is good
and comes of God: but a clean conscience and a virtuous life is much better,
and more to be desired. Because some men study to have cunning rather then to
live well, therefore they err many times, and bring forth little good fruit or
none. O if they would be as busye to avoid sin, and to plant virtues in
their souls as they be to move questions, there should not be so many evil
things seen in the world, ne so much evil example given to the people, ne
yet so much dissolute living in religion. At the day of judgment it shall not
be asked of us, what we have read, but what we have done, nor how well we have
said, but how religiously we have lived. Tell me now, where be all the great
clerks and famous doctors, whom thou haste wel-knowen? when they lived, they
flourished greatly in their learning, and now other men occupy their prebendes
and promotio^s, and I can not tell whether they think any thing on the^: in
their life they were holden great in the world, and now is little speaking of
the^. O how shortly passes away the glory of this world, with all the false
deceauable plesures of it? would to God their life had accorded well with their
learning, for then had they well studied and read. How many perish daily in
this world by vain cunning, that care little for a good life, ne for the
service of God. And because they desire rather to be great in the world then
to be meek, therefore they vanishe away in their learninges as smoke in the
air. Truly he is great that has great charity: and he is great that is
little in his own sight, and that sets at naught all worldly honor. And he
is very wise, that accompteth all worldly pleasures as vile dounge, so that he
may win Christ. And that person is very well taught, that forsakes his own
will, and follows the will of God.

That light credence is not to be given to words. The.4. Chapter.
IT is not good lightly to believe every word or instinct that comes, but
the thing is advisedly and leasurely to be considered and pondered, that
almighty God be not offended through our lightness. But alas for sorrow, we be
so frail, that we anon believe of other evil, sooner then good. But
nevertheless, perfect men be not so light of credence, for they know well, that
the frayllie of man is more prone to evil the^ to good, and that it is in
words very unstable. It is therefore great wisdom, not to be hasty in our
deeds, ne to trust much in our own wits, nor lightly to believe every tale, nor
to show anon to other all that we hear or believe. Take always counsel of a
wise man, and covet rather to be instructed and ordered by other, then to follow
thine own invention. A good life makes a man wise to God, and instructs him
in many things, that a sinful man shall never feel ne know. The more meek
that a man is in him self, and the more obedient that he is to God, the more
wise and the more peaceful shall he be in every thing that he shall have to do.

Of the readinge of holy Scripture. The.5. Chapter.
Charity is to be sought in holy Scripture, and not eloquence, and it should
be read with the same spirit that it was first made. We ought also to seek
in holy Scriture, ghostlye profit rather then curiosity of style, and as
gladly shall we read simple and devout books, as books of high learning
and cunninge. Let not the authority of thine author mislike thee, whether he
were of great cunning or little: but that the love of the very pure truth
styrr thee to read. Ask not who said this, but take heed what is said. Men
pass lightlye away, but the truth of God ever abides. Almighty God speaks
to us in his Scripture in diverse manners, without acceptinge of persons: but our
curiosity often lets us in reading of Scripture, when we will reason and
argue things that we should meekely and simply pass over. If thou will
profit by readinge of Scripture, read meekely, simply, and faithfullye, and
never desire to have thereby the name of cunning. Ask gladlye, and hear
meekely the sayings of Saints, and mislike not the parables of ancient
fathers, for they were not spoken without great cause.

Of inordinate affections. The 6. Chapter.
When a man desires any thing inordinatelye, forthwith he is unquiet in him
self. The proud man, and the covetous man never have rest: but thee meek
man, and the poor in spirit lives in great abundance of rest and peace. A
man that is not yet mortified to himself, is lightly tempted and overcome in
lietl and small temptations. And he that is weak in spirit, and is yet some
what carnal, and inclined to sensible things, may hardly withdraw himself
from worldly desires: And therefore he has often great grief and heaviness in
heart, when he withdraws him from them, and he disdayneth anon, if any man
resist him, and if he obtain that he desires, yet is he unquieted with grudge
of conscience, for he has followed his passion which nothing helps to the
getting of that peace be desired. Then by resisting of passions is gotten the
very true peace of heart, and not by following of them. There is therefore no
peace in the heart of a earnall man, nor in the heart of a man that gives him
self all to outward things: but in the heart of a ghostli man or woman which
have their delight in God, is found great peace and inward quietness.

That vain hope and elation of mind are to be fled and avoided. The.7.
Chapter.
HE is vain that puts his trust in man, or in any creature. Be not ashamed
to serve other for the love of Jesus Christ, and to be poor in this world for
his sake: trust not thy self, but all thy trust set in God: do that in the is
to please him, and he shall well help forth thy good will. Trust not in thine
own cunning, neither in the cunning or policy of any creature living, but
rather in the grace of God, which helps meek persons, and those that presume
of them selves, he suffers to fall till they be meek. Glorify not thy self
in thy riches, nor in thy worldly friends, for that they be mighty, but let
all thy glory be in god only that gives all things, and that desires to
give himself above all things. Exalt not thy self for the largenes or
fayrenes of body, for with a little sickness it may be soon defouled. Joy not
in thy self for thy ability or readiness of wit, least thou displease God, of
whose gift it is all that thou haste. Hold not thy self better then other,
least happlye thou be thereby impaired in the sight of God, who knows all
that is in man. Be not proud of thy good deeds, for the judgments of God be
other then the judgments of man, to whom it displeases often times, that
pleases man. If thou have any goodness or virtue in thee, believe yet that
there is much more goodness and virtue in other, so that thou may always
keep thee in meeknes. It hurts not though thou hold thy self worse then
any other, though it be not so in deed, but it hurts much if thou prefer
thy self above any other, be he never so great a sinner. Great peace is with
the meek man, but in the heart of a proud man is always envy and indignation.

That much familiarity is to be avoided. The.8. Chapter.
OPen not thy heart to every person, but to him that is wise, secret, and
dreadinge God. Be seldom with young folks and strangers: Harter not rich
men, and before great men do not lightly appear. Accompany thy self with
meek persons and simple in heart, who be devout and of good governance, and
treat with them of things that may edify and strength the soul. Be not
familier to any woman, but all good women commend to God. Couete to be familier
only with God and with his Angels: but the familiarity of man, as much as
thou may, look thou eschew. Charity is to be had to all: but familiarity
is not expedient. Sometime it happens, that a person unknown thorough his
good fame is much commendable, whose presence after likes us not so much. We
ween sometime with our presence to please other, when we rather displease
them, through the evil manners and evil conditions that they see and will
consider in us.

Of meek subjection and obedience, and that we shall gladly follow the
counsel of others. The 9. Chapter.
IT is a great thing to be obedient, to live under a prelate, and in nothing to
seek our own liberty. It is much more surer way, to stand in the state of
obedience, then in the state of prelacie. Many be under obedience more of
necessity then of charity, and they have great pain, and lightlye murmr
and grudge: and they shall never have liberty and freedom of spirit, till
they whollye submit them selves unto their superior. Go here and there where
thou will, and thou shall never find perfect rest, but in meek obedience
under the governance of thy prelate. The imagining and changing of place has
deceived many a religious person: Truth it is, that every man is disposed to
do after his own will, and best can agree with them that follow his ways.
But if we will that God be among us, we must sometime leave our own will,
though it seem good, that we may have love and peace with other. Who is so
wise that he can fully know all things? truly none. Therefore trust not to
much to thine own wit, but hear gladlye the counsel of other. And if
percase the thing which thou would have done be good and profitable, and
yet neuerthlesse thou leauest thine own will therein, and folowest other, thou
shall find much profit thereby. I have often times hear say, that it is the
more surer way to hear and take counsel, then it is to give it. It is good
to hear every man's counsel, but not to agree, when reason requires, it is a
sign of a great singularity of mind, and of much inward pride.

That we should avoid superfluity of words, and the company of vvorldly
living people. The.10. Chapter.
FLee the company of wordly living people as much as thou may: for the
treatinge of wordlie matters lets greatly the fervor of spirit: though it
be done with a good intent, we be anon deceived with vanity of the world, and
in manner are made as thral unto it, if we take not good heed. I would I had
held my peace many times when I have spoken, and that I had not been so much
among worldly company as I have been. But why are we so glad to speak and
commen together, since we so seldom depart without some hurt of conscience?
This is the cause, By our coming together we think to comfort each other,
and to refreshe our hearts when we be troubled with vain imaginations, and we
speak most gladly of such things as we most love, or else of things that be
most contracious unto us. But alas for sorrow* all is vain that we do: for
this outward comfort is no little hinderance of the true inward comfort that
comes of God. Therefore it is necessary, that we watch and pray, that the
time pass not away from us in ydlenes. If it be lawful and expedient to
speak, speak then of God, and of such things as are to the edifyinge of thy
soul, or of thy neighbors. An evil use, and a uegligence of our ghostly
profit, makes us often times to take little heed how we should speak.
Neuerthlesse, sometime it helps right much to the health of the soul, a
devout commoning of spiritual things, specially when men of one mind and
spirit in God, do meet, and speak and common together.

The means to get peace, and of desire to profit in virtues. The 11. Chapter.
We might have much peace, if we would not meddle with other men's sayings and
doeinges that belong not unto us. How may he long live in peace, that
wilfully will meddle with other men's business, and that seeks occasions
abroad in the world, and seldom or never gathers him self together in
God. Blessed be the true, simple and meek persons, for they shall have great
plenty of peace. Why have many saints been so perfectly contemplative, for
they always studied to mortify the^ selves fro worldly desires, that they might
freely with all the power of their heart tend to our lord. But we be occupied
with our passions, and be much busied with transitory things, and it is very
seldom that we may fully overcome any one vice: And we be nothing quick to
our duties, wherefore we remain cold and slow to devotion. If we were
perfectly mortifyed to the world and to the flesh, and were inwardly purifyed
in soul, we should anon savor heavenly things, and somewhat should we
have experience of heavenly contemplation. The greatest hinderance of the
heavenly co^templation is, for we are not yet clearly delivered from al
passions and concupiscence, ne we enforce not our self to follow the way that
holy Saints have gone before us: but when any little adversity comes to us,
we be anon cast down therein, and turn us over soon to seek man's comfort.
But if we would, as strong men, and as mighty champio^s fight strongly in
this ghostlye battle, we should undoubtedly see the help of God come in
our need: for he is always ready to help al them that trust in him, and he
procures occasions of such battle, to the end we should overcome and have
the victory, and in the end to have the greater reward therefore. If we set
the end and perfection of our religion in these outward obseruaunces, our
devotion shall soon be ended. Wherefore we must set our axe deep to the root
of the tree, that we (purged from al passions,) may have a quiet mind. If we
would every year overcome one vice, we should anon come to perfection: But I
fear rather, that contrariwise we were better and more pure in the beginning
of our conversion, then we be many years after we were converted. Our feruor
and desire to virtue should daily increase in us, as we increase in age: But it
is now thought a great thing, if we may hold a little sparcle of the feruor
that we had first: but if we would at the beginning break the evil inclination
that we have to our self and to our own will, we should after do virtuous
works easily, and with great gladness of heart. It is an hard thing to leave
evil customs, but it is more hard to break our own will, but it is most
hard, evermore to lie in pain, and endiessye to lose the joys of heaven If
thou overcome not small things and light, how shall thou then overcome the
greater? Refist therefore quickelie in the beginning thy evil inclinations,
and leave of wholly all thine evil customs, least happlie by little and little
they bring the after to greater difficulty. O if thou would consider how
great inward peace thou should have thy self, and how great gladness thou
should cause in other, in behauinge of thy self well, I suppose verilye
thou would be much more diligent to profit in virtue, then thou haste been
before this time.

Of the profit of adversity. The.12. Chapter.
IT is good, that we have sometime griefs and adversities: for they drive a
man to behold him self, and to see, that he is here but as in an exile, and
be learned thereby to know, that he ought not to put his trust in any worldly
thing. It is good also, that we suffer sometime contradiction, and that we be
holden of other as evil and wretched, and sinful, though we do well and
intend well: far such things help us to meekenes, and mightilye defend us
from vain glory and pride. We take God the better to be our judge and
witness, when we be outwardly despised in the world, and that the world
judges not well of us. Therefore a man ought to settle him self so fully in
God, that what adversity so ever befall unto him, he shall not need to seek
any outward comfort. When a good man is troubled or tempted, or is inquieted
with evil thoughts, then he understands and knows that God is most
necessary to him, and that he may nothing do that is good without him, Then
he soroweth, waileth and prays for the miseries that he rightfully suffers:
The^ it yrketh him also the wretchedness of this life, and he coueteth to be
dissolved from this body of death, and to be with Christ. And the^ also he
sees well, that there may be no full peace nor perfect quietness here in this
world.

Of temptations to be resisted. The 13. Chapter.
AS long as we live i^ this world we may not be fully without temptation. For
as Job says, temptation is the life of man upon earth, therefore every man
should beware well against his temptations, and watch in prayers that the
ghostly enemy find not time and place to deceive him, which never sleeps,
but always goes about, seekinge whom he may devour. There is no man so
perfect nor so holy in this world, that he sometime has not temptations. And
we may not fully be without the^: for though they be for the time very
grievous and painful, yet if they be resisted, they be very profitable: for a
man by experience of such temptations is made more meek, and is also purged
and informed in diverse manner, which he should never have known, but by
experience of such temptations. All blessed Saints that now be crowned in
heaven, grew and profited by temptations and tribulations, and those that
could not well bear temptations, but were finallye overcome, be taken
perpetual prisoners in hell. There is no order so holy, ne no place so
secret, that is fully without temptation, and there is no man that is fully
free from it here in this life: for in our corrupt body we bear the matter
whereby we be tempted, that is, our inordinate concupiscence, wherein we were
borne. As one temptation goes, another comes, and so we shall always have
somewhat to suffer: and the cause is, for we have lost our innocence. Many
folk seek to flee temptation, and they fall the more greeuouslie into it: For
by only fleeing we may not have victory, but by meekenes and patience we be
made stronger then al our enemies. He that only flies the outward occasions,
and cutteth not away the inordinate desires hid inwardly in the heart, shall
little profit, and temptations shall lightly come to him again, and grieve him
more then they did first, by little and little with patience and sufferaunce,
and with the help of God, thou shall sooner overcome temptations then with
thine own strength and importunity. In thy temptation it is good that thou
often ask counsel, and that thou be not rigorous to no person that is
tempted: but be glad to comfort him, as thou would be comforted. The
beginning of all evil temptations is inco^stancie of mind, and to little a trust
in God. For as a ship without guide is driven hither and thither with every
storm, so an unstable man that anon leaves his good purpose in God, is
diversely tempted. The fire proves gold, and temptation proves the righteous
man. We know not many times what we can suffer, but temptation shows
plainly what we are, and what virtue is in us. It is necessary in the
beginning of every temptation to be well ware, for then the enemy is soon
overcome, if he be not suffered to enter into the heart, but that he be
resisted and shut out as soon as he proffereth to enter: For as a bodily
medicine is very late ministered, when the sickness has been suffered to
increase by long continuance: so is it of temptation. First comes to the
mind an unclean thought, and after follows a strong imagination, and then
delectation and diverse evil motions, and in the end follows a full assent,
and so by little and little the enemy has full entry, for he was not wisely
resisted in the beginning: and the more slow that a man is in resisting, the
more weak he is to resist, and the enemy is daily the more stronger against
him. Some persons have their greatest temptations in the beginning of their
conversion, some in the end, and some in manner all their life time be troubled
therewith, and there be many that be but lightly tempted, and all this comes
of the great wisdom and righteousness of God, which knows the state and
merit of every person, and ordeineth all things for the best, and to the
everlasting health and salvation of his elect and chosen people. Therefore we
shall not despair when we be tempted, but shall the more ferue^tlye pray unto
God, that he of his infinite goodness and fatherly pity vouchefase to help us
in every end, and that he, (according to the saying of S Pauie) so prevent us
with his grace in every temptation, that we may be able to sustain. Let us
then meeken our souls under the strong hand of allmyghtie God, for he will
save all them, and exalt all them that be here meek and lowly in spirit. In
temptations and tribulatio^s a man is proved how much he has profited, and
his merit is thereby the greater before God, and his virtues are the more
openly showed. It is no great marvel if a man be fervent and devout when he
feels no grief: but if he can suffer patiently in time of temptation or
other adversity, and therewithal can also stir himself to fervor of
spirit, it is a token, that he shall greatly profit hereafter in virtue and
grace. Some persons be kept from many great temptations, and yet daily they be
overcome through little and small occasions, and that is of the great goodness
and sufferance of God to keep them in meeknes, that they shall not trust ne
presume of them selves, that see them selves so lightlye, and in so little
things daily overcome.

That we shall not judge lightly other men's deeds, nor cleave much to our
own will. The 14. Chapter.
Have always a good eye to thy self, and beware thou judge not lightlye other
men. In judging other men a man often labors in vain, often erreth, and
lightly offends God: but in judging him self and his own deeds, he always
laboreth fruitfully, and to his ghostly profit. We judge oftentimes after our
own heart and affections, and not after the truth: for we often lose the true
judgment through our private love. But if God were always the whole intent of
our desire, we should not so lightly err in our judgments, nor so lightly be
troubled, for that we be resisted of our will. But commonly there is in us some
inward inclination, or some outward affection, that draws our heart with them
from the true judgment. Many persons through a secret love that they have to
their self, work vndiscretelye after their own will, and not after the will
of God, and yet they ween not so: and they seem to stand in great inward
peace when things follow after their mind, but if it follow otherwise then
they would, anon they be moved with impatiente, and be right heavy and
pensife. By diversities of opinions be sprung many times dissentions between
friends and neighbors, and also between religious and devout persons. An
old custom is hardly broken, and no man will lightly be removed from his own
will: but if thou cleave more to thine own will or to thine own reason, then
to the meek obedience of Jesus Christ, it will be long or thou be a man
illumined with grace. For almighty God will, that we be perfectly subject and
obedient to him, and that we ascend and rise high above our own will, and
above our own reason, by a great brenning love, and a whole desire to him.

Of works done in charity. The 15. Chapter.
FOr nothing in the world, nor for the love of any creature, is evil to be
done, but sometime for the need and comfort of our neighbor a good deed may
be deferred, or be turned into another good deed, for thereby the good deed
is not destroyed, but is changed into better. Without charity the outward
deed is little to be praised: but whatsoever is done of charity, be it never
so little, or never so despisable in sight of the world, it is right profitable
before God, who judges all thing after the intent of the doer, and not after
the greatness or worthiness of the deed. He does much that much loves God, and
he does much that does his deed well, and he does his deed well, that does
it rather for the comminaltie then for his own will. A deed sometime seems
to be done of charity and of love to God, when it is rather done of
carnalitie, and of a fleshly love, then of a charitable love: for co^monlie
some carnal inclination to our fre^des, or some inordinate love to our self,
or some hope of a temperall reward, or a desire of some other profit, moves
us to do the deed, and not the pure love of charity. Charity seeks not
him self in that he does, but he desires to do only that, which shall be
honor and praysinge to God. He enuieth no man, for he loves no private love,
neither will he joy in him self, but he covers above all things to be
blessed in God. He knows well, that no goodness begins originallie of man,
and therefore he refers all goodness to God, of whom all things proceed,
and in whom all blessed Saints do rest in everlasting fruition. Oh, he that
had but a little sparkle of this perfect charity, should feel sooth fastlie in
his soul, that all earthly things be full of vanity.

Of the suffering of other men's defaultes. The.16. Chapter.
SVche defaultes as we can not amend in our selves nor in other, we must
patientlye suffer, til our Lord of his goodness will other wise dispose. And we
shall think, that happlye it is so best for to be for prouinge of our
patience, without which our merits are but little to be po^dred. Nevertheless,
thou shalt pray hartilye for such impedime^tes, that our Lord of his great
mercy and goodness vouchsafe to help us, that we may patientlye bear them. If
thou admonish any person once or twice, and he will not take it, strive not
ouermuche with him, but commit al to God, that his will be done, and his honor
in all his servants, for he can well by his goodness turn evil into good. Study
always, that thou may be patient in suffering of other men's defaultes, for
thou haste many things in thee, that other do suffer of thee: and if thou
canste not make thy self to be as thou would, how may thou then look to
have another to be ordered in all things after thy will? We would gladlye have
other perfect, but will not amend our own defaultes. We would that other
should be straightly corrected for their offenses, but we will not be corrected.
It misliketh us, that other have liberty, but we will not be denied of that we
ask. We would also, that other should be restrained according to the
statutes, but we in no wise will be restrained. Thus it appears euidentlye,
that we seldom ponder our neighbor, as we do our self. If al men were
perfect, what had we then to suffer of our neighbors for God? Therefore God
has so ordained, that one of us shall learn to bear another burden: for in
this world no man is without default, no man without burden, no man sufficient
to him self, nor no man wise enough of him self. Wherefore it behooves each
one of us to bear the burden of other, to comfort other, to help other, to
inform other, and to instruct and admonish other in all charity: who is of
most virtue, appears best in time of adversity. Occasions make not a man
frail, but they show openly what he is.

What should be the life of a true religious person. The.17. Chapter.
IT be hooueth thee to break thine own will in many things, if thou will
have peace and concord with other. It is no little thing to be in monasteries
or in congregations, and to continue there without complaining or missaying,
and faithfully to persevere there unto the end: Blessed are they that there
live well, and make a good end. If thou will stand surely in grace, and much
profit in virtue, hold thy self as an outlaw, and as a pilgrim here in this
life, and be glad (for the love of God) to be holden as a fool, and as a vile
person in the world, as thou art. The habit and tonsure help little, but the
changing of life, and the mortifying of passions make a person perfect and
true religious. He that seeks any other thing in religion, then purely god,
and the health of his soul, shall find nothing there but trouble and sorrow,
and he may not long stand there in peace and quietness that laboreth not to be
least and subject to all. It is good therefore that thou remember often, that
thou camste to religion to serve, and not to be served, and that thou art
called thither to suffer and to labor, and not to be idle, or to tell vayn
tales. In religion a man shall be proved as gold in a furnace, and no man may
stand long there in grace and virtue, but he will with all his heart meek him
self for the love of God.

Of the examples of holy fathers. The.18. Chapter.
Behold the lively examples of holy fathers and blessed Saints, in whom
flourished and shined all true perfection of life and perfect religion. And
thou shall see how little it is, and welnigh as nothing, that we do now in
these days, in comparison of them: O what is our life, if it be to them
compared? They served our Lord in hunger and thirste, in heat and in cold,
in nakedness, in labor and in werines, in vigiles and fastinges, in prayers,
and in holy meditations, in persecutions, and in many reproufes. O how many,
and how grievous tribulations suffered the Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors,
virgins, and other holy Saints, that would follow the steps of Christ? They
refused honors and all bodily pleasures here in this life, that they might
always have the everlasting life. O how strait and abiecte a life led the holy
fathers in wilderness? how grievous temptations suffered they, how fiersly were
they with their ghostly enemies assailed, and how fervent prayer offered they
dailye to God? What rigorous abstinence used they, how great zeal and
fervor had they to spiritual profit? how strong battle held they against
all sin, and how pure and whole intent had they to God in all their deeds?
On the day they labored, and in the night they prayed. And though they labored
on the day bodily, yet they prayed in mind, and so they spent their time always
fruitfullye, and thought every hour short for the service of God: and for the
great sweetenes that they had in heavenly contemplatio^, they forgot often times
their bodily refection. All riches, honor, dignities, kinsemen and friends
they renounced for the Jove of god. They coueted to have nothing in the world,
and scarsely they would take that was necessary for the bodily kind. They were
poor in worldly goods, but they were rich in grace and virtue. They were
needy outwardly, but inwardly in their souls they were replenished with grace
and ghostly eo^fortes. To the world they were alienes and strangers, but to God
they were right dear and familier friends. In the sight of the world, and in
their own sight they wear vile and abiecte, but in the sight of God and his
Saints they were precious, and singulerlye elect. In the shined all
perfection of virtue, true meekenes, simple obedience, charity and patience,
with other like virtues and gracious gifts of God: Wherefore they profited
daily in spirit, and obtained great grace of God. They be left as an example
to al religious persons: and more ought their examples to stir them to
devotion, and to profit more and more in virtue and grace, then the great
multitude of dissolute and idle persons should any thing draw them abacke. O
what fervor was in religious persons at the beginning of their religion? what
devotion in prayers? what zeal to virtue? what love to ghostlye discipline?
and what reverence and meek obedience fiourished in the^ under the rule of
their superior? Truly their deeds yet bear witness, that they were holy and
perfect, and so, mightily subdued the world, and thruste it under foot. Now a
days he is accounted virtuous, that is no offender, and that may with patience
keep some little sparcle of that virtue and feruor that he had first. But alas
for sorrow, it is through our own sloth and negligence, and through losing of
time, that we be so soon fallen from our first fervor into such a ghostly
weakness and dulnes of spirit, that in manner it is to tedious to us for to
live. But would to God, that the desire to profit in virtue slepte not so
utterly in thee, that so often haste seen the holy examples of blessed Saints.

Of the exercises of a good religious person. The 19. Chapter.
THe life of a good religious man should shine in all virtue, and be inward, as
it appears outward, and that much more inward: for almighty God beholds
the heart. Whom we should always honor and reverence, as if we were ever in
his bodilye presence, and appear before him as Angels clean and pure, shining in
all virtue: we ought every day to renew our purpose in God, and to stir our
heart do feruor and devotion, as though it were the first day of our
conversion, and daily we shall pray and say thus: Help me my Lord Jesus, that
I may persevere in good purpose, and in thy holy service unto my death, and that
I may now this present day perfectly begin, for it is nothing that I have
done in time past. After our purpose, and after our intent shall be our reward:
And though our intent be never so good, yet it is necessary, that we put
thereto a good will, and a great diligence. For if he that often times purposes
to do well and to profit in virtue, yet fails in his doing, what shall he
do then, who seldom or never takes such purpose? Let us intend to do the
best we can, and yet our good purpose may happen to be hindered and let in
diverse manners. And our special hinderaunce is this, that we so lihgtly leave
of our good exercises that we have used to do before time: for it is seldom
seen, that a good purpose wilfully broken may be recovered again without
great spiritual hinderance. The purpose of righteous men depends in the
grace of God more then in themselves, or in their own wisdom: for man
purposes, but God disposes: ne the way that man shall walk in this world,
is not in himself, but in the grace of God. If a good custom be sometime left
of for help of our neighbor, it may soon be recovered: but if it be left of
through sloth, or through our own negligence, it will greatly hinder us, and
hardly will it be recovered again. Thus it appears, that though we incorage
our selves all that we can to do well, yet it is good that we always take such
good purpose, especially against such things as hinder us most. We must
also make diligent search both within us and without us, that we leave nothing
inordinate vnterformed in us, as nigh as our frailty may suffer. And if thou
can not for frayltie of thy self do thus continual^ie, yet at the least, that
thou do it once on the day, evening or morning. In the morning thou shall take
a good purpose for that day folowinge, and at night thou shalt discuss
diligently, how thou have behaved thee the day before, in word, in deed,
and in thought: for in them we do often offend God and our neighbor. Arm thee
as Christ's true knight with meeknes and charity, against all the malice of
the enemy. Refrain glotonie, and thou shall the more lightly refrain all
carnal desires. Let not the ghostly enemy find thee all ylde, but that thou
be readinge, writing, prayinge devoutly, thinkinge, or some other good labor
doing, for the comminaltie. Bodily exercises are to be done discreetly: for
that that is profitable to one, is sometime hurtful to another: and also
spiritual labors done of denotion, are more sure, done in priuitie, then in
open place. And thou must beware, that thou be not more ready to private
deuotio^s, then to them, that thou art bound to by duty of thy religion.
But when thy duty is fulfilled, the^ add thereto, after as thy devotion
gives. All may not use one manner of exercise, but one in one manner, another in
another manner, as they shall feel to be most profitable to the^. Also, as the
time requires, so diverse exercises are to be used, for one manner of exercise
is necessary on the holy day, another on the feriall day: one in time of
temptation, another in time of Peace and consolation: one when we have
sweetenes in devotion, another, when devotion withdraws. Also against
principal feasts we ought to be more dilligent in good works, and devoutly
to call for help to the blessed Saints, that then be worshipped in the
Church of God, then in other times, and to dispose our selves in like manner,
as if we should then be taken out of this world, and be brought into the
everlasting feast in heaven. And fith that bliss is yet differred from us for
a time, we may well think, that we be not yet ready nor worthy to come
thereto. And therefore we ought to prepare our selves to be more ready another
time. For as S. Luke says, Blessed is that servant, whom our Lord, when he
shall come at the hour of death, shall find ready: for he shall take him, and
lift him up high above all earthly things, into the everlasting joy and
bliss in the kingdom of heaven. Amen.

Of the love of onelines and silence. The.20. Chapter.
Seek for a convenient time to search thine own conscience, and think often
on the benefits of god. Leave of all curious things, and read such matters
as shall stir thee to compunctio^ of heart for thy sins, rather then to
read only for occupyinge of the time. If thou will withdraw thy self from
superfluous words, and from unprofitable runninges about, and from the
hearing of rumors and vain tales, thou shall find time eonuenient to be
occupied in holy meditations. The most holy men and women that ever were,
fled the company of worldly living men with all their power, and chose to
serve god in secret of their heart: And one holy man said: As often as I have
been among worldly company, I have departed with less fervor of spirit
then I came: and that we know well when we talk long, for it is not so hard
to keep allwaye silence, as it is, not to exceed in words when we speak
much. It is also more light to be always solitarti at home, then to go forth
into the world, and not offend. Therefore he that intends to come to an
inward setting of his heart in God, and to have the grace of devotion, must
with our Savior Christ. withdraw him from the people. No man may surely
appeace among the people, but he that would gladly be solitary if he might:
nor no man is sure in prelacie, but he that would gladly be a subject: no,
none may surely command, but he that has learned gladly to obey: and none
ioyeth truly, but he, whose heart witnesses, that he has a clean
conscience: ne none speaks surely, but he that would gladly keep silence,
if he might. And always the surety of good men and blessed men has been in
meekenes and dread of God. And though such blessed men shined in all virtue,
yet they were not therefore lift up into pride, but were therefore the more
diligent in the service of God, and the more meek in all their doeings. And on
the contrariwise, the surety of evil men rises of pride, and of presumption,
and in the end it deceaueth them. Therefore think thy self never sure in
this life, whether thou be religions or seculer: for often times they that have
been holden in the sight of the people most perfect, have been suffered to
fall more greeuouslye for their presumption. Also it is much more profitable
to many persons that they have sometimes temptations (least happlye they think
them selves overmuch safe, and be thereby lift up into pride, or run to seeking
of outward consolation) then that they be always without temptations. O how
pure a conscience should he have, that would despise all transitory joy, and
never would meddle with worldly business. And what peace and inward quietness
should he have, that would cut away from him all business of mind, and only
to think on heavenly things. No man is worthy to have ghostlye co^fortes,
unless he have fie^ been well exercised in holy co^punctio^. And if thou will
have co^punctio^, go into a secret place, and put from thee all the clamorous
noise of the world: for the prophet David says, Let the sorrow for thy
sins be done in thy secret chamber: i^ thy ^elle thou shall find great
grace which thou may lightlye lose without. Thy Celle well continued, shall
wax sweet and pleasant to thee, and shall be to thee hereafter a right dear
friend: and if it be but evil kept, it shall grow very tedious and yrkesome
to thee. But if in the beginning thou be often therein, and keep it well in
good prayers and holy meditations, it shall be after to thee a special friend,
and one of thy most special comfortes, in silence and quietness of heart. A
devout soul profits much, and learneth the hid sentences of Scripture, and
finds there also many sweet tears in devotion, wherewith every night she
washes her mightily from all filth of sin, that she may be so much the more
familiar with God, as she is disseuered from the clamorous noise of wordly
business. Therefore, they that for the love of virtue withdraw them from their
acquaintance, and from their worldly friends, our Lord with his angels shall
draw nigh to them, and shall abide with them. It is better, that a man be
solitary, and well take heed of him self, then that he do miracles in the
world forgettinge himself. It is also a laudable thing in a religious person,
seldom to go forth, seldom to see other, and seldom to be seen of other.
Why will thou see that, the which it is not lawefull for thee to have: The
world passes away with all his concupiscence and deceuable pleasures. Thy
sensual appetite moves thee to go abroad, but when the time is past, what
bear thou home again, but remorse of conscience, and unquietness of heart? It
is often seen, that after a merry goinge forth follows a heavy returninge, and
that a glad euentide causes a heavy morning: and so all fleshly joy enters
pleasantly, but in the end it biteth and slays. What may thou see
without thy Celle, that thou may not see within? Lo, heaven and earth, and
all the elements, whereof all earthly things be made: and what may thou
elsewhere see under the sun that may long endure? And if thou might see all
earthly things, and also have all bodily pleasures present at once before
thee, what were it but a vain sight? Lift up thine eyes therefore to God in
heaven, and pray heartily, that thou may have forgeuenes of thine offenses.
Leave vain things to them that wild vain, and take thou heed only to
those things that our Lord commands thee. Shet fast the door of thy
soul, that is to say, thy ymagination, and keep it warilye from beholding of
any bodily thing as much as thou may: and then lift up thy mind to thy
Lord Jesus, and open thy heart faithfully to him, and abide with him in thy
Celle, for thou shall not find so much peace without. If thou had not gone
forth so much as thou haste done, nor had given hearing to vain tales,
thou should have been in much more inward peace the^ thou art: but
forasmuch as it delights thee to hear new things, it behooves thee
therefore to suffer sometime both trouble of heart, and unquietness of mind.

Of compunction of the heart. The.21. Chapter.
IF thou will any thing profit to the health of thy soul keep thee always
in the dread of God, and never desire to be fully at liberty, but keep thee
always under some wholesome discipline. Never give thy self to indiscreet mirth
for no manner of thing, as nigh as thou may. Have perfect compunction, and
sorrow for thy sins, and thou shall find thereby great inward devotion.
Compunction opens to the sight of the soul many good things, which
lightness of heart, and vain mirth soon drives away. It is marvel, that
any man can be merye in this life, if he consider well, how far he is exiled
out of his country, and how great peril his soul daily stands in: but
through lightness of heart, and negligence of our defaultes, we feel not, nor
we will not feel the sorrow of our own soul: but often times we laugh, when
we ought rather to weep and mourn: for there is no perfect liberty, nor true
joy, but in the dread of God, and in a good conscience. That person is right
happy, that has grace to avoid from him all things that lets him from
beholdinge of his own sins, and that can turn him self to God by inward
compunction: and he is happy also that auoideth from him all things that may
offend or grieve his conscience. Fight strongly therefore against all sins,
and dread not overmuch, although thou he encumbered by an evil custom, for
that evil custom may be overcome, with a good custom. And excuse thee not,
that thou art let by other men, for if thou will leave the familiarity with
other, they will suffer thee to do thy deeds without impediment. Meddle thee
not with other men's goods, neither busy thee in great men's causes: have
always an eye to thy self, and diligently inform and admonish thy self
before all other. If thou have not the favor of worldly living people,
sorrow not therefore: but let this be thy daily sorrow, that thou behauest not
thy self in thy conversation, as it beseems a good religious person for to
do. It is more expedient, and more profitable, that a man sometime lack
consolations in this life, the that he have them always after his own will,
namelye, fleshly consolations. Neuerthlesse, that we have not sometime
heavenly consolations, or that we so seldom feel them as we do, it is
through our own defaulte: for we seek not to have the true compunction of
heart, nor we cast not fully away from us the false outward consolatio^s.
Hold thy self therefore unworthy to have any consolation, and worthy to have
much tribulation. When a man soroweth perfectlye for his sins, then all
wordly co^fortes be painful to him A good man finds always matter enough,
why he ought justly so sorrow and weep: for if he behold him self, or if he
think on his neighbor, he seeeth well, that none lives here without great
misery, and the more thoroughly that he may consider him self, the more sorrow
he has. And always the matter of true sorrow, and of true inward copunction,
is the remembrance of our sins, wherein we be so wrapped on every side, that
seldom we may behold any ghostly things. But if we would more often think on
our death, then we do on long life, no doubt but we should more fervently
apply our self to amendment: and I beeleue also, that if we would heartily
remember the pains of hell, and of purgatory, that we should more gladlye
sustain all labors and sorrows, and that we should not dread any pain in
this world, whereby we might avoid the pains that are to come. But forasmuch
as these things go not to the heart, and we yet love the flattering and false
pleasures of this world, therefore we remain cold, and void of devotion,
and often it is through the weakness of the spirit, that the wretched body so
lightly complains. Pray therefore meekelie to our Lord, that he of his great
goodness give thee the spirit of compunction, and say with the prophet thus:
Feed me (Lord) with the bread of compunction, and give me to drink water of
tears in great abundance.

Of the consideringe of the misery of mankind, and wherein the felicity of
man stands. The.22. Chapter.
AVVretch thou act, whosoever thou be, withersoeuer thou turn thee, but if
thou turn thee to God. Why art thou so lightly troubled, for that it
falls not to thee as thou would and desire. What is he that has all
thing after his will? neither thou nor I, nor any man living: for none live
here without some trouble or anguishe, be he king. Or who think thou, is in
most favor with God? truly he that suffers gladly most for God. But many
persons weak and feeble in spirit, say thus in their hearts: Lo, how good
a life that man leads, how rich he is, how mighty he is, how high in
authority, how great in sight of the people, and how fair and beautiful in
his bodily kind: but if thou take heed to the goodness everlasting, thou
shall well see, that these worldly goods and worldly likinges are but little
worth, and that they be more rather grievous then pleasant, for they may not be
had ne kept, but by great labor and business of mind. The felicity of man
stands not in abundance of worldly goods, for the mean is best. And
verily, to live in this world is but misery: and the more ghostly that a man
would be, the more painful it is to him for to live, for he feels more
plainly the defaultes of man's corruption. For why, to eat, to drink, to
sleep, to wake, to rest, to labor, and to serve all other necessities of the
body, is great misery, and great affliction to a devout soul, which would
gladly be free from the bondage of sin, that it might without let serve our
Lord in purity of conscience, and in cleannes of heart. The inward man is
greatly grieved through the bodily necessities in this world. Wherefore the
prophet David desired, that he might be delivered from such necessities. But
woe be to them that know not their own misery, and woe be to them that love
this wretched and this corruptible life: for some love it so much, that if
they might ever live here, though they might poorelye get their living with
labor and begginge, yet they would never care for the kingdom of heaven. O
mad and unfaithful creatures are they, that so deeply set their love in
earthly things, that they have no feeling nor taste but in fleshly pleasures.
Truly in the hour of death they shall know, how vile and how naughty it
was, that they so much loved. But holle Saints, and devout folowers of Christ.
they did not what pleased the flesh, ne what was pleasant in the sight of the
world, but all their whole intent and desire they held to things invisible,
and feared, least by sight of things visible they might be drawn down to the
love of them. My well-beloved brother, lose not the desire to profit in
spiritual things, for thou have yet good time and space. Why will thou any
longer defer the time? Arise, and now this same instant begin, and say
thus, Now is time to labor in good works, now is time to fight in ghostly
battle, and now is time to make ame^des for trespass passed. When thou art
troubled, then is best time to merit and get rewards of God. It behooves thee
to go through fire and water, before thou come to the place of recreation, and
but if thou can fully have the mastry over thy self, thou shall never
overcome sin, nor live without great tediousnes and sorrow. We would gladly
be delivered from all misery and sin: but because we have through sin lost
our innocence, we have lost also the very joy and felicity. Wherefore, we
must hold us in patience, and with good hope abide the mercy of God, till
wretchedness and misery be ouerpassed, and that this bodily life be changed
into the life everlasting. O how great is the frailty of man, that he is ever
ready and prone to sin. This day thou art confessed, and to morrow thou
fallest again. Now thou purposest to beware, and intendest to go forth
strongly in good works, and shortly after thou do as thou never had
taken such purpose. Rightfullie therefore we ought to meek our self, and
never to think in us any virtue or goodness, for that we be so frail and
unstable: Soon may it be lost through negligence, that with much labor, and
special grace was hardly gotten. But what shall become of us in the end,
when we so soon wax dull and slow? Sothlie sorrow and woe shall be to us, if
we fail to bodily rest now, as though we were in ghostly sikernes, when there
appears not as yet, neither sign nor token of virtue nor of good living in
our conversation. Wherefore it were expedient to us, that we were yet again
instructed (as Nouices) to learn good manners, it happly there might by that
means be found hereafter any trust of amendment and spiritual profit in our
conversation.

Of the remembrance of death. The.23. Chapter.
THe hour of death will shortly come, and therefore take heed how thou orderest
thy self: for the common proverb is true, To day a man, to morrow none. And
when thou art out of sight, thou art anon out of mind, and soon shall thou
be forgotten. O the great dulnes and hardness of man's heart, that only thinks
on things present, and little provides for the life to come. If thou did
well, thou should so behave thy self in every deed, and in every thought,
as thou should in this instant dye. If thou had a good conscience, thou
should not much fear death. It were better for thee to leave sin, then
fear death. O my dear brother, if thou be not ready this day, how shall
thou be ready to morrow? To morrow is a day uncertain, and thou canste not
tell, whether thou shall live so long. What profit is it to us to live long,
when we thereby so little amend our life? Long life does not always bring us
to amendment, but often times increases more sin. VVoulde to God that we
might be one day well co^uersant in this world? Many reckon their years of
conversion, and yet there is but little fruit of amendment, nor of any good
example seen in their conversation. If it be fearful to die, peradventure it
is more perilous to live long. Blessed be those persons, that ever have the
hour of death before their eyes, and that every day dispose themselves to
die. If thou ever saw any man die, remember that thou must needelie go the
same way. In the morninge doubt whether thou shall live to night, and at night
think not thy self sure to live till to morrow. Be always ready, and live in
such manner, that death find thee not unprovided. Remember how many have died
sodenlie and unprovided, for our Lord has called them in such an hour as
they least thought. And when that last hour shall come, thou shall begin to
feel all otherwise of thy life passed, then thou haste done before: and thou
shall then sorrow greatly, that thou have been so slow and negligent in the
service of God as thou haste been. O how happy and wise is he therefore, that
laboreth now to stand in such state in this life, as he would be found in at
his death. Truly, a perfect despising of the world, and a fervent desire to
profit in virtue, a love to be taught, a fruitful labor in works of
penance, a ready will to obey, a forsaking of our self, and a willing
suffering of all adversities for the love of God, shall give us a great trust,
that we shall die well. Now, whilst thou art in health, thou may do many
good deeds, but if thou be sick, I can not tell, what thou may do: For
why, few be amended through sickness. And likewise, they that go much on
pilgrimage, be seldom thereby made perfect and holy. Put not thy trust in thy
friends and thy neighbors, neither defer thy good deeds till after thy
death: for thou shall soonet be forgotten then thou weenest. Better it is to
provide for thy self betime, and to send some good deeds before thee, then to
trust to other, who peradventure will lightly forget thee: if thou be not now
busy for thy self, and for thine own soul health, who shall be busy for
thee after thy death? Now is the time very precious, but alas for sorrow, that
thou spe^dest the time so unprofitably, in the which thou should win the
life everlasting. The time shall come, when thou shall desire one day or one
hour to amend thee, but I wot not whether it shall be granted unto thee. O my
dear brother, from how great peril and dread might thou now deliver thy
self, if thou would always in this life dread to offend God, and always
have the coming of death suspect. Therefore study now to live so, that at
the hour of death thou may rather joy then dread. Learue now to dye to
the world, that thou may then live with Christ. Learnt also to despise all
worldly things, that thou may then freelye go to Christ. Chastise now
thy body with penance, that thou may then have a sure and a steadfast hope
of salvation. Thou art a fosle, if thou think to live long, since thou art not
sure to live one day to the end. Now many have been deceived through trust
of long life, and sodenlie have been taken out of this world or they had
thought. Now often have thou heard say, that such a man was slain, and such
a man was drowned, and such a man fell and brake his neck? This man as he
eat his meat was strangled, and this man as he played took his death, one
with fire, another with iron, another with sickness, and some by theft have
suddenly perished? And so the end of all men is death, for the life of man as a
shadow suddenly slideth and passes away. Think often, who shall remember thee
after thy death, and who shall pray for thee? Do now forthy self all that
thou can, for thou wottest not when thou shall dye, nor what shall follow
after thy death VVhilest thou have time, gather thee riches immortal, think
nothing abidingly, but on thy ghostly health. Set thy study only on things
that be of God, and that belong to his honor. Make thee friends against that
time, worship his Saints, and follow their steps, that when thou shall go
out of this world, they may receive thee into the everlasting tabernacles.
Keep thee as a pilgrim, and as a stranger here in this world, to whom nothing
belongs of worldly business. Keep thy heart always free, and lifted up to
God, for thou have no city here long abiding. Send thy desires, and thy
daily prayers always upward to God, and pray perseuerantly, that thy soul
at the hour of death, may blessedly depart out of this world, and go to
Christ.

Of the last judgment, and of the pain that is ordained for sin. The 24.
Chapter.
IN all things behold the end and often remember, how thou shall stand
before the high Judge, to whom nothing is hid: who will not be pleased with
rue ardes, nor receive any manner excuses, but in all things will judge that is
righteous and true O most unwise and most wretched sinner, what shall thou
then answer to God, who knows all thy sins and wretchedness, since thou
dreadest here sometime the face of a mortal man? Why do thou not now
provide for thy self against that day, since thou may not then be excused
nor defended by none other? But every man shall then have enough to do, to
answer for him self. Now thy labor is fruitful, and weeping is acceptable,
thy mourning is worthy to be heard, and thy sorrow also is satisfactory and
purging of sins. The parie^t man, who suffers iniuryes and wrongs of
other, and yet nevertheless soroweth more for their malice, then for the wrong
done to him self, has a wholesome and blessed purgatory in this world, and so
have they that gladly can pray for their enemies, and for them that be
contrarious unto them, and that in their heart can forgive those that offend
them, and tarry not Idge to ask forgeuenes. And so have they also, that more
lightly be stirred to mercy then to vengeance, and that can, as it were, by a
violence break down their own will, and strongly resist sin, and labor
always to subdue their body to the spirit. It is better now to purge sin,
and to put away vsce, then to reserve it to be purged hereafter. But verilye,
we deceive our selves by inordinate love that we have to our bodily kind.
What shall the fire of purgatory devour, but thy sin? truly nothing.
Therefore, the more thou sparest thy self now, and the more thou folowest thy
fleshly liking the more greeuouslye shall thou wayle hereafter, and the more
matter thou resch. seruest for the fire of purgatory. In such things as a man
most has offended, shall he most be punished. The slouthful persons shall be
there pricked with burning pricks of iron, and gluttons shall be tormented
with great hunger and thirste. The lecherous persons, and lovers of voluptuous
pleasures shall be filled full with brenning pitche and brimstone: and envious
persons shall wayle and howl, as do mad dogs. There shall no sin be
without his proper torment. The proud man shall be filled full with all shame
and confusion, and the covetous man shall be pined with penury and need. One
hour there in pain shall be more grievous then here a hundred yece in most
sharpest penance. There shall be no rest nor consolation to the damned souls:
but here sometime we feel relief of our pains, and have sometime consolation
of our friends. Be now sorrowful for thy sins, that at the day of judgment
thou may be saved with blessed Saints. Then shall righteous men stand in
great constancy against them that have wronged them, and oppressed them here.
Then shall he stand as a Judge that here submitted himself meekelye to the
judgment of man. Then shall the meek poor man have great confidence and
trust in God, and the obstinate proud man shall quake and bread. The^ shall it
appear, that he was wise in this world, that for the love of God was content
to be taken as a fool, and to be despised, and set at naught. Then shall it
also please him much the tribulation that he suffers patiently in this
world, and all wickedness shall stop his mouth. Then every devout person shall
be joyful and glad, and the vnreligious persons shall wayle and dread. Then
shall the flesh, that has been with discretion chastised joy more, then if
it had been nourished with all delectation and pleasure. Then shall the vile
habit shine clear in the sight of God, and the precious garments shall xare
foul and loathsome to behold. Then the poor cottage shall be more allowed,
the^ the palace over gilted with gold. Then shall more help a constant
patience, the^ all worldly power and riches. Then shall meek obedience be
exalted more high, then all worldly wisdom and policy and then shall a good
clean conscience make us more gladsome and merry, then the cunning of all
philsophye. Then the despising of worldly goods shall be more of valor then all
worldly riches and treasure. Then shall thou have more comfort for thy devout
prayinge, then for all thy delicate feedinge. Then shall thou also joy more
for thy silence keepinge, then for thy long talkinge and iangling. Then good
deeds shall plenteouslie be rewarded, and fair words shall little be
regarded. Then shall it please more a strait life and hard penance here, then
all worldly delectation and pleasure. Learn now therefore to suffer the
small tribulations in this world, that thou may then be delivered from the
greater there ordained for sin. First prove here, what thou may suffer
hereafter. And if thou may not now suffer so little a pain, how shall thou
then suffer the everlasting torments? And if now so little a passion make
thee impatient, what shall then do the intolerable fire of purgatory or of
hell? Thou may not have two heavens, that is to say, to joy here, and to
have delectation here, and after to joy also with Christ in heaven. Moreover,
if thou had lived always unto this day in honors, and fleshlye
delectations, what should it profit thee now, if thou should this present
instant depart the world. Therefore all thing is vanity, but to love God,
and to serve him. He that loves God with all his heart, dreadeth neither
death, torment, judgment nor hell, for a perfect love makes a sure passage to
God: but if a man yet delight in sin, it is no marvel though he dread both
death and hell. And though such a dread be but a thral dread, yet
nevertheless it is good, that if the love of God withdraw us not from sin,
that the dread of hell constrain us thereto. He that sets apart the dread of
God, may not long stand in the state of grace, but soon shall he run into the
snare of the devil, and lightlye shall he therewith be deceived.

Of the fervent amendinge of all our life, and that we shall specially take
heed of our own soul health, before all other. The.25. Chapter.
MY son, be wakinge and diligent in the service of God, and think often
wherefore thou art come, and why thou haste forsaken the world: was it not that
thou should live to God, and be made a spiritual man? yes truly.
Therefore stir thy self to perfection, for in short time thou shall receive
the full reward of all thy labors, and from thenceforth shall never come to
thee neither sorrow nor dread. Thy labor shall be little and short, and thou
shall receive therefore again everlasting rest and comfort. If thou abide
faithful and fervent in good deeds, without doubt our Lord will be faithful
and liberal to thee in his rewards. Thou shall always have a good trust, that
thou shall come to the palm of victory, but thou shall not set thee in a full
surety thereof, least happlie thou wax dull and proud in heart. A certain
person, which often times doubted whether he where in the state of grace or
not, on a time fell prostrate in the Church, and said thus: O that I might
know, whether I should persevere in virtue to the end of my life. And anon
he heard inwardly in his soul the answer of our Lord, saying: What
would thou do if thou knew thou should persevere? do now, as thou
would do then, and thou shall be safe, and so anon he was comforted, and
committed himself wholly to the will of God, and all his doubtfulnes ceased,
and never after would he curiousie search to know what should become of him,
but rather he studied to know, what was the will of god against him, and how
he might begin and end all his deeds that he should do to the pleasure of
God, and to his honor. Trust in God, and do good deeds, says the prophet.
David, inhabit the earth, and thou shall be fed with the riches of thy good
deeds. But one thing withdraws many from profitinge in virtue, and from
amendment of life, that is an horror, and a false worldly dread, that they
may not abide the pain and labor that is needful for the gettinge thereof.
Therefore they shall most profit in virtue before all other, that enforce them
selves mightily to overcome those things that be most grievous and
contrarious to them. For a man profits there most, and there wins most
grace, where he most overcomes him self, and wherein he most mortifieth his
body to the soul. But all men have not in like much to mortify and overcome,
for some have mo passions then some have. Nevertheless, a fervent lover of
god, though he have more greater passions the^ other, yet shall he be more
stronger to profit in virtue, then another that is better manered, and that
has fewer passions, but is less fervent to virtue. Two things help a man
much to amendment of life, that is, a mighty withdrawinge of himself from
those things that the body most inclines him to, and a fervent labor for
such virtues as he has most need of. Study also to overcome in thy self
those things that most mislike thee in other men, and take always some
special profit in every place wheresoever thou become, as, if thou see any
good example, enforce thee to follow it: and if thou see any evil example,
look thou eschew it. As thy eye considers the works of other, right so,
and in the same wise thy works be considered of other. O how joyous and how
delectable is it, to see religious men devout and fervent in the love of God,
well manered, and well taught in ghostly learning: and on the contrary part,
how heavy and sorrowful is it to see them live inordinatlie, not vsinge those
things that they have chosen and taken them to. Also, how inconvenient a
thing is it, a man to be negligent in the purpose of his first calling, and
to set his mind to things that be not committed to him. Think often therefore
on the purpose that thou haste taken, and set before the eye of thy soul the
memory of Christ's passion: and if thou behold well, and diligently his
blessed life, thou may well be ashamed, that thou haste no more conformed
thee to him then thou haste done. He that will inwardly and devoutly exercise
him self in the most blessed life and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ,
shall find therein plenteouslye all that is necessary for him, so that he
shall not need to seek any thing without him. O if Jesus crucified were often
in our hearts, and in our remembrance, we should soon be learned in all
things that be necessary for us. A good religious man that is fervent in his
religion, takes all thing well, and does gladly all that he is commanded to
do, but a religious person that is negligent and slothful, has trouble upon
trouble, and suffers great anguishe and pain on every side, for he lackeeh
the true inward comfort: and to seek the outward comfort he is prohibited.
Therefore a religious person that lives without discipline, is like to fall in
great ruin. Also he that in religion seeks to have liberty and releasinge
of his duty, shall always be in anguishe and sorrow, for one thing or other
shall ever displease him. Therefore take heed how other religious persons
do, that be right straightly kept under the rule of their religion. They go
seldom forth, they live hardly, they eat poorly, and be clothed grossly:
they labor much, speak little, watch long, rise early, make long prayers,
read often, and keep them selves always in some wholesome doctrine. Behold the
Carthusiens, the Cistersiens, and many other monks and Nuns of diverse
religions, how they rise every night to serve our Lord. And therefore it
were great shame to thee, that thou should wax slow and dull in so holy a
work, where so many laud and praise our Lord. O how joyous a life were it,
if we should nothing else do, but with heart and mouth continuallye praise
our Lord. Now truly, if we should never need to eat, drink, nor sleep,
but that we might always laud him: and only take heed to spiritual
studies, then were we much more happy and blessed then we are now, when we
are bound of necessity to serve the body. O would to God, that these bodily
meats were turned into spiritual refections, which (alas for sorrow) we taste
but seldom. When a man is come to that perfection, that he seeks not his
consolation in any creature, then begins God first to savor sweet unto him,
and then he shall be contented with every thing that comes, be it in likinge
or mislikinge. Then shall he be glad for no worldly profit, be it never so
great, nor sorry for the wantinge of it, for he has set and established him
self wholly in God, the which is unto him all in all: to whom nothing
perishes nor dies, but all thing lives to him, and serves him without
ceassinge, after his biddinge. In every thing remember the end, and that
time lost can not be called again. Without labor and diligence thou shalt
never get virtue. If thou begin to be negligent, thou beginnest to be feeble
and weak: but if thou apply thee to fervor, thou shall find great help of
God, and for the love of virtue thou shall find less pain in all thy
labors then thou did first. He that is seruent and louinge, is always
quick and ready to all things that be of God, and to his honor. It is more
labor to resist vices and passions, then it is to toil and sweat in bodily
labors. He that will not flee small sins, shall be little and little fall into
greater. Thou shall always be glad at night, when thou haste spent the day
before fruitfullye. Take heed to thy self, and stir thy self always to
devotion. Admonish thy self, and howesouer thou remember other, forget not
thy self: and so much shall thou profit in virtue, as thou can break thine
own will, and follow the will of God.

Here begins the second Book.


Of inward conversation. The first Chapter.
THe kingdom of God is within you (says Christ our Savior) Turn thee
therefore with all thy heart to God, and forsake this wretched world, and thy
soul shall find great inward rest. Learn to despise outward things, and
give thy self to inward things, and thou shall see the kingdom of God come
into thy soul. The kingdom of God is peace and joy in the holy ghost, that
is not granted to wicked people. Our Lord Jesus Christ will come to thee, and
will show to thee his consolations. If thou will make ready for him in thy
heart a dwelling place, that is all that he desires to have in thee, and there
is his pleasure to be. There is betwixt almighty God and a devout soul many
ghostly visitinges, sweet inward speaking, great gifts of grace, many
consolations, much heavenly peace, and wondrous familiarity of the blessed
presence of God. Therefore thou faithful soul, prepare thy heart to Christ
thy spouse, that he may come to thee, and dwell in thee: for he says him
self, Who so loves me, will keep my commandment. And my father and I and
the holy Ghost shall come to him, and we shall make in him our dwelling place.
Give therefore to Christ free entry into thy heart, and keep out all things
that may let his entrye: and when thou haste him, thou art rich enough, and
he only shall suffice to thee, and then he shall be thy prouider and defender,
and thy faithful helper in every necessity, so that thou shall not need to
put thy trust in any other without him. Man is soon changed, and lightly
falls away, but Christ abides for ever, and stands strongly with his
lover unto the end. There is no great trust to be put in man that is but
mortal and frail, though he be right much profitable, and also much beloved
unto thee, nor any great heaviness to be taken, though he sometime turn and be
against thee: for they that this day be with thee, to morrow may happen to be
against thee, and may often turn, as does the wind. Put thy full trust
therefore in God, and let him be thy love and dread above all things, and he
will answer for thee, and will do for thee in all things as shall be most
needeful and expedient for thee. Thou haste here no place of long abiding, for
wheresoever thou become, thou art but a stranger, and a pilgrim, and never
shall thou find perfect rest, til thou be fullye united to God. Why do
thou look to have rest here, since this is not thy resisting place? Thy full
rest must be in heavenly things, and all earthly things, thou mnst behold as
things transitorye, and shortly passing away: and be well ware thou cleave
not ouermuche to them, least thou be taken with love of them, and in the end
perish thereby. Let thy thought be always upward to god, and direct thy prayers
to Christ continually: and if thou may not for frayltie of thy self always
occupye thy mind in contemplation of the godhead, be then occupied with mind
of his passion, and in his blessed wounds make thee a dwelling place. And if
thou fly devoutly to the wound of Christ's side, and to the marks of his
passion, thou shall feel great comfort in every trouble, and shall little
force, though thou be openly despised in the world, and what evil words soever
be spoken of thee, they shall little grieve thee. Our master Christ was
despised in the world of all men, and in his most need was forsaken of his
acquaintance and friends, and left among shames and rebukes. He would suffer
wrongs, and be naught set by in the world, and we will not, that any person do
us wrong, nor disprayse our deeds. Christ had many adversaries and backbiters,
and we would have all to be our friends and lovers. How should thy patience be
crowned in heaven, if no adversity should be fall to thee in earth. If thou will suffer none adversity, how may thou be the friend of Christ? It
behooves thee to suffer with Christ, and for Christ, if thou will reign with
Christ. Truly, if thou had once entered into the bloody wounds of Jesus,
and had there tasted a little of his love, thou should little care for
lykinges or mislikinges of the world, but thou should rather have great
joy, when wrongs and reproufes were done unto thee: for perfect love of God
makes a man perfectlye to despise him self. The true inward love of God that
is free from all inordinate affections, may anon turn him self freelye to
God, and lift him self up in spirit, in contemplation, and fruitfullye rest
him in Christ. Also he, to whom all things be esteemed as they be, and not as
they be taken and thought to be of wordly people, is very wise, and is rather
taught of God then of man. And he that can inwardly lift his mind upward to
God, and little regard outward things, needs not for to seek for time or
place to go to prayers, or to do other good deeds or virtuous occupations.
For the ghostlye man may soon gather him self together, and fix his mind in
God, for he never suffers it to be fullye occupied in outward things. And
therefore his outward labors, and his worlddlye occupations necessary for the
time, hinder him not but little, for as they come so he applies him self to
them, and refers them always to the will of God. Moreover, a man that is
well ordered in his soul, forces little the unkind demeanor of worldly
people, ne yet their proud behavior. As much as a man loves any worldly
thing more then it should be beloved, so much his mind is hindered and let
from the true ordinate love that he should have to God. If thou wexe well
purged from all inordinate affections, then whatsoever should befall to thee,
should go to thy ghostly profit, and to the great increasing of grace and
virtue in thy soul. But the cause why so many things displease thee, and
trouble thee, is, for that thou art not yet perfectly dead to the world, nor
thou art not yet fully severed from the love of earthly things: and nothing
so much defiles the soul, as an unclean love to creatures, if thou forsake
to be comforted by worldly things outwardly, thou may behold more
perfectly heavenly things, and thou shall then singe continually lauds and
praysinges to him with great joy and inward gladness of heart, The which
grant thee and me the blessed Trinity. Amen.

Of a meek knovving of our own defaultes. The second Chapter.
Regard not much who is with thee, nor who is against thee, but be this thy
greatest study, that God may be with thee. In every thing that thou do,
have a good conscience, and he shall well defend thee, and whomsoever he will
help and defend, there may no malice hinder ne grieve. If thou can be still,
and suffer a while, thou shall without doubt see the help of God come in thy
need. He knows the time and place how to deliver thee, and therefore thou
must resign thy self wholye to him. It pertayneth to him to help and deliver
from all confusion. Nevertheless, it is often times much profitable to us,
for the more surer keeping of meekenes, that other men know our defaultes, and
reprove us of them. When a man meeketh him self for his offenses, he lightly
pleases other, and reconcileth himself to them whom he has offended. The
meek man almighty God defends and comfort, to him he inclines him
self, and sends him great plentye of his grace. To him also he shows his
secrettes, and lovingly draws him to him, and after his oppressions he
lifts him up to glory. The meek man, when he has suffered confusion and
reproufe, is in good peace, for he trusts in God, and not in the world.
Moreover, if thou will come to the highness of perfection, think not thy self
to have profited any thing in virtue, til thou can feel meekely in thine
heart, that thou haste less meekenes, and less virtue then any other has.

How good it is for a man to be peaceful. The 3. Chapter.
First put thy self in peace, and then may thou the better pacify other.
A peaceful man and a patient profits more to him self, and other also, then
a man learned, who is vnpeacefull. A man that is passionate turns often times
good into evil, and lightly believes the worse part: but a good peaceful
man turns all thing to the best, and has suspicion to no man. But he that
is not content, is often troubled with many suspicions, and neither is he quiet
him self, nor yet suffers he other to be quiet. He speaks often times that
he should not speak, and he omitteth to speak, that were more expedient to
be spoken. He considers greatly what other be bound to do, but to that,
where unto he him self is bounden, he is full negligent. Have therefore first
a zeal and a respect to thy self, and to thine own soul, and then may
thou the more righteously, and with the more due order of charity have zeal
upon thy neighbors. Thou art anon ready to excuse thine own defaultes, but
thou will not hear the excuses of thy brethren. Truly it were more charitable
and more profitable to thee, that thou should accuse thy self, and excuse
thy brother: for if thou will be borne, bear other. Behold how far thou art
yet from perfect meekenes and charity, which can not be angry with none, but
with them selves. It is no great thing to be well conversant with good and
tractable men, for that naturally pleases all people, and every man gladly
has peace with them, and most loves them that follow their appetite, but to
live peaceably with evil men, and with froward men that lack good manners,
and be untaught, and that be also contrarious unto us, is a great grace and a
manly deed, and much to be praised: for it can not be done, but through
great ghostly strength. Some persons can be quiet them selves, and can also
live quietly with other: and some can neither be quiet them selves, nor yet
suffer other to be quiet. They be grievous to other, but they be more grievous
to them selves. Some can keep them selves in good peace, and can also bring
other to live in peace, and nevertheless all our peace while we be in this
mortal life, stands more in meek sufferinge of troubles, and of things
that be contrarious unto us, then in the not feelinge of them, for no man may
live here without some trouble. And therefore he that can best suffer, shall
have most peace, and is very true overcome of him self, is a Lord of the
world, a friend to Christ, and the true inheritour of the kingdom of heaven.

Of a pure mind, and a simple intent. The.4. Chapter.
MAn is borne up from earthlye things with two wings, that is to say, with
plainnes and cleannes: plainnes is in the intent, and cleannes is in the love.
The good, true, and plain intent looks toward God, but the clean love
takes a say, and tastes his sweetness. If thou be free from all inordinate
love, there shall no good deed hinder thee, but that thou shall therewith
increase in the way of perfection. If thou intend well, and seek nothing but
God, and the profit of thine own soul, and of thy neighbors, thou shall
have great inward liberty of mind. And if thy heart be strayte with God, then
every creature shall be to thee a mirror of life, and a book of holy
doctrine, for there is no creature so little nor so vile, but that it shows
and represents the goodness of God. And if thou were inwardly in thy soul
pure and cleave, thou should then without lettinge take all things to the
best. A clean heart pearceth both heaven and hell. Such as a man in his
conscience inwardlye, such he shows to be by his outward conversation. If
there be any true joy in this world, that has a man of a clean conscience.
And if there be any where tribulation or anguishe, an evil conscience knows
it best. Also, as iron put into the fire is cleansed fro ruste, and is made all
clean and pure, right so, a man turninge him self wholly to God, is purged
from all slouthfulnes, and sodenlie is changed into a new man. When a man
begins to wax dull and slow to ghostly business, then a little labor
fears him greatly, and then takes he gladly outward comfortes of the
world, and of the flesh: but when he begins perfectlye to overcome him
self, and to walk stro^glye in the way of God, then he regards the labors
but little, that he thought before to be right grievous, and as importable to
him.

Of the knovvinge of our self. The.5. Chapter.
We may not trust much in our selves, nor in our own wit, for often times
through our presumption we lack grace, and right little light of true
understanding is in us: and that we have, many times we lose through our own
negligence, and yet do we not see, neither will we see how blind we are.
Often times we do evil, and in defense thereof we do much worse, and
sometime we be moved with passion, and we ween it to be of a zeal to god. We
can anon reprove small defaults in our neighbors, but our own defaults that
be much greater we will not see. We feel anon, and ponder greatly what we
suffer of other, out what other suffer of us, we will not consider. But he that
would well and righteously judge his own defaults, should not so rigorously
judge the defaults of his neighbors. A man that is inwardlye turned to God,
takes heed of him self before all other: and he that can well take heed of
him self, can lightly be still of other men's deeds. Thou shall never be an
inward man, and a devout follower of Christ, unless thou canste keep thy
self from meddling on other men's deeds, and canste specially take heed of
thine own. If thou take heed wholly to God and to thy self, the defaultes
which thou see in other shall little move thee. Where art thou, when thou art
not present to thy self? And when thou haste all run about, and much haste
considered other men's works, what haste thou profited thereby, if thou have
forgotten thy self? If thou will therefore have peace in thy soul, and be
perfectly united to God in blessed love, set apart all other men's deeds, and
only set thy self and thine own deeds before the eye of thy soul, and that
thou see amiss in thee, shortly reform it. Thou shall much profit in grace
if thou keep thee free from all te^porall cares, and it shall hinder thee
greatly, if thou set price by any temporal things. Therefore let nothing be
in thy sight high, nothing great, nothing liking ne acceptable to thee, but it
be purely God, or of God. Think all comfortes vain that come to thee by any
creature. He that loves God and his own soul for God, despises all other
love: for he sees well that God alone which is eternal, incomprehensible, and
that fullfilleth all things with his goodness, is the whole solace and comfort
of the soul, and that he is the very true gladness of heart, and none other
but only he.

Of the gladness of a clean conscience. The 6. Chapter.
THe glory of a good man, is the witness of God, that he has a good
conscience. Have therefore a good conscience, and thou shall always have
gladness. A good conscience may hear many wrongs, and is ever merry and glad in
adversities, but an evil conscience is always fearful and unquiet. Thou
shall rest thee sweetly and blessedlie, if thine own heart reprove thee.
not. Be never glad, but when thou have done well. Evil men have never perfect
gladness, nor feel no inward peace, for our Lord says, there is no peace to
wicked people. And though they say, We be in good peace, there shall no evil
come to us, lo who may grieve us, or hurt us? believe the^ not, for suddenly
the wrath of god shall fall upon them, unless they amend, and all that they
have done shall turn to naught, and that they would have done shall be undone.
It is no grievous thing to a fervent lover of God to joy in tribulation, for
all his joy and glarie is to joy in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ. It is
a short glory that is given to man, and commonly some heaviness follows
after. The joy and gladness of good men is in their own conscience, and the
joy of righteous men is in God, and of God, and their joy is in virtue and in
good life. He that desires the very perfect joy that is everlasting, sets
little price by temporal joy: and he that seeks any worldly joy, or does
not in his heart fully despise it, shows him self openly to love but little
the joy of heaven. He has great tranquillity and peace of heart, that neither
regards praises nor dispraises, and he shall soon be pacified and content
that has a good conscience. Thou art not the better because thou art praised,
nor worse if thou be dispraysed, for as thou art, thou art. And whatsoever be
said of thee, thou art no better then almighty God (which is the searcher of
man's heart) will witness thee to be. If thou behoulde what thou art inwardly,
thou shall not care much what the world speaks of thee outwardly. Man sees
the face, but God beholds the heart, Man beholds the deed, but God
beholds the intent of the deed. It is a great toke^ of a meek heart, a man
ever to do well, and yet to think himself to have done but little. And it is
a great sign of cleannes of life, and of inward trust in God, when a man
takes not his comfort of any creature. When a man seeks no outward witness
for him self, it appears that he has wholly committed him self to God.
Also after the words of S. Paul, he that commends him self, is not
justified, but he whom God commends, and he that has his mind always lift
up to God, and is not bound with any inordinate affection outwardly, is in
the degree, and in the state of a holy and a blessed man.

Of the love of Jesus above all things. The.7. Chapter.
BLessed is he that knows how good it is to love Jesus, and for his sake to
despise him self. It behooves the lover of Jesus to forsake all other love
beside him, for he will be loved only above all other. The love of creatures
is deceyuable and failing, but the love of Jesus is faithful and always
abydinge. He that cleaves to any creature, must of necessity fail, as does
the creature: but he that cleaves abydingly to Jesus, shall be made stable in
him for ever. Love him therefore, and hold him thy freende, for when all other
forsake thee, he will not forsake thee, nor suffer thee finally to perish.
Thou must of necessity be departed from thy friends, and from all man's
company, whether thou will or not, and therefore keep thee with thy Lord Jesus
living and dying, and commit thee to his fidelity, and he will be with thee and
help thee, when all other forsake thee. Thy beloved is of such nature, that he
will not admit any other laue, for he will have alonely the love of thy heart,
and will sit therein, as a king in his proper throne. If thou could well
avoid from thee the love of creatures, he would always abide with thee, and
never would forsake thee. Thou shalt in manner find it all as lost,
whatsoever trust thou have put in any manner of thing beside Jesus. Put not thy
trust therefore to any such thing as is not but a quilfull of wind, or as a
holowe stick, which is not able to sustain thee, ne to help thee, but in thy
most need will deceive thee, for man is but as hay, and all his glory is as a
flower in the feelde, which suddenly vanishes and slideth away: if thou take
heed only to the outward appearaunce, thou shall soon be deceived: and if
thou seek thy comfort in any thing but in Jesus, thou shall feel thereby great
spiritual loss: but if thou seek in all things thy Lord Jesus, thou shall
truly find thy Lord Jesus, and if thou seek thy self, thou shall find thy
self, but that shall be to thine own great loss: for truly a man is more
grievous and more hurtful to him self, if he seek not his Lord Jesus, then is
all the world, and more then all his adversaries may be.

Of the familier freendship of Jesus. The.8. Chapter.
When our Lord Jesus is present, all thing is liking, and nothing seems
hard to do for his love, but when he is absent all thing that is done for his
love is paynefull and hard. When Jesus speaks not to the soul, there is no
faithful consolation: but if he speak but one word only, the soul feels
great inward comfort. Did not Mary Magdalene rise soon from weeping, when
Martha showed her that her master Christ was nigh, and called her? yes truly.
O that is an happy hour, when Jesus calls us from weeping to joy of
spirit. Remember how dry and how undevout thou art without Jesus, and how
unwise, how vain, and how uncunning thou art when thou desire any thing
beside Jesus: truly that desire is more hurtful to thee, than if thou had
lost all the world. What may this world gene thee, but through the help of
Jesus? To be without Jesus is a pain of hell: and to be with Jesus is a pleasant
Paradise. If Jesus be with thee, there may no enemy grieve thee: and he that
finds Jesus, finds a great treasure that is best above all other treasures:
and he that Ioseth Jesus, loses very much, and more than all the world. He is
most poor that lives without Jesus, and he his most rich that is with Jesus.
It is great cunning to be well co^uersaunt with Jesus, and to keep him is right
great wisdom. Be meke and peaceful, and Jesus shall be with thee: be devout
and quiet, and Jesus will abide with thee. Thou may anon drive away thy
Lord Jesus, and loose his grace, if thou apply thy self to outward things:
and if through negligence of thy self thou loose him, what freende shalt thou
the^ have? Without a freende thou may not long endure, and if Jesus be not
thy freende most before all other, thou shall be very heavy and desolate,
and be left without all perfect friendship. And therefore thou do not wisely
if thou trust or joy in any other thing beside him. We should rather choose
to have all the world against us, then to offend God, and therefore of all
that be to thee lefe and dear, let thy Lord Jesus be to thee most lefe and
dear, and most specially beloved to thee above all other, and let all other be
beloved for him, and he only for him self. Jesus is only to be beloved for
him self, for he only is proved good and faithful before all other
friends. In him and for him both enemies and friends are to be beloved, and
before all things we ought meekely with all diligence to pray to him, that he
may be beloved and honored of all his creatures. Never cover to be singulerly
loved or commended, for that belongs only to God, which has none like unto
him, and desire not that any thing be occupied with thee in thy heart, ne that
thou be occupied with love of any creature, but that thy Lord Jesus may be in
thee, and in every good man and woman. Be pure and clean inwardly without
letting of any creature, as nigh as thou canste: for it behooves thee to have a
right clean, and a pure heart to Jesus, if thou will know and feel how sweet
he is. And verily thou may not come to that purity, unless thou be
prevented and drawn through his grace, and that all other things set apart,
thou be inwardlye knyt and united to him. When the grace of God comes to a
man, then is he made mighty and strong to do every thing that belongs to
virtue, and when grace withdraws, then is he made weak and feeble to do any
good deed, and is in manner as he were left only to pain and punishments.
And if it happen so with thee, yet despair not overmuch therefore, nor leave
not thy good deeds undone, but stand always stro^glye after the will of God,
and turn all things that shall come to thee to the laud and praysinges of
his name. For after winter comes somer, and after the night comes the day,
and after a great tempest shows again right clear and pleasant weather.

Of the vvanting of all solace and comfort. The 9. Chapter.
IT is no great thing to despise man's comfort, when the comfort of God is
present: but it is a great thing, and that a right great thing, a man to be
so strong in spirit that he may bear the wantinge of them both, and for the
love of God, and to his honor, to have a ready will, to bear as it were a
desolation of spirit, and yet in nothing to seek him self nor his own
merits. What proof of virtue is it, if a man be merry and devout in God when
grace comes and visits the soul? for that hour is desired of every
creature. He rides right safely, whom the grace of God bears and supporteth:
and what marvel is it if he feel no burden, that is borne up by him that is
almighty, and that is led by the sovereign guide that is God him self? We
be always glad to have solace and consolation, but we would hane no
tribulation, nor we will not lightly cast from us the false love of our self.
The blessed Martyr Saint Laurence through the love of God mightily overcame the
love of the world, and of him self, for he despised all that was likinge and
delectable in the world. And Sixtus the Pope, whom he most loved for the love
of God, he suffered meekelie to be taken from him, and so through the love of
God he overcame the love of man, and for man's comfort he chose rather to follow
the will of God. Do thou in like wise, and learn to forsake some necessary
and well-beloved freende for the love of God, and take it not greeuouslie, when
thou art left or forsaken of thy freende: for of necessity it behooves
worldly friends to be disseuered. It behooves a man to fight long, and
mightilye to strive with him self, before he shall learn fully to overcome
him self, or be able freely and readlly to set all his desires in God. When a
man loves him self, and much trusts to him self, he falls anon to man's
comfortes: but the very true lover of Christ, and the dilligent follower of
virtue, falls not so lightlye to them, neither seeks much such sensible
sweetenes, ne such bodily delites, but rather is glad to suffer great hard
labors and pain for the love of Christ. Nevertheless, when ghostlye comfort
is sent to thee of God, take to meeklye, and give humble thanks for it: but
know it for certain, that it is of the great goodness of God that sends it to
thee, and not of thy deserving: and look thou be not therefore lift up into
pride, nor that thou joy much thereof, neither presume vainly therein, but
rather that thou be the more meek for so noble a gift, and the more wary and
fearful in all thy works: for that time will pass away, and the time of
temptation will shortly follow after. When comfort is withdrawn, despair
not therefore, but meekelye and patiently abide the visitation of God, for he
is able, and of power to give thee more grace, and more ghostly comfort, then
thou had first. Such alteration of grace is no new nor strange thing to
them that have had experience in the way of God, for in great Saints, and
holy prophets was many times found like alteration. Wherefore the prophet
David says: Ego dixi in abundantia mea, non mouebor in aeternum. That is to
say, When David had abundance of ghostly comfort, he said to our Lord,
that he trusted he should never be removed from such comfort. But after, when
grace withdrewe, he said: Auertisti faciem tuam a me, and factus sum
conturbatus. That is, O Lord, thou have withdrawn thy ghostlye comfortes from
me, and I am left in great trouble and heaviness: and yet nevertheless, he
dispaired not therefore, but prayed heartily unto our Lord, and said: Ad to
domine clamabo, and ad deum meum deprecabor. That is to say, I shall busilye
cry to thee, O Lord, and I shall meekelye pray to thee for grace and
comfort. And anon he had the effect of his prayer, as he witnesses him
self, saying thus: Audiuit dominus, and misertus est mei, dominus factus est
adiutor meus, That is to say, Our Lord has heard my prayer, and has had
mercy on me, and has now again sent me his help and ghostlye comfort. And
therefore he says afterward: Lord, thou have turned my sorrow into joy, and
thou haste belapped me with heavenly gladness. And if almighty God has thus
done with holy Saints, it is not for us weak and feeble persons to despair,
though we sometime have fervor of spirit, and be sometime left cold and void
of devotion. The holy ghost goes and comes after his pleasure, and
therefore the holy man Job says: Lord, thou graciously visitest thy lover in
the morning tide, that is to say, in the time of comfort, and suddenly thou
prouest him: that is to say, in withdrawing such comfortes from him. Wherein
then may I trust, or in whom may I have any confidence, but only in the great
endless grace and mercy of God? for why? the company of good men, nor the
fellowship of devout brethren and faithful friends, neither the having of holy
books, or devout treatises, ne yet the hearing of sweet songs, or of devout
hymns may little avail, and bring forth but little comfort to the soul, when
we are left to our own frailty and poverty. And when we be so left, there is
no better remedy but patience, with a whole resigning of our own will to the
will of God. I never yet found any religious person so perfect, but that he
had sometime absentinge of grace, or some minishinge of fervor: and there was
never yet any Saint so highly ravished, but that he first or last had some
temptation. He is not worthy to have the high gift of contemplation, that has
not suffered for God some tribulation. The temptations goinge before, were wont
to be a soothfast token of heavenly comfort shortly coming after. And to
them that be found stable in their temptations, is promised by our Lord great
consolation. And therefore he says thus: He that overcomes, I shall give him
to eat of the tree of life. Heavenly comfort is sometime given to a man, that
he may after be more strong to suffer adversities: but after follows
temptation, that he be not lift up into pride, and think him self worthy of
such consolation. The ghostly enemy sleeps not, neither is the flesh yet
fully mortified: and therefore thou shalt never cease to prepare thy self
to ghostlye battle, for thou haste enemies on every side, that ever will be
ready to assail thee, and hinder thy good purpose all that they can.

Of yeeldinge thanks to God for his manifold graces. The.10. Chapter.
Why seek thou rest here, sith thou art borne to labor? dispose thy
self to patience, rather then to co^fortes, to bear the Cross of penance,
rather then to have gladness. What temporal man would not gladly have
spiritual comfortes, if he might always keep them? for spiritual comfortes
excede far all worldly delites, and all bodelie pleasures, for all worldly
delites be either foul or vain, but ghostly delites are only iocunde and
honest, brought forth by virtues, and sent of God into a clean soul. But such
comfortes no man may have when he would, for the time of temptation tarieth
not long. The false liberty of will, and the overmuch trust that we have in
our self, be much contrary to the heavenly visitations. Our Lord does well
in sendinge such comfortes, but we do not well, when we yield no thanks
therefore to him again. The greatest cause why the gifts of grace may not
lightly come to us, is, for that we be unkind to the gyuer, and yield not
thanks to him, from whom all goodness comes. Grace is always given to the^
that be ready to yield thanks therefore again. And therefore it shall be taken
from the proud man, that is wont to be given to the meke man. I would none of
that consolation that should take from me compunction, nor any of that
contemplatio^ that should lift my soul into presu^ption. Every high thing in
sight of man, is not holy, nor every desire clean and pure: every sweet thing
is not good, nor every dear thing to man, is always pleasant to God. We
shall therefore gladly take such gifts, whereby we shall be the more ready
to forsake our self, and our own will. He that knows the comforts that come
through the gifts of grace, and knows also how sharp and painful the
absentinge of grace is, shall not dare to think, that any goodness comes of
him self, but he shall openly confess, that of him self he is right poor,
and naked of all virtue: yield therefore to God, that is his, and to thy self
that is thine: that is to say, thank God for his manifold graces and blame
thy self for thine offenses. Hold in thee always a sure ground, and a sure
fouudation of meekenes, and then the highness of virtue shall shortly be given
unto thee: for the high tower of virtue may not long stand, but if it be borne
up with the low foundation of meekes. They that be most great in heaven, be
least in their own sight: and the more glorious they be, the meeker they are
in them selves, full of truth and heavenly joy, not desirous of any vain
glory or praisinge of man. Also they that be fully stabled and confirmed iu
God, may in no wise be lift up into pride: and they that ascribe all goodness
to God, seek no vain glory nor vain praysinges in the world, but they
desire only to joy, and to be glorified in God, and desire in heart, that he
may be honored, lauded and praised above all things, both in him self, and
in all his Saints: and that is always the thing that perfect men most covet,
and most desire to bring about. Be thou louinge and thankful to God for the
least benefit that he gives thee, and then shall thou be the more apt and
worthy to receive of him more greater benefits. Think the least gift that he
gives, is great, and the most despisable things accept as special gifts,
and as great tokens of love: for if the dignity of the geuer be well
considered, no gift that he gives shall seem little. It is no little thing
that is given of God: for though he send pain and sorrow, we should take
them gladly and thankefullie, for it is for our ghostly health, all that he
suffers to come unto us. If a man desire to hold the grace of God, let him
be kind and thankful for such grace as he has received, patient when it is
withdrawn, and pray devoutly, that it may shortly come again. Let him be
meek and lowa in spirit, that he lose it not again through his presumption
and pride of heart.

Of the small number of the lovers of the Cross. The.11. Chapter.
Jesus has many lovers of his kingdom of heaven, but he has few bearers of
his cross. Many desire his consolation, but few desire his tribulation. He
finds many fellows at eatinge and drinkinge, but he finds few that will be
with him in his abstine^ce and fasting. All men would joy with Christ, but
few would any thing suffer for Christ. Many follow him to the breakinge of
his bread, for their bodilye refection, but few will follow him to drink a
draught of the Chalice of his passion. Many maruayle and honor his miracles,
but few will follow the shame of his cross, and of his other vilanies. Many
love Jesus so long as no adversity follows to them, and can praise him, and
bless him, when they receive any benefit of him: but if Jesus a little withdraw?
him self from them, and a little forsake them, anon they fall to some great
grudginge, or to ouergreat defection, or into open desperation: But they that
love Jesus purelie for him self, and not for their own profit and commodity,
they bless him as heartily in temptation and tribulation, and in all other
adversities, as they do in time of consolation. And if he never sent them
consolation, yet would they always laud him, and praise him. O how may the
love of Jesus do to the help of a soul, if it be pure and clean, not mixed
with any inordinate lone to him self? truly nothing more. May not they then
that ever look for worldly comfortes, and for worldly consolations, be
called worldly inarchants, and worldly lovers, rather then lovers of God? do
they not openly show by their deeds that they rather love them self than
God? yes truly. O where may be found any that will serve God freely and
purelye, without looking for some reward for it again? And where may be
found any so spiritual, that he is cleerelye delivered and bereft from love
of him self, and that is truly poor in spirit, and is whollye avoided from
love of creatures? I trow noue such can be found but it be far hence, and in
far countries If a man give all his substance for God yet he is naught: and if
he do great penance for his sins, yet he is but little* and if he have great
cunning and knowledge, yet he is far from virtue: and if he have great virtue
and brenninge devotion, yet much wants in him, And that is specially one
thing, which is most necessary to him: what is that? that all things
forsaken, and him self also forsaken, he go clearly from him self, and keep
nothing to him self of any private love, and when he has done all that he
ought to do, that he feel in him self, as he had nothing done, nor that he
think it great, that some other might think great, but that he think him
self truly, as he is, an unprofitable feruant: for the author of truth, our
Savior Christ says, when ye have done all that is commanded you to do, yet
say that ye be but unprofitable servants. Then he that can thus do, may
well be called poor in spirit, and naked of private love: and he may well say
with the prophet David, I am united in God, and am poor and meek in heart.
There is none more rich, none more free, nor any of more power, then he that
can forsake him self, and all passinge things, and that truly can hold him
self to be lowest and vilest of all other.

Of the way of the Cross, and bow profitable patience is in adversity. The
12. Chapter.
THe words of our Savior ^e thought very hard and grievous, when he says
thus: Forsake your leife, take the Cross, and follow me. But much more
grievous shall it be, to hear these words at the last day of judgment: Go
ye from me ye cursed people into the fire that ever shall last. But those that
now gladly hear and follow the words of Christ, whereby he counsaileth them
to follow him, shall not then need to dread for hearing those words of
everlasting damnation. The sign of the Cross shall appear in heaven, when
our Lord shall come to judge the world, and the servants of the Cross, who
conformed them selves here in this life to Christ crucified on the Cross,
shall go to Christ their Judge with great faith and trust in him. Why do
thou then dread to take this Cross, since it is the very way to the kingdom
of heaven, and none but that? In the Cross is health, in the Cross is life,
in the Cross is defense from our enemies, in the cross is infusion of
heavenly sweetness, in the Cross is the strength of mind, the joy of
spirit, the highness of virtue, and the full perfection of all holiness, and
there is no health of soul, nor hope of everlasting life, but through virtue
of the cross Take therefore the Cross, and follow Jesus, and thou shall go
into the life everlasting. He has gone before thee bearinge his Cross, and
died for thee upon the Cross, that thou should in like wise bear with him
the Cross of penance and tribulation, and that thou should be ready
likewise for his love to suffer death, if need require, as he has done for
thee. If thou die with him, thou shall live with him: and if thou be fellow
with him in pain, thou shall be with him in glory. Behold then how in the
Cross stands all, and how in dyinge to the world lies all our health, and
that there is no other way to true and inward peace, but the way of the
Cross, and of deadly mortifyinge of the body to the spirit. So whether thou will, and seek what thou list, and thou shall never find above thee, nor
beneath thee, within thee, nor without thee, more high, more excellent, nor
more sure way to Christ, then the way of the holy cross. Dispose every
thing after thy will and thou shall never find, but that thou must of
necessity somewhat suffer either with thy will, or against thy will, and so
shall thou always find the Cross: for either thou shall feel pain in thy
body, or in thy soul thou shall have trouble of spirit. Thou shall be
sometime as thou were forsaken of God. Sometime thou shall be vexed with thy
neighbor, and, that is yet more painful, thou shall sometime be grievous to
thy self, and thou shall find no mean to be delivered, but that it behooves
thee to suffer til it shall please almighty god of his goodness otherwise to
dispose for thee: for he will, that thou shall learn to suffer tribulation
without co^solatio^, that thou may thereby learn, wholly to submit thy
self to him, and by tribulation to be made more meek, then thou were at the
first. No man feels the passion of Christ so effectuouslie, as he that
feels like pain as Christ did. This Cross is always ready, and every where
it abides thee, and thou may not flee, nor fully escape it, whersoeuer
thou become, for in what place soever thou art, thou shall bear thy self
about with thee, and so always shall thou find thy self. Turn thee where
thou will, above thee, beneath thee, within thee, and without thee, and thou
shall find this cross on every side, so that it shall be necessary for thee,
that thou always keep thee in patience: and that it behooves thee to do, if
thou will have inward peace, and deserve the perpetual crown in heaven. If
thou will gladly bear this Cross, it shall bear thee, and bring thee to
the end that thou desire, where thou shall never after have any thing to
suffer. And if thou bear this Cross against thy will, thou make a great
burden to thy self, and it will be the more grievous to thee, and yet it
behooves thee to bear it. And if it happen thee to put away one cross, that
is to say, one tribulation, yet surely another will come, and happlie more
grievous then the first was. Trowest thou to escape, that never yet any mortal
man might escaped What Saint in this world has been without this Cross, and
without some trouble? Truly, our Lord Jesus was not one hour without some
sorrow and pain, as long as he lived here, for it behooved him to suffer
death, and to rise again, and so to enter into his glory: and how is it then,
that thou seek any other way to heaven then this plain high way of the
Cross? All the life of Christ was Cross and martyrdom, and thou seek
pleasure and joy. Thou errest greatly, if thou seek any other thing then to
suffer: For all this mortal life is full of miseries, and is all beset about
and marked with Crosses, and the more highly that a man profits in soi^ite,
the more painful Crosses shall he find, For by the sooth fastnes of Christ's
love, wherein he daily increases, daily appears unto him more and more the
pain of this exile. But nevertheless, a man thus vexed with pain, is not
left wholly without all comfort, for he sees well, that great fruit and high
reward shall grow unto him by the bearinge of his Cross. And when a man
freely submits him self to such tribulation, then all the burden of
tribulation is sodenlie turned into a great trust of heavenly consolation. And
the more the flesh is punished with tribulation, the more is the soul
strengthened daily by inward consolation: And sometime the soul shall feel
such comfort in adversities, that for the love and desire that it has to be
conformed to Christ crucified, it would not be without sorrow and trouble:
for it considers well, that the more that it may suffer for his love here,
the more acceptable shall he be to him in the life to come. But this workinge
is not in the power of man, but through the grace of God, that is to say, that
a frail man should take and love that, which his bodily kind so much
abhors and flies: for it is not in the power of man, gladly to bear the
Cross, to love the Cross, to chastise the body, and to make it obedient to
the will of the spirit, to flee honors, gladly to sustain reproufes, to
despise him self, and to covet to be despised: patiently to suffer
adversities, with all displeasures thereof, and not to desire any manner of
profit in this world. If thou trust in thy self, thou shaltneuer bring this
matter about: but if thou trust in God, he shall send thee strength from
heaven, and the world, and the flesh shall be made subject to thee: yea, and if
thou be strongly armed with faith, and be marked with the Cross of Christ, as
his household servant, thou shall not need to fear thy ghostly enemy, for
he shall also be made subject to thee, so that he shall have no power against
thee. Purpose thy self therefore as a true faithful servant of God, manfullye
to bear the Cross of thy Lord Jesus, that for thy love was crucified on the
Cross: prepare thy self to suffer all manner of adversities and discommodities
in this wretched life: for so shall it be with thee, whersoeuer thou hide thee,
and there is no remedy to escape, but that thou must keep thy self always in
patience. If thou desire to be a dear and well beloved friend of Christ,
drink effectuouslie with him a draught of the chalice of his tribulation. As
for consolations, commit them to his will, that he order them as he knows
most expedient for thee: but as for thy self, and for as much as in thee is,
dispose thee to suffer, and when tribulatio^s come, take them as special
consolations, saying with the Apostle thus: The passions of this world be not
worthy of them selves, to bring us to the glory that is ordained for us in
the life to come, yea, though thou thy self might suffer as much as all men
do. When thou co^mest to that degree of patience, that tribulation is sweet
to thee, and for the love of God is sauoury and pleasant in thy sight, then
may thou trust, that it is well with thee, and that thou art in good estate,
for thou haste found paradise in earth. But as long as it is grievous to thee
to suffer, and thou seek to flee, so long it is not well with thee, neither
art thou in the perfect way of patience: but if thou could bring thy self
to that estate, that thou should be at, that is, to suffer gladly for God,
and to dye fully to the world, then should it shortly be better with thee,
and thou should find great peace: but yet, although thou were rapt with
Paul into the third heaven, thou should not therefore be sure without all
adversity: for our Savior speaking of S. Paul, after he had been rapt into
heaven, said thus of him: I shall show him how many things he shall suffer
for me. To suffer therefore to thee remains, if thou will love thy Lord
Jesus, and serve him perpetually. Would to god, that thou wexe worthy, to
suffer somewhat for his love. O how great joy should it be to thee, to
suffer for him? what gladness to all the Saints of heaven? and how great
edifying to thy neighbor? All men commend patience, and yet few men will
suffer. Righteously thou ought to suffer some little thing for God, that
suffer much more for the world. And know this for certain, that after
this bodily death thou shalt yet live, and the more that thou can dye to thy
self here, the more thou beginnest to live to God. No man is apt to receive
the heavenly reward, but he have first learned to bear adversities for the
love of Christ, for nothing is more acceptable to God, nor more profitable to
man in this world then to be glad to suffer for Christ, in so much that if it
were put in thy election, thou should rather chose adversity then
prosperity, for then by the pacient sufferinge thereof thou should be more
like to Christ, and the more confirmed to all his saints. Our merit, and our
perfection of life stands not in consolations and sweetness, but rather in
sufferinge of great grievous adversities and tribulations. For if there had
been any nearer or better way for the health of man's soul then to suffer, our
Lord Jesus would have showed it by words, or by examples: But for there was
not, therefore he openly exhorted his disciples that followed him, and all
other that desired to follow him, to forsake their own will, and to take the
Cross of penance and follow him, saying thus, Who so will come after me,
forsake he his own will, take he the Croue, and follow he me. Therefore all
things searched and read, be this the final conclusion, that by many
tribulations it behooves us to enter into the kingdom of heaven. To the which
bring us our Lord Jesus. Amen.

Here begins the third Book.


Of the inward speakinge of Christ to a faithful soul. The first Chapter.
I Shall take heed, says a devout soul, and I shall hear what my Lord Jesus
shall speak in me. Blessed is that man which hears Jesus speaking in his
soul, and that takes of his mouth some word of comfort, and blessed be the
ears that hear the secret rowninges of Jesus, and heed not the deceytfull
rowninges of this world. And blessed be the good plain ears that heed not
the outward speech, but rather take heed what God speaks and teaches
inwardlye in the soul. Blessed be the eyes also, that be shut from sight of
outward vanities, and that take heed to the inward mouinges of God. Blessed
be they also that get them virtues, and prepare them by good bodily and ghostly
works, to receive daily more and more the secret inspirations and inward
teachinges of God. Also, blessed be they that set them selves wholly to serve
God, and for his service set apart all lettinges of the world. O thou my soul,
take heed to that is said before, and shet the doors of thy sensualities,
that are thy five wits, that thou may hear inwardlye, what our Lord Jesus
speaks in thy soul. Thus says thy beloved, I am thy health, I am thy peace,
I am thy life, keep thee with me, and thou shall find peace in me. Forsake
the love of transitory things, and seek things that be everlasting What be
all temporal things but deceauable? and what may any creature help thee, if
thy Lord Jesus forsake thee. Therefore all creatures, and all worldly things
forsaken and left (...) that in thee is, to make thee pleasant in his sight,
that after this life thou may come to the life everlasting, in the kingdom
of heaven. Ame^.

How almighty God speaks invvardlye to man's soul without sound of
words. The.2. Chapter.
Speak Lord, for I thy servant am ready to hear thee, I am thy servant: give
me wisdom and understanding to know thy commandments. Bow my heart to
follow the words of thy holy teachings that they may distill into my soul, as
dew into the grass. The children of Israel said to Moses: Speak thou to
us, and we shall hear thee: but let not our Lord speak to us, least happily we
dye for dread. Not so Lord, not so I beseech thee, but rather I ask meekelye
with Samuel the prophet, that thou vouchsafe to speak to me thy self, and I
shall gladlye hear thee. Let not Moses, nor any other of the prophets speak
to me, but rather thou Lord, who art the inward inspirour and given of light
to all prophets: for thou alone without them may fully inform and instruct
me. They without thee may little profit me. They speak thy words, but they
give not the spirit to understand the words. They speak fair, but if thou
be still, they kindle not the heart. They show fair letters, but thou
declarest the sentence. They bring forth great high mysteries, but thou openest
thereof the true understanding: they declare thy commandments, but thou
helpest to perform them. They show the way, but thou geuest comfort to walk
therein. They do all outwardly, but thou illuminest and infourmest the heart
within. They water only outwardly, but it is thou, that geuest the inward
growing. They cry all in words, but thou geuest to the hearers understanding
of the words that be hard. Let not Moses therefore speak to me, but thou my
Lord Jesus, who art the everlasting truth, least happily I dye, and be made as
a man without fruit, warmed outwardly, and not inflamed inwardly, and so to
have the harder judgment, for that I have heard thy word, and not done it:
known it, and not loved it: believed it, and not fulfilled it. Speak
therefore to me thy self, for I thy servant am ready to hear thee. Thou
have the words of eternal life, speak them to me, to the full comfort of my
soul, and give me amendment of all my life past, to thy joy, honor and glory
everlastingly. Amen.

That the words of God are to be heard with great meekenes, and that there
be but fevve that ponder them, as they ought to do. The.3. Chapter.
MY son says our Lord, hear my words, and follow them, for they be most
sweet, far passing the wisdom and cunning of all philosophets, and wise men
of the world. My words be spiritual and ghostly, and can not be fully
comprehended by man's wit, neither are they to be turned or applied to the vain
pleasure of the hearer, but are to be heard in silence with great meeknes and
reverence, and with great inward affection of the heart, and also in great rest
and quietness of body and soul. O blessed is he, lord, whom thou infourmest and
teach, so that thou may be meelie and merciful. Lord unto him in the
evil day, that is to say, in the day of the most dreadful judgment, that he be
not then left desolate and comfortless in the land of damnation. Then says
our Lord again: I have taught prophets from the beginning, and yet cealse I
not to speak to every creature, but many be deaf, and will not hear, and
many hear the world more gladly then me, and more lightly follow the appetite
of the flesh, the^ the pleasure of God. The world promises temporal things
of small value, and yet is he served with great affection: but God promises
high things, and things eternal, and the hearts of the people be slow and
dull. Oh, who serves and obeys God in all things with so great desire, as he
does the world, and as worldly princes be served and obeyed? I trow none: for
why? for a little prebend great iourneyes be taken, but for the life
euerlas^ing, the people will scarsely lift their feet once from the ground. A
thing that is of small price, many times is busily sought, and for a penie is
sometime great strife, and for the promise of a little worldly profit, men
eschew not to swinke and sweat both day and night: But alas for sorrow, for
the goods everlasting, and for the reward that may not be esteemed by man's
ha^^e, and for the high honor and glory that never shall have end, men be
slow to take any manner of pain and labor. Be thou therefore ashamed thou
slow servant of God, that they be found more ready to works of death, then
thou art to works of life, and that they joy more in vanity, then thou in
truth: and yet they be often deceived of that that they have most trust in, but
my promise deceueth no man, nor leaves no man that trusts in me without some
comfort. That I have promised I will perform, and that I have said I will
fulfill to every person, so that they abide faithfully in my love and dread
unto the end, for I am the rewarder of all good men, and a strong prouer of
all devout souls. Write my words therefore in thy heart diligently, and often
think thou upon them, and they shall be in time of temptation much necessary
unto thee. That thou understand not when thou read it, thou shall
understand in the time of my visitation. I am wont to visit my servants two
manner of ways, that is to say, with temptation, and with consolation: and two
lessons daily I read unto them, one whereby I rebuke their vices, another
whereby I stir the^ to increase in virtues: and he that knows my words and
despises the^, has that that shall judge him in the last day.

A prayer to obtain the grace of devotion. The.4. Chapter.
Lord Jesus, thou art all my riches, and all that I have, I have it of thee. But
what am I (Lord) that I dare thus speak to thee, I am thy poorest servant,
and a worm most abject, more poor, and more dispisable than I can or bare
say. Behold (Lord) that I am naught, that I have naught, and of my self I am
naught worth: thou art only good, righteous and holy, thou orderest all things,
thou give all things, and thou fulfillest all things with thy goodness,
leaving only the wretched sinner barrain and void of heavenly comfort.
Remember thy mercies, and fill my heart with thy manifold graces, for thou
will not that thy works in me be made in vain. How may I bear the miseries
of this life, unless thy grace and mercy do comfort me therein? Turn not thy
face from me, defer not thy visiting of me, ne with draw not thy comforts from
me, lest happily my soul be made as dry earth without the water of grace, and
as it were a thing unprofitable to thee. Teach me, Lord, to fulfill thy will,
and to live meekly and worthily before thee, for thou art all my wisdom and
running, and thou art he that know me as I am, and that knew me before
the world was made, and before that I was borne or brought into this life.

How we ought to be conversant before God in truth and meekenes. The 5.
Chapter.
MY son, says our lord Jesus, walk before me in truth and meekenes, and
seek me always in simplenes and playnnes of heart. He that walks in truth,
shall be defended from all perils and dangers, and truth shall deliver him
from all deceyuers, and from all evil sayings of wicked people. If truth
deliver thee, thou art very free, and thou shall little care for the vain
sayings of the people. Lord it is true all that thou say, be it done to me
after thy saying. I beseech thee that thy truth may teach me and keep me, and
finally lead me to a blessed ending, and that it may deliver me from all evil
affections, and from all inordinate love, that I may walk with thee in
freedom of spirit, and liberty of heart. Then truth says again, I shall
teach thee what is acceptable and liking to me: Think on thy sins paste,
with great displeasure and sorrow of heart, and never think thy self worthy
to be called holy or virtuous for any good deeds that thou have done, but
think how great a sinner thou art, be^apped and bound with great and
manifold sins and passions, and that of thy self thou drawest to naught,
soon fallest, soon art overcome, soon troubled, and soon art thou broken
with labor and pain: and thou have nothing whereof thou may righteously
glorify thy self, but many things thou have wherefore thou ought to despise
thy self, for thou art more unstable and more weak to ghostly works, then
thou know or may think. Let nothing therefore seem great to thee, nothing
precious, nothing worthy any reputation, nor worthy to be praised in thy
sight, but that is everlasting. Let the everlasting truth be most liking and
most pleasant to thee above all other things, and that thine own sin and
vileness be most misliking and most displeasaunt to thee. Dread nothing so
much, nor reprove nothing so much, neither let any thing be to thee so much
hated, nor flee nothing so much as thy sins and wickedness: for they should
more displease thee, then should the loss of all worldly things. Some there
be that walk not purelye before me, for they through pride and curiosity of
the^ selves desire to search and know high things of my godhead, forgetting
them selves, and the health of their own souls: such persons fall often times
into great le^ptations and grievous sins by their pride and curiosity, for
the which I am turned against them, and leave them to the^ selves, without
help or counsel of me. Dread therefore the iudgemetes of God, and the wrath
of him that is almighty, and discuss not, nor search his secrets, but
search well thine own iniquities, How often, and how greeuouslie thou haste
offended him, and how many good deeds thou haste neglige^tlie omitted and
left undone, which thou might well have done. Some persons bear their
devotion in books, some in images, some in outward tokens and figures: some
have me in their mouth, but little in their heart: but some there be, that have
their reason clearly illumined with the light of true understanding, whereby
their affection is so purged and purified from love of earthly things, that
they may always couete and desire heavenly things: in so much as it is
grievous to the^ for to hear of earthly likinges, and it is to them also a
right great pain to serve the necessities of the body, and they think all the
time as lost, wherein they go about it. Such persons feel and know well,
what the spirit of truth speaks in their souls, for it teaches them to
despise earthly things, and to love heavenly things: to forsake the world
that is transitory, and to desire both day and night, to come thither where
is joy everlasting, to the which bring us our Lord Jesus. Amen.

Of the meruaillous effect of the love of God. The.6. Chapter.
BLessed be thou heavenly father, the father of my Lord Jesus Christ, for
thou haste vouchesafed to remember me thy poorest servant, and sometime do
comfort me with thy gracious presence, that am unworthy al comfort: I bless
thee, and glorifye thee always, with thy only begotten son, and the holy
Ghost without endinge. Amen.

O my Lord God most faithful lover, when thou come into my heart, all mine
inward parts do joy. Thou art my glory, and the joy of my heart, my hope
and wholle refuge in all my troubles. But forasmuch as I am yet feeble in
love, and imperfect in virtue, therefore I have need of more comfort and
help of thee. Vouchsafe therefore often times to visit and instruct me with
thy holy teachinges. Deliver me from all evil passions, and heal my sick
heart from all inordinate affections, that I may be inwardly healed and purged
from all inordinate affections and vices, and be made apt and able to love
thee, strong to suffer for thee, and stable to persevere in thee. Love is a
great thing and a good, and only makes heavy burdens light, and bears in
like balaunce things pleasant and displeasant: it bears a heavy burden, and
feels it not, and makes bitter things to be sauerie and sweet. Also the
noble love of Jesus perfectly printed in man's soul, makes a man to do great
things, and stirs him always to desire perfection, and to grow more and
more in grace and goodness. Love will always have his mind upward to god, and
will not be occupied with love of the world. Love will also be free from all
worldly affections, that the inward sight of the soul be not darked or let,
nor that his affection to heavenly things be put from his free liberty by
inordinat winninge or losinge of worldly things. Nothing therefore is more
sweet then love, nothing higher, nothing stronger, nothing larger, nothing
ioyfuller, nothing fuller, nor any thing better in heaven or in earth: for
love descends from God, and may not rest finally in any thing lower then
God. Such a lover flies high, he runs swiftly, he is merry in God, he is
free in soul, he geneth all for all, and has all in all: for he rests in
one high goodness above all things, of whom all goodness flows and proceeds
the beholds not onelee the gift, but the geuer above all gifts. Love
knows no measure, but is fervent without measure. It feels no burden, it
regards no labor, it desires more the^ it may attain, it complains of
none impossibility, for it thinks all thing that may be done for his
beloved, possible and lawful unto him. Love therefore does many great things,
and brings them to effect, wherein he that is no lover faints and fails.
Love waketh much, and sleeps little, and sleepinge sleeps not: it faints,
and is not werie: is restrained of liberty, and is in great freedom. He sees
causes of fear, and fears not, but as a quick bronde or sparkle of fire,
flameth always upward by feruoure of love into God, and through the especial
help of grace is delivered from all perils and dangers. He that is thus a
ghostly lover, knows well what his voice means, which says thus: Thou
Lord God art my wholle love and my desire, thou art all mine, and I all thine.
Spread thou my heart into thy love, that I may taste and feel how sweet it
is to serve thee, and how joyful it is to laud thee, and to be as I were all
molten into thy love. O I am bounden in love, and go far above my self: for
the wonderful great fervor that I feel of thy unspeakable goodness, I shall
singe to thee the song of love, and I shall follow thee my beloved by highness
of thought, wheresoever thou go, and my soul shall never be werie to praise
thee with the joyful song of ghostly love, that I shall sing to thee. I
shall love thee more then my self, and not my self but for thee, and all
other in thee and for thee, as the law of love commands, which is given by
thee. Love is swifte, pure, meek, joyous and glad, strong, patient,
faithful, wise, forbearing, manlye, and never seeking him self, nor his own
will, for whenever a man seeks him self, he falls fro love. Also love is
circumspect, meek, righteous, not tender, not light, nor heedinge vain
things: sober, chaste, stable, quiet, and well stabled in his outward wits.
Also, love is subject and obedient to his prelate, vile and despisable in his
own sight, devout and thankful to God, trusting, and always hoping in him,
and that when he has but little devotion, or little savor in him: for without
some sorrow or pain no man may live in love. He that is not always ready to
suffer, and to stand fullye at the will of his beloved, is not worthy to be
called a lover, for it behooves a lover to suffer gladlye all hard and bitter
things for his beloved, and not to decline from his love for no contrariou
thing that may befall unto him.

Of the proof of a true lover of God. The 7. Chapter.
MY son, says our Savior Christ, thou art not yet a strong and a wise
lover: for why? for a little adversity thou leauest anon that thou haste
begone in my service, and with great desire thou seek outward consolatio^s.
But a strong and a faithful lover of God stands stable in all adversities,
and gives little heed to the deceitful persuasions of the enemy, and as he
pleseth him in prosperity, so he displeases him not in adversity. A wise
lover co^sidereth not so much the gift of his lover as he does the love of the
geuer. He regards more the love then the gift, and accompteth all gifts
little in comparison of his beloved, who gives them to him. A noble lover
rests not in the gift, but in me above all gifts. Furthermore, it is not
all lost, though thou sometime feel less devotion to me, and to my Saints
then thou would do, and on that other side, the sweet ghostly desire that
thou feel sometime to thy Lord Jesus, is the feleable gift of grace given to
thy comfort in this life, and a taste of the heavenly glory in the life to
come: but it is not good, that thou lean overmuch to such co^fortes, for they
ligthly come and go after the will of the geuer: but to strive always without
ceassing against all evil motions of sin, and to despise all the suggestions
of the enemy, is a token of perfect love, and of great merit and singular
grace. Let no vanities, nor no strange fantasies trouble thee, of what matter
soever they be. Keep thine intent and thy purpose always whole and strong to
me, and think not that it is an illusion, that thou art sodenlie ravished into
excess of mind, and that thou art soon after turned again to thy first
lightness of heart, for thou suffrest such lightness rather against thy will,
than with thy will. And therefore if thou be displeased therewith, it shall be
to thee great merit and no perdition. I know (says our Lord) that the old
ancient enemy the feende, will assay to let thy good will, and to extinct the
good desire that thou have to me, and to all goodness, all that he can, and he
will also hinder thee from all good works, and devout excercises if he may:
that is to say, from the honor and worship that thou art bound to give to me
and to my saints, and from mind of my passion, and from the remembrance of
thine own sins, from a diligent keeping of thy heart in good meditatio^s,
and from a steadfast purpose to profit in virtue. He will also put into thy
mind many idle thoughts, to make thee yrke, and to be soon werye with prayer,
and with readinge, and with all other good virtuous works. A meke confession
displeases him much, and if he can he will let a man that he shall not be
houseled. But believe him not, nor care not for him though he assail thee never
so much. Make all his malice return to him self again, and say to him
thus, Go from me thou wicked spirit, and be thou ashamed, for thou art foul
and vglye, that would bring such things into my mind. Go from me thou
false deceyuer of mankind, thou shall have no part in me, for my Savior Jesus
stands by me as a mighty warrior and a strong champion, and thou shall
fly away to thy confusion. I had lever suffer the most cruel death, then to
consent to thy malicious stiringes. Be still therefore thou cursed feende, and
cease thy malice, for I shall never assent to thee, though thou vex me never
so much. Our Lord is my light and my health, whom shall I dread? and he is
the defender of my life, what shall I fear? Truly though an host of men
arise against me, my heart shall not dread them: For why? God is my helper and
my redeemer. Then says our Lord again to such a soul, strive always as a
true knight against all the styringes of the enymie. And if thou be sometime
through thy frailty overcome, rise so one again, and take more strength then
thou had first, and trust vertlie to have more grace, and more comfort of
God, than thou had before. But beware always of vainglorie and pride, for
thereby many persons have fallen into great errors, and into great blindness of
soul, so far, that it has been right nigh incurable. Be it therefore to
thee a great exemple, and a matter of perpetual meekenes, the fall and ruin
of such proud folks, that foolishlie have presumed of them self, and have
in the end finally perished by their presumption.

How grace is to be kept close through the virtue of meekenes. The.8. Chapter.
MY son, it is much more expedient, and much more surer way for thee, that
thou hide the grace of devotion, and not to speak much of it nor much to
regard it, but rather to despise thy self the more for it, and to think thy
self unworthy any such gracious gift of god than to speak of it. And it is not
good to cleave much to such affections as may be soon turned into the
contrary. When thou have the grace of devotion, consider how wretched and
needy thou were wont to be, when thou had no such grace The profit and
increase of life spiritual is not only when thou have devotion, but rather
when thou can meekly and patienly bear the withdrawing and absenting
thereof, and yet not to leave thy prayers, nor thy other good deeds that thou
art accustomed to do, undone, but to thy power, and as far as in thee is,
do thy best therein, and forgettest not thy duty therefore, nor art not
negligent for any dulnes or unquietness of mind that thou feel.
Nevertheless there be many persons, that when any adversity falls to them,
they be anon impatient, and be made thereby very slow and dull to do any
good deed, and they hinder them selves greatly. For it is not in the power of
man the way that he shall take, but it is only in the grace of God to
dispose that after his will, and to send comfort when he will, and as much
as he will, and to whom he will, as it shall please him, and none otherwise.
Some unware persons through an indiscreet desire that they have had to have the
grace of devotion, have destroyed them selves, for they would do more then
their power was to do, and would not know the measure of their gift, nor the
litlenes of their own strength, but rather would follow the pride of their
heart, then the judgment of reason. And because they presumed to do greater
things then was pleasant to God, therefore they lost anon the grace that they
had before, and were left needy and without comfort, which thought to have
builded their nestes in heaven: and so they were taught not to presume of them
selves, but meekely to trust in God, and in his goodness, Also, such persons, as
be beginners, and yet lack experience in ghostly travail, may lightly err,
and be deceived, unless they will be ruled by counsel of other. And if they
will needlye follow their own counsel, and will in no wise be removed from
their own will, it will be very perilous to them in the end. And it is not
lightly seen, that they that be wise and cunning in their own sight, will be
meekely ruled or ordered by other. It is better to have little cunning with
meekenes, then great cunninge with vain liking therein: and it is better to
have little cunninge with grace, then much cunninge, whereof thou should be
proud. Also, he does not discretely, that in time of devotion sets him
self also to spiritual mirth, and as it were, to a heavenly gladness, and
forgets his former desolation, and the meek dread of God. Neither does he
well or virtuously, that in time of trouble, or any manner adversity or grief
bears him self over much desperatlye, and does not feel or think so
faithfully of me as he ought to do. He that in time of peace and ghostly
comfort will think him self ouermuche sure, commonly in time of battle and
of temptation, shall be found ouermuche deiect and fearful: but if thou
could always abide meek and little in thine own sight, and could order
well the motions of thine own soul, thou should not so soon fall into
presumption or despair, nor so lightly offend almighty God. Wherefore this is
good and wholesome counsel, that when thou haste the spirit of fervor, thou
think, how thou shall do, when that feruor is passed, and then when it
happens so with thee, that thou think that it may soon come again, which
to my honor, and to thy proving I have withdrawn for a time. And it is more
profitable to thee, that thou should be so proved, then that thou should
always have prosperous things after thy will: for why? merits are not to be
thought great in any person, because he has many visions, or many ghostlye
comfortes, or for that he has clear understanding of Scripture, or that he is
set in high degree: but if he be stablye grounded in meekenes, and fulfilled
with charity, and seek wholly the worship of God, and in nothing regards
him self, but fully in his heart can despise him self, and also coueteth to
be despised of other, then may he have good trust, that he has somewhat
profited in grace, and that he shall in the end have great reward of God for
his good travail. Amen.

How we shall think through meekenes our self to be vile and abject in the
sight of God. The 9. Chapter.
SHall I, Lord Jesus, dare speak to thee, that am but duste and ashes?
verily, if I think my self any better then ashes and duste, thou stand
against me, and also mine own sins bear witness against me, that I may not
withsaye it: but if I despise my self, and set my self at naught, and think
my self but ashes and dust, as I am, then thy geace shall be nigh unto me, and
the light of true understanding shall enter into my heart, so that all
presumption and pride in me shall be drowned in the vale of meekenes, through
perfect knowinge of my wretchedness, Thorough meekenes thou shall show unto me
what I am, what I have been, and from whence I came, for I am naught, and knew
it not. If I be left to my self, the^ am I naught, and all is feeblenes and
imperfection. But if thou vouchesafe a little to behold me, anon I am made
strong, and am ^illed with a new joy, and marvel it is, that I wretch am
so soon lift up from my unstableness, into the beholdinge of heavenly things,
and that I am so lovingly lifted up of thee, that of my self fall down
always to earthly likinges. But thy love, Lord, causes all this, which
preuenteth me, and helps me in all my necessities, and keeps me warily from
all perils and dangers, that I daily am like to fall into. I have lost thee,
and also my self by inordinate love that I have had to my self, and in
seekinge of thee again, I have found both thee and me, and therefore I will
more deeply from henceforth set my self at naught, and more diligently seek
thee, then in time paste I have done: for thou Lord Jesus, thou do to me
above all my merits, and above all that I can ask or desire. But blessed be
thou in all thy works, for though I be unworthy any good things, yet thy
goodness never ceasseth to do well to me, and also to many other, which be
unkind to thee, and that are turned right far from thee. Turn us Lord
therefore to thee again, that we may he^ceforward be loving, thankful, meek
and devout to thee, for thou act our health, thou art our virtue and all our
strength in body and soul, and none but thou: to thee therefore be joy and
glory everlastingly in the bliss of heaven. Amen.

How all things are to be referred to God, as end of every work. The.10.
Chapter.
My son, says our Savior Christ, I must be the end of all thy works, if
thou desire to be happy and blessed. And if thou refer all goodness to me,
from whom all goodness comes, then shall be purged and made clean in thee
thine inward affections, which else would be evil inclined to thy self and to
other creatures. If thou seek thy self in any thing as end of thy work,
anon thou faylest in thy doing, and waxest dry and barrein from all moisture
of grace. Wherefore thou must refer all things to me, for I give all. Behold
therefore all things as they be, flowinge and springinge out of my sovereign
goodness, and reduce all things to me as to their original beginning, for of
me both small and great, poor and rich, as of a quick springinge wall,
draw, water of life. He that serves me freely and with good will, shall
receive grace for grace: But he that will glorify him self in him self, or
wilfully joy in any thing beside me, shall not be stablished in perfect
joy, nor be delated in soul, but he shall be let and anguished many ways
from the true freedom of spirit. Thou shall therefore ascribe no goodness to
thy self, nor thou shall not think, that any person has any goodness of him
self, but that thou yield always the goodness to me, without whom man has
nothing. I have given all, and all will I have again, and with great straitnes
will I look to have thankings therefore. This is the truth, whereby is driven
away all manner of vain glory and pride of heart. If heavenly grace and
perfect charity enter into thy heart, then shall there no envy nor unquietness
of mind, neither any private love have rule in thee: For the charity of God
shall overcome all things, and shall dilate and inflame all the powers of thy
soul. Wherefore, if thou understand a right, thou shall never joy but in
me, and in me only thou shall have trust, for no man is good but God alone,
who is above all things to be honored, and in all things to be blessed.

That it is svveete and delectable to serve God, and to forsake the world.
The 11. Chapter.
NOw shall I speak again to thee my Lord Jesus, and not cease. And I shall
say in the ears of my Lord, my God and king that is in heaven. O how great is
the abundance of thy sweetenes, which thou haste hid and kept for the^ that
dread thee? But what is it then to them that love thee, and that with all
their heart do serve thee? verily, it is the unspeakable swetenes of
contemplation, that thou geuest to them that love thee. In this Lord, thou have
most showed the swetenes of thy charity to me, that when I was not, thou
made me, and when I erred far from thee, thou broughtest me again to serve
thee, and thou co^maundest me also, that I shall love thee. O fountain of love
everlasting, what shall I say of thee? how may I forget thee, that have
vouchedsafe to louinglye to remember me? When I was like to have perished,
thou shewedst thy mercy to me above all that I could think and desire, and
have sent me of thy grace and love above my merits. But what shall I give thee
again for all this goodness? It is not given to all men to forsake the world,
and to take a solitarye life, and only to serve thee, and yet it is no great
thing to serve thee, whom every creature is bound to serve. It ought not
therefore to seem any great thing to me to serve thee, but rather it should
seem marvel and wonder to me, that thou will vouchsafe to receive so poor,
and so unworthy a creature as I am into thy service, and that thou will join
me to thy well-beloved servants. Lo Lord, all things that I have, and all that
I do thee service with, is thine: and yet thy goodness is such, that thou
rather seruest me, then I thee: for lo, heaven and earth, planets and stars
with their contents, which thou have created to serve man, be ready at thy
biddinge, and do daily that thou haste commanded. And thou haste also
ordained angels to the minysterie of man. But above all this, thou haste
vouchedsafe to serve man thy self, and haste promised to give thy self unto
him. What shall I then give to thee again for this thousand fold goodness?
would to God that I might serve thee all the days of my life, or at the
least, that I might one day be able to do thee faithful service, for thou
art woorthye all honor, service, and praysinge for ever. Thou art my Lord and
my God, and I thy poorest servant, most bound before all other to love thee,
and praise thee, and I never ought to ware werye of the praysinge of thee. And
that is it that I ask, and that I desire, that is to say, that I may always
laud and praise thee. Vouchsafe therefore, most merciful Lord, to supply,
that wants in me, for it is great honor to serve thee, and all earthly
things to despise for the love of thee. They shall have great grace that freely
submit the^ selves to thy holy service. And they shall find also the most
sweet consolation of the holy ghost, and shall have great freedom of
spirit, that here forsake all worldly business, and choose a hard and strait
life in this world for thy name. O free and joyful service of God, by the
which a man is made free, holy, and also blessed in the sight of God. O holy
state of religion, which makes a man like to angels, pleasant to God,
dreadefull to wicked spirits, and to all faithful people right highlye
commendable. O service much to be embraced, and always to be desired, by whom
the high goodness is won, and the everlasting joy and gladness is gotten
without end.

That the desires of the heart ought to be well examined and moderated. The
12. Chapter.
My son, says our Lord, it behooves thee to learn many things that thou
haste not yet well learned. What be they Lord? that thou order thy desires and
affections wholly after my pleasure, and that thou be not a lover of thy self,
but a desirous follower of my will in all things. I know well that desires often
move to this thing or to that: but consider well, whether thou be moved
principally for mine honor, or for thine own, If I be in the cause, thou
shall be well contented, whatsoever I do with thee: but if any thing remain
in thy heart of thine own will, that is it that lets and hinders thee.
Beware therefore that thou lean not much to thine own desire without my
council, least happly it repent thee, and displease thee in the end, that
first pleased thee, Every affection and desire of man's heart that seems good
and holy, is not forthwith to be followed, nor every contrarious affection or
desire is not hastily to be refused. It is sometime right expedient, that a man
refrain his affections and desires, though they be good, least happlye by his
importunity he fall into unquietness of mind, or that he be a let to other, or
be let by other, and so fail in his doing: and sometime it behooves us to
use as it were, a violence to our self, and stronglye to resist and break
down our sensual appetite, and not to regard what the flesh will or will
not, but always to take heed that it be made subject to the will of the
spirit, and that it be so long chastised, and compelled to serve, till it be
ready to all thing that the soul commands, and that it can learn to be
content with a little, and can delight in simple things, and not to murmr nor
to grudge for any co^trarious things that may befall unto it.

How we should keep patience, and continually strive against all
concupiscence. The.13. Chapter.
O My Lord God (as I hear say) patience is much necessary unto me, because
of many contrarious things, which in this life daily chance. I see well,
that howesoeuer I do order my self for peace yet can not my life be without
some battle and sorrow. My son, it is true that thou say: wherefore, I
will not, that thou seek to have such peace as wants temptations, or as
feels not some co^tradictio^: But that thou trow and believe that thou have
found peace when that thou have many troubles, and art proved with many
co^trarious things in this world. And if thou say, thou may not suffer
such things, how shall thou then suffer the fire of Purgatory? Of two evils,
the less evil is to be taken. Suffer therefore patiently the little pains of
this world, that thou may hereafter escape the greater in the world to
come. Trowest thou, that worldly men suffer little or nothing? yes truly, thou
shall find none without some trouble, though thou seek the most delicat
persons that be. But percase thou say to me again, they have many
delectations, and follow their own pleasures so much, that they ponder but
little all their adversities. Well, I will it be as thou say, that they have
all that they can desire, but how long trowest thou that it shall endure?
Soothly, it shall suddenly vanish away as smoke in the air, so that there
shall not be left any remembrance of their joys passed, and yet when they
lived they were not without great bitterness and grief, for often times of the
same thing wherein they had their greatest pleasure, received they after great
trouble and pain, and righteouslie came that unto them, that forasmuch as
they sought delectations and pleasures inordinatelye, that they should not
fulfill their desire therein, but with great bitterness and sorrow. O how
short, how false, and how inordinate be all the pleasures of this world?
Soothlye, for dronkenship and blindness of heart the worldly people perceive
it not, nor will not perceive it, but as dombe beasts, for a little pleasure of
this corruptible life, they run headlonge into everlasting death. Therefore
my son, go not after thy concupiscence, but turn thee lightly from thine
own will. Delight thee in god, and fix thy love stronglye in him, and he shall
give thee the asking of thine heart. And if thou will have consolation
aboundantlye, and wilt receive the soothfast comfort that comes of God,
dispose thy self fullye to despise this world, and put from thee whollye all
inordinate delectations, and thou shall have ple^teously the comfort of God.
And the more that thou with drawest thee from the consolation of all creatures,
the more sweet and blessed consolations shalt thou receive of thy creatoure.
But soothlye thou can not at the first come to such co^solations, but with
heaviness and labor goinge before, thy old custom will somewhat withstand
thee, but with a better custom it may be overcome. The flesh will murmr
against thee, but with fervor of spirit it shall be restrained. The old
ancient enemy thee freende will ^et thee if he can, but with devout prayer. He
shall be driven away, and with good bodilye and ghostlye labors his way
shall be stopped, so that he shall not dare come nigh unto thee.

Of the obedience of a meek subject, after the example of our Lord Jesus
Christ. The 14. Chapter.
My son, says our Savior Christ, he that labors to withdraw him from
obedience, withdraws him from grace: And he that seeks to have private
things, loses the things that be in common. If a man can not gladly submit
him self to his superior, it is a token that his flesh is not yet fully
obedient to the spirit, but that it often rebelleth and murmureth. Therefore if
thou desire to overcome thy self, and to make thy flesh obey meekelye to the
will of the spirit, learn first to obey gladlye to thy superior. The outward
enemy is the sooner overcome, if the inner man, that is the soul, be not
feebled nor wasted. There is none worse, nor any more grievous enemy to the
soul, then thy self, if thy flesh be not well agreeinge to the will of the
spirit. It behooves the therefore, that thou have a true despisinge and
contempt of thy self, if thou will prevail against thy flesh and blood. But
forasmuch as thou yet love thy self inordinatlie, therefore thou fear to
resign thy will wholly to another man's will. But what great thing is it to
thee that art but doste and naught, if thou subdue thy self to man for my
sake, when I, that am almighty, and most high God, maker of all things
subdued my self mekelye to man for thy sake? I made my self most meek and
most low of all men, that thou shoudest learn to overcome thy pride through
my meekenes. Learn therefore, thou ashes, to be tractable, learn thou earth
and dust, to be meek, and to bow thy self under every man's foot for my
sake: learn to break thine own will, and to be subject to all men in thine
heart. Rise in great wrath against thy self, and suffer not pride to reygne in
thee, but show thy self so little and obedient, and so noughtie in thine own
sight, that as thee thinks, all men may righteouslye go over thee, and tread
upon the, as upon earth or claye. O vain man, what haste thou to complain. O
thou foul sinner what may thou righteously say against them that reprove
thee, since thou haste so often offended God, and haste also so often deserved the
pains of hell? But nevertheless, my eye of mercy has spared thee, for thy
soul is precious in my sight, that thou should thereby know the great
love* that I have to thee, and be therefore the more thankful to me again, and
give thy self to perfect and true subjection and meekenes, and to be ready in
heart, patiently to suffer for my sake thine own contemptes and despisings,
whenever they shall happen to fall unto thee. Amen.

Of the secret and hid judgments of God to be considered, that we be not
proud of our good deeds. The.15. Chapter.
LOrd, thou soundest thy judgments terribly upon me, and fillest my body and
bones with great fear and dread: my soul also trembles very sore, for I am
greatly astonished, for that I see that heavens be not clean in thy sight, for
since thou foundest default in angels, and sparedst the^ not, what shall become
of me, that am but vile and stinking carreyne? Stars fell from heaven, and I
dust and ashes, what should I presume? Also some people that seemed to have
great works of virtue, have fallen full low. And such as were fed with meat
of angels, I have seen after delight in swynes meat, that is to say, in
fleshlye pleasures. Wherefore it may be well said and verifyed, that there is
no holiness nor goodness in us, if thou with: draw thy hand of mercy from us,
nor that no wisdom may avail us, if thou Lord govern it not: nor any
strength help, if thou cease to preserve us: no sure chastity can be, if
thou Lord defend it not, nor any sure keeping may profit us, if thy holy
watchfulnes be not present: for if we be forsaken of thee, anon we be drowned
and perish: but if thou a little visit us with thy grace, we anon live, and
be lift, up again. We be unstable, unless thou confirm us, we be cold and
dull, but if by thee we be stirred to feruoure of spirit. O how meekely and
abiectly ought I therefore to judge of my self, and how much ought I in my
heart to despise my self, though I be holden never so good and holy in sight
of the world: and how profoundly ought I to submit me to thy deep and
profound judgments, since I find in my self nothing else but naught and
naught? O substance that may not be pondered. O Sea, that may not be sailed:
in thee, and by thee I find that my substance is nothing, and over all naught
where is now the shadow of this worldly glory, and where is the trust that
I had in it? Truly it is vanished away through the deepenes of thy secret
and hid Judgments upon me. What is flesh in thy sight? how may clay
glorifye him self against his maker? how may he be deceived with vain praises
whose heart in truth is subject to god? All the world may not lift him up into
pride, who^ truth, that God is, has perfectly made subject unto him, nor he
may not be deceived with any flattering, that puts his whole trust in God.
For he sees well, that they that speak be vain and naught, and that they
shall shortly fail with the sound of words, but the truth of God always
abides.

How a man shall order him self in his desires. The.16. Chapter.
My son, says our Savior Christ, thus shall thou say in every thing that
thou desire. Lord, if it be thy will, be it done as I ask, and if it be to
thy praising, be it fulfilled in thy name. And if thou see it good and
profitable to me, give me grace to use it to thy honor. But if thou know it
hurtful to me, and not profitable to the health of my soul, then take from me
such desire. Every desire comes not of the holy ghost, though it seem
rigteous and good, for it is sometime full hard to judge, whether a good
spirit or an evil moves thee to this thing or to that, or whether thou be
moved of thine own spirit. Many be deceued in the end, which first seemed to
have been moved of the holy ghost. Therefore with dread of God, and with
meekenes of heart it is to desire and ask whatsoever comes to our mind to
be desired and asked, and with a whole forsakinge of our self to commit all
things to God, and to say thus: Lord, thou know what thing is to me most
profitable, do this or that after thy will, give me what thou will, as much as
thou will, and when thou will. Do with me as thou know best to be done, and
as it shall please thee, and as shall be most to thy honor. Put me where
thou will, and freelye do with me in all things after thy will. Thy creature
I am, and in thine hands, lead me and turn me where thou will, lo, I am
thy servant ready to all things that thou commaundest, for I desire not to
live to my self, but to thee. VVoulde to God it might be worthilye and
profitablye, and to thy honor. Amen.

A prayer, that the will of God be alvvaye fulfilled. The 17. Chapter.
MOst benign Lord Jesus, grant me thy grace, that it may be always with me,
and work with me, and persevere with me unto the end. And that I may ever
desire and will that is most pleasant and acceptable to thee. Thy will be my
will, and my will always to follow thy will, and best accord therewith. Be
there always in me one will, and one desire with thee, and that I may have no
power to will or to not will, but as thou will or wilt not. And grant me that
I may dye to all things that be in the world, and for thee, to love to be
despised, and to be as a man unknown in this world. Grant me also above all
things that can be desired, that I may rest me in thee, and fullye in thee
pacifye my heart, for thou Lord art the very true peace of heart, and the
perfect rest of body and soul, and without thee all things be grievous and
unquiet. Wherefore, in that peace that is in thee, one high, one blessed, and
one endless goodness shall I always rest me, so may it be. Amen.

That the very true solace and comfort is in god. The.18. Chapter.
What at soever I may desire or think to my comfort, I abide it not here, but
I trust to have it hereafter: for if I alone might have all the solace and
comfort of this world, and might use the delites thereof after mine own
desire without sin, it is certain, that they might not long endure:
wherefore my soul may not fully be comforted, nor perfectly refreshed, but in
God only, who is the comfort of the poor in spirit, and the embracer of the
meek and lowly in heart. Abide, my soul, abide the promise of god, and thou
shall have abundance of all goodness in heaven. If thou inordinatelye couete
these goodness present, thou shall lose the goodness eternal. Have therefore goods
present in use, and eternal in desire. Thou may in no manner be satiate with
temporal goods, for thou art not created so to use the^, as to rest thee in
them: for if thou alone had all the goods that ever were created and made,
thou might not theefore be happy and blessed, but thy blessedfulnes and full
felicity stands only in God, that has made all things of naught. And that
is not such felicity as is commended of the foolish lovers of the world, but
such as good christen men and women hope to have in the bliss of heaven, and
as some ghostlye persons clean and pure in heart sometime do taste here in
this present life, whose conversation is in heaven. All worldly solace, and all
man's comfort is vain and short, but that comfort is blessed and soothfast,
that is perceived by truth inwardly in the heart. A devout follower of God
bears always about with him his comforter, that is Jesus, and says thus unto
him: My Lord Jesus, I beseech thee that thou be with me in every place, and
every time, and that it be to me a special solace, gladly for thy love to want
all man's solace. And if thy solace want also, that thy will, and thy righteous
proving and assaying of me, may be to me a singular comfort, and a high solace.
Thou shall not always be angry with me, neither shall thou always threate me.
So may it be. Amen.

That all our study and business of mind ought to be put in God. The.19.
Chapter.
My son, says our Lord to his servant, suffer me to do with thee what I
will, for I know what is best and most expedient for thee. Thou workest in
many things after thy kindly reason, and after as thy affection, and thy
worldly policy stirs thee: and so thou may lightly err and be
deceued. O Lord, it is true all that thou say, thy providence is much more
better for me, then all that I can do or say of my self. Wherefore it may
well be said and verified, that he stands very casuallye, that sets not
his wholle trust in thee. Therefore Lord, while my wit abides steadfast and
stable, do with me in all things as it pleases thee, for it may not be but
well all that thou do. If thou will, that I be in light, be thou blessed,
and if thou will, that I be in darkness, be thou also blessed. If thou
vouchsafe to comfort me, be thou highly blessed. And if thou will, that I shall
live in trouble, and without all comfort, be thou in likewise much blessed. My
son, so it behooves to be with thee, if thou will walk with me: as ready
must thou be to suffer, as to joy, and as gladly be needye and poor, as
wealthy and rich. Lord, I will gladly suffer for thee whatsoever thou will
shall fall upon me. Indifferently will I take of thy hand good and bad, bitter
and sweet, gladness and sorrow, and for all things that shall befall unto me,
heartily will I thank thee. Keep me, Lord, from sin, and I shall neither
dread death nor hell. Put not my name out of the book of life, and it shall
not grieve me, what trouble soever befall upon me.

That all temporal miseries are gladly to be borne through the example of
Christ The 20. Chapter.
My son, says our Lord, I descended from heaven, and for thy health have I
taken thy miseries, not compelled thereto of necessity, but of my charity,
that thou should learn to have patience with me, and not to disdain to
bear the miseries and wretchedness of this life, as I have done for thee: for
from the first hour of my birth unto my death upon the cross, I was never
without some sorrow or pain. I had great lack of temporal things, I heard
great co^plaintes made on me, I suffered beningely many shames and rebukes, for
my benefits I received unkindness, for my miracles, blasphemies, and for my
true doctrine many reproufes. O Lord, forasmuch as thou were found patient
in thy life, fulfilling in that most specially the will of thy father, it is
seeming, that I most wretched sinner bear me patiently after thy will in all
things, and as long as thou will, that I for mine own health, bear the
burden of this corruptible life: for though this life be tedious, and as an
heavy burden to the soul, yet nevertheless, it is now through thy grace made
very meritorious, and by example of thee, and of thy holy saints, it is now
made to weak persons more sufferable and clear, and also much more
comfortable then it was in the old law, when the gates of heaven were shet,
and the way thitherwarde was dark, and so few did covet to seek it. And yet
they that were then righteous, and were ordained to be saved, before thy
blessed passion and death might never have come thither. O what thanks am I
bound therefore to yield to thee, that so lovingly haste vouchedsafe to show
to me, and to all faithful people that will follow thee, the very true and
strait way to thy kingdom. Thy holy life is our way, and by thy patience we
walk to thee, who art our head and governor. And if thou Lord had not
gone before, and showed us the way, who would have endeavored him to have
followed? how many should have tarried behind, if they had not seen thy
blessed examples goinge before? We be yet slow and dull, now we have seen
and heard thy signs and doctrines: what should we then have been, if we had
seen no such light goinge before us: Truly, we should have fixed our mind
and love whollye in worldly things, from the which keep us Lord of thy
great goodness. Amen.

Of patient suffering of injuries and vvronges, and who is truly patient.
The.21. Chapter.
My son, what is it that thou speak, why complainest thou thus? cease,
cease, complain no more, consider my passion, and the passions of my saints,
and thou shall well see, that it is right little that thou suffrest for me. Thou
have not yet suffered to the shedinge of thy blood, and truly, thou haste
little suffered in comparison of them that have suffered so many things for me in
time past, and that have been so strongly tempted, so greeuouslye troubled, and
so many ways proved. It behooves thee therefore to remember the great
grievous things that other have suffered for me, that thou may the more
lightly bear thy little griefs: and if they seem not little to thee, look thy
impatie^ce cause not that: but nevertheless, whether they be little or great,
study always to bear them patiently without grudginge or complayninge, if
thou may, and the better that thou can dispose thee to suffer them, the more
wiselier thou do, and the more merit shall thou have, and thy burden by
reason of thy good custom and of thy good will shall be the lighter. Thou
shall never say, I can not suffer this thing of such a person, nor it is not
for me to suffer it: he has done me great wrong, and lays unto my charge
that I never thought, but of another man I will suffer as I shall think. Such
manner sayings be not good, for they consider not the virtue of patience, nor
of whom it shall be crowned, but they rather consider the persons and the
offenses done unto them. Therefore he is not truly pacient that will not
suffer but as much as he will, and of whom he will: for a true pacient man
forces not of whom he suffers, whether of his Prelate, or of his fellow that
is egall unto him, or of any other that is under him nor whether he be a good
man and a holy, or an evil man and an unworthy, but whenever any adversity
or wrong falls unto him whatsoever it be, and of whom soever if be, and how
often soever, he takes all thankfully as of the hand of God, and accompteth
it as a rich gift, and a great benefit, O God, for he knowweth well that
there is nothing that a man may suffer for God that may pass without great
merit. Be thou therefore ready to battall, if thou will have victory:
without battle thou may not come to the crown of patience, and if thou will not suffer, thou refusest to be crowned. Wherefore, if thou will needlie
be crowned, resist strongly, and suffer patiently, for without labor no man
may come to rest, nor without battle no man may come to victory. O Lord
Jesus, make it possible to me by grace, that is impossible to me by nature: Thou
know well that I may little suffer, and that I am cast down anon with a
little adversity, wherefore I beseech thee, that trouble and adversity may
hereafter for thy name be beloved and desired of me, for truly, to suffer,
and to be vexed for thee, is very good and profitable to the health of my
soul.

Of the knovvinge of our own infirmities, and of the miseries of this life.
The.22. Chapter.
I Shall knowledge against me all my unrighteousness, and I shall confess to
thee Lord all the unstableness of my heart. Often times it is but a little
thing that casts me down, and makes me dull and slow, to all good works,
and sometime I purpose to stand strongly: but when a little temptation
comes, it is to me great anguishe and grief, and sometime of a right little
thing, a grievous temptation rises, and when I think my self to be somewhat
surer, and that, as it seems, I have the higher hand, suddenly I feel my
self nere hand overcome by a light temptation. Behold therefore, good Lord,
behold my weakness and my frailnes, best known to thee before all other: have
mercy on me, O Lord, and deliver me from the filthy dregs of sin, that my
feet be never fixed in them. But this is it that often grudgeth me sore, and in
manner co^foundeth me before thee, that I am so unstable and weak, and so
feayle to resist my passions. And though they draw me not always to consent,
yet neuerthlesse, their cruel assaults be very grievous unto me, so that it
is in manner tedious to me, to live in such battle: but yet such battle is
not all unprofitable to me, for thereby I know the better mine own
infirmities, for I see well, that such wicked fantasies do rise in me much
sonner then they go away* But would to God, that thou most strongest God of
Israel, the lover of all faithful souls, would vouchsafe to behold the
labor and sorrow of me thy poorest servant, and that thou would assist me
in all things that I have to do. Strength me Lord with heuenlye strength, so
that the old enemy the fiende, nor my wretched flesh, which is not yet fullye
subject to the spirit, have not power nor lordship over me, against whom I
must fight continuallye, while I shall live in this miserable life. But alas,
what life is this, where no trouble nor misery wants, where also every place
is full of snares and of mortal enemies? for one trouble or temptation goinge
away, another comes, and the first conflict yet duringe, many other suddenly
rise more then can be thought. How may this life therefore be loved that has
such bitterness, and that is subject to so many miseries? And how may it be
called a life, that brings forth so many deaths, and so many ghostly
infections? and yet it is beloved and much delighted of in many persons. The
world is often reproved, that it is deceiptful and vain, and yet it is not
lightly forsaken, especially when the concupiscences of the flesh be suffered
to have rule. Some things stir a man to love the world, and some things to
despise it: the concupiscence of the flesh, the concupiscence of the eye, and
the pride of the heart, stir man to love the world. But the pains and
miseries that follow of it, causes hatred and tediousnes of it again. But
alas for sorrow, a little delectation overcomes the mind of the^ that be much
set to love the world, and dryueth out of their hearts all heavenly desires,
insomuch that many account it as a joy of Paradise to live under such se^sible
pleasures, and that is, because they neither have seen nor tasted the sweetness
in God, nor the inward gladness that comes of virtues. But they that
perfectly despise the world, and that study to live under holy discipline,
be not ignorant of the heavenly sweetness that is promised unto ghostly
livers: and they see also how greeuouslie the world erreth, and how
greeuouslie it is deceived in diverse manners.

How a man should rest in God above all things. The 23. Chapter.
Above all things, and in all things rest thou my soul in thy Lord God, for
he is the eternal rest of all Angels and saints. Give me Lord Jesus, this
special grace for to rest me in thee above all creatures: above all health and
fayrenes, above all glory and honor, above all dignity and power, above all
cunninge and policy, above all riches and crafts, above all gladness of body
and soul, above all fame and praising, above all sweetness and consolation,
above all hope and repromission, above all merit and desire, above all gifts
and rewards, that thou may give or send beside thy self, and above all
joy and mirth that man's heart or mind may take or feel: And also above all
Angels and Archangels, and above the company of heavenly spirits, above all
things visible and invisible, and above all thing that is not thy self. For
thou, O Lord God, art most best, most highest, most might, most sufficient,
and most full of goodness: most sweet, most comfortable, most fair, most
louinge, most noble, and most glorious above all thing, in whom all goodness
is together perfectly and fully, has been and shall be. And therefore,
whatsoever thou geuest me beside thy self, it is little and insufficient to me
for my heart may not rest, nor fullye be pacifyed but in thee, so that it
ascends above all gifts, and also above all manner of things that be
created. O my Lord Jesus Christ most loving spouse, most purest lover and
gouernoure of every creature, who shall give me wings of perfect liberty,
that I may fite high, and rest me in thee. O when shall I fully tend to thee,
and see, and feel how sweet thou art: when shall I wholly gather my self
together in thee, so perfectlye that I shall not for thy love feel my self,
but thee only above my self, and aobue all bodily things, and that thou
visit me in such wise as thou do visit thy faithful lovers? Now I often
mourn and complain the miseries of this life, and with sorrow and woe bear
the^ with right great heaviness: for many evil things happen daily in this
life, which often times trouble me, and make me very heavy, and greatly
darken mine understanding. They hinder me greatly, and put my mind from thee,
and so encomber me many ways, that I can not have free mind and clean desire
to thee, nor have thy sweet imbracinges that to thy blessed Saints be always
present. Wherefore I beseech thee Lord Christ Jesus, that the sighinges and
the inward desires of my heart, with my manifold desolutions, may somewhat
move thee, and incline thee to hear me. O Jesus the light and brightness of
everlasting glory, the joy and comfort of all christien people that are walking
and laboring as pilgrims in the wyldernes of this world, my heart cries to
thee by still desires without voice, and my silence speaks unto thee, and
says thus: How long carries my Lord God to come to me, verily I trust that
he will shortly come to me his poorest servant, and comfort me, and make me
joyous and glad in him, And that he will deliver me from all anguishe and
sorrow. Come Lord come, for without thee I have no glad day, nor hour, for
thou art all my joy and gladness, and without thee my soul is barren and
void. I am a wretch, and in manner in prison, and bound with fetters, till
thou through the light of thy gracious presence vouchsafe to visit me, and to
refresh me, and to bring me again to liberty of spirit, and that thou
vouchsafe to show thy favorable and louinge countenance unto me. Let other
seek what they will, but truly there is nothing that I will seek, nor that
shall please me, but thou my Lord God, my hope and everlasting health. I shall
not cease of prayer till thy grace return to me again, and that thou speak
inwardly to my soul, and say thus, Lo I am here, I am come to thee, for thou
haste called me, thy tears and the desire of thy heart, thy meeknes and thy
contrition have bowed me down, and brought me to thee. And I shall say
again, Lord I have called thee, and I have desired to have thee, ready to
forsake all things for thee, thou first haste stirred me to seek thee.
Wherefore be thou always blessed that haste showed such goodness to me, after
the multitude of thy mercy: What has thy servant (Lord) more to do or say,
but that he meeken him self before thy majesty, and ever have in mind his
own iniquity? There is none like to thee Lord, in heaven nor in earth, thy
works be good, thy judgments be righteous, and by thy providence all things
be governed. Wherefore to thee which art the wisdom of the father, be
everlasting joy and glory, and I humbly beseech thee, that my body and soul,
my heart and tongue, and all thy creatures, may always laud thee, and bless
thee. Amen.

Of remembringe of the great and manyfolde benefits of God. The 24. Chapter.
OPen mine heart, Lord, into the beholding of thy laws, and in thy
commandments teach me to walk, give me grace to know and to understand thy
will, and with great reverence and diligent consideration to remember thy
manyfold benefits, that I may from henceforth yield to thee due thanks for
the^ again. But I know and confess it for truth, that I am not able to yield
to thee condign thankinges for the least benefit that thou have given me, for
I am less then the least benefit that thou have given. And when I behold thy
noblenes and woorthines, my spirit dreadeth and trembles very sore for the
greatness thereof. O Lord, all that we have in body and in soul, inwardly and
outwardlye, naturally or supernaturallye, they be thy benefits, and show thee
openly to be a blessed and good benefactour, of whom we have received such
gifts. And though one has received more, and another less, yet they all be
thy gifts, and without thee the least can not be had: and he that has more
received, may not rightfully glorify him self therein, as though he had gotten
it by his own merit, nor exalt him self above other, nor disdain other, nor
despise his inferiors therefore: for he is greatest and most acceptable to
thee, that least ascribes to him self, and that is for such gifts the more
meek and devout, in yeldinge thanks to thee for them again. And he that
through meekenes can hold him self most vile, and most unworthy of all
other, is the more apt to receive of thy hand more larger gifts. And he that
has received the fewer gifts, ought not therefore to be heavy, or to disdain
at it, nor to be envious against them that have received the greater, but
rather he ought to lift his mind upward to thee, and highlye to laud and
praise thy name, that thou so liberallye, so louinglye, and so freelye, withou
acceptinge of persons, departest thy gifts among thy people: all things come
of thee, and therefore thou art in all things to be blessed. Thou know what
is expedient to be given to every person, and why one has less, and another
more, it is not for us to reason or discuss, but to thee only, by whom the
merits of every man shall be discussed. Wherefore Lord, I account it for a
great benefit not to have many gifts, whereby outwardly, and after ma^s
judgment, laud and praysinge should follow. And over that, as me seems,
although a man consider and behold his own poverty, and the vileness of his
own person, he ought not therefore to take grief, heaviness, or de^ection, but
rather to conceive thereby great gladness of soul: for thou haste chosen, and
daily do chose poor meek persons, and such as be despised in the world,
to be thy familier and household servants, witness thy Apostles, whom thou
made princes of all the world, which nevertheless were conuersaunt among
the people without complayninge or missaying, so meek and simple without all
malice and disceipte, that they ioyed to suffer reproufes for thy name, so
farreforth, that such things as the world abhors and flies, they coueted
with great desire. Thus it appears, that there ought nothing so much to
comfort and glad thy lover and him that has received thy benefits, as that
thy will and pleasure in him be fullfilled after the eternal disposition of
him from the beginning, wherewith he ought to be so well contented and
pleased, that he would as gladly be holden least, as other would be holden
most, and as peaceful would he be, and as well pleased in the lowest place,
as in the highest: and as glad to be despised and abject, and of no name nor
reputation in the world, as other to be nobler or greater: for thy will, Lord,
and the honor of thy name ought to excel all things, and more ought it to
please and comfort thy lover, then all other benefits given, or that might be
given unto him.

Of four things that bring peace into the soul. The 25. Chapter.
My son, now shall I teach thee the very true way of peace and of perfect
liberty. O Lord Jesus, do as thou say, for that is right joyous for me to
hear. Study my son rather to fulfill another man's will, then thine own.
Those always to have little worldly riches, rather then much: seek also the
lowest place, and desire to be under other, rather then above, and couete
always and pray, that the will of God be whollye done in thee. Lo, such a
person enters soothfastlie into the very true way of peace and inward
quietness. O Lord, this short lesson that thou haste taught me, conteyneth in
it self much high perfection. It is short in words, but it is full of
sentence, and fruitful in virtue: for if it were well and faithfully kept of
me, vnrestfulnes should not so lightly spring in me as it has done. For as
often as I feel my self unrestful, and not contented, I find that I have
gone from this lesson, and from this good doctrine. But thou Lord Jesus, who
have all things under thy gouuernaunce, and always love the health of man's
soul, increase more grace in me, that I may from henceforth fulfill these
teachinges, and that I may do always, that shall be to thy honor, and to the
health of my soul. Amen.

A prayer against evil thoughts. The.26. Chapter.
My Lord Jesus, I beseech thee be not far from me, but come shortly, and
help me, for vain thoughts have risen in mine heart, and worldly dredes have
troubled me very sore, how shall I break them down? how shall I pass
unhurt without thy help? I shall go before thee, says our Lord, and I shall
drive away the pride of thy heart, then shall I set open to thee the gates of
ghostly knowledge, and shall show to thee the priuities of my secrets. O
Lord, do as thou say, and then shall flee from me all wicked fantasies,
and truly this is my hope, and my only comfort, to flee to thee in every
trouble, steadfastly to trust in thee, inwardly to call to thee, and
patiently to abide thy coming, and thy heavenly consolations, which I trust
shall shortly come to me. Amen.

A prayer for clarifying of man's mind. The.27. Chapter.
Clarify me, Lord Jesus, with the cleerenes of the everlasting light, and
drive out of my heart all manner of darkness, and all vain imaginations, fight
strongly for me, and drive away the evil beasts, that is to say, all my
evil and wicked co^cupiscences, that peace of conscience may enter and have
full rule in me, and that abundance of lawde and praysinge of thy name, may
sound continually in the chamber of my soul: that is to say, in a pure and
clean conscience in me. Command the winds and tempests of pride to cease,
bid the sea of worldly couetise to be in rest, and charge the north wind,
that is to say, the fiendes temptation, that it blow not and then shall be
great tranquillity and peace in me. Send out thy light and truth of ghostlye
knowledge, that it may shine upon the earth barreyne and dry, and send down
thy grace from above, and therewith annoint my dry heart, and give me the water
of inward devotion, to moiste therewith the drines of my soul, that It may
bring forth some good fruit, that shall be liking and pleasant to thee. Raise
up my mind, that is sore oppressed with the heavy burden of sin and lift up
my desire to the love of heavenly things, that by a taste of the heavenly
felicity, it may loathe to think on any earthly things. Take me Lord, and
deliver me from the vile consolation of creatures, which must of necessity
short: lie perish and fail. For there is nothing created, that may fullye
satisfye mine appetite. Join me therefore to thee with a sure bond of
heavenly love, for thou only suffisest to thy lover. And without thee all
things be vain, and of no substance.

That it is not good to search curiouslye another man's life. The 28. Chapter.
My son, says our Lord, look thou be not curious in searchinge of any
other man's life, neither do thou busy thy self with those things, which do
not belong unto thee. What is this or that to thee? follow thou me: What is
it to thee, whether this man be good or bad? or whether he say or do this or
that? Thou need not to answer for another man's deeds, but for thine own
deeds thou must needly answer. Why then do thou meddle where it needs
not? I see and know every man, and every thing under the sun, I see and
behold, and how it is with every person, what he thinks, what he wills,
and to what end his work draws, is open to me. And therefore all things
are to be referred to me. Keep thy self always in good peace, and suffer him
that will always search another man's life, be as busye as he will, and in the
end shall fall upon him as he has done and said, for he can not deceive me
whatsoever he be. If thou admonish any person for his soul health, look
thou do it not, to get the thereby any name or fame in the world, nor to have
the familiarity or pryuate love of any person, for such things cause much
unquietness of mind, and will make thee also to lose the reward that thou
should have of God, and will bring great darkness into thy soul. I would
gladly speak to thee my words, and open to thee the secret mysteries of
fraternall correction: if thou would prepare thy soul ready against my
coming, and that thou would open the mouth of thy heart faithfullye to
me: Be thou provident, wake diligently in prayer, humble thy self in every
thing, and thou shall find great comfort in God, and little resistance in thy
even christen.

In what thing the peace of heart, and greatest profit of man stands. The
29. Chapter.
My son, says our Lord Jesus, I said to my disciples thus: My peace I leave
with you, my peace I give you, not as the world gives, but much more then it
may give. All men desire peace, but all men will not do that belongs to
peace. My peace is with the meek and mild in heart, and thy peace shall be in
much patience: if thou will hear me, and follow my words, thou shall have
great plenty of peace. O Lord what shall I do to come to that peace? Thou
shall in all thy works take good heed what thou do and say, and thou
shalt set all thy whole intent to please me, and nothing shall thou covet or
seek without me, and of other men's deeds thou shall not judge presumptuously,
nor thou shall not meddle with things that perteine not to thee, if thou do
thus it may be that thou shall little or seldom be troubled: but
nevertheless, to feel at no time any manner of trouble, nor to suffer any
heaviness in body nor in soul, is not the state of this life, but of the life
to come. Think not therefore that thou haste found the true peace when thou
feel no grief, nor that all is well with thee when thou have none
adversity, nor that all is perfect for that every thing comes after thy
mind. Nor yet that thou art great in godds sight, or specially beloved of
him, because thou have great fervor in devotion, and great sweetness in
contemplation, for a true lover of virtue is not known by all these things,
nor the true perfection of man stands not in them. (Wherein then Lord?) In
offering of a man with all his heart wholly to God, not seking him self, nor
his own will, neither in great things nor in small, in time nor in
eternity, but that he abide always one, and yield always like thanks to God
for things pleasant and displeasant, waying them all in one like balance as in
his love. Also if he be strong in God, that when inward consolation is
withdrawn he can yet stir his heart to suffer more if God so will, and yet
justifies not him self, nor prayseth him self therefore, as holy and
righteous: then he walks in the very true way of peace, and then he may well
have a sure and a perfect hope and trust that he shall see me face to face, in
everlasting joy and fruition in the kingdom of heaven. And if he can come to a
perfect and a full contempt and despisinge of him self, then shall he have
full habundance of rest and peace in the joy everlasting, after the measure
of his gift. Amen.

Of the liberty, excellency, and worthiness of a free mind. The.30.
Chapter.
Lord it is the work of a perfect man, not to sequester his mind from the
beholding of heavenly things, and among many cares, to go as he were without
care: not in the manner of an idle or of a desolate person, but by the special
prerogative of a free mind, always busy in gods service, not cleuinge by
inordinate affection to any creature. I beseech thee therefore my Lord Jesus,
most meek and merciful, that thou keep me from the business and cares of the
world, and that I be not overmuch inquieted with the necessities of the
bodily kind, nor that I be not taken with the voluptuous pleasures of the
world, and the flesh, and that in likewise thou preserve me from all
hinderance of the soul, that I be not broken with overmuch heaviness, sorrow,
nor worldly dread. And by these petitions I ask not only to be delivered
from such vanities as the world desires, but also from such miseries as
grieve the soul of me thy servant, with the common malediction of mankind,
that is, with corruption of the bodily feelinge, where with I am so grieved
and let, that I may not have liberty of spirit to behold thee when I
would. O Lord God, that art sweetness unspeakable, turn into bitterness to me
all fleshly delites, which would draw me from the love of eternal things to
the love of a short and a vile delectable pleasure: Let not the flesh and
blood overcome me, nor the world with his short glory deceive me, nor the
fiend with his thousand fold crafts supplant me, but give me ghostly
strength in resistinge, patience in sufferinge, and constancy in perseueringe.
Give me also for all worldly consolatio^s, the most sweet consolations of the
holy ghost, and for all fleshly love, send into my soul the love of thy holy
name. Lo meat, drink, cloathinge, and all other necessaries for the body be
painful and troublesome to a fervent spirit, which if it might, would
always rest in God, and in ghostly things. Grant me therefore grace to use
such bodilye necessaries temperatlye, and that I be not deceived with overmuch
desire to them. To forsake all things it is not lawful, for the bodilye kind
must be preserved, but to seek superfluous things, more for pleasure, then
for necessity, thy holy law prohibiteth: for so the flesh would rebel
against the spirit. Wherefore Lord, I beseech thee, that thy hand of grace
may so govern and teach me, that I exceed not by any manner of superfluity.
Amen.

That private love most lets a man from God. The.31. Chapter.
My son, says our Lord it behooves thee to give all for all, and nothing to
keep to thee of thine own love, for the love of thy self more hurts thee,
then any other thing in this world. After thy love, and after thine affection
every thing cleaneth to thee more or less. If thy love be pure, simple, and
well ordered, thou shalt be without inordinate affection to any creature.
Couete therefore nothing that is not lawful for thee to have, and have nothing
that may let thee from ghostlye travail, or that may take from thee inward
liberty of soul. It is meruail, that thou committest not thy self fullye to
me with all thy heart, with all things that thou may have or desire. Why
art thou thus consumed with vain sorrow? why art thou weried with superfluous
cares? Stand at my will, and thou shall find nothing that shall hurt or
hinder thee: but if thou seek this thing or that, or would be in this place
or in that for thine own profit, and for thine own pleasure, thou shall
never be in rest, nor ever free from some trouble of mind: for in every place
shall be found something that will mislike thee. Transitory things when they
be had and greatly multiplied in the world, do not always help man's soul to
peace, but rather when they be despised and fully cut out of the love and
desire of the heart, and that not to be understand only of gold and silver,
and other worldly riches, but also of desire of honors and praysinges of the
world, which shortly vanishes and passes away, as does the smoke with the
wind: the place helps little if the spirit of fervor be away. Also the
peace that a man gets outwardelye, shall not long stand who^e, if it be
void from the true inward peace of heart, that is to say, though thou change
thy place, yet it shall little amend thee, unless thou stand steadfast in me:
for by new occasions that shall daily rise, thou shalt find that thou have
fled, and percase much more perilous, and much more grievous things than the
first were.

A prayer for the purginge of man's soul, and for heavenly vvisdome and the
grace of God to be obtained and had. The 32. Chapter.
Confirm me Lord, by the grace of the holy ghost, and give me grace to be
strong inwardlye in soul, and avoid out thereof all unprofitable business of
the world, and of the flesh that it may not be led by unstable desires of
earthly things. And that I may behold all things, as they be, transitory,
and of short abidinge, and me also to go with them: for nothing under the Sun
may long abide, but all is vanity, and affliction of spirit. O how wise is
he that feels and understands this to be true that I have said. Give me
(Lord) therefore heavenly wisdom, that I may learn to seek thee, and to
find thee, and above all things to love thee, and all other things to
understand and know, as they be, after thorder of my wisdom, and none
otherwise, and give me grace also, wisely to withdraw me from them that
flatter me, and patiently to suffer the^ that grieve me: for it is great
wisdom not to be moved with every blast of words, nor to give ear to him
that flattereth, as does the mairmayde. The way that is thus begone, shall
bring him that walks in it, to a good and a blessed ending.

Against the evil sayings of detractours. The 33. Chapter.
My son, says our Savior Christ, thou shall not take it to grief, because
some persons think evil, or say evil of thee, that thou would not gladlye
hear, for thou shall yet think worse of thy self, and that no man is so
evil as thou art. If thou be well ordered inwardlye in thy soul, thou shall
not much care for such flyinge words. And it is no little wisdom, a man to
keep him self in silence, and in good peace, when evil words be spoken to
him, and to turn his heart to God, and not to be troubled with man's judgment.
Let not thy peace be in the hearts of men, for whatsoever they say of thee,
good or bad, thou art not therefore a another man: but as thou art, thou art.
Where is the true peace and glory, is it not in me? yes truly: Therefore he
that neither desires to please man, nor dreadeth not to displease him, shall
have great plenty of peace: for of inordinate love, and vain dread, comes
all unquietness of heart, and vnrestfulnes of mind.

How almighty God is to be invvarldlye called unto, in time of tribulation.
The 34. Chapter.
Lord, thy name be blessed for ever: that thou would this temptation and
tribulation should fall upon me, I may not escape it, but of necessity I am
driven to flee to thee, that thou vouchsafe to held me, and to turn all into
gohstlye profit. O Lord, I am now in trouble, and it is not well with me,
for I am greatly vexed with this present passion. And now most best beloved
father, what shall I say, I am now taken with anguishes and troubles on every
side, save me in this hour, but I trust that I am come into this hour, that
thou shall be lauded and praised when I am perfectlye made meek before thee,
and that I am clearly delivered by thee, be it therefore pleasant to thee to
deliver me. For what may I most sinful wretch do, or whither may I go
without thee? Give me patience now at this time in all my troubles: help me
my Lord God, and I shall not fear ne dread what troubles soever fall upon me.
And now what shall I say, but that thy will be done in me? I have deserved to
be troubled and grieved, and therefore it behooves that I suffer as long as it
shall please thee, but would to God that I might suffer gladlye till the
furious tempests were ouerpassed, and that quietness of heart might come again.
Thy mighty hand (Lord) is strong enough to take this trouble from me, and
to aswage the cruel assaults thereof, that I do not utterly fail, as thou
have often times done to me before this time, and the more hard that it is to
me, the more light it is to thee. And when I am clearly delivered by thee, then
shall I say, This is the changing of the right hand of him that is highest,
that is, the blessed Trinity, to whom be joy, honor, and glory
everlastingly. Amen.

Of the help of God to be asked, and of a full trust to recover through devout
prayer our former grace. The.35. Chapter.
My son, I am the Lord that sends comfort in time of tribulation, come
therefore to me, when it is not well with thee. This is it that lets thee
most, that thou turnest thee over slowly to me, for before thou pray heartily
to me, thou seek many other comforts, and refreshest thy spirits in
outward things. And therefore all that thou do little avails thee, til
thou can behold and see, that I am he that sends comfort to all that
faithfully do call to me, and that there is not without me any profitable
counsel nor perfect remedy. But now take a good spirit to thee, and after
thy troubles be thou comforted in me, and in the light of my mercy have thou
full trust, for I am nere to thee to help thee, and to restore thee again,
not only to like grace as thou had first, but also to much more, in
great abundance. Is there any thing hard or impossible to me? or am I like
to him, that says a thing, and does it not? where is thy faith? Stand
strongly and perseuerantlie in me, be steadfast, abiding my promise, and thou
shall have comfort in such time as it shall be most expedient for thee: abide,
abide, and tarry for me, and I shall come soon, and help thee. It is
temptation that vexes thee, and a vain dread that fears thee much. But what
avails such fear of dread for things that perchance shall never come, but
that the ghostlye enemy would thou should have sorrow upon sorrow. Bear
therefore patienlye thy troubles that be present, and dread not ouermuche those
that be to come: for it suffiseth to every day his own malice. It is a vain
thing and unprofitable, to be heavy or glad for things, that perchance shall
never happen nor come, but it is the unstableness of man, that he will be
deceived, and so lightly to follow the suggestion of the enemy, for he cares
not whether he may deceive by true suggestion or by false, nor whether it be
by love of things present, or by dread of things to come. Therefore be thou
not troubled, neither dread, but trust strongly in me, and in my mercy have
perfect hope, for when thou weenest, that thou art right far from me, often
times I am right near unto thee: and when thou weenest that all is lost, then
often times follows the greater reward. It is not therefore all lost, though
some thing happen against thy will, and thou shall not judge therein after thy
outward feelinge, neither shall thou take any grief so sore to heart, but
that thou shall have good trust to escape it: nor thou shall not think thy
self all wholly forsaken of me, though I send thee for a time some heaviness
and trouble, for that is the surer way to the kingdom of heaven: and doubtless,
it is more expedient to thee, and to other of my servants, that ye sometime
be proved with adversities, then that ye have always all things after your wills.
I know the hid thought of man, and that it is much expedient to the health of
the soul, that he be left sometime to him self without ghostly savor or
comfort, least happily he be raised up into pride, and think him self better
then he is. That I have given, I may take away, and may restore it again,
when me shall list. When I give a thing to any person, it is mine own that I
have given, and when I take it away again, I take none of his: for every
good gift, and every perfect reward comes of me. If I send to thee trouble
or heaviness, in what wise soever it be, take it gladly, and disdain it not,
neither let thy heart fail thee therein, for I may anon lift thee up again,
and turn thy heaviness into great joy and ghostlye gladness. And verily, I am
righteous, and much to be lauded and praised, when I do so with thee. If thou
understand a right, and behold thy self truly as thou art, thou shall
never be so directly heavy for any adversity, but rather thou shall joy
therein, and think it as the greatest gift, that I spare not to scourge thee
with such trouble and adversity: for I said to my disciples thus: As my
father loves me I love you: and yet I sent them not forth into the world, to
have temporal joys, but to have great battles, not to have honors, but
despites, not to be idle, but to labor, not to rest, but to bring forth much
good fruit in patience and good works. My son, remember well these words
that I have spoken to thee, for they be true, and can not be denied.

How we should forget all creatures, that we might find our Creator.
The.36. Chapter.
Lord, I have great need of thy grace, and that of thy great singular grace,
or that I may come thither, where no creature shall let nor hinder me from
perfect beholdinge of thee: for as long as any transitorye thing holds me,
or has rule in me, I may not fly freelye to thee. He coueted to fly without
let, that said thus: Who shall give me wings like to a dove, that I may fly
into the bosom of my savior, and into the holes of his blessed wounds and
rest me there? I see well, that no man is more restfull, nor more likinge in
this world, then is that man, who always has his mind, and whole intent
upward to God, and nothing desires of the world. It behooves him therefore
that would perfectly forsake him self, and behold thee, to surmount al
creatures, and him self also, and through excess of mind to see and behold,
that thou maker of all things have nothing among all creatures like unto thee:
and but a man be clearly delivered from the love of creatures, he may not
fully tend to his Creator? And this is the greatest cause, why there be so
few co^te^platiues, that is to say, because there be so few, that willinglye
will sequester them selves from the love of creatures. To co^templation is
great grace required, for it lifts up the soul, and rauisheth it up in
spirit above it self. And except a man be lift up in spirit above him self,
and be clearelie delivered from all creatures, as in his love, and be perfectly
and fully united to God, whatsoever he can, or whatsoever he has, either in
virtue or cunning, it is but little worth before God. Therefore he shall have but
little virtue, and long shall he lie still in earthly likinges, that accounts
any thing great or worthy to be praised, but only God, for all other things
besides God are naught, and for naught are to be accounted. It is great
difference between the wisdom of a devout man lightened by grace, and the
cunninge of a subtle and studious clerk, and that learning is much more
noble and much more worthy, that comes by the influence and gracious gift
of God, than that that is gotten by the labor and study of man. Many desire to
have the gift of contemplation, but they will not use such things as be
required to contemplation. And one great let of contemplation is, that we
stand so long in outward signs, and in sensible things, and take no heed of
perfect mortifying our body to the spirit. I wot not how it is, nor with what
spirit we be led, nor what we pretend, we that be called spiritual persons,
that we take greater labor and study for transitory things, than we do to
know the inward state of our own soul. But alas for sorrow, anon as we
have made a little recollection to God, we ten forth to outward things, and
do not search our own conscience with due examination, as we should do, nor
we heed not where our affection rests, new sorrow not that our deeds be so
evil and so unclean as they be. The people corrupted them self with fleshly
uncleanness, and therefore followed the great floode: and verily when our inward
affection is corrupted, it is necessary that our deeds folowinge thereupon be
also corrupted, for of a clean heart springs the fruit of good life. It is
often times asked what deeds such a man has done, but of what zeal, of what
intent he did them, is little regarded: whether a man be rich, strong, fair,
able, a good writer, a good singer, or a good labourer, is often enquired, but
how poor he is in spirit, how pacient and meek, how devout, and how
inwardly turned to God, is little regarded. Nature holds the outward deed,
but grace turns her to the inward intent of the deed. The first is often
deceived, but the second puts her trust wholly in God, and is not deceived.

How we should forsake our self, and thruste down all couetise out of our
hearts. The.37. Chapter.
My son, says our Lord, thou shall not have perfect liberty of mind,
unless thou wholly forsake thy self. All proprietaries, and al lovers of them
selves, al covetous persons, curious, vain glorious, and all runners about,
and also such as seek things soft and delectable in this world, and not of
Jesus Christ, often fayninge, and greedilye seekinge things that shall not
long endure, be as men fettred and bound with chains, and have no perfect
liberty nor freedom of spirit, for all things shall perish that be not
wrought of God. Hold well in thy mind this short word: Forsake all things,
and thou shall find all things, forsake couetise, and thou shall find great
rest. Print well in thy mind that I have said, for when thou haste fulfilled
it, thou shalt well know, that it is true. Lord, this lesson is not one
days work, nor a play for children, for in it is contained the full
perfection of all religion. Also, my son, thou ought not to be turned from
god, nor to be any thing discouraged from his service, when thou hear the
strait life of perfect men, but rather thou ought to be provoked thereby to
higher perfection, and at least to desire in heart, that thou might come
thereto. But would to God thou were first come to this point, that thou were
not a lover of thy self, but that thou would keep my commandments, and
the commandments of him that I have appointed to be thy father spiritual:
for then thou should please me greatly, and then all thy life should pass
forth in joy and peace. Thou haste yet many things to forsake, which
unless thou can whollye forsake, thou shall not get that thou desire. And
therefore I counsel thee, to buy of me bright shininge gold, that is to
say, heavenly wisdom, that despises all earthlye things, and cast fro
thee all worldly wisdom, and all man's comfort, and all thine own affections,
and that thou chose to have vile things and abject, rather the^ precious and
high in the sight of the world. But thee true heavenly wisdom seems to
many, to be vile and little, and well nigh forgotten. Many can say with their
mouth that it is good, not to desire to be magnifyed in the world, but their
life follows not their saying. And therefore they desire it privily in their
heart, but yet that is the precious margaret, and the high virtue that is hid
fro much people for their presumption, get it who so may.

Of the unstableness of man's heart; and that our final intent in all things
should be to God. The.38. Chapter.
My son, look thou believe not thine own affection, for it changes often
from one to an other. As long as thou live thou shall be glad to change
ability whether thou will or not, as now glad, now sorrowful, now pleased,
now displeased, now devout, now undevout, now lusty, now slothful, now
heavy, now lightsome. But a wise man that is well taught in ghostly
travail, stands stable in all such things, and forces little what he
feels, nor on what side the wind of unstableness blows, but all the intent
and study of his mind is, how he may most profit in virtue, and finally
come to the most fruitful and most blessed end. By such a wholle intent
fully directed to God, may a man abide steadfast and stable in him self among
many adversities, and the more pure and the more clean that his intent is, the
more stable shall he be in every storm. But alas for sorrow, the eye of man's
soul is anon darkened, for it beholds lightly delectable things that come
of the world, and of the flesh, in so much that there is seldom found any
person that is free and clear from the venomous desire of hearing of some
tales, or of some other fantasies, and that by their own seekinge. In such
manner ^ame the Jews into Bethany, to Martha and to Marie Magdalen, not for the
love of our Lord Jesus, but for to see Lazarus, whom he had raised from death
to life. Wherefore the eye of the soul is to be kept full bright, that it be
always pure and clean, and that it be above all passing things, wholly
directed to god: the which grant us to. etc. Amen.

How our Lord God sauoureth to his lover sweetly above all things, and in
all things. The 39. Chapter.
Our Lord God is to me all in all, and since he is so, what would I more have,
or what can I more desire? O this is a sauoury word and a sweet, to say,
that our Lord is to me all in all. But that is to him that loves the word,
and not the world. To him that understands this word, is said enough, but
yet to repeat it often is likinge to him that loves. I may therefore more
plainly speak of this matter, and say, Lord when thou art present to me,
all thing is pleasant and likinge, but when thou art absent, all things are
grievous and greatly mislikinge. When thou come thou make mine heart
restfull, and bring into it a new joy, thou make thy lover to feel and
understand the truth, and to have a true judgment in all things, and in all
things to laud and praise thee. O Lord, without thee nothing may belong
likinge nor pleasant, for if any thing should be lykinge and sauourye, it
must be through help of thy grace, and be tempered with the spicerie of thy
wisdom. To him to whom thou sauourest well, what shall not savor well? And
to him that thou sauourest not well unto, what may be joyful or likinge? But
worldly wise men, and they that savor fleshlye delights, fail of this
wisdom. For in worldly wisdom is found great vanity, and in fleshly
pleasures is everlasting death: and therefore they that follow thee Lord by
despising of the world, and by perfect mortifieng of their fleshly lusts, be
known to be very wise, for they be led from vanity to truth, and from
fleshelie likinge to spiritual cleannes. To such persons God sauoureth
wondrous sweet: and whatsoever they find in creatures, they refer it all
to the laud and praising of the Creatoure: for they see well, that there is
great difference betwixt the Creator and creature, eternity and time, and
betwixt the light made and the light unmade. O everlasting light far
passinge all things that are made, send down the beams of thy lightninges
from above, and purifye, glad, and clarify in me all the inward parties of my
heart. Quicken my spirit with all the powers thereof, that it may cleave fast,
and be joined to thee in joyful gladness of ghostlye rauishinges. O when shall
that blessed hour come, that thou shall visit me, and glad me with thy blessed
presence, so that thou be to me all in all? As long as that gift is not given
to me, that thou be to me all in all, there shall be no full joy in me. But
alas for sorrow, mine old man, that is my fleshly liking, yet lives in me,
and is not yet fully crucified, nor perfectly dead in me, for yet strives the
flesh strongly against the spirit, and moves great inward battle against
me, and suffers not the kingdom of my soul to live in peace. But thou, good
Lord, that have the lordship over all the power of the Sea, and do aswage
the streams of his flowinges. Arise and help me, break down the power of
mine enemies, which always move this battle in me. Show the greatness of thy
goodness, and let the power of thy right hand be glorified in me, for there is
to me none other hope nor refuge, but in thee only my Lord, my God: to whom
be joy, honor and glory everlastingly. Amen.

That there is no full surety from temptation in this life. The 40. Chapter.
Our Lord says to his servant thus: Thou shalt never be sure from
temptation and tribulation in this life. And therefore, armoure spiritual shall
always, as long as thou live, be necessary for thee. Thou art among thine
enemies, and shall be troubled and vexed with them on every side, and but if
thou use in every place the shield of patience, thou shall not long keep thee
unwounded. And over that, if thou set not thy heart strongly in me, with a
ready will to suffer all things patiently for me, thou may not long bear
this ardoure, nor come to the reward of blessed saints. It behooves thee
therefore manly to pass over many things, and to use a strong hand against
all the objections of the enemy. To the ouercommer it promises Angels food,
and to him that is overcome, is left much misery. If thou seek rest in this
life, how then shall thou come to the rest everlasting? Set not thy self to
have rest here, but to have patience, and seek the true soothfast rest, not in
earth, but in heaven, not in man, or any creature, but in God only, where it
is. For the love of God thou ought to suffer gladly all things, that is to
say, all labors, sorrows, temptations, vexations, anguishes, needines,
sickness, injuries, evil sayings, reprouinges, oppressions, confusions,
corrections, and despisinges. These help a man greatly to virtues, these
prove the true knight of Christ, and make redye for him the heavenly crown,
and our Lord shall yield him again everlasting reward for this short
labor, and infinite glory for this transitory confusion. I ^owest thou,
that thou shall have always spiritual co^fortes after thy will? Nay, nay, my
Saints had them not, out many great griefs, and diverse temptations, and
great desolations, but they bare all with great patience, and more trusted in
me then in them selves: for they knew well, that the passions of this world
be not able of them selves to get the glory that is ordained for the^ in the
kingdom of heaven. VVilt thou look to have anon that, which others could
not get but with great weepinges and labors? Abide patiently the coming of
our Lord, do manfully his bidding, be comforted in him, mistrust him not, nor
go not back from his service for pain nor for dread, but lay forth thy body
and soul constantlye to his honor in all good bodylye and ghostly labors,
And he shall reward thee again most plenteouslye for thy good travail, and
shall be with thee, and help thee in every trouble that shall befall unto thee,
So may it be. Amen.

Against the vain judgments of men. The 41. Ch^pter.
My son, fix thy heart steadfastly in God, and dread not the iudgme^tes of
man, where thine own conscience withnesseth thee to be innocent and clear. It
is right good and blessed, sometime to suffer such sayings, and it shall not
be grievous to a meek heart which trusts more in God than in him self.
Many folk can say many things, and yet little faith is to be given to their
sayings, and to ple^^e all men it is not possible. For though S. Paul
labored all that he might to have pleased al people in God, and did to all men
all that he could for their salvation, yet nevertheless he could not let,
but that he was sometime judged of other. He did for the edifyinge and health
of other as much as in him was, but that he should not sometime be judged of
other, or not be despised of other, he could not let, wherefore he committed
all to God that knows all thing, and armed him self with patience and
meeknes, against all things that might be vntruelye spoken against him. And
nevertheless sometime he answered again, lest that by his silence hurt or
hinderance might have grown to other What art thou then that dreadest so sore
a mortal man? this day he is, and to morrow he appears not, dread God, and
thou shall not need to dread man. What may man do with thee in words or
injuries? he hurts him self more than thee, and in the end he shall not
flee the judgment of God, whatsoever he be. Have always God before the eye of
thy soul, and strive not again by multiplyinge of words. And if thou seem
for a time to suffer confusion that thou have not deserved, disdain thou not
therefore, nor through impatience minishe nor thy reward, but rather lift up
thy heart to God in heaven, for he is able to deliver thee from all confusion
and wrongs, and to reward every man after his desert, and much more then he
can deserve.

Of a pure and a vvholle forsakinge of our self and our own will, that we
might get the freedom of spirit, and follow the will of God. The.42.
Chapter.
My son, says our Lord, forsake thy self, and thou shall find me. Stand
without election, and without folowinge of thine own will, and also without al
propriety, and thou shall much profit in grace: and if thou wholly resign
thy self into my hands, and take nothing to thee again, thou shall have the
more grace of me. O Lord, how often shall I resign me unto thee, and in what
things shall I forsake my self? Always, and in every hour, in great things
and in small: I except none, for in all things I will find thee naked and
very poor, and void of thine own will: else how may thou be mine, and I
thine, but if thou be clearly berefte within and without of thine own will.
And the sooner that thou can bring it about, so much the sooner shall it be
better with thee, and the more perfectlye and the more clearly that thou can
do it, the more fully shall thou please me, and the more shall thou win.
Some persons resign the^ selves unto me, but it is with some exception, for
they trust not fullye to me, and therefore they study to provide for the^
selves. And some at the beginning offer thous to me, but after, when any
temptation comes, they soon turn again to their own will, and to that,
which they promised to forsake, and therefore they profit little in virtue. And
truly such persons shall never come to perfect clennes, and to freedom of
heart, nor to the grace of familiarity with me, but through a perfect
forsakinge of them selves, and through a daily offering of them, and all that
they have wholly to me, for without that may no man have perfect fruition and
vnitinge with me. I have said to thee many times before, and yet I say to thee
again, forsake thy self, and resign thy self whollye to me, and thou shall
have great inward peace in me. Give all for all, and nothing keep to thy
self of thine own will, but stand purelye and stably in me, and thou shall
have me, and thou shall be so free in heart and in soul, that darkness of
conscience, nor thraldom of sin shall ever have power in thee. Endeavor thy
self therefore to get this freedom of spirit that I speak of, pray for it,
study for it, and always desire in thy heart, that is to say, that thou
may clearly be spoiled and bereft of all property and of thine own will,
and that thou being naked of all wordly things, may follow me that honge
naked for thee upon the Cross, and that thou may dye to thy self and to
all worldly things also (as in thy love) and blessedly to live to me. Then if
thou do thus, al vanities, and all vain fantasies, and all superfluous cares
of the world, and of the flesh, shall fail, and fade, and go away. Then also
immoderate dread and inordinate love shall dye in thee, and thou shall
blessedly live in me, and I in thee. Amen.

How a man shall rule him self in outvvarde things, and how he ought to
call to God for help in all perils and dangers. The.43. Chapter.
Our Lord Jesus says to his servant thus, Thou ought to take heed
diligently, that in every place, in every deed, and in every outward
occupation that thou do, thou be inwardlye free in thy soul, and have the
rule over thy self, and that all things be under thee as in thy love, and
thou not under them: but that thou be the Lord and gouernoure over thy deeds,
not as a servant, or a bond man, but rather exempted as a true Hebrewe, that is
to say, as a true christien man, goinge into the number and into the freedom
of the children of God, which stand upon things present, and look toward
things everlasting, and behold things transitorye with their left eye, and
things everlasting with their right eye: whom worldly goods can not draw
down to the love of them, but they rather draw worldly goods to serve, in
such wise, as they be ordained to of God, and as they be instituted to do by
the high maker of all things, which leaves nothing inordinate in his
creatures. Also, if thou stand in every adventure, and doubt that shall happen
to thee, not to the judgment of thy outward apperance, but anon in every
such doubt thou entrest into thine own soul by devout prayer, as Moses did
into the tabernacle, to ask counsel of God, thou shalt hear anon the
answer of our Lord, which shall instruct thee sufficientlye in many things,
both present, and that are to come. It is read, that Moses had always
recourse to the tabernacle of God, for doubts and questions to be assolied,
and that he there asked the help of God through devout prayer for the perils
and dangers, as well of him self, as of the people. So should thou enter
into the secret tabernacle of thine own heart, and there ask inwardly with
good devotion the help of God in all such doubts and perils. We read that
Iosue, and the children of Israel were deceived of the Gabaonites, because they
gave light credence to their sayings, and did not first ask counsel of
God, as they should have done, and so by the fair words of the Gabaonites,
and thorough a false pity, Iosue and the children of Israel were illuded and
greatly deceived.

That a man should not be importune in his business. The.44. Chapter.
My son, says our Lord, commit always thy cause to me, and I shall well
dispose it for thee when time shall come. Abide mine ordinance and direction,
and thou shalt find thereby great profit and help. O Lord, gladly will I
commit all things to thee, for it is litie that I can do for my self. Would
to God that I did not cleave to desires of worldly things, but that I might
always offer my self whollye to thy will and pleasure. My son, so it is good
for thee to do, for often times a man that trusts much in him self, and in
his own will, sets his mind much to bring about this thing or that, as
he desires: but when he has attained that he desires, the^ begins he to
feel all otherwise of it then he did before: for the affections and desires of
man be not always one, but often drive a man from one thing to another.
Therefore it is no small thing, a man fully to forsake him self, though it
be in right little and small things. For truly, the very perfection of man
is a perfect denyinge, and a full forsakinge of himself, And such a man is
very free, and beloved for God. But the old ancient enemy the fiende, which
resists goodness all that he may, ceasseth not long from temptation, but
day and night he makes grievous assaults, to see if he may catch any
unware person into his snare of deceit. Therefore wake ye, and pray, that ye
be not deceived by temptation.

That man has no goodness of him self, and that he may not rightfully glorifye
him self in any thing. The 45. Chapter.
O Lord, what is man, that thou do vouchsafe to have mind on him? Or what
has he done for thee, that thou will visit him with grace? And what may he
compain, although thou sometime forsake him? Or what may I righteouslye
say, though thou grant me not that I ask? Truly, I may well think and say
thus: I am naught, nor I have no goodness of my self, but in all things I am
of my self al insufficie^t, and go to naught, and but if I be helped of thee,
and be inwardly informed and taught by thee, I shall be altogether s^outhfull,
and to all thing unprofitable. O Lord, thou art always one, ever shall be
one, always good always righteous and holy, well, righteously and blessedly
disposing all things after thy wisdom: but I wretch, that always am more
ready and prone to evil then to good, am not always abidinge in one, for seven
times be changed upon me. Nevertheless, it shall be better with me, when it
shall please thee to put to thy helpinge hand, for thou only act he, that
without man may help me, and so confirm and stable me in thee, that mine
heart shall not so lightly be changed from thee, but that it may be wholly
fired in thee, and finallye to rest in thee. And verilye, if I could cast
away from me all man's comfort, either for getting of devotion, or for that I
am compelled thereto of necessity, for that I find no comfort in man, then
might I well trust in thy grace to have of thee new visitations, and new
heavenly consolation: But I confess it for truth, that I am unworthy to have
any such consolations, and I thank thee, as often as any good thing comes
to me: for all that is good comes of thee. I am but vanity, and naught
before thee, an unconstant man, and a feeble, and therefore, whereof may I
righteously glorify my self, or why should I look to be magnified? Truly
vain glory is a perilous sickness, a grievous pestilence, and a right great
vanity: for it draws a man from the true joy that he should have in God, and
robs him cleerelye of all heavenly grace. For when a man pleases him self,
he displeases thee, and when he delights in man's praysinges, he is deprived
from the true virtues: for the true steadfast joy and gladness is, to joy in
thee, and not in him self, in thy name, and not in his own virtue, nor in
any creature. Therefore thy name be praised, and not mine, thy works be
magnified, and not mine, and thy goodness be always blessed, so that nothing be
given to me of the laud and praising of man. Thou art my glory and the joy of
my heart, in thee shall I be glorified, and always shall I joy in thee, and in my
self nothing, but in my infirmities. Let the Jews seek glory among them
selves, but I will seek none but that is only of thee, for all man's glory,
all temporal honor, and all worldly highness to thy eternal glory compared,
is but as foolishnes, and a great vanity. O truth, O mercy, O blessed
trinity, to thee be laud, honor, and glory everlastingly. Amen.

How all temporal honor is to be despised. The 46. Chapter.
My son, take it not to grief, though thou see other men honored and
exalted, and thy self despised and set at naught. If thou raise up thine heart
to me in heaven, the despites of man in earth shall little grieve thee. O Lord
we be here in great darkness, and are soon deceived with vanities, but verily
if I beheld my self well, I should openly see, that there was never any wrong
done to me by any creature, nor that I have nothing whereof I may righteoussie
complain. But for as much as I have often sinned, and greeuouslie offended
against thee, therefore all creatures be armed against me. To me therefore is
due, confusion and despite, to thee land, honor, and glory. And unless I
can bring my self to this point, that I would gladlye be despised and
forsaken of all creatures, and utterly to seem as naught in the world, I may
not be inwardlye pacified nor stablished in thee, nor spirituallie be
illumined, nor yet fully united to thee.

That our trust is not to be put in vvorldlye people. The 47. Chapter.
My son, if thou set thy peace with any person for thine own pleasure, or
worldly frendshippe, thou shall always be unstable, and never shalt thou be
contented: but if thou have always recourse to the truth everlasting, that is
God himself, then the death or goinge away of thy dearest freende, whatsoever
he be, shall little grieve thee. The love of thy friend ought always to be
referted to me, and for me he is to be beloved, how good and how profitable
soever he seem unto thee in this life. Without me friendship is naught worth,
nor may not long endure, nor that love is not true and clean that is not knit
by me. Thou ought therefore to be so mortified in all such affections of
worldly men, that in as much as in thee is, thou would couete to be without
all man's comfort. So much a man draws nerer to God, as he can withdraw him
self from the world, and from all worldly comfort, and so much the more he
ascends higher to God, as he can descend lower in him self, and as he can
wax vile and abject in his own sight. He that ascribes any goodness to him
self, withstandeth the grace of God, and lets it to live in him, for the
grace of the holy ghost seeks always a meek and an humble heart. If thou
could perfectly annihilate thy self, and wholly put out of thy heart all
humane and create love, then should I (says our Lord) dwell in thee with
great abundance of my grace But when thou look to creatures, then is
righteouslie drawn from thee the sight of thy Creator. Learn therefore to
overcome thy self for the love of him that made thee like to him self. and
thou shall anon come to great ghostly knowledge. How little soever the thing
be that a man loves, if he love it inordinatlie, it hinders and lets him
greatly from the true and perfect love that he should have to God.

That we should eschew vain seculer cunninge. The.48. Chapter.
My son, says our Lord, let not fair and subtle words move thee, for the
kingdom of heaven stands not in words, but in good virtuous works. Take heed to my words, for they inflame the heart, and lighten the understanding,
and bring in also compunction of heart for sins past, and cause also often
times great heavenly comfort, suddenly to come into the soul. Read never in
any science, to the intent thou would be called wise, but study rather to
mortify in thee all stirringes of sins, as much as in thee is, and that
shall be more profitable to thee, than the knowledge of many hard and subtle
questions. When thou have read and understood many doubts, yet
nevertheless, it behooves thee to come to one that is beginning of all
things, that is, God him self, and else thy knowledge shall little avail thee.
I am he that teaches a man cunning, and do give more understanding to meek
persons, than can be taught by ma^s teaching. And he to whom I speak, s^al
soon be made wise, and much shall he profit in spirit, when pain and woe
shall be to them that only seek for curious learning, taking little heed
to the way to serve God. The time shall come when Christ Lord of Angels, and
master of all masters shall appear to hear the lesson of every creature, and
to examine the conscience of every person, and then shall Jerusalem, that is,
man's soul, be searched with lanternes and lights of Gods high knowledge, and
rightful judgments, and then also shall be made open the deeds and thoughts
of every man, and all excuses and vain arguments shall cease, and utterly
be set apart. I am he also that sodenlie at a point illumine and lift up a
meek soul, that it shall be made able to take and to receive in short time more
perfectly the true reason of the wisdom of God, then an other that studieth
ten years in schools, and lacks meekenes. I teach without sound of words,
without diversity of opinions, without desire of honor, and without strife
and arguments. And I am he that teach all the people to despise earthlye
things, to loathe things that be present, to seek and to savor eternal
things, to flee honors, to bear pacientlie all evil words and speakinges,
to put their trust wholly in me, nothing to covet without me, and above all
things brenninglie to love me And some folks through an inward love that
they have had to me, have learned many great things, and have spoken high
mysteries of my God head. They profit more in forsaking all things, then in
studyinge for high and subtle learning. But to some me^ I speak common
things, to some special things, to some I appear sweetly in signs and
figures, and to some I give great understanding of Scripture, and open to the^
high secret mysteries. There is in books one voice, and one letter that is
read, but it enfourmeth not all persons alike, for I am within secretly
hidden in the letter, the teacher of truth, the searcher of man's heart, the
knower of thoughts, the promoter of good works, and the rewarder of al men,
after as my wisdom and goodness judges them to have deserved, and none
otherwise.

That we should not regard much outvvarde things, nor po^der but little the
judgment of man. The 49. Chapter.
My son, it is profitable to thee to be ignorant in many things, and to
think thy self as dead to the world, and to whom all the world is
crucified. And thou must also with a deaf ear let many things pass, as
thou neither heard them, nor saw them, and to think on such things as shall
cause in thee an inward peace in soul. It is also more profitable to thee,
that thou turn the eye of thy soul from things that displease thee, and to
let every man hold his opinion therein as him seems ^est, rather than to
strive again with froward words. And truly, if thou were well stabled in
God, and beheldest well his judgments, thou should lightly be content to
be judged of other, and to be overcome of other, as our Lord Jesus was for
the^ in time of his passion. O Lord, since it is true that thou say, what
shall become of us that heed so much worldly things, and beweepe so
greatly a little temporal loss, and we labor and tun for worldly profit
with all our might, but our spiritual profit and the health of our own
souls, we little regard? Such things as little or nothing profits us, is
much set by, but that that is most necessary to us is nighe forgorten. For
why? all men run gladlye into outward things. And truly but they shortly
turn back again, they shall gladly rest still in them, which in the end
shall be to them great peril and danger.

That men be not alvvaye to be believed, for that they so lightlye offend in
words. The.50. Chapter.
Lord send me help in my troubles, for man's help is little worth. How often
have I not found friendship where I thought I should have found it? And how
often have I found it, where I least presumed to have found it? wherefore it is
a vain thing to trust in man, for the true and soothfast trust and health of
righteous men is only in thee. Blessed be thou Lord therefore in all things
that happen unto us, for we be weak and unstable, soon deceived, and soon
changed from one thing to an other. Who may so warelie and so alsuredlie
keep him self in every thing, but shall sometime fall into some deceit, or
into some perplexity? truly very sewe: but he that trusts in thee, and
that seeks thee with a clean heart, s^^deth not so lightly from thee. And if
it happen him to fall into any trouble or perplexity, whatsoever it be, and
how grievous soever it be, he shall anon either be delivered by thee, or be
comforted by thee, for thou never forsakest him that trusts in thee. It is
right hard to find so true and so faithful a friend that will persevere with
his freende in all his troubles, but thou Lord art most faithful in all
things, and like to thee none can be found. O how well sauoured that holy
soul in ghostly things, that said thus: My mind is stablished in God, and
is fully grounded in Christ. Truly if it were so with me, the dread of man
should not so lightly enter into me, nor other men's words should not so soon
move me. Who may forsee all things? or who may prevent all evils that are to
come? and if things foreseen do yet often times great hurt, What shall then
those things do that be not foreseen? But why have not I, wretch, better
seen to my self? and why have I so lightlye believed other men's sayings?
truly for that we be but men, and that but frail men, though we be esteemed
and thought of many to be as Angels in our conversation Whom may I believe but
only thee? Thou art the truth that deceyuest no man, nor may not be
deceived. And on the other, side, every man is a liar, weak, and unstable, and
s^ding (most especially) in words, so that scarcely it may be believed that
seems openly to be true. How prudentlie therefore haste thou warned us to
beware of the lightness of man, and that our familier servants may be our
enemies, so that it is not to be believed, though one will say, Lo here is thy
friend, or there is thy friend, for I am taught with mine own hurt: but would to
God it might be as a warninge to me, and not to my more follye. Some say to
me, Beware, beware, keep riose to thy self that I shall the we thee. And when
I keep it close, and believe it to be secret, he can not be secret in that him
self desired, but anon he betrayeth both him self and me, and goes his
way. From such tales, and from such unstable men Lord defend me, that I
fall not into their hands, nor that I never commit any such things. A true
word and a stable Lord give into my mouth, and a deceitful tongue drive far
away from me, for that I would not have done to my self, I ought to be ware
that I do it not to other. O how good and how peaceful is it to keep silence
of other men's words and deeds, and not to give full credence till the truth
be tried, and not to report lightlye to other all that we hear or see, nor to
open our heart fullye but to very few, and to seek thee always that art the
beholder of man's heart, and not so be moved with every flake of words, but to
desire in heart that all things in us inwardly and outwardlye may be fulfilled
after thy will: how sure a thing is it also for the keepinge of heavenly
grace, to flee the conversation of worldly people all that we may, and not to
desire things that seem outwardly to be pleasant and liking: but with all
the study of our heart to seek such things as bring in fervor of spirit, and
amendment of life. It has been truly a great hurt to many persons, a
virtue known, and over timely praised: and contrariwise, it has been right
profitable to some, a grace kept in silence, and not lightly reported to other
in this frail life, that is full of temptation and priule envy.

That we shall put all our confidence in God, when evil words be spoken to
us. The.51. Chapter.
My son, says our Lord, stand strongly, and trust faithfully in me. What
be words but wind? they fly in the air, out they hurt never a stone on the
ground. And if thou know thy self not guilty, think that thou will suffer
gladly such words for God. It is but a little thing for thee to suffer
sometime a hasty word, since thou art not yet able to suffer hard strokes.
But why is it that so little a thing goes so nigh thy heart, but that thou art
yet fleshelie and carnal, and heedest to please men more then thou should.
And because thou dreadest to be despised, thou will not gladly be reproved of
thine offenses, and thou searchest therefore busily, and with great study how
thou may be excu^ed But behoulde thy self well, and thou shall see, that
the world yet lives in thee, and a vain love also to please man. When thou
refusest to be rebuked and punished for thy defaultes, it appears evidently,
that thou art not yet soothfastlie meek, nor that thou art not yet dead to
the world, nor the world to thee yet truly crucified. But hear my words,
and thou shall not need to ear for the words of ten thousand men. Lo, if
all things were said against thee, that might be most maliciously and
untruely feigned against thee, what should they huit, if thou suffered them to
ouerpasse and go away? truly no more then a straw under thy foot, and one
hear of thy head they might not take from thee. But he that has not a man^
heart inwardly, nor sets not God before the eye of his soul, is soon moved
with a sharp word, when he that trusts in me, and will not stand to his own
judgment, shall be free from all man's dread, for I am the Judge that knows
all secrettes: I know how every thing is done, and I know also both him that
does the wrong, and him that it is done to. Of me this thing is wrought, and
by my suffera^ce it is come about, that the thoughts of men's hearts may be
known, and when the time comes I shall judge both the innocent, and him that
is guilty. But first through my righteous examination I will prove them both.
The witness of man often times deceaueth, but my judgment always is true, and
shall not be subverted. And howbeit it is sometime hid, and not known, but to
few, yet it is ever true, and erreth not, neither may err, though in the
sig^^ of some persons it seems not so. Therefore in every doubt it behooves
to run to me, and not to lean much to thine own reason, but with every
thing that I shall send thee to be content, for a righteous man is never
troubled with any thing that I shall suffer to fall unto him, insomuch, that
though a thing were untruely spoken against him, he should not much care for
it, neither should he much joy, though he were sometime reasonablye excused,
for he thinks alwaye^ that I am he that searches man's heart, and that I judge
not after the outward apperance: for often times it shall be found in my sight
worthy to be blamed, that in man's sight seems much worthy to be praised. O
Lord God most righteous Judge, strong and patient, which know the frayltie
and malice of man, be thou my strength and wholle comfort in all my
necessities, for mine own conscience (Lord) suffiseth me not, for thou
know in me that I know not. And therefore in every reproufe I ought always
to meeken my self, and patiently to suffer all things in charity, after thy
pleasure. Forgive me (Lord) as often as I have not so done, and give me grace
of greater sufferaunce in time to come. Thy mercy is more profitable, and more
sure may for me to the gettinge of pardon and forgeuenes of my sins, then a
trust in mine own works, through defense of my dark conscience. And though I
dreede not my conscience, yet I may not therefore justify my self, for thy
mercy removed and taken away, no man may be justified, nor appear righteous
in thy sight.

How all grievous things in this life are gladly to be suffered, for
vvinning of the life that is to come. The.52. Chapter.
My son, says our Lord, be not broken by impatie^ce, with the labor that
thou have taken for my sake, nor suffer thou not tribulation, to cast thee in
despair, nor into unreasonable heaviness or anguishe in any wise, but be thou
comforted and strengthed in every chance by my promises and behests, for I am
able, and of power to reward thee and other my servants abundantly more
then ye can think or desire. Thou shall not labor long here, nor always be
grieved with heaviness: tarry a while my promises, and thou shall shortly see an
end of all thy troubles. One hour shall come, when all thy labors and
troubles shall cease: and truly, that hour will shortly come, for all is
short that passes with time. Do therefore as thou do, labor busily and
faithfullye in my vineyarde, and I shall shortly be thy reward. Write, read,
singe, mourn, be still and pray, and suffer gladlye aduersitye, for the
kingdom of heaven is more worth then all these things, and much more greater
things then they are. Peace shall come one day, which is to me known, and
that shall not be the day of this life, but a day everlasting, with infinite
cleerenes, steadfast peace, and sure rest without ending. And then thou shall
not say, Who shall deliver me from the body of this death, neither shall
thou need to cry, woe is me, that my coming to the kingdom of heaven is
thus prolonged. For death shall then de destroyed, and health shall be without
end of body and soul, insomuch that no manner of vnrestfulnes shall be, but
blessed joy, and most sweetest and fairest company. O if thou saw the
everlasting crowns of my Saints in heaven, in how great joy and glory
they are, that sometime seemed to be vile persons, and as men despisable in the
world, thou should anon meken thy self low to the ground, and should
rather couete to be subject to all men, then to have soueraintie over any one
person, and thou should not desire to have mirth and solace in this world,
but rather tribulation and pain, and thou should the^ account it as a great
winning, to be despised and taken as naught among the people. O if these
things sauoured well to thee, and deeply pierced into thy heart, thou
should not once dare complain for any manner of trouble that should befall
unto thee. Are not all painful things, and most grievous labors gladlye
to be suffered for the joys everlasting? yes verilye, for it is no little
thing to win or lose the kingdom of heaven. Lift up thy face therefore into
heaven, and behold how I and all my Saints that be with me in heaven, had
in this world great battall and conflict, and now they joy with me, and be
comforted in me, and be sure to abide with me, and to dwell with me in the
kingdom of my father without ending. Amen.

Of the day of eternity, and of the miseries of this life. The 53. Chapter.
O Blessed mansion of the heavenly City, O most cleerest day of eternity,
whom the night may not darken, but the high truth, that God is, illumineth and
cleereth the day, always merry, always sure, and never changing his state
into the contrary. VVoulde to God that this day might once appear and shine
upon us, and that these temporal things were at an end. This blessed day
shines to Saints in heaven with everlasting brightness and claritie, but to
us pilgrims in earth it shines not but a far of, as through a mirroure or
glass. The heavenly Citizens know well, how joyous this day is: But we
outlawes, the children of Eve, do weep and wayle the bitterness and tediousnes
of this day, that is, of this present life, short and evil, full of sorrows
and anguishes, where man is often times defiled with sin, enco^bred with
passions, inquieted with dreades, bounden with charges, busied with vanities,
blinded with errors, ouercharged with labors, vexed with temptations,
overcome with delights and vain pleasures of the world, and greeuouslie
tormented, sometime with penury and need. O Lord, when shall the end come
of all these miseries, and when shall I be cleerelie delivered from the bondage
of sin? when shall I only Lord have mind on thee, and fully be made glad
and merry in thee? when shall I be free without letting, and in perfect
liberty, without grief of body and soul? When shall I have sad peace
without trouble, peace within and without, and on every side steadfast and sure?
O Lord Jesus, when shall I stand and behoulde thee, and have full sight and
contemplation of thy glory? And when shall thou be to me all in all? and when
shall I be with thee in thy kingdom, that thou haste ordained to thy elect
people from the beginning. I am left here poor, and as an outlawe in the
land of mine enemies, where daily be battles and great misfortunes. Comfort
my exile, assuage my sorrow, for all my desire cries to thee. It is to me a
grievous burden, whatsoever the world offers me here to my so lace. I desire
to have inward fruition in thee, but I can not attain thereto. I covet to
cleue fast to heavenly things, but temporal things, and passions
unmortified pull me away downward. In mind I would be above all temporal
things, but whether I will or not, I am compelled through mine own default to
be subject to my flesh. Thus I most wretched man fight in my self, and am
made grievous to my self, whiles my spirits desires to be upward, and my
flesh downewarde. O what suffer I inwardly, when in my mind I behold
heavenly things, and anon a great multitude of carnal thoughts enter into my
soul? Therefore Lord, be not long from me, neither depart in thy wrath from
me thy servant. Send to me the lightness of thy grace, and break down in me
all carnal thoughts. Send forth the darts of thy love, and break therewith
all fantasies of the enemy. Gather the wits and powers of my soul together in
thee. Make me forget all worldly things, and grant me to cast away, and
wholly to despise all fantasies of sin. Help me thou everlasting truth,
that no worldly vanity hereafter have power in me. Come also thou heavenly
sweetness, and let all bitterness of sin fly far from me. Pardon me, and
mercifully forgive me, when I think in my prayer of any thing, but of thee:
for I confess for truth, that in time past I have used my self very unstable
therein, for many times I am not there, where I stand or sit, but rather I am
there, where my thoughts lead me, for there am I where my thought is, and
there as my thought is accustomed to be, there is that that I love, and that
often times comes into my mind, that by custom pleases me best, and that
most desires me to think upon. Wherefore, thou that art everlasting truth,
say: Where as thy treasure is, there is thy heart. Wherefore, if I love
heaven, I speak gladly of heavenly things, and of such things as be of
God, and that pertain most to his honor, and to the glorifyinge and
worshippinge of his holy name. And if I love the world, I joy anon at
worldly felicity, and sorrow anon at his adversity. If I love the flesh, I
ymagine often times that pleases the flesh, and if I love my soul, I delight
much to speak and to hear of things that be to my soul health. And so
whatsoever I love of them, I gladlye hear and speak, and bear the images of
them often in my mind. Blessed is that man that for thee (Lord) forgets all
creatures, and learneth truly to overcome him self, and with the fervor of
spirit crucifieth his flesh, so that in a clean and a pure conscience he
may offer his prayers to thee, and be worthy to have company of blessed
Angels, all earthly things excluded from him, and fullye set apart. Amen.

Of the desire of everlasting life, and of the great reward that is promised
to them that stronglye fight against sin. The 54. Chapter.
My son, when thou feel that a desire of everlasting bliss is given unto
thee, and thou couetest to go out of the tabernacle of thy mortal body, that
thou might clearelie without shadow behold my clearenes, Open thine heart,
and with all the desires of thy soul, take that holy inspiration, and yielding
most large thanks to the high goodness of God that so worthily does to thee,
so beninglie visits thee, so brenninglie stirs thee, and so mightelie
bears thee up, that through thine own burden thou fall not down to
earthilie likings, and think not, that that desire comes of thy self, or of
thine own workinge, but rather that it comes of the gift of grace, and of a
lovely beholdinge of God upon thee, that thou should profit thereby in
meekenes and virtue, and that thou should also prepare thee to be ready
against another time for battles that are to come, and the more surely to
cleave to God with all the desire and affection of thy heart, and to study with
all thy power how thou may most purelie and most devoutly serve him: and
take heed of this common proverb, The fire does often burn, but the flame does
not ascend without some smoke: So likewise the desire of some men draws to
heavenly things, and yet they be not all free from the smoke of carnal
affections, and therefore they do it not always purelie for the honor and love
of God, that they ask so desirouslie of him. Such often times is thy desire
that thou show to be so importune, for that desire is not clean and perfect
that is mixte with thine own commodity. Ask therefore not that is delectable
and profitable to thee, but that is acceptable and honor to me: for if thou do
well, and judge aright, thou shall prefer my ordinance, and my will, before
all thy desires, and before all things that may be desired beside me. I know
well thy desire: Thou would now be in liberty of the glory of the sons
of God: now the everlasting house, and the heavenly country full of joy
and glory delights thee much, but that time comes not yet, for there is
yet another time to come, that is to say, a time of labor and of proof. Thou
desire to be fulfilled with the high goodness in heaven, but thou may not
yet come thereto I am the full reward of man, abide me till I shall come, and
thou shall have me to thy reward. Thou art yet to be proved here upon earth,
and more throughlye to be assayed in many things, some comfort shall be given
to thee, but the fulness thereof shall not yet be granted. Be thou therefore
comforted in me, and be thou strong, as well in doing as in sufferinge things
contrary to thy will. It behooves thee to be clothed in thy blood, and to be
changed into a new man, and thou must often times do that thou would not
do, and that thou would do thou must forsake and leave undone. That shall
please other shall go well forward, and that shall please thee shall have no
speed: that other men say shall be well heard, and that thou shall say,
shall be set at naught Other shall ask, and have their askinge, thou shalt
ask and be denied. Other shall be great and have great land and praise of the
people, and of thee no word shall be spoken. To other this office or that
shall be committed, and thou shalt be judged unprofitable in every thing: for
these things and other like, nature will murmr and grudge, and thou shall
have a great battle in thy self, if thou bear them secret in thy heart
without complaining and missaying. Nevertheless, in such things and other
like my faithful servants are wont to be proved, how they can deny them
selves, and how they can in all things break their own wylles, and there is
nothing that thou shall need so much to overcome thy self in, as to learn
to be contented not to be set any price by in the world, and to suffer such
things as be most contrary to thy will, especially when such things as in
thy sight seem unprofitable, be commanded to be done. But (my son) consider
well the profit and fruit of all these labors, the short end, and the
great reward, and then thou shall feel not grief nor pain in all thy
labors, but the most sweetest comfort of the holy ghost through thy good
will, and for that little will that thou forsakest here, thou shall always have
thy will in heaven, where thou shall have all that thou can or may desire.
There shalt thou have full possession of all goodness, without dread to lose
it. There thy will shall be ever one with my will, and it shall couete no
strange nor private things. There no man shall resist thee, no man shall
complain on thee, no man shall let thee, nor no man shall wythstande thee, but
all things that thou can desire shall be there present, and shall fulfill
all the powers of thy soul unto the full. There shall I yield glory for
reprofes, and a palle of laud for thy heaviness, and for the lowest place here,
a seat in heaven for ever. There shall appear the fruit of obedience, the
labor of penance shall joy, and the humble subjection shall be crowned
gloriously Bow thee therefore meekelye now under every man's hand, and force
little who says this, or who commands this to be done. But with all thy
study take heed, that whether thy prelate, or thy fellow, or any other lower
than thou, ask any thing of thee, or will any thing to be done by thee, that
thou take it always to the best, and with a glad will study to fulfill it. Let
this man seek this thing, and another that, and let this man joy in this
thing, and another in that, whatsoever it be, and let them be lauded and
praised a thousand times, but joy thou neither in this thing nor in that,
but only in thine own contempt and despising, and in my will to be
fulfilled, and whether it be by life or death, that I may always be lauded and
honored in thee and by thee. Amen.

How a man that is desolate, ought to offer him self vvhollye to God.
The.55. Chapter.
Lord holy father, be thou blessed now and ever, for as thou will so it is
done, and that thou do is always well: let me thy poorest servant and most
unworthy, joy in thee, and not in my self, nor in nothing else beside the^,
for thou Lord art my gladness, thou art my hope, my crown, my joy, and all my
honor. What has thy servant but that he has of thee, and that without his
desert? All things be thine, and I am poor, and have been in trouble and in
pain ever from my youth, and my soul has been in great heaviness with
weeping and tears, and sometime it has been troubled in it self through
manifold passions, that come of the world, and of the flesh. Wherefore
Lord, I desire that I may have of thee the joy of inward peace, and I ask
the rest of thy chosen children, that be fed and nourished of thee in the
light of heavenly comforts, but without thy help I can not come thereto. If
thou Lord give peace, or if thou give inward joy, my soul shall be anon
full of heavenly melody, and be devout and fervent in thy lauds and
praysings: but if thou withdraw thy self from me, as thou haste sometime
done, then may not thy servant run the way of thy commandments, as he did
first, but then he is compelled to bow his knees, and knock his breast, for it
is not with him, as it was before, when the lantern of thy ghostly presence
shone upon his head, and that he was defended under the shadow of thy mercy
from all perils and dangers, O righteous father ever to be praised, the time
is come that thou will thy servant be proved. And righteouslie is it done,
that I now shall suffer somewhat for thee: now is the hour come that thou have
known from the beginning, that thy servant for a time should outwardly be
set at naught, and inwardly to live to thee, and that he should a little be
despised in the sight of the world, and be broken with passions and sickness,
that he might after rise with thee into a new light, and be clarified, and
made glorious in the kingdom of heaven. O holy father, thou haste ordained it
so to be, and it is done as thou have commanded: this is thy grace to thy
freende, to suffer, and to be troubled in this world for thy love, how often
so ever it be, of what person soever it be, and in what manner soever thou
suffer it to fall unto him: without thy counsel and providence, nor without
cause nothing is done upon earth. Oh, it is good to me, Lord, that thou have
meekened me, that I may thereby learn to know thy righteous judgments, and
put from me all manner of presumption and highness of mind. And it is very
profitable to me, that confusion has covered my face, that I may learn
thereby to seek for help and succor to thee rather the^ to man. And I have
thereby learned to dread thy secret and terrible judgments, which scourgest
the righteous man with the sinner, but not without equity and justice. I
yield thanks to thee, that thou haste not spared my sins, but haste punished
me with scourges of love, and have sent me sorrows and anguishes within, and
without, so that there is no creature under heaven that may comfort me, but
thou Lord God the heavenly leach of man's soul, which strikest and healest,
and bring a man nigh unto bodily death, and after restorest him to health
again, that he may thereby learn to know the littlenes of his own power,
and the more fully to trust in thee. Thy discipline is fallen upon me, and thy
rod of correction has taught me, and under that rod I wholly submit me,
strike my back and bones as it shall please thee, and make me to bow my
crooked will unto thy will, make me a meek and an humble disciple, as thou have
sometime done with me, that I may walk all after thy will. To thee I commit my
self, and all mine to be corrected, for better it is to be corrected by thee
here, then in time to come* Thou know all things, and nothing is hid
from thee that is in man's conscience. Thou know things to come before they
fall, and it is not needful that any man teach thee or warn thee of any
thing that is done upon the earth. Thou know what is speedefull for me, and
how much tribulation helps to purge the rest of sin in me: do with me
after thy pleasure, and disdain not my sinful life, to none so well known as
it is to thee. Grant me Lord that to know, that is necessary to be known:
that to love, that is to be loved: that to praise, that highly pleases thee:
that to regard, that appears precious in thy sight, and that to refuse that
is vile before thee. Suffer me not to judge after my outward wits, nor to give
sentence after the hearing of vncunninge men, but in a true judgment to
discern things visible and invisible, and above all things always to search
and follow thy will and pleasure. The outward witness of men be often deceived
in their judgments, And in likewise, the lovers of the world be deceived
through louinge only of visible things. What is a man the better, for that
he is taken better? truly nothing. For a deceitful man deceyueth an other,
a vain man deceyueth an other, and a blind and feeble creature deceyueth an
other when he exalts him, and rather confounds him then prayseth him. For
why? how much soever a man be in light of God, so much he is, and no more,
says the meek Saint Fraunces, how holy and how virtuous soever he be taken
in sight of the people.

That it is good, that a man give him self to meek bodilye labors, when he
feels not him self disposed to high works of devotion. The 56. Chapter.
My son, thou may not always stand in the high fervent desire of virtue,
ne in the highest degree of contemplatio^, but thou must of necessity through
the corruption of the first sin sometime descend to lower things, and
against thy will, and with great tediousnes, to bear the burden of this
corruptible body: for as long as thou bear this body of death, thou must
need feel some tediousnes and grief of heart, and thou shall often times
beweepe and mourn the burden of thy fleshly feelinges, and the contradictio^
of thy body to thy soul, for thou may not for the corruption thereof
persevere in spiritual studies, and in heavenly contemplation as thou would
do, and then it is good to thee to fly to meek bodily labors, and to
exercise thy self in good outward works, and in a steadfast hope and trust to
abide my coming, and my new heavenly visitations, and to bear thy exile,
and the drines of thy heart patiently, till thou shall be visited by me again,
and be delivered from all tediousnes and unquietness of mind. When I shall
come, I shall make thee forget all thy former labors, and to have inward
rest and quietness of soul. I shall also lay before thee the flourishing medowe
of holy scripture, and thou shalt with great gladness of heart in a new
blessed feeling, feel the very true understanding thereof, and then quickly
shall thou run the way of my commandments, and then shall thou say in
great spiritual gladness. The passions of this world be not worthy of the^
selves to bring us to the joy that shall be showed us in the bliss of heaven,
To the which bring us our Lord Jesus. Amen.

That a man shall not think him self, worthy to have comfort, but rather to
have sorrow and pain: and of the profit of contrition. The 57. Chapter.
Lord, I am not worthy to have thy consolation, nor any spiritual
visitatio^, and therefore thou do righteously to me, when thou leauest me
needy and desolate: for though I might weep water of tears like to the Sea,
yet were I not worthy to have thy con^olatio^, for I am worthy to have nothing
but sorrow and pain, for I have so greeuouslye and so often offended thee, and
in so many things greatly trespassed against thee. Therefore I may well say
and confess for truth, that I am not worthy to have thy lest consolation.
But thou Lord benign and merciful, that wilt not thy works do perish, to
show the greatness of thy goodness in the vessels of thy mercy, above all my
merits or desert, do vouchsafe sometime to comfort me thy servant more
then I can think or devise. Thy co^solations be not like to men's fables, for
they be in them selves soothfast and true. But what have I done Lord, that
thou will vouchsafe to give me any heavenly consolation? I know not that I
have done any thing well as I should have done, but that I have been prone and
ready to sin, and slow to amendment. This is true, and I can not deny it:
for if I would deny it, thou should stand against me, and no man might
defend me. What have I then deserved, but hell and everlasting fire? I
confess for truth, that I am worthy in this world of shame and despite, and
that it becomes not me to be conversant with devout people. And though it be
grievous to me to say thus, yet (since the truth is so) I will confess the truth
as it is, and openly will reprove my self of my defaultes, that I may the
rather obtain of thee mercy and forgeuenes. But what may I then say Lord,
that thus am guilty and full of confusion? truly I have no mouth nor tongue to
speak, but only this word: I have sinned Lord, I have sinned, have mercy on
me, forgive me, and forget my trespass, suffer me a little, that I may weep
and wail my sins, or that I pass hence to the land of darkness covered with
the shadow of death. And what do thou Lord ask most of such a wretched
sinner, but that he be contrite, and meeken him self for his sin, for in
true contrition and meekenes of heart, is found the very hope of forgeuenes of
sin, and the troubled conscience is thereby cleared, and the grace before lost
is recovered again. Man also is thereby defended fro the wrath to come, and
almighty God, and the penitente soul mete lovingly together in holy
kissinges of heavenly love. A meek contrition of heart is to thee Lord a
right acceptable Sacrifice, more sweetly sauouringe in thy sight, then
burning incence. It is also the precious ointment, that thou would should
be shed upon thy blessed feet, for a meek and contrite heart thou never
despisest. This contrition is the place of refuge, from the dread and wrath of
the enemy, and thereby is washed and cleansed, whatsoever is before misdone, or
that is defiled through sin in any manner.

That grace will not be mixed with love of vvorldlye things. The.58. Chapter.
My son, grace is a precious thing, and will not be mixte with any private
love, nor with worldly comfortes. It behooves thee therefore to cast away
all lettinges of grace, if thou will have the gracious gift thereof. Those
therefore a secret place, and love to be alone, and keep thee from hearing
of vain tales and fables, and offer to God devout prayers, and pray heartily,
that thou may have a contrite heart, and a pure conscience. Think all the
world as naught, and prefer my service before all other things, for thou
may not have mind on me, and therwithall delight thee in transitory
pleasures. It behooves thee therefore to withdraw thee from thy dearest
friends, and from all thine acquaintance, and to sequester thy mind wholly
fro the inordinate desire of all worldly comfort as much as thou may. Thus
prayed Saint Peter, that all Christien people might hold them selves as
strangers, and as pilgrims upon earth, for then they should not set but little
price by the comfort thereof. O how suce a trust shall it be to a man at his
departinge out of this world, to feel inwardly in his soul, that no worldly
love, nor yet the affection of no passinge or tra^sitorie thing has any rule
in him. But a weak feeble person newly turned to God, may not so lightly
have his heart severed from earthly likinge, nor the beastly man knows not
the freedom of a man that is inwardly turned to god. And therefore if a man
will perfectly be spiritual and ghostly, he must as well renounce strangers
as kinsfolk, and specially before all other, that he be most ware of him
self, for if he overcome him self perfectly, he shall the sooner overcome
all other enemies. The most noble and most perfect victory, is, a man to
have the victory of him self. He therefore that holds him self so much
subject, that the sensuality obeys to reason, and reason in all things
obeys to me, he is the true ouercommer of him self, and the Lord of the
world. But if thou covet to come to that point, thou must begin manfully,
and set thy axe to the root of the tree, and fully to cut away, and to
destroy in thee all the inordinate inclination that thou haste to thy self,
or to any private or material thing, for of that vice that a man loves him
self inordinatlie, well nigh depends all that ought groundlie to be
destroyed in man. And if that be truly overcome, anon shall follow great
tranquillity and peace of conscience. But forasmuch as there be but few that
labor to die to them selves, nor to overcome them selves perfectly, therefore
they lie still in their fleshly feelinges and worldly comfortes, and may in
no wise rise up in spirit above them selves: for it behooves him that will be
free in heart, and have co^te^platio^ of me, to mortify all his evil
inclinations that he has to him self, and to the world, and not to be bound
to any creature by any inordinate or private love.

Of the diversities and diverse mouinges between nature and grace. The 59.
Chapter.
My son, take good heed of the motions of nature and grace, for they be
very subtle, and much contrary the one to the other, and hardly may they be
known asonder, but it be by a ghostly man, that through spiritual grace is
inwardlye lightened in soul. Every man desires some goodness, and pretends
somewhat of goodness in all his words and deeds, and therefore under pretense
of goodness many be deceived. Nature is wily, and full of deceit, and draws
many to her, whom she often times snareth and deceyueth, and ever beholds her
own wealth, as the end of her work. But grace walks simplye, without
dereyte, she declineth from all evil, she pretends no gyle, but all things
she does purelye for God, in whom finallye she rests. Nature will not gladlye
dye, nor gladlye be oppressed or overcome, neither will she gladlye be under
other, ne be kept in subjection: but grace studieth how she may be mortified
to the world, and to the flesh. She resists sensuality, she seeks to be
subject, she desires to be overcome, she will not use her own liberty: she
loves to be holden under holy discipline, and coueteth not to have lordship
over any one creature, but to live and to stand always under the dread of
God, and for his love is always ready to bow her self meekely to every
creature. Nature labors for her own profit and advantage, and much
beholds what winning comes to her by other. But grace beholds not what is
profitable to her self, but what is profitable to many. Nature receaueth
gladlye honor and reverence, but grace refers all honor and reverence to
God. Nature dreadeth reprouinges and despising, but grace ioyeth for the name
of god to suffer the^ both, and take them when they come as special gifts of
God. Nature loves idleness and fleshly rest, but grace can not be idle without
doeinge some good deed, and therefore she seeks gladlye some profitable
labors. Nature desires fair things and curious, and abhors vile things
and gross: but grace delights in meke and simple things, she despises not
hard things, nor refuses not to be clad in poor old clothing and simple
garments. Nature beholds gladly things temporal, she ioyeth at worldly
winninges, is heavy for worldly leesinges, and anon is moved with a sharp
word, but grace beholds things everlasting, and trusts not in things
temporal, nor is not troubled with the loss of the^, nor she is not grreeued
with a froward word, for she has laid her treasure in God, and in ghostly
things which may not perish. Nature is covetous, and more gladly takes
than gives, and loves much to have property and private things: but grace
is pitiful and liberal to the poor, she flies singular profit, she is
content with little, and judges it more blessed to give then to take. Nature
inclines to the love of creatures, to the love of the flesh, and to vanities
and runnings about, and to see new things in the world: but grace draws a
man to the love of God, and to the love of virtues, she renounceth all
creatures, she flies the world, she hates desires of the flesh, restrayneth
liberty and wandringes about, and escheweth as much as she may to be seen
among recourse of people. Nature has gladlye some outward solace, wherein she
may faylably delight in her outward wits: but grace seeks only to be
comforted in God, and to delight her in his goodness above all things. Nature
does all things for her own winninge and singular profit, she may do
nothing free, but hops always to have like profit or better, or laud or
favor of the people, and coueteth much that her deeds and works be greatly
pondred and praised: but grace seeks no temporal thing, nor none other
reward for her hire, but only God, she will no more of te^porall goods then
shall need for the gettinge of the goods everlasting, and cares not for the
vain praise of the world. Nature ioyeth greatly in many friends and
kinsfolks, and is glorified much of a noble place of birth, and of her noble
blood and kindred she ioyeth with mighty men: she flattereth rich men, and is
merry with them that she thinks like to her in noblenes of the world: but
grace makes a man to love his enemies, she has no pride in worldly friends,
she regards not the noblenes of kynne, ne the house of her father? but if the
more virtue be there, she favors more the poor then the rich, she has
more compassion of an innocent then of a mighty man: she ioyeth ever in truth,
and not is falsehoode, and always comfort good men more and more to profit
and grow in virtue and goodness, and to seek daily more higher gifts of
grace, that they may through good virtuous works be made like to the son of
God. Nature complayneth anon for wantinge of a right little thing that she
would have, or for a little worldly heaviness, but grace bears gladly all
needines and wantinges of the world. Nature inclynethe all things to her
self, and to her own profit as much as she may: she argues for her self,
and strives and fights for her self: but grace renders all things to God,
of whom all things do flow and spring originallie. She ascribes no goodness
to her self, nor presumes of her self: she strives not, nor prefer^eth her
opinion before other men's, but in every sentence she submits her meeklie ^o
the eternal wisdom and judgment of God* Nature coueteth to know and to
here new secret things, she will that her works be showed outwarldlie, and
will have experience of many things in the world by her outward wits, she
desires also to be known, and to do great things in the world, whereof
laud and praysinge may follow, but grace cares not for any new things,
nor for any curyous things whatsoever they be: for she knows well, that all
such vanities comes of the corruption of sin, and that no new thing may
long endure upon earth. She teaches also to restrain the outward wits,
and to eschew all vain pleasure and outward shewinge, and meekelie keeps
secret things, that in the world were greatly to be meruayled and praised.
And in every thing, and in every science she seeks some spiritual profit
to her self, and laud and honor to almighty God. She will not, that her
good deeds, nor her inward devotion be outwardly known, but most desires,
that our Lord be blessed in all his works, which gives all things freely
of his high excellent charity. This grace is a light supernatural, and a
spiritual gift of God, and it is the proper mark and token of elect people,
and an earnest penie of the everlasting life, for it rauisheth a man fro love
of earthly things, to the love of heavenly things, and of a fleshly liver
makes an heavenly person: and the more that nature is oppressed and overcome,
the more grace is given, and the soul thorough new gracious visitations is
daily reformed more and more to the image of God.

Of the corruption of nature, and the vvorthynes of grace. The.60. Chapter.
O Lord, which haste made me to thine image and likeness, grant me this grace
that thou haste showed to me to be so great and so necessary to the health of
my soul, that I may overcome this wretched nature which draws me always to
sin, and to the losinge of mine own soul. I feel in my flesh the law of
sin fighting strongly against the law of my spirit, which leads me as a
thral or bondsman to obey to sensualitye in many things, and I may not resist
the passions thereof, but if thy grace do assist me therein. I have therefore
great need of thy grace, and that of the great abundance of thy grace, If I
should overcome this wretched nature, which always fro my youth has been
ready and prone to sin. For after that nature was vitiate and befiled by the
sin of the first man Adam, the pain thereof descended into all his
posterity, so that, that nature which in the first creation was good and
righteous, is now taken for sin and corruption, so far forth, that the
motions that are now left unto nature, draw man always unto evil. And that
is for this reason, for that the little strength and mouinge to goodness, that
yet remains in it, is as a little sparcle of fire, that is hid and ouerhilled
with ashes, that is to say, the natural reason of man, which is all about
belapped and ouerhilled with darkness of ignorance, which nevertheless has
power yet to judge betwixt good and bad, and to show the distance and
diversity betwixt true and false. Howbeit that through weakness of it self,
it is not able to fulfill all that it approves, nor has not since the first
sin of Adam the full light of truth, nor the sweetness of affections to God as
it had first. Of this it comes, most merciful Lord, that in my inward man
that is in the reason of my soul, I delight me in thy laws and in thy
teachinges, knowinge that they are good, and righteous, and holy, and that all
sin is evil, and to be fled and eschewed: and yet in my outward man, that
is to say, in my fleshelie felinge, I serve the law of sin, when I obey
rather to sensuality then to reason. And of this it follows also, that I will
good, but to perform it without thy grace I may not for weakness of my
self. And sometime I purpose to do many good deeds, but for that grace
wants, that should help me, I go backward, and fail in my doing. I
know the way to perfection, and how I should do, I see it euidentlye, but
for that I am so oppressed with the heavy burden of this corrupt body of
sin, I lie still, and rise not to perfection: O Lord, how necessary
therefore is thy grace to me, to begin well, to continue well, and to end
well, for without thee I may nothing do that good is. O heavenly grace
(without whom our merits are naught worth, nor the gifts of nature nothing
to be pondred, neither crafts or riches any thing to be regarded, nor
beauty, strength, wit nor eloquence nothing may avail) come thou shortly
and help me. The gifts of nature be common to good men and bad, but grace and
love are the gifts of elect and chosen people, whereby they be marked and
made able and worthy to have the kingedome of heaven. This grace is of such
worthynes, that ^eyther the gift of prophecy, nor the workinge of miracles,
nor yet the gift of cunninge and knowledge may nothing avail wihout it, ne
yet faith, hope or other virtues be not acceptable to thee without grace and
charity. O blessed grace, that makes the poor in spirit to be rich in
virtue, and him that is rich in worldly goods, makes meek and low in
heart, come and descend into my soul, and fulfill me with thy ghostly
comfortes, that it fail not, nor faint for werines and drynes of it self. I
beseech thee Lord, that I may find grace in thy sight, for thy grace shall
suffice to me, though I do want that nature desires. For although I be
tempted and vexed with troubles on every side, yet shall I not need to dread,
whiles thy grace is with me: for she is my strength, she is my comfort, and she
is my counsel and help, she is stronger then all mine enemies, and wiser
then all the wisest of this world. She is the maystres of truth, the teacher
in discpline, the light of the heart, the comfort of trouble, the driuer away
of heaviness, the auoyder of dread, the nourisher of devotion, and the bringer
of sweet tears and devout weepinges. What am I the^ without grace, but a
dry stock to cast away? Grant me therefore, that thy grace may prevent me
and follow me, and that It may make me ever busy and diligent in good works
unto my death. So may it be. Amen.

That we ought to forsake our self, and to follow Christ by bearinge of his
Cross. The 61. Chapter.
My son, as much as thou can go out fro thy self, and frothine own will,
so much as thou may enter into me: and as to desire nothing outwardly
brings peace inwardly into man's soul, so a man by an inward forsakinge of
him self joins him to God. I will therefore, that thou learn to have a
perfect forsaking, and a full resigning of thy self into my hands, without
withsaying and complayninge, and that thou follow me: for I am the way, I am
the truth, and I am the life. Without a way no man may go, and without truth
no man may know, and without life no man may live. I am the way which thou
ought to go, the truth which thou ought to believe, and the life which
thou shall hope to have. I am the way that can not be defiled, the truth which
can not be deceived, and the life that never shall have end. I am the way
most strait, the truth most perfect, and the life most soothfast. A blessed
life, and a life unmade that made all things. If thou dwell and abide in my
way, thou shall know the truth, and truth shall deliver thee, and thou shall
come to everlasting life. If thou will come to that life, keep my
commandments, If thou will know the truth, believe my teachinges, If thou will be perfect, sell all that thou haste, If thou will be my Disciple, forsake
thy self, If thou will have the blessed life, despise this present life, If
thou will be exalted in heaven, meek thee here in earth, And if thou will
reign with me, bear the Cross with me: for truly, only the servants of
the Cross shall find the life of blessedness, and of everlasting light. O
Lord Jesus, forasmuch as thy way is narowe and strait, and is also much
despised in the world, give me grace to bear gladlye the despisinges of the
world. There is no servant greater then his Lord, nor any Disciple above his
master. Let thy servant therefore be exercised in thy ways, for therein is
the health and the very perfection of life: whatsoever I read or hear beside
that way, it refreshes me not, nor delights me not fullye. My son,
forasmnche as thou know these things, and have read them all, thou shall
be blessed if thou fulfill them. He that has my commandments, and keeps
them, he it is that loves me, and I shall love him, and I shall show my self
unto him, and shall make him sit with me in the kingdom of my father. Lord
as thou have said and promised, so be it done to me, I have taken the Cross
of penance at thy hand, and I shall bear it unto my death, as thou haste put
it to me to do. For the life of every good man is the Cross, and it is also
the way and leader to Paradise, and now it is begone, it is not lawful for
me to go back fro it, ne it is not behouefull for me to leave it. Have done
therefore my well-beloved brethren, go we forth together, Jesus shall be with us,
for Jesus we have taken this Cross, for Jesus let us persevere, and he shall be
our help, that is our guide and leader. ^^ our king goes before us, that
shall fight for us, follow we him stronglye, dread we no perils, but be we
ready to dye stronglye with him in battle, that we put no blot into our
glory, nor minishe not our reward, by flyinge cowardlye away from the Cross.

That a man shall not be ouermuche cast into heauynes, though he happen to fall
into some defaul^es. The.62. Chapter.
My son, patience and mekenes in adversity, please me more, then much
consolation and devotion in prosperity. Why art thou so heavy for a little
word said or done against thee? if it had been more, thou should not have
been moved therewith, but let it now ouerpasse, it is not the first, and it
shall not be the last if thou live long. Thou art manfull enough as long as no
adversity falls to thee, and thou can well give counsel, and well can
thou comfort and strengthen other with thy words: But when adversity knocks
at thy door, thou failest anon both of counsel and strength. Behold well
therefore thy great frayltie, which thou have daily experience of in little
obiectes* Nevertheless, it is for thy ghostly health that such things and
other like be suffered to come unto the Purpose thy self in thy heart to do
the best that lies in thee, and then when such tribulations shall happen to
fall unto thee, although it grieve thee, yet let it not wholly overthrow thee,
nor let it not long tarry with thee. And at the least suffer it pacientlie,
although thou may not suffer it gladly. Moreover, though thou be loath to
hear such things, and that thou feel great indignation thereat in thy heart,
yet thrust thy self down low in thine own sight, and suffer no inordinate
word pass out of thy mouth, whereby any other might be hurt, and then all
such indignation shall be anon assuaged and soon appeased in thee. And then
also that which before was taken to so great heaviness to thee, shall anon be
made sweet and pleasant in thy sight. For yet live I (says our Lord) ready
to help thee, and to comfort thee, more then ever I did before, if thou will
whollye trust in me, and devoutly call for help to me. Be quiet in heart,
prepare thy self yet to more sufferance. For it is not all lost though thou
feel thy self often troubled or greeuouslye tempted. Think thou art a man,
and not God, a fleshlye man, and no Angel. How may thou always be in one
state of virtue, when that wanted to Angels in heaven and to the first man in
Para dise, the which stood not long? I am he that raise up them that be
sorrowful to health and comfort, and those that know their own unstableness, I
lift them up to be stabled in the sight of my Godhead for ever. Lord, blessed
be thy hol^e word. It is more sweeter to my mouth then honye comb. What
should I do in all my troubles and heaviness, if thou did not sometime
comfort me with thy wholesome and sweet words? Therefore it shall not force
what trouble or adversity I suffer here for thee, so that I may in the end
come to the port of everlasting health. Give me a good end and a blessed
passage out of this world: have mind on me, my Lord my God, and direct me by
a strait and ready way into thy kingdom, I beseech thee. Amen.

That a man shall not search the judgments of God. The.63. Chapter.
My son, beware to dispute of highe-matters, and of the secret judgments of
God, why this man is so left and forsaken of God, and why this man is taken to
so great grace, why also one man is so much troubled, and another so greatly
advanced. These things ouerpasse all man's knowledge, for to search gods
judgment no man's reason may suffice, nor yet this disputation. Therefore, when
the ghostly enemy stirs thee to such things, or if any curious men ask of
thee such questions, answer with the prophet David, and say thus, Lord thou
art righteous, and thy judgments are true, and be justified in them self, thy
indgements are to be dread, and not to be discussed by man's wit, for they be to
man's wit incomprehensible. Beware also that thou search not, nor reason not of
the merits of Saints, which of them was holyer then other, or which of them
is higher in heaven: Such questions often times nourishe great strifes and
unprofitable reasoninges, and proceed of pride and vaineglory, whereby envy
springs and disce^tion: that is to say, when one labors to prefer this
Saint, and another that. And truly a desire to know such things rather
displeases Saints then pleases them For I (says our Lord) am not God of
discention and strife, but of unity and peace, the which peace stands rather
in true meekenes, than in exalting of them selves. Some men be more stirred to
love this Saint or that, and that with much greater affection, but truly that
affection is often time more rather a manly affection, than a godly. Am not I he
that have made all Saints? yes truly: and over that I have given the^ grace,
and I have given them glory: I know all their merits, I prevented them with
the sweetness of my blessings, I knew my elect and chosen people before the
world was made, I have chosen them from the world, they have not chosen me, I
called them by my grace, I drew them by my mercy, I led them through
temptations, I sent them inward comfortes, I gave them perseueraunce, I
crowned their patience, I know the first man and the last, I love them all
with an inestimable love. Thus I am to be praised in all my Saints, and above
all things to be blessed and honored in all, and in every of them whom I have
so glorioussye magnifyed and predestinate without any merits in them goeinge
before. Therefore he that despyseth the least of my Saints, does no honor to
the greatest, for I have made both the less and the more, and he that
disprayseth any of my Saints, he disprayseth me and other of my Saints in the
kingdom of heaven, for they be all one, fast united and knit together in one
sure bond of perfect charity. They feel all one thing, and they will all
one thing, and they love altogether all into one thing, and they love me
much more then them selves, or their own merits, for they be rapt about
themselves, and be drawn from their own love, and wholly be turned into my
love, in the which they rest by eternal fruition. There is nothing that may
turn them from my love, nor that may thrust them down out of their glory,
for they be full of eternal truth, and burn inwarldlie in soul with fire of
everlasting charity, that never shall be quenched. Let all them cease
therefore that be carnal and beastly, and that can not love but private joy,
to search the state of my blessed Saints in heaven, for they put away, and
add to their merits as they favor, and not after the pleasure of the
eternal truth of God. In many folks is great ignorance, but most specially
in them that have so little light of ghostly understanding, that they can not
love any person with a clean love. Many also be moved by a natural affection,
or by a worldly friendship to love this saint or that, and as they imagine in
earthly things, so they imagine of heavenly things, but there is a distaunce
incomparable betwixt things which imperfect men imagine by natural reason,
and which men truly illumined with grace behold by heavenly contemplation.
Beware therefore, my son, to treat curiously of such things, for they
pass thy knowledge, and endeavor thy self, that thou may be worthy so be
nu^bred with the least Saint that shall come to heaven. And if percase a man
might know who were holyer, or who should be taken greater in the kingdom of
heaven, what should that knowledge avail him, but if he would thereby the more
meek him self, and the more rise thereby, into the laud and praysinge of my
name? truly nothing. Therefore he is much more acceptable to God that
thinks on the greatness of his sins, and of the littlenes of his virtues,
and how far he is from the perfection of the least Saint that is in heaven,
then he that argues of their greatness, or of their litlenes, or blessedness of
life, forgettinge them self. It is better also with devout prayers, and with
weepinges and tears meekelie to pray to Saints, and to call to them for
help, then vainly to search for their perfection. They be very well
contented with the joy that they have, if men would refrain themselves from
such vain arguments. They glorify not them selves of their merits, ne they
ascribe no goodness to themselves, but they refer all goodness to me, for they
know well that I of my infinite goodness and charity have given all unto them.
And they be so much fulfilled with love of the godhead, and with ouerpassing
joy, that no glory may want in them, nor any felicity. And the higher that
they be in heaven, the meeker be they in them selves, and the more nighe and
the more loving to me. Therefore it is written in the Apocalips, that Saints
in heaven laid their crowns before God, and fell prostrate on their faces
before the meek lamb, that is Jesus, and they woorshipped him as their Lord
God, that is and shall be living evermore without ending. Amen. Many search who
is highest in heaven, that know not whether they shall be worthy to be numbered
with the least that shall come thither: for it is a great thing to be the
least in heaven, where all be great, for all that shall come thither shall be
called the sons of God, and so shall they be in deed: the lest there shall
be counted for a thousand, and a sinner of a hundred year shall be set at
naught When the Apostles asked among them selves, who should be greatest in
the kingdom of heaven, they heard this answer of Christ: but ye (said he) be
converted from your sin, and be made meek as little children, ye may not
enter into the kingdom of heaven. He therefore that meeketh him self as this
little child, he shall be greatest in the kingdom of heaven. VVoe then be to
them that disdain to meek them selves with little children, for the meek part
of heaven will not suffer them to enter into it: woe also be unto the proud
rich men that have their consolation here, for when the good poor men shall
enter into the kingdom of God, they shall stand weepinge and waylinge
without. Joy ye then, ye that be meek and poor in spirit, for yours is the
kingdom of God, so that ye walk and houlde your journey assuredlye in the way
of truth.

That all our hope and trust is to be put in God only. The 64. Chapter.
O Lord, what is the trust that I have in this life? or what is my most
solace of all things under heaven? Is it not thou, my Lord God, whose mercy
is without measure? where has it been well with me without thee? or when has
it not been well with me, thou being present? I had lever be poor with thee.
then rich without thee, I had lever be with thee as a pilgrim in this world,
then without thee to be in heaven, for where thou art, there is heaven, and
where thou art not, there is both death and hell. Thou art to me all that I
desire, and therefore it behooves me to sigh to thee, to cry to thee, and
heartily to pray to thee, I have nothing to trust in that may help me in my
necessities, but only thee, for thou art my hope, thou art my trust, thou art
my comfort, and thou art my most faithful helper in every need. Man
seeks that is his, but thou seek my health and profit, and turnest all
things into the best for me, for if thou send temptations and other
adversities, thou ordeinest all to my profit, for thou art wont by a thousand
ways to prove thy chosen people. In which proof thou art no less to be
lauded and praised, than if thou had fulfilled the^ with heavenly
comfortes. In thee Lord therefore I put my trust, and in thee I bear
patientlye all my adversities, for I find nothing without thee but
unstableness and folly, for I see well, that the multitude of worldly friends
profits not, nor that strong helpers nothing may avail, ne wise
counsayler give profitable counsel, ne cunninge of doctors give consolation,
ne riches deliver in time of need, ne secret place any thing defend, if
thou Lord do not assist, help, comfort, counsel, inform, and defend. For
all things that seem to be ordained to man's solace in this world, if thou be
absent, be right naught worth, nor may not bring to man any true felicity,
for thou art the end, Lord, of all good things, the highness of life, and the
profounde wisdom of all things that is in heaven and in earth. Wherefore to
trust in thee above all things, is the greatest comfort to al thy servants.
To thee therefore I lift mine eyes, and in thee only I put my trust, my Lord
my God, the father of mercy, bless thou, and halowe thou my soul with thy
heavenly blessings, that it may be thy dwelling place, and the seat of thy
eternal glory, so that nothing be found in me at any time, that may
offend the eye of thy majesty. Behold me (Lord) after the greatness of thy
goodness, and of thy manyfolde mercies, and graciouslye hear the prayer of me
thy poorest servant, outlawed, and far exiled into the country of the
shadow of death, defend and keep me among the manyfolde perils and dangers
of this corruptible life, and direct me through thy grace by the way of peace,
into the country of everlasting clearnes without ending. Amen.

Finis.
Hereafter follows the fourth Book of the folowinge of Christ, which
treats most specially of the Sacrament of the aultare.


Prologue.
COme to me (says our Lord) all ye that labor and be charged, and I shall
give unto you refection. And the bread that I shall give unto you, shall be my
flesh for the life of the world. Take it and eat it, for it is my body, that
for you shall be given in sacrifice, do ye this in remembrance of me, for who
so eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, he shall dwell in me, and I in him.
These words that I have said to you be spirit and life.

With how great reverence Christ is to be received. The first Chapter.
O My Lord Jesus Christ, eternal truth, these words aforesaid be thy
words, albeit they were not said in one self time, nor written in one self
place. And for that they be thy words, I will thankefully and faithfully
accept them. They be thy words, and thou haste spoken them, and they be now
mine also: for thou haste said them for my health. I will gladlye receive them
of thy mouth, to the end they may be the better sown and planted in mine
heart. Thy words of so great piety, full of sweetness and love, greatly excite
me. But Lord, my sins fear me greatly, and my conscience not pure to
receive so great a mystery, draws me sore abacke. The sweetness of thy words
provoke me, but the multitude of mine offenses charge me very sore. Thou
commaundest that I shall come unto thee faythfullie, if I will have part with
thee, and receive the nourishinge of immortality, and couete to obtain the
glory and life eternal. Thou say Lord, come ye to me that labor and be
charged, and I shall refreshe you. O how sweet, and how amyable a word is
it in the ear of a sinner, that thou Lord God wilt bid me, that am so poor
and needy to the Communion of thy most holy body? But what am I Lord, that
I dare presume to come to thee? Lo heaven and earth may not comprehend thee,
and thou say, come ye al to me. What means this most meek worthynes,
and this lovely and friendly biddinge? how shall I dare come unto thee, which
know not that I have done any thing well? How shall I bring thee into mine
house, which so often have offended before thy face? Angels and Archangels honor
thee, and righteous men dread thee, And thou say yet, Come ye all unto me:
but that thou Lord had said it, who would believe it to be true? And but
thou haste commanded it, who durst attempt to go unto it? Noe that just man
labored an hundred year to make the ship, to the end he might be saved with
a few of his people. How may I prepare me then in an hour to receive thee
with due reverence, that art maker and Creator of all the world? Moses thy
servant? and great familier and special freende made the arc of timber not
corruptible, which he covered with right pure gold, and put in it the tables
of the law. And I a corrupt creature, how shall I so lightly date receive
thee, that art maker of the law, and geuer of grace and life unto all
creatures? The wise Solomon, king of Israel, edified a marvelous temple to the
praysinge of thy name in the space of seven years, and by eight days hallowed
the feast of the dedication of the same: he offered a thousand peacible hosts,
and put the ark of God in the place made ready for it with great melody of
clarions and trumpetres. How dare I then that am most poor among other
creatures receive thee into mine house, who scarcely have well spent one hour
of time, or one half hour of my life? O my good Lord how much studied they
to please thee, and how little is it that I do? How little time take I, when I
dispose me to be houseled? seldom am I gathered together in thee, and more
seldom and I purged fro having my mind overmuch on worldly things. And
certainly, no unprofitable thoughts ought to come into the holy presence of
thy Godhead, nor no creatures ought there to have place, for I shall not
receive an Angel, but the Lord of Angels into my heart. Nevertheless, there
is great difference between the ark of God with his relics, and thy most
pure and precious body, with his virtues, which are mo then can be spoken: and
between the Sacrifice of the old law, that was but a figure of the new law,
and the true host of thy precious body, which is the accomplishement of all
the old sacrifice. Why then am I not more inflamed to come to thee, why do I
not prepare my self with greater diligence to receive this holy and blessed
Sacrament, since the holy ancient fathers, the patriarchs and prophets,
Kings and Princes, with all the people, have showed so great affection
toward thy service in time passed. The most devout and blessed King the
King David, went before the ark of God, and honored it with all his
strength, always remembringe the great benefits before given unto the fathers:
he made Organes of diverse manners, and also Psalms, which he ordained to be
song, and he him self sang them with great gladness, and often times with his
harp, he being fulfilled with the grace of the holy ghost, taught the people
of Israel to laud and praise God with all their heart, and daily with their
mouth to bless him, and preach his goodness. And if there were showed then so
great devotion and remembrance of laud and praysinge to God, before the arc
of the old testament: how much reverence and devotion ought we then now to
have in the presence of this holy Sacrament, and in the receauinge of the most
excellent body of our Lord Jesus Christ? Many runue to diverse places to
visit relics of Saints, and marvel greatly when they hear of their
blessed deeds, they see great buyldinges of temples, and behold how their
bones and holy relics be covered with silk, and lapped in gold: and lo
thou my Lord God, thou art present here with me upon the Altar, the most
holy Saint of Saints, maker of all things, and Lord of Angels. Often times
there is great curiosity and vanity in the sight of such things, and little
fruit and amendeme^t is had thereby, and that specially, where there is so
light recourse and waueringe, without any contrition goinge before. But thou
my Lord God, my Lord Jesus Christ, god and man, art here wholle present in
the Sacrament of the Aultare, where the fruit of everlasting health is had
plenteoustie, as often as thou art worthily and devoutly received. But if that
shall be done fruitfullie, there may be no lightness, curiosity, nor
sensuality: but steadfast faith, devout hope, and pure charity. O God
invisible, maker of all the world: how maruaylous^ye do thou with us, how
sweetly, and how graciously disposest thou all things to thy chosen
people, to whom thou offerest thy self to be taken in this glorious Sacrameut?
Certainly it surmounteth all understanding, and it draws the hearts, and
kindles the affection of all devout men. The true faithful people that
dispose all their life to amendment, receive often times through this glorious
Sacrament great grace and devotion, and great love of virtue. O meruaylous and
secretly hid is the grace of this Sacrament, the which faithful people of
Christ do only know: for infidels, and they that live in sin, may have
thereof no manner of experience. In this Sacrament spiritual grace is given,
and the virtue that was lost in their soul is repaired, and the beauty that
was deformed through sin, returns again: and the grace of this Sacrament
sometime is so much, that of the fulness of devotion that comes thereby, not
only the mind, but also the fee^le body recover their former strength. But
verilye, it is greatly to be sorowed, that we be so slow and negligent, and
that we be stirred with no more affection to receive Christ then we be, for in
him stands all merit and hope of them that shall be saved. He is our health
and our redemption, he is the comfortour of all that live in this world, and
the eternal rest of all Saints in heaven. And it is also greatly to be
sorowed, that so many take so little heed of this high mystery, which gladdeth
the heaven, and preserves all the world. Alas the blindness and hardness of man's
heart, that takes no greater heed to so noble a gift, but by the daily using
thereof is negligent, and takes little heed thereto. If this blessed Sacrament
were ministered only in one place, and consecrate but by one priest in the
world, with how great desire, think thou, the people would run to that
place, and to that Priest, that they might see there these heavenly mysteries?
Now there be many priests, and Christ is offered in many places, that the
grace and love of God to man may appear so much the more, as the holy
communion is spread the more abroad throughout the world, thankinges be to
thee therefore, my Lord Jesus, that thou vouchsafe to refresh us poor outlawes
with thy precious blood and to stir us with the words of thine own mouth to
receive this holy mystery, saying, come ye all to me that labor and be
charged, and I shall refresh you.

That the great goodness and charity of God is given to man in this blessed
Sacrament. The second Chapter.
O My Lord Jesus, trustinge in thy great goodness and mercy I come to the, as a
sick man to him that shall heal him, and as he that is hungrye and thirsty
to the fountain of life, that is needy, to the King of heaven, as a servant
to his Lord, a creature to his creator, and as a desolate person to his meek
and blessed comfortour. But how is it that thou come to me? who am I that
thou will give thy self unto me? how dare I a sinner appear before thee? and
how is it that thou will vouchsafe to come to so simple a creature? Thou
know thy servant, and see well that he has no goodness of him se^^e,
whereby thou should give this grace unto him. I confess therefore mine own
unworthiness, and I knowledge thy goodness, I praise thy piety, and yield thee
thankings for thy great charity. Verily thou do all this for thine own
goodness, and not for my merits, that thy goodness may thereby the more appear,
and thy charity the more largely be showed, and thy meekenes the more highly
be commended. Therefore because this pleases thee, and thou have commanded
that it should thus be done, thy goodness also therein pleases me: and would
to God that mine iniquities resisted me not. O my Lord Jesus, how great
reverence and thankinges, with perpetual praysinges of thy name, ought to be
given thee for the receyuinge of thy holy body, whose dignity no man is able
to express? But what shall I think in this communion, and in goeinge to my
Lord God, whom I can not worship as I ought to do, and yet I desire to
receive him devoutly. But what may I think better or more healthful to me,
then wholly to meek my self before thee, exaltinge thy infinite goodness
far above me. I laud thee my Lord God, and shall exalt thee everlastingly,
I despise my self, and submit me to thee, and sorrow greatly the deepenes of
mine iniquity. Thou art the Saint of all Saints, and I am the filth of all
sinners, and yet thou enclinest thy self to me, that am not worthy to look
toward thee. Thou come to me, thou will be with me, thou biddest me to thy
feast, thou will give me this heavenly meat, and this Angels food to eat,
which is plainly none other but thy self that art the lively bread which
desce^dest from heaven, and geuest life to the world. Behold Lord from
whence all this love proceeds, and how great goodness shines upon us, and
how great thanks and praises are due to thee therefore. O how helthful and
how profitable a counsel was it when thou ordeinedst this glorious
Sacrament? and how sweet and joyous a feast was it when thou gave thy self
as meat to be eaten? O Lord how marvelous is thy work, how mighty is thy
virtue, and how far unspeakable is thy truth? By thy word all things were
made, and all things were done as thou have commanded. It is a meruaylous
thing and worthy to be believed, and far above the understanding of man,
that thou Lord that art God and very man, art wholly contained under a little
likeness of bread and wine, and art eaten without consuminge, of him that takes
thee: and that thou that art Lord of all things, and that need nothing in
this world, would by this glorious Sacrament dwell in us, keep thou mine
heart and my body immaculate, that in a glad and a pure conscience I may often
times celebrate thy mysteries, and receive them to my everlasting health,
which thou haste ordained most specially to thy honor and perpetual memory.
O my soul be thou merry and glad for so noble a gift, and so singular a comfort
left to thee in this vale of misery, for as often as thou remembrest this
mystery, and take the body of Christ, so often thou workest the work of thy
redemption, and art made partaker of all the merits of Christ. Truly the
charity of Christ is never minished, and the greatness of his mercy is never
consumed, and therefore thou ought always with a new renewing of mind to
dispose thee to it, and with a well advised and a deep consideration to think
on this great mystery of health. It should seem to thee as new, and as
pleasant a joy and comfort, when thou singest mass, or hear it, as if
Christ the same day first entered into the womb of the virgin, and were made
man, or if he the same day suffered and dyed upon the Cross, for the health
of mankind.

That it is very profitable often to be houseled. The.3. Chapter.
Lord I come to the to the^de that it may be well with me through thy gift,
and that I may joy at the holy feast that thou of thy great goodness haste
made ready for me. In thee is all that I may or should desire, for thou art my
health and my redemption, my hope, my strength, my honor and glory. Make me
thy servant this day merry and glad in thee, for I have lift my soul unto
thee, now I desire devoutly and reverently to receive thee into mine house,
that I may deserve with zeal to be blessed of thee, and to be accompanied
among the children of Abraham. My soul coueteth to receive thy body, my heart
desires to be united with thee, betake thy self to me Lord and it suffiseth,
for without thee there is no comfort, nor without thee I may not be, nor
without thy visitation I may not live, and therefore it behooves me often times
to go to thee, and for my health to receive thee, lest happilye if I should
be defrauded from that heavenly meat I should fail in the way. So thou
sayedst thy self, most merciful Jesus, as thou were preaching to the people,
and healedst them of their sicknesses: I will not let the^ return into their
houses fasting, lest they fail by the way. Do with me therefore in like
manner, that have left thy self in this glorious Sacrament for the comfort of
all faithful people. Thou art only the true refection of the soul, and he
that worthily eats thee shall be partaker and heir of eternal glory: it is
necessary to me that so often do offend, so soon ware dull and slow, that by
often prayers and co^fessions I may renew my self, purify my self, and
kindle my self to quicknes and fervor of spicite, lest happily by long
abstaining I might fall from that holy purpose: for the wits of man and woman
be from their youth proud and ready to evil, and but this heavenly lie
medicine do help, man may anon fall to worse and worse, therefore this holy
communion draws a man from evil, and comfort him in goodness. If I now be
often times so negligent and slothful when I am commanded, what should I be
if I received not that biessed medicine nor sought not for that great help?
And though I be not every day apt nor disposed to receive my Creator:
nevertheless I shall take heed to receive him in times convenient, so that I
may be partaker of so great a grace, for it is one of the most principal
consolations to a faithful soul, that is to say, that as long as he is as a
pilgrim in this mortal body, that he often remember his Lord God, and
receive him that is his only beloved above all things. It is a marvelous
goodness of the great pity that thou Lord haste against us, that thou Creator
and geuer of Iyfe to all spirits, vouchestsafe to come to a poor creature,
and with thy godhead and manhood to refresh his hunger and need O happy is
that man, and blessed is that soul that deserves devoutly to receive his
Lord God, and in that receiuinge to be fulfilled with a spiritual joy. O how
great a Lord does he receive? how well-beloved a gest does he bring into his
house? how joyous a fellow does he receive? how faithful a freeude does he
accept? how noble a spouse does he embrace that receives thee? For thou art
only to be beloved before all other, and above all things. Let heaven and
earth, and all the ornaments of them be still in thy presence, for whatsoever
they have worthy laud or praise, they have that of the larges of thy gift: and
yet they may not be like to the honor and glory of thy name, of whose
wisdom there is no number nor measure.

That many commodities be given to them, that devoutly receive this holy
Sacrament. The 4. Chapter.
O My Lord God, prevent thy servant with the blessings of thy sweetenes, that
he may deserve to go reverently and devoutly to this high Sacrament. Stirrs up
my heart into a full beholdinge of thee, and deliver me from the great sloth
and ydlenes that I have been in in time passed: visit me in thy goodness, and
give me grace to taste inwardly in my soul, the sweetness that is hid
secretly in this blessed Sacrament, as in a most plenteous fountain. Illumine
also mine eyes to see and behold so great a misterrie, and strengthen me, that
I may always faythfullie and undoubtedly believe it: for it is thy operation,
and not the power of man, thy holy institution, and not man's invention. And
therefore to take and to understand these things, no man is sufficient of him
self, and they also ouerpasse the subtility of all Angels and heavenly
spirits. What may I then most unworthy sinner, earth and ashes search and
talk of so high a secret, but only that in simplenes of heart, in a good
stable faith, and by thy commandment I come to thee with meek hope and
reverence, and believe verily, that thou art here present in this Sacrament God
and man? Thou will therefore, that I shall receive thee, and knit my self to
thee in perfect charity. Wherefore I ask thee mercy, and desire, that thou
give me thy special grace, that I may from henceforth be fully molten, and
relented into thee, flow in thy love, and never after to intermit my self
with any other comfort. This most high and most worthy Sacrament is the life
of the soul and body, the medicine of all spiritual sickness, whereby all vices
be cured, passions refrayned, temptations overcome and diminished: the greater
grace is sent, virtue increased, and faith stablished, hope strengthed, and
charity kindled and spread abroad. Thou haste given, and often times geuest
many great gifts by this Sacrament to thy beloved servants that devoutly
receive thee, for thou thereby art the strong vpholder of my soul, the
repairer of all the infirmities of man, and the geuer of all inward
consolation, and of comfort in tribulation: and from thee deepnes of their own
desection thou raysest them again into a strong hope of thy preservation, and
renewest them, and lightest them inwardly with a new grace, so that they that
felt them selves before receiving of that blessed Sacrament, heavy and without
affection, after when they have received it, have found them selves changed
into a great ghostly fervor. And all this thou do to thy elect people of
thy great goodness, that they may see and know openly by experience, that they
have nothing of them selves, but that all grace and goodness that they have,
they have received of thee, for of them selves they be cold, dull and
undevout, and by thee they be made fervent, quick in spirit, and devout
folowers of thy will: who may go meekly to the fountain of sweetness, but that
he shall bring away with him great plenty of sweetness? or who may stand by
a great fire, but he shall feel great heat thereof? and thou Lord art the
fountain of all sweetness, and the fire always brenning, and never faylinge,
and therefore, though. I may not draw the fulness of that fountain, nor
drink thereof to the full, I shall nevertheless put my mouth to the hole of
the heavenly pipe, that I may take some little drop thereof to refreshe my
thirst, so that I be not all dried away. And though I be not all heavenly and
brenninge in charity, as the Seraphins and Cherubins be, nevertheless I shall
endeavor me to set my self to devotion, and to prepare mine heart, that I may
get some little sparcle of the brenninge of heavenly life, through the meek
receuing of this lively Sacrament: and whatsoever wants in me, I beseech
thee my Lord Jesus, most holy and blessed, that thou beninglye and graciously
supply in me: for thou haste vouched safe to call all to thee, saying: Come ye
all to me that labor and be charged, and I shall refreshe you. I labor in the
sweat of my body, and am tormented with the sorrow of mine heart, and charged
with sins, trauayled with temptations, intriked and oppressed with many evil
passions, and there is none that may help, or that may deliver me, ne that
may make me safe, but thou Lord God my only Savior, to whom I commit me
and all mine, that thou keep me, and lead me into life everlasting: accept me
and take me into the laud and glory of thy name, that haste ordained to me
thy body and blood to be my meat and drink: and grant me Lord, I beseech
thee, that by the often receauinge of thy high mystery, the fervor of devotion
may daily increase in me.

Of the worthiness of the Sacrament of the Altar, and of the state of
priesthood. The.5. Chapter.
IF thou had the purity of Angels, and the holiness of S. John Baptist,
thou should not for that be worthy to receive nor touch this holy
Sacrament: for it is not granted for the merits of man, that a man should
consecrate and touch the Sacrament of Christ, and take to his meat the
bread of Angels. It is a great mystery, and it is a great dignity of
priests, to whom it is granted, that is not granted to Angels, for priests
only that be duly ordained in the Church, have power to singe Mass, and to
consecrate the body of Christ: for a priest is the minister of God, vsinge the
word of consecration, by the commandment and ordinance of God: and God is
there the principal doer, and the invisible worker, to whom is subject all
that he wills, and all obeys to that he commands. Thou ought
therefore more to believe almighty God in this most excellent Sacrament, then
thine own wit, or any other visible toke^ or sign. And therefore with dread
and reverence it is to go to this blessed work. Take heed then diligently,
and see from whence this mystery and service comes that is given unto thee by
the touching of the hands of the bilhop. Thou aste now made a priest, and
art consecrate to sing Mass. Take heed therefore, that thou faithfullye and
deuoutlye offer thy sacrifice to God in due time, and that thou keep thy self
without reproufe, thou haste not made thy burden more light, but hou art now
bound in a straiter bond of discipline, and of much more high perfection
then thou were before. A priest ought to be adorned with all virtues, and to
give other example of good life: his conversation should not be with the
common people, nor in the common way of the world, but with Angels in heaven,
or with perfect men in earth, that be best disposed to serve God. A priest also
clothed in holy vestimentes bears the place of Christ, that he should
humbly and meekly pray to our Lord for him self, and for all the people: he
has before him and behind him the sign of the Cross of Christ, that he
should diligently remember his passion: he bears before him the Cross, that
he may diligently behold and see the steps of Christ, and study feruentlye
to follow them, and behind him also he is signed with the Cross, that he
should gladly and meekly suffer all adversities for the love of God: he bears
the Cross before him, that he should bewail his own sins, and he bears
it behind him, that he may through compassion beweepe the sins of other,
and know him self to be set as a mean between God and all the people, and not
to cease of prayer and holy oblation, til he may deserve of almighty God
mercy and grace. When a priest says Mass, he honoreth God, he makes Angels
glad, he edifieth the Chruche, he helps the people that be a live, and gives
rest to them that be dead, and makes him self partaker of all good deeds.

Of the inward remembrance and exercise that a man ought to have before the
receauinge of the body of Christ. The 6. Chapter.
Lord, when I think of thy worthiness, and of my great filthiness, I tremble
strongly, and am confounded in my self: for if I receive thee not, I fly the
eternal life: and if I unworthily receive thee, I run into thy wrath. What
shall I then do my good Lord, my helper, my protector, comforter, and right
sure Counsailer in all my necessities? Teach me (good Lord) the right way,
and purpose unto me some ready erercise conuenable to the receauinge of this
holy mystery, for it is necessary unto me, and greatly profitable to know,
how devoutly and reverently I ought to prepare mine heart to receive it, or
to consecrate so great and so goodly a Sacrifice as it is.

Of the discussing of our own conscience, and of the purpose of amendment.
The 7. Chapter.
IT behooves thee above all things with sovereign reverence and profounde
meeknes of heart, and with full faith, and humble intent (to the houour of God)
to celebrate, take and receive this holy Sacrament, examine diligently thy
couscience by true contrition and meek confession, and make it clean after
thy power, so that thou know nothing that greueth or biteth thy conscience, or
that may let thee to go frelie unto it: have displeasure of all thy sins in
general, and for thy daily excesses and offenses have sighinges and
sorowinges more special. And if the time will suffer it, confess unto God in
secret of thine heart the miseries of all thy passions, weep and sorrow, that
thou art yet so carnal and worldly, so unmortified from thy passions, so full
of motions of concupiscences, so unware, and so evil ordered in thy outward
wits, so often wrapped in vain fantasies, so much inclined to outward and
worldly things, so negligent to inward things, so ready to laughinge and
dissolution, so hard to weepinge and compunction, so ready to easy things,
and to that that is likinge to the flesh: so slow to penance and feruor of
spirit, so curious to hear new things, and to see fair things, so loathe
to meek and abject things, so covetous to have much, so scarce to give, so
glad to hold, so unadvised in speakinge, so incontinent to be still, so evil
ordered in manners, so importune in deeds, so greedy upon meat, so deaf to
the word of God, so quick to rest, so slow to labor, so attentive to
fables, so sleepye to holy vigils, so hasty to the end, so unstable to take
heed to the way to the end, so negligent in the service of God, so dull and
so undevout to go to Mass, so dry in thy housell, so soon fallen at large to
outward things, so seldom gathered together to inward things, so soon
moved to anger and wrath, so lightlye stirred to the displeasure of other, so
ready to judge, so rigorous to reprove, so glad in prosperity, so feeble in
adversity, so often purposinge many good things, and so seldom bringinge them
to effect. And when thou haste thus confessed and be wept all these defaults
and such other like in thee, with great sorrow and displeasure of thine own
fraylenes, set thee then in a full purpose to amend thy life, and to profit
always from better to better, and then with a full resigninge and a wholle will
offer thy self into the honor of my name in the Altar of thy heart, as
sacrifice to me, that is to say, faythfullie committinge to me both thy body
and soul, so that thou may be worthy to offer to me this high sacrifice,
and to receive healthfullie the Sacrament of my holy body, for there is no
oblation more worthy, nor satisfaction greater to put away sin, then a man
to offer him self purelie and wholly to God, with the offeringe of the body
of Christ in mass and in holy communion. If a man do that in him is, and is
truly penitent as often as he comes to me for grace and forgiveness, I am the
Lord that says, I will not the death of a sinner, but rather that he be
converted to live, and I shall no more remember his sins, but they all shall
be forgeuen and pardoned unto him.

Of the oblation of Christ on the Cross, and of a full forsakinge of our
self. The 8. Chapter.
Our Lord Jesus says to his servant thus: As I hanginge all naked with mine
arms spread abroad upon the cross, offered my self to God the father for thy
sins, so that nothing remained in me, but that all went in sacrifice to
please my Father, and to appease his wrath against mankind: so thou ought
to offer thy self freely to God as much as thou may, in a pure and holy
oblation daily in the Mass with all thy power and affection. What require I
more of thee, then that thou should study wholly to resign thy self unto
me? for whatsoever thou geuest beside thy self I regard it not, for I look
not for thy gifts, but for thee. For as it should not suffice to thee to have
all things beside me, so it may not please me whatsoever thou give beside thy
self. Offer thy self to me, and give thy self all to God, and thy oblation
shall be acceptable. Lo I offered my self whollye to my father for thee, and I
gave my body and blood to thy meat, that I should be all wholly thine, and
thou mine. But if thou have a trust in thy self, and do not freelye offer
thee to my will, thy oblation is not pleasant, and there shall be between us
no perfect unity. Therefore a free offeringe of thy self into the hands of
God, must go before all thy works, if thou will obtain grace and the true
liberty. Therefore it is that so few be inwardly illuminate and free,
because they can not whollye forsake them self (for my words be true) but a
man renounce him self he may not be my disciple. Offer thy self fully to me
with all thine affection and love. Amen.

That we ought to offer our self and all ours to God, and to pray for all
people. The 9. Chapter.
Lord all things be thine that be in heaven and earth. I desire to offer my
self to thee in a free and perpetual oblation, so that I may perpetually be
with thee. Lord in simplenes of heart I offer me this day to thee to be thy
servant in the service and sacrifice of laud perpetual, accept me with this
oblation of thy precious body which I this day offer to thee in the presence
of thy holy Angels that be here present invisible, that it may be to my
health, and to the health of all the people. And Lord I offer to thee all my
sins and offenses that I have committed before thee and thy holy Angels fro
the day that I might first offend unto this day, that thou vouchesafe
through thy great charity to put away all my sins, and to cleanse my
conscience of all mine offenses, and restore to me again the grace that I
through sin have lost, and that thou forgive me all things past, and receive
me mercifully into a blessed kissing of peace and forgeuenes. What may I do
then but meekelie confess and bewail my sins, and continually ask mercy
of thee? forgive me merciful Lord I beseech thee, for all my sins
displease me much, and I will never commit them again, but sorrow for them,
ready to do penance and satisfaction after my power. Forgive me Lord,
forgive me my sins for thy holy name, save my soul that thou have redeemed
with thy precious blood. I commit my self wholly unto thy mercy, I resign
me wholly into thy hands, do with me after thy goodness, and not after my
malice and wretchedness. I offer also to thee all my good deeds, though they be
very few and imperfect, that thou amend them, and sanctify them, and make
them likinge and acceptable to thee, and always make them better and better,
and that thou bring me, though I be a slow and an vuprofitable person, to a
blessed and a laudable end. I offer also to thee all the desires of devout
persons, the necessity of mine auncesters, friends, brother, sister, and of
all my lovers, and of all them that for thy love have done good to me or to any
other, and that have desired and asked me to pray, or to do sacrifice for
them or for their friends, whether they be alive or dead, that they may the
rather feel the help of thy grace, and the gift of thy heavenly
consolation, thy protection from all perils, and the deliverance from all
pain, and that they so being delivered from all evils, may in spiritual
gladness yield to thee high laud and praysinges. I offer to thee also my
prayer and my peaceable offeringe, for all them that have in any thing hindered
me, or made me heavy, or that have done me any hurt or grieve: and for all them
also whom I have at any time made heavy, troubled, grieved, or slaundered, in
word or deed, wittinglye or ignorantlye, that thou forgive us altogether our
sins and offenses against thee, and of each of us against other, and that
thou Lord take fro our hearts all suspicion and indignation, wrath, variance,
and whatsoever may let charity, or diminish fraternall love, that each of us
should have to other: have mercy Lord, have mercy on all them that ask
thee mercy, and give grace to them that have need, and make us to stand in
such case, that we be worthy to have thy grace, and finallye to come to the
life everlasting. Amen.

That the holy Communion is not lightlye to be forborne. The.10. Chapter.
IT behooves thee to run often to the fountain of grace and mercy, and to
the fountain of all goodness and purity, that thou may be healed from thy
passions and vices, and be made more strong against all the temptations and
deceytfull craft of our enemy. The fiende knowinge the greatest fruit, and
highest remedy to be in receauinge of this biessed Sacrament, inforceth him by
all the ways that he can, to let and withdraw all faithful and devout people
from it as much as he can: and therefore some men, when they dispose them
selves to it, have more greater temptations then they had before: for as it is
written in Job, the wicked spirit comes among the children of God, that he
may by his old malice and wickedness trouble them, or make them overmuch
fearful and perplexed, so that he may diminishe their affection, or take
away their faith, if happily he may thereby make them either utterly to
cease from being houseled, or else that they go to it with little devotion.
But it is not any thing to care for all his crafts and fantasies, how vile
and vgglye soever they be, but all fantasies are to be thrown again at is
own head, and he so far to be despised, that for all his assaults and
co^motions that he can stir up, the holy communion be not omitted. Sometime
over much curiousnes to have devotion, or over great doubt of making
confession, lets much this holy purpose. Do therefore after the counsel
of wise men, and put away all doubtfulnes and scrupulousnes, for they let the
grace of God, and destroy wholly the devotion of the mind. Also it is not
good that for any little trouble or grief, that thou leave this holy work,
but go lightly and be confessed and forgive gladlye all that have offended
thee. And if thou have offended any other, meekelie ask of them forgeueues,
and God shall right mercifully forgive thee. What profits it long to tarry
from confession, or to defer this holy Communion? Purge thee first, and
quickelie cast out thy venim, and haste thee after to take the medicine, and
thou shall feel more profit thereby, then if thou tariedst longer for it. If
thou defer it to day for this thing or that, to morrow we may happen to
come a greater, and so thou may be let long from thy good purpose, and be
made afterward more unapt unto it. Therefore as soon as thou can, discharge
thy self from such heaviness and dulnes of mind, and fro all sloth, for it
nothing profits long to be anguished, long to go with trouble, and to
sequester him self for such daily obstacles, fro the divine mysteries: but it
does great hurt, and commonly brings in greath sloth, and lack of
devotion. But alas for sorrow, some slothful and dissolute persons gladlye
seek causes to tarry from confession, and so defer the longer this holy
Communion: and that they do, to the intent that they should not be bound to
give them selves to any more sure kepinge of them selves in time to come, then
they have done before. But alas, how little charity, and slender devotion have
they that so lightly leave of so holy a thing, and how happy is he, and how
acceptable to God that so lives, and that so keeps his conscience in such
cleannes, that he is every day ready, and has good affection to be housled,
if it were lawful unto him, and that he might do it without note or slander?
He that sometime abstaineth of meekenes, or for any other lawful impediment,
is to be praised for his reverence, but if it be through slouthfulnes, he ought
to quicken him self, and to do that in him is, and our Lord shall strengthen
his desire for his good will, for to a good will our Lord has always a
special respect, and when he is lawfully let, he shall have a good will and a
meek intent to it, and so he shall not want the fruit of the Sacrament. And
verily every devout man may every day, and every hour go healthfullie,
and without prohibition unto the spiritual Communion of Christ, that is to
say, in remembringe of his passion, and nevertheless, in certain days and
times he is bound to receive Sacramentally the body of his Redemer with a
great reverence: and rather to pretend therein the laud and honor of God,
then his own consolation. For so often a man is housled misticallye and
inuisibly, as he remembers devoutly the mystery of the incarnation of Christ,
and his passion, and is thereby kindled into his love. He that does prepare
him self for none other cause, but because the feast is coming, or the
custom compels him thereto, he shall co^monlie be unready to it. Blessed is
he therefore, that as often as he says Mass, or is housled, offers him self
unto our Lord in holy Sacrifice. Be not in saying Mass over long, nor over
short, but keep the good common way, as they do with whom thou live: for
thou ought not do that should grieve other, or make them tedious, but to
keep the common way, after the ordinance of the holy fathers, and rather to
confirm thy self to that that shall be profitable to other, then to follow
thine own devotion, or private pleasure.

That the body of Christ and holy Scripture, are most necessary for the
health of man's soul. The.11. Chapter.
O Most sweetest Jesus, how great sweetenes is it to a devout soul, when he
is fed with thee at thy heavenly feast, where there is none other meat
brought forth to eat, but thou his only beloved, and that art most desirable
to him, above all the desires of his heart. And verily it should be sweet
and pleasant to me, by an inward and meek affection, to weep before thee,
and with the blessed woman Marie Magdalene, to wash thy feet with the tears
of mine eyes. But where is that devotion? where is that plenteous sheddinge out
of holy tears? Certainly all my heart ought to breune, and to weep for joy
in the sight of thee, and of thy holy Angels: for I have thee verilye present
with me, though thou be hid vnderr another likeness, for to behold thee in thy
proper and divine cleerenes, mine eyes might not bear it, neither all the
world might sustain to see thee in the cleerenes and glory of thy majesty.
Therefore thou greatly helpest my weakness, in that thou hidest thy self under
this blessed Sacrament. I have him verily, and worship him, whom Angels worship
in heaven, but I only in faith, and they in open sight, and in thine own
likeness without any couerture. It behooves me to be content in the light of
true faith, and therein to walk till the day of everlasting eleerenes shall
appear, and that the shadow of figures shall go away. When that that is
perfect shall come, all use of Sacraments shall cease, for they that be
blessed in the heavenly glory, have no need of this Sacramental medicine: for
they joy without end in the presence of God, beholding his glory face to face,
and so transformed fro clerenes to clerenes of the godhead, they taste the
glory of the son of God made man, as he was in his godhead fro the
beginning, and shall be everlasting. When I remember all these maruailous
comfortes, whatsoever solace I have in this world, though it be spiritual, it
is grievous and tedious unto me, for as long as I see not my Lord openly in
his glory, I set it at naught all that I see and hear in this world. Lord,
thou art my witness, that nothing may comfort me, nor any creature may quiet
me, but thou my Lord God, whom I desire to see and behold eternally: but that
is not possible for me to do, as long as I shall be in this mortal life.
Wherefore it behooves me to keep my self in great patience, and to submit my
self to thee in every thing that I desire, for thy holy Saints that now
joy with thee, abode in good faith and patience all whiles they lived here the
coming of thy glory. That they believed, I believe, that they hoped to have, I
hope to have, and thither as they by thy grace be come, I trust to come, and
till then I shall walk in faith, and take comfort of the examples of the said
holy Saints. I have also holy books for my solace, as a spiritual glass to
look upon, and above all these I have for a singular remedy thy holy body.
I perceue well, that two things be much necessary unto me in this world,
without which this miserable life should be to me as importable: for as long as
I shall be in this body, I confess my self to have need of two things, that
is to say, of meat and light. These two have thou given unto me, that is to
say, thy holy body to the refreshing of my body and soul, and thou haste set
thy word as a lantern before my feet, to show me the way that I shall go.
Without these two I may not well live, for the word of God is the light of my
soul, and this Sacrament is the bread of my life. These two may also be
called the two tables, set here and there in the spiritual treasure of holy
Church: The one is the table of the holy Altar, having this holy bread, that
is the precious body of Christ: The other is the table of the laws of God,
containing the holy doctrine of the law of God, and instructing man in the
right faith, and in the true belief, leadinge him into the inward secrettes
that be called Sancta Sanctorum, where the inward secrettes of Scripture be
hid and contained. I yield thankinges to thee my Lord Jesus, the brightness of
the eternal light, for this table of holy doctrine the which thou have
ministered to us by thy servants, Prophets, and Apostles, and other doctors:
and thankings also be to thee the creator and redeemer of mankind, that thou
to show to all the world the greatness of thy charity, preparedst a great
supper, in the which thou set not forth the Lamb figured in the old law,
but thy holy body and blood to be eaten, gladding thereby in that holy feast
all faithful people, and giving them to drink of thy chalice of health, in the
which be contained all the delights of Paradise, where Angels eat with us
with much more plenteous sweetenes. O how great and how honorable is the
office of Priests, to whom is given power to consecrate with the holy words
of consecration, the Lord of all majesty, to bless him with their lips, to
hold him in their hands, to receive him into their mouths; and to minister
him to other. O how clean should the hands be, how pure a mouth, how
holy a body, and how undefiled should be the heart of a Priest, to whom so
often enters the author of al cleannes? Truly there ought to proceed from the
mouth of a priest that so often receaueth the Sacrament of Christ's body, no
word but that is holy, honest, and profitable, his eyes should be full simple
and chaste, that use to behold the body of Christ, and his hands should be
full pure, and lift up into heaven, which use to touch the Creator of heaven
and earth: and therefore it is specially said in the law to Priests, be ye
holy, for I your Lord God am holy. O God almighty, thy grace be with us, and
help us that have received the office of priesthood that we may serve thee
worthily and devoutly in all purity, and in a good conscience. And though we
may not live in so great innoce^cie as we ought to do, yet give us grace at
the least, that we may weep and sorrow the evils that we have done, so that
in spiritual meeknes, and in full purpose of a good will we may serve thee
hereafter. Amen.

That he that shall be houseled ought to prepare him self thereto before with
great diligence. The.12. Chapter.
I Am the lover of al purity, and the liberal geuer of all holiness. I seek a
clean heart, and there is my restinge place, make ready for me a great chamber
strawed, that is thine heart, and I with my Disciples shall keep mine Easter
with thee. If thou will that I shall come to thee, and dwell with thee, cleanse
thee of all the old filth of sin, and cleanse also the habitacle of thine
heart, and make it pleasant and fair. Exclude the world, and all the
clamorous noise of sin, and sit solitary, as a sparowe in an house easinge,
and think upon all thy offenses with great bitterness of heart, for a true lover
will prepare to his beloved freende the best and the fairest place that he can,
for in that is known the love and affection of him that receives his freende.
But nevertheless, I know that thou may not of thy self suffice to make
this preparinge fully, as it ought to be in every point, though thou went
about it a wholle year together, and had none other thing in thy mind to
think upon, but of my mercy and grace only: Thou art suffered to go unto my
table, as if a poor man were called to the dinner of a rich man, and he had
none other thing to give him again, but only to humble him felfe, and
thank him for it: do that in thee is, with thy best diligence, and do it not
only of custom, nor of necessity only, for that thou art bound to it, but
with dread and reverence and great affection take the body of thy beloved
Lord God, that so lovingly vouchethsafe to come unto thee. I am he that has
called thee, I have commanded that this thing should be done, I shall
supply that wants in thee. Come therefore and receive me, and when I give
thee the grace of devotion, yield thanks to me therefore, not for that thou
art worthy to have it, but for that I have showed my mercy louinglye to thee.
And if thou have not the grace of devotion through receauinge of this
Sacrament, but that thou feel thy self more dry, and more undevout then
thou were before, yet continue still in thy prayer, wayle, weep, and and call
for grace, and cease not, til thou may receive some little drop of this
helthfull grace of devotion. Thou haste need of me, and not I of thee, ne thou
come not to sanctify me, but I come to sanctify thee, and to make thee
better then thou were before. Thou come to be sanctified, and be united unto
me, and that thou may receive a new grace, and be kindled a new to
amendment. Do not forget this grace, but always with all thy diligence prepare
thine heart, and bring thy beloved unto thee: and it behooves thee not only
to prepare thy self unto devotion before thou shall be housled, but also, to
keep thy self therein diligently after the receauinge of the Sacrament. And
there is no less keeping requisite after, then a devout preparation is
needful before: for a good keepinge after is the best preparation to receive
new grace hereafter, and a man shall be the more undisposed thereto, if he
anon, after he has received the Sacrament, give him self to outward solace.
Beware of much speakinge, abide in some secret place, and keep thee with thy
Lord God, for thou have him that all the world may not take from thee. I am
he, to whom thou must give all, so that fro henceforth thou live not in thy
self, but only in me.

That a devout soul should greatly desire with all his heart to be united
to Christ in this blessed Sacrament. The.13. Chapter.
Who shall graut unto me (Lord that I may find thee only, and open all mine
heart to thee, and have thee, as mine heart desires, so that no man may
deceive me, nor any creature move me nor draw me back, but that thou only
speak to me, and I to thee as a lover is wont to speak to his beloved, and a
freende with his beloved freende? That is it that I pray for, that is it that
I desire, that I may be wholly united to thee, and that I may withdraw my
heart fro all things create, and through the holy communion, and often saying
Mass, to savor and taste eternal things. Ah Lord God, when shall I be all
united to thee, and wholly be molten into thy love, so that I wholly forget my
self? Be thou in me, and I in thee: and grant, that we may so abide always
together in one. Verily, thou art my beloved, elect and chosen before all
other, in whom my soul coueteth to abide all days of his life. Thou art the
Lord of peace, in whom is the sovereign peace and true rest, without whom is
labor and sorrow, and infinite miserye. Verily thou art the head God, and thy
counsel is not with wicked people, but with meek men, and simple in heart. O
how secret and how benign is thy holy spirit, which to the intent. thou
would show to thy chosen people thy swetnes, haste vouchedsafe to refreshe
them with the most sweet bread that desce^deth from heaven Verily there is
none other nation so great, that has their gods so nigh unto them, as thou
Lord God art to all thy faithful people, to whom for their daily solace, and
to raise their hearts into the love of heavenly things, thou geuest thy self
as meat and drink. O what people be there, that be so noble as the christien
men are? or what creature under heaven is so much beloved as the devout
christien soul, into whom God enters, and feeds her with his own glorious
flesh and blood? O inestimable grace, O meruaillous worthiness, O love without
measure, singulerly showed unto man: but what shall I yield again to God for
all this grace and high charity? Truly there is nothing more acceptable to
him, then that I whollye give mine heart, and inwardly join my self unto him,
and then shall all mine inward parts joy in him, when my soul is perfectly
united unto him. Then shall he say to me, If thou will be with me, I will be
with thee: And I shall answer to him again, and say, Vouchesafe Lord to
abide with me, and I will gladly abide with thee, for that is all my desire,
that mine heart may be fast knit unto thee without departinge. Amen.

Of the brenninge desire that some devout persons have had to the body of
Christ. The 14. Chapter.
O How great multitude of sweetness is it Lord that thou have hid for them
that dread thee? But what is it the^ for them that love thee? Verily, when I
remember me of many devout persons that have come to this holy Sacrament with
so great feruoure of devotion, I am then many times astonished and confounded in
my self, that I go unto thy altar, and to the table of thy holy communion so
coldely, and with so little fervor, and that I abide still so dry, and without
any affection of heart, and that I am not so wholly kindled before thee my
Lord God, nor so strongly drawn thereby in affection to thee as many devout
persons have been, the which of the great desire that they have had to this
holte communion, and for a feeleable love of heart that they have had thereto,
might not refrain them from weping, but effectuously with the mouth of their
heart and body together, opened their mouths to thee Lord that art the
lively fountain, because they could not otherwise assuage, ne tempt their
hunger, but that they took thy holy body, which they did with great joy and
spiritual gredines. Truly the great brenninge s^ith of them is a probable
argument of thy holy presence, and they also know verily their Lord in
breaking of bread, whose hearts so stronglye brenneth in them by the presence
of their Lord Jesus, sacramentallye then walking with them. But verily, such
affection and devotion, and so strong fervor and love be often time far from
me. Be thou there fore must sweet and benign Lord Jesus, merciful and meek
unto me, and grant me thy poor servant, that I may feel sometime some
litie part of the hearty affection of thy love in this holy Communion, that my
faith may the more recover and amend, and mine hope through thy goodness be
the more perfect, and my charity being once perfectly kindled, and having
experience of the heavenly Manna, do never fail. Thy mercy (Lord) is
strong enough to grant to me this grace, that I so much desire: and when the
time of thy pleasure shall come, beninglye to visit me with the spirit of a
brenninge fervor to thee. And though I do not brenne in so great desire as
such special devout persons have done, yet nevertheless, I have desired the
grace to be inflamed with that brenninge desire, praying and desiring, that I
may be made partaker of all such thy fervent lovers, and to be numbered in
their holy company.

That the grace of devotion is gotten thorough meekenes, and for sakinge of our
self. The 15. Chapter.
IT behooves thee abidinglie to seek the grace of devotion, and without
ceassing to ask it, patiently and faithfully to abide it, thankefullie to
receive it, meekelie to keep it, studiously to work with it, and wholly to
commit to God the time and manner of his heauenlte visitalion, till his pleasure
shall be to come unto thee: and principally thou ought to meek thee, when
thou feel but little inward devotion, but thou shall not be ouermuche cast
down therefore, nor inordinatlie be heavy, for our Lord gives many times in
a short moment, that he denied long time before: he gives also sometime in
the end, that in the beginning of the prayer he deferred to grant. If grace
should always anon be granted, and should anon be present, after the will
of the asket, it should not be well able to be borne by a weak and feeble
person, and therefore in a good hope and meek patience the grace of devotion
is to be abiden and tarried for, and thou ought to impute it to thy self and
to thine own sins, when grace is not given thee, or that it is secretly
taken from thee. Sometime it is but a little thing that lets grace or hides
it away, if it may be called little, and not rather great, that lets and
prohibiteth so good a thing, but whether it be little or great, if thou remove
it, and perfectlye overcome it, it shall be granted unto thee that thou
desire, and forthwith as thou betakest thy self with all thine heart to God,
and desire neither this thing nor that for thine own pleasure, but whollye
put thy will to his will, thou shall find thy self united to him, and set
in a great inward peace, for nothing shall savor so well to thee, nor so
much please thee, as that the will and pleasure of God be fully dene in thee.
Whosoever therefore in a pure simple heart lifts his intent up to God, and
void him self from all inordinate love and displeasure of any worldly
thing, shall be more apt to receive grace, and shall be best worthy to have
the gift of devotion. For there our Lord gives his blessinge where he finds
the vessels empty and void. And the more perfectlye a man can renounce him
self and all worldly things, and can by despising of him self the more die to
him self, so much the sooner grace shall come, and shall the more plenteouslie
enter into him, and the higher shall lift up his heart into God. Then his heart
shall see and abound, and shall marvel and be delated in him self, for the
hand of our Lord is with him, and he has wholly put him into his hand for
ever. Lo, so shall a man be blessed that seeks God with all his heart, and
takes not his soul in vain. Such a man in receiuinge this holy Sacrament
deserves great grace of the uniting in God, for he looks not to his own
devotion and consolation, but to the glory and honor of God.

That vveshoulde open all our necessities to Christ, and ask his grace. The
16. Chapter.
O Most sweet Lord, whom I desire devoutly to receive, thou know the
infirmity and necessity that I am in, in how many sins and vices I lie,
how often I am grieved, tempted, troubled, and defiled, I come to thee for
remedy, and I make my prayer to thee for comfort, and I speak to him that
knows all things, to whom all my secret and inward thoughts be manifest
and open, and the which only may perfectlye counsel me and help me.
Thou know what I need to have, and how poor I am in virtue. Lo I stand
before thee poor and naked, askinge and desiringe thy grace. Refresh me
therefore thy poorest servant, begginge for spiritual food, kindle my heart
with the fire of thy love, and illumine my blindness with the clerenes of thy
presence: turn all worldly things into bitterness to me, and all grievous
things and contrarious things into patience, and all create things into
despisinge, and into forgettinge of them. Lift up mine heart to thee into
heaven, and suffer me not live vaynlie, nor to err in this world. Thou Lord
from henceforth shall be sweet to me for ever, for thou art only my meat
and drink, my love, my joy, my sweetness, and all my goodness: would God that
thou would kindle me, inflame me, and turn me wholye into thee, that I may
be made one spirit with thee by grace of inward uniting, and meltinge of
burning love into thee: suffer me not to depart from thee fasting and dry,
but work with me mercifullye, as thou haste often times marueillouslye wrought
with thy beloved servants in time paste. What marvel were it if I were all
inflamed into thee, and failed in my self, since thou art the fire always
burning, and never failing, the love purifying the hearts, and lightning the
understanding of all creatures.

Of the burninge love and great affection that we should have to receive
Christ. The 17. Chapter.
With high devotion and burninge love, and with all fervor and affection of
the heart, I desire to receive thee Lord, as many Saints and devout persons
have desired thee in their communion, and that most specially pleased thee in
the holiness of their life, and were in most burninge devotion to thee. O my
Lord God, my love eternal, all my goodness and felicity without endinge: I
covet to receive thee with as great desire, and as due reverence as any holy
man ever did, or might do: and though I be unworthy to have such feelinge in
devotion as they had, yet nevertheless I offer to thee the whole affection of
my heart as verily as if I only had all the burninge and flaminge desires
that they had, and over that, all that a meek mind may imagine and desire, I
give and offer to thee with high reverence and worship, and inward fervor:
and I desire to reserve nothing to my self, but me and all mine I offer to
thee in sacrifice freely and most liberally. And also my Lord God, my creator
and redeemer, with such affection, reverence, laud and honor: with such
thanks, dignity and love, and with such faith, hope and purity, I desire to
receive thee this day, as thy most holy and glorious mother the virgin Mary
desired and received thee, when she meekely and devoutly answered the Angel
that showed her the mystery of thy incarnation, and said: Ecce ancilla
domini, fiat secundum verbum tuum, that is to say, Lo, I am the hand maid of
God, be it done to me after thy word: and as thy blessed precursour Saint John
the Baptist, most excellent of all Saints, was glad, and ioyed in great joy
in the holle ghost through thy presence, when he was yet in his mothers womb,
And after when he saw thee walkinge among the people, very meekelie, and with
devout affection he said: The fceend of a spouse that stands and hears,
ioyeth with great joy to hear the voice of the spouse: and so couete I in
great and holy desires to be inflamed, and to present my self to thee with
all mine heart, and also I offer and yield to thee all the lauds of deuont
hearts, the brenninge affections, excessive thoughts, spiritual
illuminations, and heavenly visions, with all virtues and praysinges, done, or
to be done by any creature, in heaven or in earth for me, and for all them that
be committed to my prayer, that thou may be worthily lauded and glorified
for ever. Accept Lord God my mind, and the desires of the manifold lauds
and blessings, that by me are to thee due of right, after the multitude of thy
greatness, more then can be spoken. And all these I yield to thee, and desire to
yield to thee every day, and every moment, and with all my desire and
affection meekelye exhort and pray all heavenly spirits and all faithful
people, to yield with me thankinges and lauds to thee. And I beseech thee
that all people, tribes and touges may magnify thy holy and most sweet
name with great joy and brenning devotion, and that all they that reverently
and deuoutlye minister this most high Sacrament, or with full faith receive
it, may thereby deserve to find before thee thy grace and mercy: and when
they have obtained the devotion that they desired, and be spirituallye united
to thee, and be thereby well comforted and maruelouslye refreshed, and be
departed from thy heavenly table, that they will have me poor sinner in their
remembrance. Amen.

That a man shall not be a curious searcher of this holy Sacrament, but a
meek folovver of Christ, subduinge alvvaye his reason to faith. The 18.
Chapter.
THou must beware of a curious, and an unprofitable searching of this most
profounde Sacrament, if thou will not be drowned in the great depth of
doubtfulnes, for he that is the searcher of Gods majesty shall be anon thrust
out of glory. God is of power to work much more then man may understand,
nevertheless a meek and an humble searchinge of the truth, ready always to
be taught, and to walk after the teachinges of holy fathers, is sufferable.
Blessed is the simplicity that leaves the way of hard questions, and goes
in the plain and steadfast way of the commandments of God. Many have lost
their devotion, because they would search higher things then pertains to
the^. Faith and a good life is asked of thee, and not the highness of
understanding, nor the depenes of the mysteries of God. If thou may not
understand nor take such things as be with in thee, how may thou then
comprehend those things that be above thee? Submit thy self therefore
meekelie to God, and submit also thy reason to faith, and the light of
knowledge and true understanding shall be given unto thee, as it shall be most
profitable and necessary for thee. Some be grievously tempted of the faith, and
of the Sacrament, but that is not to be reputed to them, but rather to the
enemy: therefore care not for him, nor dispute not with thy thouhtes, nor
answer not to the doubts that thine enemy shall lay unto thee, but believe
the words of God, and believe his Saints and Prophets, and the wicked enemy
shall anon flee away fro thee. And it is often times much profitable, that the
servant of God should feel and sustain such doubts for their more proof:
and commonly the enemy tempts not unfaithful people and sinners, whom he
has sure possession of, but he tempts and vexes in diverse manners the
faithful and veuout persons. Go therefore with a pure and undoubted faith, and
with an humble reverence proceed to this Sacrament, and whatsoever thou can
not understand, commit it faithfullye to God, for God will not deceive thee,
but he shall be deceived that trusts overmuch to him self. God walks with
the simple persons, he opens him self, and shows him self to meek
persons. He gives understanding to them which are poor in spirit, he opens
the wit to pure and clean minds, and hides his grace from curious men and
proud men. Man's reason is feeble and weak, and anon may be deceived, but
faith is stable and true, and can not be deceived, therefore all reason and all
natural workinge must follow faith without further reasoning: for faith and
love in this most holy and most excellent Sacrament surmount and work high in
secret manner above all reason. O the eternal God, and the Lord of infinite
power does great things in heaven and in earth, that may not be serched, for
if the works of God were such that they might be lightlye understood by
man's reason, they were not so marvelous and so inestimable as they be.

Here ends the fourth book of the folowinge of Christ, the which fourth
book treats most principallye of the blessed Sacrament of the Altar.
HERE BEGINS A GODLY Treatise, and it is called a notable Lesson, otherwise
it is called the golden Epistle.
Jesus fili David misereremei.
O matter Dei memento mei


The exposition of the name of this little Book.
A Right good and wholesome Lesson, profitable unto all Christians, ascribed
unto S. Bernard, and put among his works, I think by some virtuous man, that
would it should thereby have the more authority, and the rather be read,
and better be borne away: for doubtless, it is a good matter, and edificatiue
unto all them that have zeal and care unto soul health, and desire of
salvation. It is called in the Title ( Notabile documentum) that is to say. A
notable lesson: And some do call it the golden Epistle. It follows immediately
after a little work called Formula honestae vitae, the form and manner of an
honest life, or of honest living.

IF you intend to please God, and would obtain grace to fulfill the same, two
things be unto you very necessary. The first, you must withdraw your mind
from all worldly and transitory things, in such manner, as though you cared
not whether any such things were in this world or no. The second is, that
you give and apply your self so wholly to God, and have your self in such a
wait, that you never do, say, or think, that you know, suppose, or believe
should offend or displease God, for by this mean you may soonest and most
readily obtain and win his favor and grace. In all things esteem and
account your self most vile and most simple, and as very naught, in respect
and regard of virtue: and think, suppose and believe, that all persons be
good and better then you be, for so shall you much please our Lord.
Whatsoever you see, or seem to perceive in any person, or yet hear of any
christian, take you none occasion therein, but rather ascribe and apply you
all unto the best, and think or suppose all is done or said for a good intent
or purpose, though it seem contrary: for man's suspicion and light judgments
be soon and lightly deceived or begiled. Despise no person willinglye, nor
ever speak evil of any person, though it were never so true that you say.
For it is not lawful to show in confession the vice or default of any person,
except you might not otherwise show and declare your own offense. Speak
little or nothing unto your proper and self laud or praise, though it were
true, and unto your familier fellow or faithful friend, but study to keep
secret and privy your virtue, rather then your vice: yet were it a cruel
deed for any persons to defame them self. Be more glad to give your ear and
hearing unto the praise, rather then unto the disprayse of any person, and ever
beware as well of hearing as speakinge of detraction: and when you speak, take
good deliberation, and have few words, and let those be true and good, sadly
set and wisely ordered. If any words be spoken unto you of vice or vanity, as
soon as ye may, break of, and leave that talk or communication. And ever
return, and apply your self unto some appointed good and godly occupation,
bodily or ghostly. If any sudden chance fall or happen unto you, or unto
any of yours, lean not to lightly thereunto, or care much therefore. If it
be of prosperity, rejoice not much therein, or be over glad thereof: If it be
adversity, be not ouercast or overthrown therewith, or brought to sorrow or
sadness, thank God of all, and set little thereby. Repute all things
transitory as of little price or valor. Give ever most thought and care unto
those things, that may profit and promote the soul. Fly and avoid the
persons and places of much speech, for better it is to keep silence, the^ to
speak. Keep the times and places of silence preciselie, so that you speak
not without reasonable and unfeigned cause. The times of silence in religion be
these. From collation unto Mass be ended after the hour of tierce: from the
first grace in the fratour unto the end of the later grace. And from the
beginning of euensonge, unto grace be ended after supper, or else (Benedicite)
after the common beuer. The places of silence be the church and the claustre,
the fratour and the dortour. If you be slaundred, and do take occasion at the
fault or offense of any person, then look well upon your self, whether you be
in the same default sometime your self, and then have compassion upon your
brother or sister. If there be none such default in you, think verily, and
believe there may be, and then do as (in like case) you would be done unto. And
thus, as in a glass ye may see and behold your self. Grudge not, ne
complain upon any person for any manner cause, except you see and perceive by
large conjecture, that you may profit and edify thereby. Neither deny, nor
affirm your mind or opinion stiflye or extremely, but that your affirmation,
denegation, or doubt be ever powdered with salt, that is to say, wisdom
discretion and patience. Use not in any wise to mock, check, or scorn, ne
yet to laugh or smile but right seldom. And that always to show reverence or
loving manner, light countenance or loose behavior becomes not a sad
person. Let your communication be short, and with few persons, always of
virtue, learning, or good and Christian edification, and ever with such
warines, that no person in things doubtful may take any authority of your
words or sentence. Let all your pastime be spent in bodily labors, good and
profitable, or else godly in study, or that passes all, in holy and devout
prayer, so that the heart and mind be occupied with the same you speak. And
when you pray for any certain persons remember their degree, estate and
condition. For a form and order of your prayer, this may be a good and ready
way, to follow the order of the six gramaticall cases: The nominative, the
genitive, the dative, the accusative, the vocative, and the ablative. The
nominative, that is, first to pray for your self, that you may have ghostly
strength and constancy, that you fall not into any deadlye offense by
frayltie, and that you may have right knowledge of God by faith, and of your
self by due consideration of your estate and condition, and of the laws of
God for your conduct and countenance: and thirdly, that you may have grace and
good will, according to the same strength and knowledge, and that having unto
God a reverent dread, you never offend in thought, word or deed, but that
you may ever love him for him self, and all his creatures in due order for
him, and in him. The second is the genitive case. Then must you pray for your
genitors, your progenitors and parents, that is to say, your fathers and
mothers spiritual and carnal, as your ghostlye fathers or spiritual
souuerains, your godfathers, your godmothers, your natural father and mother,
your graundfathers and graundmothers, your brothers and sisters, and all your
kin. In the third place is the dative case. There must you pray for
benefactours, good doers, of whom you have received any manner of gifts
spiritual or temporal, unto the wealth of your soul or body. In the fourth
place is the accusative case, where you should pray for your enemies, such
persons as by any means have anoyed, hurt, or grieved you, either ghostly or
bodily, that is to say, in your soul or manners by any suggestion,
intisinge, evil counsel, or evil example. In your fame or good name by
detraction, backbiting, or slaundering, or yet by familier company. For a
person commonly is reputed and supposed to be of such condition, as they be,
with whom he has conversation and company. And for them that hurt your body,
either by strokes, or by any other occasion have hindered the state and health
thereof. And likewise of your worldly goods or possessions. For all these
manner of enemies must you pray, that our Lord God would forgive them as you
do, and as you forgeuen would be, and that they may come to right charity
and peace. The fifth case is called vocative, that is to say, the calling
case, where you conveniently may call, cry, and pray unto our Lord for all
manner of persons that be out of the state of grace, either by infidelity, as
Turks, Sarazens, and such other: or else by error, as all manner of heretics:
or else by any deadly sin or offense to God. Pray for all these manner of
persons, that they may come unto the right way of their salvation. In the
sixte and last place is the ablative case, where thou must pray for all them
that be taken out of this life, and that died or passed the same life in
charity, and that now have need of prayer. In the which you may keep a
form of the same order that is before, that is to say: In steed of the
nominative, where you prayed for your self, you may now pray for all those
that do bide in pain for any default or offense done by your example or
occasion: and for the genitive in the second place, for your parents, and all
your kin departed this life. And in the third place for the dative, pray
for your benefactours passed. And for the accusative in the fourth place, you
may pray for them that live in pain, for any occasion or ensample that they
gave unto you. And in the fifte place for the vocative, pray for all them that
have greatest pains in purgatory, and least help here by the suffrage of
prayers. And for the ablative in the sixte and last place, pray for all souls
in general. And that you may be the more apt to pray, call three things
often times to remembrance, that is to say, what you have been, what you be,
and what you shall be. First, by reason of your body, you were conceived of
the most filthy abominable matter of man, shameful to be spoken, far more
vile then the slutche or slime of the earth, and after borne in a sinful
soul, and purged only by grace. And now (as unto the body) you be a
muckheape or dunghill of filth, more vile then any upon earth, if you remember
what does issue daily, and come forth out of the meats of your body. And
your soul is daily in some sin, or (at the least) full like to be. What
you shall be as unto your body, you may see in experience, worms meat, and
earth again. And what shall become of your soul, no man in this world can
assure you. To remember then the joys of heaven, and pains of hell, and that
both be infinite, endless, and without rebate, but both ever encresinge and
never ceasing, never have ease nor test, but ever continue and everlasting. To
remember then, I say, these things may greatly move you to have your self in
a good awayte, and to study how you may avoid the one, and obtain the other.
Remember specially how great a loss it is to loose heaven, and how
uncomfortable gains to win hell, and how soon and how lightly either of
them may be gotten or lost. When any thing then of adversity, hurt, or
displeasure happen unto you, think the^ or imagine, that if you were in hell,
you should have the same displeasure and many worse. And so to avoid those,
you shall here the better suffer, and for our Lord the more patiently bear
all these that now be present, or any that may come hereafter. And in like
manner, if any good prosperity or pleasure happen unto you, think then that if
you were in heaven, you should have that pleasure and many m^ excellent joys.
And so for the fervent desire of those joys, you shall set little by any
worldly comfort or pleasure. A good contemplation therefore may it be unto you
in feasts of holy Saints, to think and record how great pains they
suffered here for the love of our Lord, and how short these were, and how
soon passed: and then again how marvelous reward they had therefore in joy
and bliss everlasting. So the troubles and torments of good persons be soon
and shortly gone and ended, and the joys and pleasures of sinful persons do
soon fade and f^^e for ever. The good persons for their troubles suffered here
upon earth, do get and win eternal and everlasting glory, which the evil
persons do lose. And contrary, these evil and sinful persons for their joy
and pleasures here, do receive by exchange eternal and everlasting shame and
rebuke, with pain and woe unspeakable. When soever the^ you be disposed to
sluggishnesse, or to be drowsy, remiss in prayers, or dull in devotion, then
take this little work, or else some other good Treatise, and read therein, and
ever note well the contents thereof, and what is meant thereby. And if you be
not thereby delivered or eased thereof, then shift unto some other work or
occupation, so that ever you avoid ydlenes, and all vain pastimes, which in
deed is loss of time. And then remember, that those that now bide in pain,
either in hell, or yet in purgatory, for such times so passed or lost, had
rather then all the world have such time to redeem their pains by, as you may
have if you will. Time then unto al persons well occupied, is very precious and
dear. Beware well therefore, how you spend it or pass it, for you can never
revoke it nor call it back. If the time pass you by trouble and vexation,
think they be happy and gracious, that be past this wretched life, and now
in bliss, for they shall never have any such misery. And when you feel a
comfort or consolation spiritual, thank. God thereof, and think the damned
souls shall never have any such pleasure. And thus let this be for your
exercise in the dative. At night when you go to rest, first make account with
your self, and remember how you have spent or passed the day and time that
was given you tobe used in virtue, and how you have bestowed your thoughts,
your words, and your works. And if you find no great thing amiss, give the
whole laud and praise unto our Lord God. And if you perceive contrary, that
you have misspent any part thereof, be sorry therefore, and beseech our Lord of
mercy and forgeuenes, and promise, and verily purpose to make amends the next
day. And if you have opportunity thereupon, it shall be full convenient for you
to be confessed on the next morrow, and specially, if the matter done, said or
thought by deliberate consent, do greuouslie weigh and work with a grudge in
your conscience, then would I advise you never to eat nor drink, till ye be
discharged thereof, if you may conveniently get a gostlie father. Now for a
conclusion of this work, put before you, as by case or ymagination two large
Cities, one full of trouble, turmoyle and misery, and let that be hell. The
other City full of joy, gladness, comfort and pleasure, and let that be heaven.
Look well on them both, for in both be many dwellers and great company. Then
cast and think within your self, what thing here might so please you, that
you should chose the worse city, or what thing should displease you on the
other part, whereby you should withdraw your self from that virtue that
might convey and bring you unto the other city. And when you have satudied
well here upon, and can nothing find, I dare well assure you, if you keep
well the precepts and counsels of this little lesson, you shall find the right
way, for the holy ghost will instruct and teach you, where you be not
sufficient of your selves, so you endeavor and give diligence to bear away and
follow that here is taught. Read it every weak once or twice, or oftener if
you will. And where you profit, give the thanks, laud, and praise unto our
Lord God, and most sweet Savior Jesus Christ, who send you his mercy and
grace, that always lives God world without end. Amen.

This lesson was brought unto me in English of an old translation, rough and
rude, with request to amend it. I thought less labor to write new the whole,
which I have done according to the meaning of the author, though not word
for word: and in diverse places added some things folowinge upon the same, to
make the matter more sente^tious and full. I beseech you take all unto the
best, and pray for the old wretched brother of Sion, Richard VVhitforde.

A spiritual glass.
Read distinctlie, pray devoutly, sigh deeply, suffer pacie^tly, meek you
lowlye, give no sentence hastily, speak but rathe, and that truly, prevent
your speech discretly, do your deeds in charity, temptations resist
strongly, break his head shortly, weep bitterly, have compassion
tenderly, do good works busily, love perseuerantlie, love hartelie, love
faythfullie, love God alonelie, and all other for him charitablie, love in
adversity, love in prosperity, think always of love, for love is none other
but God him self. Thus to love brings the lover to love without end. Amen.

THE RVLES OF A CHRISTIAN life, made by John Picus the elder Earl of Mirandula.
FIrst, if to man or woman the way of virtue does seem hard or painful,
because we must needs fight against the flesh, diue^l, and the world, let him
or her call to remembrance, that whatsoever life they will chose according to
the world, many adversities, incommodities, much heaviness and labor are to be
suffered.

Moreover let them have in remembrance, that in wealth and worldly
possessions is much and long contencion, laborious also, and therewith
unfruitful, wherein travail is the conclusion or end of labor, and finallye
pain everlasting, if those things be not well ordered and charitablie
disposed.

Remember also, that it is very folishenes, to think to come unto heaven by
any other mean than by the said battle, consideringe that our head and
master Christ did not ascend unto heanen but by his passion: And the
servant ought not to be in better estate or condition than his master or
sovereign.

Furthermore consider that this battle ought not to be grudged at, but to be
desired and wished for, all though thereof no price or reward might ensue or
happen, but only that thereby we might be comfourmed or joined to Christ out
God and master. Wherefore as often as in resistinge any ty^ptacion thou do
withstand any of thy senses or wits, think unto what part of Christ's
passion thou may apply thy self or make thy self like: As resistinge
glotonie, whiles thou do punish thy taste or appetite: remember that Christ
received in his drink, aysell mixte with the gall of a beast, a drink most
unsavory and loathsome.

When thou withdrawest thy hand from unlawful taking or keepinge of any
thing, which likes thine appetite, remember Christ's hands as they were
fast nailed unto the tree of the Cross. And resistinge of pride, think on
him, who being very God almighty, for thy sake received the form of a
subject, and humbled him self unto the most vile and reprochefull death of
the Cross. And when thou art tempted with wrath: Remember that he, which was
God, and of all men the most just or righteous, when he beheld him self
mocked, spitte on, scourged, and punished with all dispites and rebukes, and
set on the Cross among errant thieves, as if he him self were a false harlot,
he not withstandinge showed never token of indignation, or that he were
grieved, but sufferinge all things with wonderful patience, answered all men
most gentillie. In this wise, if thou peruse all things one after an other,
thou may find, that there is no passion or trouble, that shall not make the
in some part conformable or like unto Christ.

Also put not thy trust in man's help, but in the only virtue of Christ
Jesus, which said: Trust well, for I have vainquished the world. And in an
other place he says: The prince of this world is cast out thereof. Wherefore
let us trust by his only virtue, to vainquishe the world, and to subdue
the devil. And therefore ought we to ask his help by our own prayers and by
the prayers of his blessed Saints.

Remember also, that as soon as thou have vainquished one temptacion, always an
other is to be looked for: The devil goes always about and seeks for him
whom he would devour. Wherefore we ought to serve diligently and be ever in
fear, and to say with the prophet: I will stand always at my defense.

Take heed moreover, that not only thou be not vainquished of the devil,
that te^pteth the, but also that thou vainquishe and overcome him. And that is
not only when thou do no sin, but also when of that thing wherein he
tempted thee, thou take occasion for to do good. As if he offreth to the
some good act to be done to the intent that thereby thou may fall into
vainglorie: forthwith thou thinking it, not to be thy deed or work, but the
benefit or reward of God, humble thou thy self, and judge the to be unkind
unto God in respect of his manifold benefits.

As often as thou do fight, fight as in hope to vainquishe, and to have at
the last perpetual peace. For that paraduenture God of his abundant grace
shall give unto the, and the devil being confused of thy victory, shall
return no more again. But yet when thou haste vainquished, bear thy self
so as if thou should fight again shortelie. Thus always in bataile, thou
must think on victory: and after victory, thou must prepare the to bataile
immediately again.

Allthough thou feel thy self well armed and ready, yet flee (not
withstandinge) all occasions to sin. For as the wise man says: Who loves
perille, shall therein perish.

In all temptacions resist the beginning, and beat the Children of Babylon
against the stone, which stone is Christ, and the children be evil thoughts
and imaginacions. For in long continuynce of sin, seldom works any
medicine or remedy.

Remember, that although in the said conflict of temptacion the bataile seems
to be very dangerous: yet consider how much sweter it is to vainquishe
temptacion, than to follow sin, whereto she inclines the, whereof the end
is repentance. And herein many be foul deceived, which compare not the
swetenes of victory to the swetenes of sin, but only compares bataile to
pleasure. Notwithstanding a man or woman, which has a thousand times known
what it is to give place to temptacion, should ones assaie, what it is to
vainquishe temptacion.

If thou be tempted think thou not therefore that God has forsaken the, or
that he sets but littell by the, or that thou art not in the sight of God,
good or perfect: but remember, that after Saint Paul had seen God, as he was
in his divinity, and such secreate mysteries as be not lawful for any man to
speak or reherce, he for all that suffered temptacion of the flesh, wherewith
God suffered him to be tempted, least be should be assaulted with pride.
Wherein a man ought to consider, that Saint Paul, which was the pure vessel
of election, and rapt into the third heaven, was notwithsta^dinge in peril to
be proud of his virtues, as he says of him self. Wherefore above all
temptacions man or woman ought to arm the^ most strongly against the
te^ptacion of pride, since pride is the rote of all mischief, against the
which the only remedy is to think always that God humbled him self for us
unto the Cross. And moreover that death has so humbled us whether we will or
no, that our bodies shall be the meat of worms loathsome and venimouse.



FINIS.

