A SHORT Inuentory of certain Idle Inventions

THE Fruits of a close and secret Garden of great ease, and little pleasure.

By C. T.

IMPRINTED AT London in Fleet Street by Thomas Marsh.

1581.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL I. R. C. T. WISHES LONG AND prosperous life, to
the glory and pleasure of Almighty GOD.
AFter I had bestovved some part of my enforced idle time in drawing these few
and frivolous lines of most vain and idle inventions, only of purpose to
occupy my mind, which otherwise, by occasions was subject to receive a more
troublesome and greater incombrance: and then bending my self to a further
intent, to bestow the sour fruictes of these my idle gatheringes (though from
a place of small pleasure) of some such of my friends, whose curtesye I
supposed would vouchsafe very well to accept of them and in every particular
point to pardon my folly: knowing that a little mite was as well accepted at the
poor woman's hands, coming with a willing mind, as the great and costly
prease^t was at the hands of the rich. I the^ settled my self unto a further
consideration, and this I wayghed and considered with my self, if I should
rashly take upon me to send unto one or two, or many of my friends, this little
bu^dle of trifling toys: not unlike but in a short time it might be drawn from
one friend to an other, and so at the lenghth clean out of the hands of my
friends, into the mouths of some others, where perhaps it may be so champt
and mumbled, as it shall clean be altered from the deace^t form and shape of
man's meat, and made loathsome to the sight of every man, and onley fit for
the mouth of the Hogg. Whereby (being desirous to proceed in my purpose) I took
occasion to enter into the imagination of the nature and disposition of man
with this intent, that if happily I could find the civil and honest
inclinatio^s of some, able to weigh in equal balance, and cou^teruaile with
the uncivil, and dishonest disposition of others, the^ would I ye more
willingly be bold to adventure ye publishing hereof to some of my friends,
according to my former meanig: and now after a little deliberatio^ taken therein,
eue^ as the faulkner, who presently after every flight, does hye and hasten
himself to take the fruicts of his game from the foot of his hawk: I in the
like manner calling my wits together, have demau^ ded a just account of them
what they have gathered according to my purpose, to serve my turn, or at the
least to resolve my mind, and as the Hawk does open his foot to yield the
pray unto his master, sometime very e gentlye, and sometime not so easelye,
without some stryuinge, and wrestynge: even so also have they in the same
manner, according to their skill now opened themselves in this sort vntome, as
hereafter follows.

According to your appointment we have bestowed some time in trauayling and
wandringe to and froe, and have not only traue^st the large and wyld field of
this world, but as near as we could, have also beaten every little scrubbe
and bushe, wherein to our judgments any likely hoode of any thing was to be
seen, which possibly might serve your turn. And now as touching those things
which at this time do only concern our charge, and serve for your purpose,
which only be pens and tongues, thus much we have gathered together of
the behavior and disposition of me^ therein. In ye open field we have seen to
the plain sight of the world, that there be a very great and infynite
number of men some with pens in they r ears, bendynge themselves only
unto vvrightinge, some with books in their hands, and with great delighte
bestowinge all their time wholly in study. Some others we find neither with
Pen, nor Book, but only with a lump of flesh in their mouths, so restles, as
it seems seldom or never will^gly content to take any rest: of these some be
restles only of zeal and ernest good will, continually to do good, or else of
pleasure to recreat themselves or delight their Fryends, without vtterynge at
any time any cause of offense: some others again with their natural and
mother wits do alwais busy and beat their brains, and most vainly occupy
their tougues only in carpinge and snatching, (doing nothing themselves)
continually at other men's doings. On the other side, of those which give their
minds only unto wrightinge, we find the dispositions of them be also
diverse, some to set forth and make plain unto the ignorant and common people
continually the heavenly and divine misteryes, only for the pleasure and
comfort to the Soul of man, some to wryghting of such necessary matters, which
only touch and concern a common wealth, being as needful for government, as
the other is necessary for comfort other some only touch^g the safe keeping
and healthful preservation of man's body, which be the Physicians. But leauinge
to report any further unto you, of necessary writers, we find an other kind
of people in the plain and open field, which give themselves very often to
write of pleasure, only to refresh sometimes the weary wits as well of
themselves, as of diverse other men, being perhaps long incombred before, with
matters of greatter wayght, which for recreation sake was never thought a
thing greatly amiss. Of these we find very many, which do greatly please and
delyght the humor of the common people, without any just cause of offense at
all, more unto one man then to another.

And now to report unto you no other wise in every point then according to
truth, we cannot justly say, that in the open field we have seen any
honest or wise man, that will take upon him by his pen willingly to iustefye
any indecent, dishonest, or uncomely thing, as well for modestyes sake, as
for the preservation and safe keepinge of their credits: for they know Litterae
scriptae mane^t, that writings remain a long time, and be always very
strong testimonies against every manne. Therefore we find all men strive
to wright them in as good, and comely order, as possibly they can. We speak
generallye every manne, because we have learned this in the world, that
among those kind of men, with whom the commendable exercise of wrighting is
mostly, and to best purpose used; whosoever is found to write otherwise the^
according to honesty and good order, they would not have him taken or reputed
among honest or wise me^, as a man, but rather as a rare deformed and misshapen
monster, they think no greater discredit^ can any way fall upon them, then to
have such a one to bear the name of a companyon amyng them. But yet full well
it is known among many of the wise and learned penmen (and to well if it might
be helped) yt many nimble witted merchants (though besides very clownish and
dull mannered dolts) under the counterfect habits of grave and civil callynges,
do oftentimes intrude themselves into that commendable exercise, with such
dishonest and unseemly behavior, as the wise are no less ashamed, then
grieved to think of that wicked abuse, though they have not alwais power to
work redres according to their good wills. But they say, it is taken for a
rule infallable among them, that wit, subtilty and wickedness: be three such
loving Brothers, as seldom or never to be found a sunder: and that wisdom,
policy, and honest behauioure on the other side, be three of the like. And of
our selves we find by common experience, that there is no greater vvyckednes
in the world, then does dailye proceed from the witty man: and yet (being as
blind in wisdom, as the man is in sight that has lost both his eyes) when
any thing coms from him craftily and wittely devised, either by pen or
speech, or any other way: he verily persuades himself, that at all hands, he
is greatly extold for his wit, but contrary to that blind imagination of
theirs, we find that among the wise and learned, they be had in continual
disdain: for they say, that neither wit nor learning deserves any reverence
at any time, where honestye wants, and as for wisdom, which in the latin
tongue is termed Sapienti^, it bears continually with him the substance and
savor of al goodness, or otherwise it must loose the name, and therefore ever to
be had in great reverence. But to be short, beside all this, we find by
great hunting and seekinge in every corner, and by beating in many bushes,
that there is yet an other kind of people which commonly like hedgecrepers,
lie lurkinge in huggermugger, never once ventringe out into any plain or open
field, if by chance they come abroad they come so secret lie, as never seen
either with pen in their ears, with books in their hands, or scarcelye with
any tongue in their mouths: if by chance they wright or speak, it is always
in clouds, in libel manner, and to the defamation, and discredit of some one
or other particular and special man. But these and all other sorts of evil
disposed men, we find in this world (the good government is such) that
continuallye they be driven to silence, and that the wise and learned men do
always govern the rest, and be the other never so subtle or nimble witted,
yet continually they do keep the^ in subjection and awe: and therefore thus much
now we may boldlye say, that what soever is set forth by any man either for
necessityes sake to a common wealth, for pleasures sake to the writer, to
gratify his friends, and delight hiselfe, or for any other reasonable or lawful
cause (if comely and honest, and any thing tolerable besides, so it be not to
ridiculous,) ye most wise and best learned man will least of all condemn him,
but rather allow his forward and willing mind, for they know it is no common
thing, for every man to be singular.

Conceyuing thus much, upon this co^^sideatio^ thus had with my self, I find
that though in number the wicked and evil disposed men do far surmount the
good, yet by auctority, and by good government, the good does always waygh
down the apparent evils: and God forbide that any apparante wickedness
should ever bear any sway It has always been seen, that one wise and
learned man, have ever been hable to keep a thousand other wittye naughty
packes continuallye in subjection, and though they starte out sometimes by
stealth like the dodmond, or Snaile, yet being once but touched, they are
always feign to pu^ home and shrink in their Horns again: and God forbid,
that in any Christian common wealth it should ever be found otherwise.
Therefore now I have found for my purpose that whatsoever I, or any other man
shall take upon him either to speak, or wright, or any other way howsoeuerto
put in act: it is only necessarilye required at every hand, that it deserve
not the just rebuke or blame of the wise, and honest disposed manne: and as
for those which be contrary, who fears them, I find must fear every blaste
of wind: for do a man well, or do he ill, they will be as ready to find
faults, and to blame him, as the wynd will be to blow upon him. Wherefore now
I have taken such courage hereby, as I have imboldned my self to fulfill the
earnest desire of my mind, to direct at this time, this little tryfle unto you,
and if the small matter herein contained, with my duty and goodwill, may but
deserve to be taken in good part at your hands, whereof I nothing doubt: and
also of the wise, and indifferent reader, which heartily I do desire, and
lightlye to pass over some vain, and unusual words, which perhaps in diverse
places here in may be found: then have I obtained the substance of my desire:
thus leaving to imagine of, and to answer any other obiectio^s which perhaps
may be invented against me,) least being to tedyous in troubli^g you to
much, I here end: and as by duty bound duringe life to be at your
commandment, do most heartily commend you unto almighty God.

From London the third of October. 1^8^.
TO HIS VERY Louinge and especial friend, old Oliver Fyndfault, of England,
in the countye of Europe Gent. William Woulwell, in most friendlye manner
sends most hartye greetinges.
IF I should so lightlye let this pass, as hereby to give fre scope to you
my friend and to every other ^^cleheaded penma^, (flowing by daily practice
and experience, in all cunninge, and curious conceiptes, perusing this small
pamphlet, which claymeth no other title then a toy,) to condemn ye inuentor
hereof I should greatly injury him, and not unworthily of great folly might
condemn my self, in that I have so rashly thrust him so nakedlye into ye
mouths of so many, whereas perhaps if I had given him warninge thereof he
might more strongly and better have furnished himself, but as naked as I
found him, so nakedlye straight ways did I prefer him. And therefore the truth
is, a very friend of mine being driven from all the benefytes and pleasures of
this world, and enforced contrary to the ordinances and rules of nature to
hyde and harbor himself (though as a gu^ltles guest) in a most solitary and
dumpish desert, being therewith drawn from all joy and felicity, in in any
worldly necessary practice, and rather indeuoring himself to recreate,
refresh, and delight his mind with some toy^sh conceits, then otherwise (being
so inco^bred) to charge it with any matters of importance or weight for his
own solace and pleasure, bestowed some part of that his idle time in certain
plain and light toys of invention, not much unlike therein unto a certain
idle king in Persia, who in his progresses, did nothig else but continuallye
cut, and whittle sticks, to drive away the time. And by reason of my daily
recourse unto him, being priuye thereunto, I craved and obtained the coppye of
this now extant, the which I diverse times and often perusynge over, took
occasion as a toy, to like so well, as I procurde it to the press, with this
title as you see, and thought it as a toke^ worthy to send unto you, to read
whether being led there unto, by the great and good affection I bare to the
maker, or by desert of the matter, I know not: but well we both know, it is the
natural incliation of friends, one always to think the best of an other.
Therefore as I know the first inuentor hereof meant nothing less, then to put
this forth to the public construction of the world, to hasarde or adventure
the allowing or disalowing thereof: I will not take vponme to give out any show
of commendatio^ therein at all. First because I know it was not made to that
intent, and besides, least if it should happen to be condemned of others as a
vain and tryfling toy, I should therewith also be condemned to have made a
partial and unworthy praise. But sir (if you can rightly consider it) as by
the least bird that flies in the air, by the least fish that swims in the
Sea, and by the smallest worm that creepes upon the earth. The omnipotent and
mighty power of God does as fully and plain appear, as by the hougest and
greatest mo^sters that bears life in this world: even so by the smalest book
that can be written, by ye most babbling ballet that can be made, and by the
least word that can be spoken, his strange and wonderful works in man, with
his most liberal and incomparable guiftes unto the^ do as perfectly set forth
and show themselves as by the greatest volume yt ever was written, by the
wayghtyest or wysest concept that ever was made, or by the most eloquente or
learned oration that ever was uttered. The honest wise and civil man does as
little despise the worst and meanest beggar that goes by the way, as he
geeatly honors ye cheifest and greatest prince that rules in ye world, even
so here the indifferent and well disposed minds, will as little trippe, or spu^ne
at this stumped, lame, and haui^nge toy, as they would greatly fawn upon, or
run after a more fine or pleasant invention. But there is an old proverb
Figulus Figulo inuidit, one Potter hates an other, the which to avoid, these
may be sufficiently to assure you, in that I know you are a crafts man in that
art, that as for this unskillful potter, this small trifle and toy is the first
that ever he made, who will not justify it to be lawful nor good, in that he
was never prentice thereunto, and for any he intendes, I dare bouldly say shall
be the last, unless it be a little cup or cruese for his own mouth* yet sir
if your friendly actions had at any time been* agreeable unto your continual
colorable shows, you would have enabled him long before this by your friendly
instructions, worthy of your fellowship and company.

But understanding he had, though to very small and little purpose, some smacke
in this your art, as only to take your vessels in hand and to read them over,
you always shook him of, demanding a double fee for the teachinge of your
skill, much like to amusition, who used to take of hysschollare, which had
learned before they came unto him, double soulare, deuble that he took of
others, which never learned before, saying that he took double pains with
them, as first to make them forget that they had learned before, and then to
teach them perfectlye again: who if now he were alive should surely find as
small resort of scholars, as I think you do in that you are so curyous in
your art. Therefore to imagine this short, and unpleasant sound, here at this
time presented unto your audable and pleasant ears, to be but as a preludium,
unto other conceytes, and that he will strive to mar your markets, with any
such like rough hewn, or misshapen vessels, it shall be in vayn, for be intendes
nothig less. And as for this small conceit, here at this time, being cast in
a very little mould, and wherein great want of an artifitial workman must needs
appear: I hope you will not strive to condemn, but rather excuse, though it
has neither head to begin, handle to houlde by, nor foot to stand upon and
though perhaps near about the end you shall find it very imperfect, and so
full of secret chinks and little crantse, as it will hardly hold liquor without
leaking: but if your grave head shall esteem it as an idle toy, imagine it (as
it is) the fruictes of an idle place. For physic sake I know you have
swallowed many unpleasant and bitter pylles, for friendship sake you may as well
at this time digest this trifling and idle toy. But if you shall answer me,
that your such Phisical rescerpts have always enforced you to use the pap of
an apple, or else to roll them in sugar, otherwise they might have stuck in
your throat: then for answer again, I can but advise you, for the more easy
digesting of this my friendly conceit, sent only as a token unto you and to
the rest of my friends, to roll it in styd of an apple, in the sott asd
slyppery pappe of your gentle pattence, or otherwise (in stead of a sugar lofe)
in some sweet and sugared spice of your most frienly interpretation: and in
this (for the old acquayntaunce of long time continued between us) I hope I
shall not fail but miss of your willing and friendly conformity: and therefore
now, since I have sufficiently declared unto you, the cause of ye publishing
hereof, with the disposition and intent of the deuisor, and least I should make
this my foretrotti^g show or preamble (which rightly should be but a brief
declaration of what is to come) longer then this his whole raze which is very
short, and considering my old lesson (worthy in every act to be remembered and
observed) quod satis est sufficit, I commend me unto you, you unto God, and
these few lines following unto your friendly construction.

Your assured friend William VVouldwell.

A SHORT PRELVDIVM to the friendly Reader.
Interpone tuis interdum ga^dia curis TO mingle mirth sometimes with care
and vsyng neither of them to much
Preserues thy body well in health,
it keeps thy mind in perfect state.
To glutte in sorrovv day and night
from day to day, from year to year,
Thou drovvnst thy self in drousy moodes,
it syngles thee from all thy vvites
The hotchpot for varietyes sake
is often accepted of the best
And taken as a daynty dish
if kyndly mixed with diverse tastes
Resceites of all preservatives
where shall you find more fyt for health
Then vvher the skilful mixtures be
in daily practice to be made.
A sugared svveete and silver sound
the music mixed does alvvayes yield
With harmony so heavenly,
wherein no man but greatly joys.
And here to make a vvindovv fight,
out of my mind, now to your eyes
Since mixtures make all things so good,
let this my hotchpot bear no blame.
A flickeryng fly with fettered fe^ete,
fast tide in scrauling Spyders web,
A stinking seat of flattering Fleet,
where ^^arse he can put out his nebb.
A bird, a beast, more meeter may
the vvitles woodcock paynt himself
Whom beaten seamen did assaye,
so often to vvarne from shollovv shelfe,
A guiltles guest and harbored long
in hollovv cave of hardest stone,
With patience now does salve his wrong.
and vvis^ it were his harm alone,
From thence this idle toy does spring
vvher were green nimble vvitseed sovvn
Great crops of toys that field might b^ing,
and rank, if often it were not movvne.
We see when grovvnd is newly laid,
with vveedes and thistles first it springes,
When suits in love be first assayd,
it first with triflyng toys begynnes,
Before we come to man's estate,
in childish toys long time we spend
And after then our youthul rate,
we walk as vvild til nere our end.
Who vvil strong houldes attempt to vvin,
do first with vveaklinges try their strength,
And so the strykers all begin
and grow to courage great at length.
Before the soldier press to vvarres
he musters first in sport to try
And there if fit, the boulder dares
adventure then in field to dye.
We likewise see when plants do spring,
before their leaves can spread abroad,
First forth their little buds must bring,
and then at length their bovves they lode,
Thus every thing if rightly vvayde,
with tryfles small does first begin
Rightly therefore it is not said,
this tryfling toy great blame does win.
A needful thing in common wealth
no man, nor woman thinks to long.
Which soul or body bringes to health
but still more more is all their song
A tryfling toy in private sport
if tedious works without delight,
Blame not therefore this joy though short
which needles here is brought to light.
Patet que pardit virtutis arctaque via est.
The Castle

This narrow lane of virtue with her 4 capt.

Prudence* Justice. Fortitude Tempera^ce.

resceyues to rest.

of rest

this wide field with these 3 captains

(...) world. The flesh. The Devil

Leads al to distru^ction.

The vvorldly soldiers.

diagram of castle

THe godly, polliticke, and wise government of the one, with the wicked, subtle,
and diuilish illutions of the other, ever since their beginning and first
entering into field of worldly fight, which was when Adam at the first subtle
intisement, and temptinge tongue of Eve, first pulled the Apple of ye tree, is by
many learned and godly auctors far more aptly discribed, better set forth,
more largelye and plainly publyshed then possibly by any here at this time,
can be spoken or imagined.

And the like I may say of every other particular theme, in this short, and
small pamphlet hereafter following.

For every little strayte and norrowe path which here is taken would most
easilye conduct and plainly lead a most cunning and perfect penman into a most
ample, and large field most pleasant and necessary.

And therefore leauinge that wide and fertile field wherein most sweet, holesom,
and necessary flowers of great good, and requisite matters might be gathered
(as to entreat now at this present of these three vyses and four virtues,
with the substance of every other matter hereafter followinge,) I rather bend
my journey forthwith according to the title of this toy, into a more secret
and syldome used garden, where I intend not to gather of all sorts of flowers
such plenty as to make thereof a great and goodly garland, but rather more
likely no flower of pl^^^ure at al. For well do I know, that hardly should I
find (were I in place never so plentiful) such a flower of pleasure or
delyght, which has not already heretofore, by some or other been presented
unto many tender noses, who perhaps if again they should be tried with the
like, would rather stop their noses, and disalow thereof, being so often cloyde
with such accustomed sauors, the^ they would praise the sweetness thereof were
it never so pleasant, which we daily see by great experience, as for example
this for one among many others may well be noted, yt when wanton youth most
wyldlye flyinge here and there exercysing the youthful wings of his unconstant
and flickeringe mind, from place to place, light happily upon some fertile, and
pleasant ground, where he fynds great plentye of sweet and comfortable
flowers: then settelynge his mind according to the humor of his eye, he syts
him down as it were upon some one chois^^^ spetial moulehil near unto to the
flower he best delytes: and there resting his body from time to time, (though
with a restles mind) rather willing to feed the desire of his wanto^ eye. in
still perusing and beholding his chosen and long eye bitten flower, then to
satisfy his hungry and needy stomach, with any other nourishing or necessary
food: at length after many bashful, and private attemptes, sometime handling ye
stalk and oftentimes kissing the leaves: gathering up some crummes of courage,
suddaynly takes it up by the roots, and caryes it clean away: which lightly
he kepes for a time most lovingly, somewhile in his hand, somewhile in his
bosom and straight in his lap, sometime to his nose, some time to his lips, and
not unlike but sometime to his bed: for that he wakes no sooner in ye morning
then he desires to have it near his nose, to be short, his delights be such
therein, as who knows not that he esteems it before all other growinge herbs,
or flowers under the sun: he loves it according to the old saying of the poet
Anacreon, as a sweet mischief, and with the saying of Propertius, as a sweet
tyranny because he indureth his torments willingly, and is sildome content to
settle or quiet his mind where he lives, but always there where he loves.
He sticks not for the love thereof to adventure the overthrow of his own
body with Roderick of Spain, who lost his kingdom for the love of Camma: or to
enterprise the death and destruction of a stranger, with Retormodicus, who
ouerthrewe ye whole state of the Lacedaemonians for the love of Scedasus
daughters, and with Cateline, who slew his own son for the love of Orestilla.
And all this not withstandinge, after a while, his eager sight being once
satisfied, a^^ the rest of his senses which before took their delights: grow
as great to mislikingr as before in their first beginning they kyndled and
grew to love, a thing no less strange unto all such as still remain free
their flower to chose, the^ it were miraculous for ye hot mount Aetna, to
become the cold hill Caucasus, and whose lo^ soever, it is to tread ye world do
not unlikely stu^ble oftentimes upon many such (though lost and cast away)
pleasant and sweet flowers. This example the world over is daily seen. And
therefore now, since that such famous inventions be so cunningly devised, and
seuerallye knyt up together, you may for a pe^ny have in your pocket choice of
many pretty toys at al times to delight you. I know it were now in vain for me
to strive to gather ye like, though my enforced idle leisure might well serve
theru^to, for in yt it should be superfluous, it would rather greatly yr^ the^
any thing at al delight: but my intent is (though I be long in coming
thereto) in this my chosen and solitary Garden, to pick out ye most tryflyng and
vaynest weeds that possiblye may be found, and therewith to make (to pass my
weary time) a small and little poesy, the rather for that I know, many be so
cloyde with pleasant and sweet sauors, as they oftentimes seek for most
filthy and s^inking weeds to sinel upon. But as I would not strive beyond my
skill to prick this full of pleasant and delectable flowers, even so would I
be loath to poison it with such unwholesome and s^inking weeds as it should
yield too fylthy or yrksome a savor. Therefore if I be not deceived, it shall
yield very barely any savor either sweet or lower at all: and in ^o doing as
the sweetenes shall little delight you, ye sower taste shall as little offend you.
And therefore to be short, leaving these circumstaunces and endless rownd running
about the bush. The first beginning hereof (though more brieflye then
cunningly) shows the weak and f^ble entering of man first into this wicked
world nourished up, and safelye kept by three chosen nurses (though in more
soft and gentle bands) not much unlike to the pore captives and prisoners
under the custody and chains of their appointed gaylors, until the Session
dai of their gail delivery: where straight they reseaue their judgments (as by
the law rightly condemned) to be led into the wide wilderness of this wretched
world, where (as pilgrims) passing long youthful and wearye time, some light
happily into the hands of good and Godly disposed men, some into the hands of
most cruel tyra^ts, whose simple, se^celes and bru^ish mynds serve the^
continually to torment and destroy ye next unarmed naweake men, yt by chance
fall into their deuilish dints, in revenge of some injury done unto them before
their equals, or superiors: from the which I pray god deliver me, and preserve
al others. Some again are chosen and placed in princely seat of rule: some in
place of divine counsel, some in place to ^^ourish and seed a common wealth,
some to cure the sick, and diseased bodies, and some continually in place to
deceive the whole world with whom no sticklers at any time, as yet could ever
preuale, til death him self in proper person, coms to play his most plain and
unskillful quarters, as hereafter in this small Pamp^er, does more plainly and
briefly appear, a thing though vnfi^ly intermingled with such idle and vain
inventions, and though unaptly bearyng the title above named in that the name
of god ought never to be so taken in vain as once to be named under the title
of such a toy: yet my intent, and matter therein considered, it shall not be
greatly amiss, if by the reader it may be construed to the best: (which I
desire) for I strive not to iustefy the perfectnes thereof, inform, in style,
in matter, or in any thing. And therefore I may not otherwise but commend it
(as a tryling ^oy) vnno the best and most friendly construction.

THe silly babe in cradel rockt
cries alvvaies out as pincht with pains
That impish thing, it would be knocked
says hairbraind hag, knock out the brains.
But she full little knovves or thinks
Of cradle crying mystery
Where man to death his draft first drinks,
And there lith cheaud to misery.
It speaks a language strange to man,
which fevv or none well understands
But feign it would from whence it came,
to earth again from all those bands,
It strugles vveakly God does know
Full often within the Nurce^ arms,
Then give it leave the mind to shovv,
to earth it flies and fears no harms.
But what should cause such harmeles souls
to strive so strangely straight to dye.
It is a ball which nature trovvles
Before their eyes, though secretle.
Of glass, vvherin they see their vvoes
which in this world they must abide
And that they be among their foes,
And therefore they would gladly hyde.
But strive or strougle as they will,
vvrith or wrest which way they can.
And cry or bleare they out their fill
they lie still tide til state of man.
And then as soon as they begin
to grovve in strength to tread the ground,
The Father captain stryues to vvin.
and train them by alluring sound.
Straight from their babish svvadling bands,
into the ample fighting field,
And first give them into their hands
their Absey books, as spear and shield.
VVhervvith we daily see them walk,
and tossing them (though childishly)
As silly tatling babes in talk,
not thinking of their misery.
And how they all be pressed to fight
in field of vvorldly vvretched vvoe,
But vvantonnes is their delight
Till they to vvretched field do go,
VVherin all fathers do agree.
As captains tryde in vvarres before
And longes in arms the child to see
which does great joys to them restore,
And thus man's life is militant
in daily styrring here and there:
Of courage stout and puissaunt.
before all things that earth does bear.
From cruel vvarres it never stint,
though bloodshed small or none be seen,
A thousand times more hard then flint,
a fort it does besiege to vvin,
Which vvorldly art did never make
nor can be vvon, but by the best
And named, (which force can never shake)
the seat of everlasting rest.
Who thinks his life most strong to fight
against the world* his raze to end.
Is sonest brought to woeful plight
if virtue does no succor send.
ANd therefore the necessary and wayghty force hereof considered, who could most
cunningly or closly convey himself into the sight of this most cruel and
continual battle) bearyng always before his body, true faith, as his
buckler, and placing constancy as a sure bulwark of defense, should doobtles
daily behold far more wonderful wrack, and destruction, with more secret
subtle policies and deceiptes, the^ through ye whole world in any our
accustomed bloody conflicts, betwixt man and man, he could possibly see al
days of his life. No blows be there to be seen, no noise to be hard, no vau^t
of victory at any time to be made, the slaughter be it never so great, is ever
st^^ and scile^t. Al deadly wounds being there daily and howerly infinite and
innumerable one only Physician does always cure, who far beyond all art,
does so continually strengthen and refresh all those inca^ped and fighting
soldiers, as from the time they first pitched their field unto this day the
battle never quailde, nor yet till the last hour ever shall. But now being
outward (as an unskillful passi^ger of this my short and easy iourneye, if I
should contrary to my farmer promise, forsake my plain and easy trot, and
suddenly fall into a more swift, and curious pace, intending to leap and run
beyond my limits into this wide field, and world of continual war. Upon my
return again, you would certainly expect a perfect and true report of some
great and wonderful news, the order and manner of their field, with
description of some notable late battle, and conquest, with many other
questions, which (for want of experience) I cannot imagine: and then if my
judgment, disposition, eloquence, and memory (^he chiefest tools, and
instruments of every cunning and perfect wise messenger) being tried with the
touchstone of some artificial workman: shall appear so utterly void of
any good, or perfect metal, as in no part able to perform what is looked
for, ^ shall justly be condemned, in so foolishly disclosing mine own
im^ecility and weakness: which otherwise by scile^ce I might still have
co^cealed. Therefore I will not take upon me as a messenger of any skill, to make
any report thereof. But whosoever can wisely and well dispose himself shall more
fitly be his own messenger. And there may behold the innumerable number of
worldlinges, having continually their desired fort in view, daily marching
forward thereunto, how by many subtle and secret pollicyes they they be
always forestald, and stopped their way, and shall plainly see, against every
lone and single man, three most strong and mighty adversaries, the world, the
flesh, and the devil, who continually keep themselves most strongly in arms,
having won ye rule and dominion of the greatest part of the world, only
leaving a most narrow and straight lane unto this our fort and castle of rest,
wherein stands Virtue, being at continual war and defiance against those
deadly and mortal enemies of man, as strongly and as surely furnished against
them, as possiblye may be. With continual becks and signs: not failing daily
and howerly to send her secret privy scoutes, and messengers from man to man,
to instruct and give us knowledge of that narrow and secret way, and therewith
never refuses, to such as be willing to follow her to accompany and assist
them, with what strength she can possibly make* to safecanduite and lead them
through ye thickest of their enemies. But this virtue (being a continual
and open fiend unto us) with all her most and stro^gest furniture of munition
and defense, is daily met withal, and incountered and yet strongly abides
those continual conflictes, sometime escaping with victory, and sometime with
loss: but most syldome does she return conquered unless the dissemblinge
Captive (whom her purpose is to safecunduit and defend) most cowardlye
quayles, and shrynkes from her by the way.

The pore soldier, is no sooner espied by his diligent daily attendantes, the
world, the flesh, and the devil, to be creaping a way under the ba^ner of
virtue, but strayghte they fly unto him with as sure hold as possible may be,
and then being faint hearted, easy to be assured, by their glorious and subtle
outward shows of deceyt, he easily lets go his hold by virtue, and yeeldes
to their tyxa^^ous (though secret) fleshly, and carnal tugges. But
contrariwyse if he be so strong of courage not easy to be carried by any secret
or subtle whyrl^wynde, or so wary in wisdom and foresight, as to eschew all
their forewarned snares, and willing to withstand those his enemies unto
death, then she most lovingly, and readily imbraceth him, as her adopted
child: and then to behold how gently and easily she like a natural mother,
draws him by little and little, out of the tearing Teeth of those most cruel
tyrants, and how cunningly and carefully she strives to carry him safely
through their dangerous and cruel force, it would doubtless drive all her
strongest ennemies most earnestlye and faithfully to love, honor, and obey her,
even to the end.

And thus in vewynge the secret and cunning wars be^twixt the world and this
our mortal life, (wherein much more may be understood, then by this idle pen,
can possibly be uttered) our subtle and secret enemies we shall the better
es^hew, and our safest way to the castle and seat of everlasting rest, shall
more easilye learn, which (as seems is not the broad and common beaten way,
but rather a very narrow and sildome trodden mossey lane. And as our foresaid
adversaries with all their army, and might be daily remaining in the one,
geuinge us continual repulce in all attemptes unto this our everlasting fort:
and trayninge us like dronken myse into their flattering pytfalles of
everlasting destruction: Even so our most loving and natural friend virtue.
with all her power continually possesses the other (which is ye narrow lane)
always ready on the other side, there to resceaue us in. And theruppon is it
written, though otherwise. as well it may be understood)

Patet quae perdit. etc.
The friendly greeting and coming together between Idleness, and a student.
THe godly and well disposed man, satlinge Student.
himself both in body and mind, (bowyng as faithfully the knees of his heart,
as many do faynedly in most dissembling manner the knees of their outward
bodies) unto his devout meditations, and prayers, is very sensably to his
feeling as he certaynlye thinks, pulled oftentimes by the head often times by
the leg* and some time by other parts of the body. It is not a thing strange
or rare to be heard of, that most strange and terrible visions have also
appeared unto such kind of men, to move them unto terror and fear of purpose to
remove them from their such devotion and prayer: who it is, or what it is, that
does work and bring such continual lettes, and i^cumbraunces unto them, I
leave to the grave and learned deuynes, whose profession (for want of
knowledge) ^ neither dare, nor can take upon me to show: yet for my plain and
short opinion therein, I think it is the secret snatching, and privy biting
degge of hell.

But the godly and holy men are so daily and hourly bitt^n therewith, as come ye
devil himself, his dog, or his damme, or what saint soever of his he listes
to send, the ofter they feel themselves bitten, and snatched at, the ofter and
more greatly do they take occasion thereby, not only to pray the more deuowtly,
but also more hartelye to rejoice unto themselves, knowing that the devil, with all his company of Angels, is never so diligent and eager in busyinge
himself to win, but where he lights in such running company of gamsters,
as he is always in fear to loose, which is never among dysers, and carders,
nor yet in any alchouse, or ryplynge pastymes, never in any feasting, or
banketinge, nor in brave and gorgious shows, nor yet in any one delyght, or
worldly pleasure at al, for in some of these, as in continual dysing and
cardinge, which is never without swearyng and staring, in continual feasting
and banketting which is never without dronkennes, and gluttony with such like,
he is never in fear among the^, as once to loose. But which of them soever can
best and most cleanly bear his ale, or with his cunninge slaightes and ingling
tricks, deceive most, and win of all the rest. ^he denill for his part is sure
at the end as cleanly to bear him, and as cunninglye to win them all, and as
in worldly delytes he likewise rests himself quiet, never offering any
trouble or disquiet unto any of them, only in hope that the pleasures of the
world will be sufficient instruments to draw them also to the bente of his
bow, as well as if he himself were in presence among them: and this appeiseth
his bottomless and insatiable gulf, desirous if possibly he might to drown and
draw unto himself, the pore innocents and souls of all the world. But there
be many godly and well disposed men, who by the continual help, and
inspiration of the holy Ghost, have at all attemptes as great cunninge to
prevent him, as he has always subtillye in seeking to tempte and deceive
them: they never muse or start at any of his sudden or secret shadows, but
continuallye labor and bend themseues to withstand his such wicked devises.

And now to show my present and secret trouble, even so in the very same
manner, though not settling my self in the like Godliness of devotion, as
before mentioned, yet bendyng my self unto a worldly and necessary study, I
feel even now of late very censably and plainly many secret and privy
twitches, but by whom I cannot imagine (hearing nor seeing any thing at all,) as
for the devil I hope it is not, for man or woman it cannot possibly be: and
therefore (desirous to follow as nere as I can, the steps of these godly,
and well disposed me^,) what soever it is, until I hear further thereof, I will
not so easily be overcome.

Idleness.
Sir to drive you from your dumps and great admirations, it is even I.

Studient.
Friend Idleness, I may not say welcome. But since you are come, give me your
hand: what was the cause, that you so often and so secretly pulled m^e by the
sleeue, that I could never neither see, nor hear you?

Idleness.
Oh sir, it was for very mere good will which I did bear, as always I have
borne most willingly unto you.

For loking privily and peping over your shoulders, and seeing you so earnestly
beside your book. I thought with my self, if sodaynlye I should have blown
out my trumpet, or have breathed any loud sound, or synging into your ears,
or if suddenly I should have appeared unto you, I might perhaps have so
frighted, and driven you unto such a sudden start and terrible fear, as
during your life ever after, you might thereby have fallen into some
wonderful and great paulsey: and therefore in the most gentle and fre^dly manner
I could, I easily and privily (fearing your such disturbance) pulled you by ye
sleeue: Whereupon hearing you so gravely beginning your ground, and running
such descant upon the Devil, his dog, and his damme, I stood a long time
(as though greatle amazed) expectinge your last stroke, and how you would make
your close: whereby at length, I might plainly perceive you in a manner likened
me (though not named) unto the Devil and his dog, which (considering my
continual friendlye mind toward you) I could not choose, but take very
vnkyndlye.

Student.
Friend injury, I know you have not been so baselye brought up in beggars
bosom with ignorance, but that you do as well know the order and course of
this world, as the greattest learned, and most famous Clarke of all: your
white head, and many years in great experience have brought you sufficient
knowledge, to counteruayle the best: continual company and often handlynge do
bring the wyld and brutish beasts, at ye length to be tame: and many Birds,
as Parattes, and Pyes, with such like oftentimes to speak. Experience teaches
us, that company many times does work great wonders: and what is it that
company will not cause, The old Proverb is, that company oftentimes does make
many old men very good cooks: and my friend take you from company take your
head from your shoulders. Sometime like a roge, and shakeragge, half naked, a
man may find you dau^cing among beggars, some while brawling, and fighting, and
some time cracking of lice, sometime in mean apparaile, in tauernes, and tippling
houses, tossing, and swilling, and cracking of crowns, sometime again, in
most brave and gorgious attire, a companion with the best: to be short, of what
estate or calling is he of, into whose company sometime or other, you have not
intruded your self.

Therefore being so well acqnaynted, as I know you are with the natures, and
dispositions of all men, it seems very strange unto me, that now you should
seem so ignorant of me, as to take any thing unkindly whatsoener I have
spoken of you: for you know right well, that notwithstanding most men are
content secretly oftentimes to entertayne you, yet few or none at any time, but
roges and knaves, dare for their credits sake, openly allow or commend you: it
can not be also unknown unto you, that you have always been cronacled to be
yt author and mother of all mischief and vice, calling your wits together,
and remembering your self, you know more herein the^ I can tell you. Therefore
never take the words of your friend, when they seem to offend you, but
rather his mind. For notwithstanding my former speech I will not be to curious,
nor shye of your company, a wise man (I know) sometime will admit of the simple
fool and prating knave to sit at his board, the one to make sport in laughing,
ye other in talkinge, and both to pass away the time: for a young man to be
always grave, until his very root begins, and grows to be gray: were
surely in my concept as great a follye in him, as if always he should be
idle. Therefore my friend, since now you have so gently, so aduysedly, and so
friendly presented your self unto me, and being I know the messenger and
seruante, and attorney of an attorney, discourage not your self at any thing I
have spoken, but even as bold as you would be with the greattest acquaynta^ce
you have, be even now as bold with me, and acquaynt me with the cause of your
coming.

Idleness.
Sir as you have said I confess in every part it is true, I find now great
reason does wish me to take in very good part what soever ye have already
spoken, or shall hereafter ever speak.

A QVESTION, BY Idleness put forth to the Studente.
SIr, if my vain and idle motions, should not trouble your grave and well
occupied mind, I would with your patience crave your advise and judgment in
a matter (though very common and easy) wherein at this time my idle brains be
some thing basyed.

Student.
My business is not so great, but I may very well afford to grant you audyence,
and also answer you if need shall so require, and therefore let me hear your
mind, and show me the troublesome and clammye way wherein you, stick, and if
my skill may possiblye work you out a more plain and easy passage, you shall
not long miss of your such earnest desire.

Idleness.
Sir, since your curtesy is so great to bend your self so gently, and so
friendly toward me, I hope I shall not need in have to scrangle my wits
together in vtteryng my mind at this time unto you, for I have so oftentimes
heretofore, and even now of late to my cost, found ye old proverb to be true,
that have makes wast as now wherein I may choose I will rather crepe with the
snayl, then run with the Heart: for we see by experience, that the slowest
going: Ass is always the surest bearing beast, the slowest winged hawk (if
any thing good besides) does commonly show the best sport, and kepes her self
longest from any mischaunce: for have we see yt many of the femenine sex, have
suddenly fallen backwarde to many incurable and great mishaps, and of men, as
many have tumbled headlonge forward, puttinge themselves in danger of as
great perril. do we not daily se, that many for have offer to put meat into
their mouths, gaping full wide, and yet puts it besides? and many with spone
meats, before their mouths can be open, chop the spone against their teeth,
and all to besquatter their lips and beardes if they have any? do not many
drink so hastily, as sometime very suddenlye they almost quackle, and choke
themselves, and then (if ashamed) will say I have drunk a crum? have you not
known diverse men, and sometime many women, to fare ye worse for their
snatching. Such as can tarry time and leisure do commonly fare best, and yet I
agree ye tarier thinks always long, unto what time this tarying must have
relation, I leave it unto them of that kind.

But to descant a little further upon this plain and hasty ground: if I shall
not trouble you to long: have you not heard that sometime a man has falue in
company by channce with a woman, as it were upon the frydaye, and has beddid
her upon saturday, wedded her upon Sunday, and al torepented himself upon
monday? if repentance in such be differd for 2. days, it is a maruayle, but
if for a week, it is a great wonder: such is the nature of have, sone ripe,
sone rotten, sone hot, sone cold, sone done, sone repented, the words of
ancient and wise men are oftentimes heard among us, but little regarded of
any: they have set down this for a rule Quod semel faciendum, diu
delibera^du^: whatsoever is but once to be done, and once done, never again to
be undone, does always require great deliberation, and long to be considered
of before* but the Elepha^t being a houge and brutish Beast without reason,
does better obey and follow this rule by nature, then we having reason can by
often and continual persuasions: for he knowing by nature, that if once he
chance to fall down he must never look to rise again, does look so narrowlye
to his footi^g, as he never sets step without great deliberation: when the
natural rest of sleep coms upon him, he gets him presently unto some tree,
and thereto leaning himself so takes his rest. And is the fall of the Elephant
greater to ye earth, then the fall of a man into a cursed Xantippa, or into the
hands of an egregious shrew? verily I think it cannot possibly be, is it not
then needful for the man to look with the Elephant, twice about him before
he leap: the wise man says insipientis est dicere: etc it is a great show
and token of an unwise man, when you hear him say, if I had known this or if I
had known that, for if rashiye he bec sped, it is the best wisdom quietly to
whist himself. I remember a familiar example of a very wise and plain man in
the country, who for his patience in bearinge that Kind of affliction, has
been kept a long time in remembrance: he and his wife keeping continuallye so
close together, as sometime fast tide together by the ears: understanding
the place and time appointed, where such a famous and learned ma^ne should
preach, they agreed in due time loui^gly to go together arm in arm, and
cheek by check, pressing so in that loving manner as nere to the Preacher as
possibly they could. And after a while the Preacher entringe into great
discourse of many matters, serving fit for his text, among diverse other things
fell into speech how Christ bear his cross, and after many learned and godly
exortatio^s opened therein, he remembered the saying in the scripture: Who
soever will be my servant, must take up his cross and follow me: at which
words this honest man having his wife arm in arm, as though sharply pricked
with a sudden motion, said immediatlye upon a sudden unto the Preacher: Sir,
that will I with all my heart, and thereupon presently hosting up his wife upon
his shoulders as well as he could, with all speed began to depart, but the
preacher and the rest of the congregation, blami^g him as little for that his
zealous and godly mind, as they greatly maruayled at that his strange and
rare example, caused him to be staide and eased of his heavy burden, and after
this the preacher proceeding to his purpose, and finishing his Sermon, he
caused this honest man and his wife to brought before him in the presence of ye
whole congregation, and knowing him by report to be a very wise man, demanded
openly of him the cause of this sudden motion: he boldly and openly answered
him. Why sir was it not your saying, that he that will be the seruante of God,
must do as christ did, in taking up his cross and following him, and that our
cross that we most bear, is ye trobles and afflictions of this world: the
preacher answered him it was true, and so was the saying of the scripture,
then said the honest man, if this be true I hope I have not offended, if I will
be a servant unto God, I must needs carry some cross, and troubles of this
world for I have hard, that Nullus sanctoru^ coronatus sine flagello vel
certamine, and for my part I have no other cross, nor trouble in this world
but only this my dear wife, who is as diuilish a dame, as cursed a shrew, as
madd a makin as ever pulled man by bearde, and if you have any other cross to
tell me of then her, which I must bear, I hope God will pardon me, and so
must you, for I know I shall not be able to live to endure ye burden* I live
(God knows) full hardly and wearely with this. The preacher said unto him:
honestman I know you are counted wise, I find it is for your honest and good
behavior ye you be so well esteemed of, and not for any great knowledge or
understanding which I thnyke you will claim unto your self: it seems you
have better understanding in your husbandry, in your occupation, or in some
other handcrafte, whatsoever it is, then you have in the knowledge of any
Divine reasons, but living honestly and well (as appears by your good report)
and being so willing and diligent to give ear unto your teacher, in that I
know every man cannot be a cunninge clarke (for then many a thief should
escape the ^^^allous) I do find the less cause to blame you, but rather I am
to instruct you according to the truth, which is my office and to bestow my
time in teaching the ignorant people. Therefore you must understand that to
bear the cross and troubles of this world, it is not to bear them upon your
shoulders, but you must bear the^ that is, you must endure them, and take them
with a quiet and patient mind, and as a punishment sent from God, for your
sumes. then said the honest man unto him again. Sir, I confess my ignorance,
and do wish that I had more knowledge, as for your counsel I will willingly
fellow as nere I can, my coming was to the same purpose: but whereas you say,
I must not take nor bear, the worldly afflictions upon my shoulders, but
endure them with a patient mind, I say that if you had my wife, or such an other
but for one year, you should find, you must not only endure with a patient
mind, but you should also have enough to do, to bear of both with head,
shoulders, back, and legs, and every other part of your body: therefore, sir,
you speak well, and like one of great learning but of little experience, and
God forbid that you should have ye like experience herein as I have found, and
perhaps many other. The preacher making have to be gone, and leauinge any
further at that time to exhort him, said, at his departure: honest man (as it
seems) you are wonderfully encumbered with a merualous cursed and diuilish
shrewe, far worse as appears most true, then the common sort of shrewes, for
they be all tolerable enough, and by this your report which bears indeed
some credit, being so honest a man, I must needs say, this wife of yours is
intolerable, therefore you may do well for your more quiet, and better ease, to
seek some lawful sepetation betwixt you, and that is the best counsel that
I, or any man else in this case can give you: for though I have no
experyence, yet by reason I find there is no stryuinge with a diuilish dame. I
hope there be not many such in the world, and so I leave you.

Then said the other again, for all your good counsayie hitherto I heartily
thank you. But now whereas at ye wynding up, you seem to give me counsel to
leave my dear wife. Which is only the cross I have in this world, whereby I
must go in ye world to come to life everlasting. I think your doctrine therein
not to my best commodity, and then taking his wife by the hand, said unto her,
come wife, let us go home together again, as lovingly as we came forth:
and since I have now learned that thou art the only mean to bring me to
heaven. I will now cherish thee more then ever I did before. but I hope I shall
not need: for if I do by chance sometime forget you, I hope you will not
forget your self, and now because you find that I have some greater care of
you, then heretofore I would be loath you should now seek, by pensiuenes to
shorten your own life, for then I may be thought to kill you with kyndnes. In
this order during his life did this wise manne content himself, with his
unadvised and hasty choice.

More have then good speed is never to be liked, soft fire makes sweet malt,
but to take have after another se^ce, they say a hasty man makes a hasty
woman, a gentle and soft manne does always make a soft and gentle woman: the
hasty man in rebuking his wife openly. resembles him that spyts into ye wind
and receyues it again upon his face: but perhaps you will say that none be
of that m^nd but women: yes truly it is the mind of many wise men: for example
sake, look where you can find a wise man, that to the sight of the world, and in
very deed will not allow his wise to be master when she list, and then on
the other side, look where you can find a fool whose wife will not tremble to
speak, and be affrayd to look aside of any man in ye presence of him. The wise
scholmayster says, it is never meet to keep that child in to much awe and
fear which by nature is so gentle and tractable as the mild^es of his face,
does always confess his fault, and even so says the wise man of the woman,
that she yielding always ye man to be her head, and by nature commonly
subiecting herself willinglye unto him, it were a great fault to keep her
also in continual subjection, and therefore among wise men it is always taken
for a rule, the humble must ever be exalted: among the other sort they must be
contented to be always oppred, and trodden down, yet sometime we see the
most harebraynd of all is surely yokt, and stepped with the Goose from creepinge
through every hedge, or scarce to go out of any narrow door.

But look which way we will, either one way or other, to what sense soever
this word Have is best and most fittest to be wres^ed (unless that it be a
hasty pudding.) I cannot possiblye ymagine or think which way, or by what
means it can well be allowed of.

We daily see by common experince hasty men never want woe, and what thing
soever is done with over much have, is commonly repented by leisure.

Therefore Sir, I will not at this time fall sodaynlye into the depth of my
desire here at this time with you, for pleasures sake only: since it is the
first time of our meeting together, by your patience we will walk a little
together by the way: and since that time does serve us both so well, I would
be glad to crave your short opinion herein. I have hard it a question.
(being diverse times* my self in company) whether it is better to be idle,
or to be ill occupied.

Student.
Friend ydlenes, not unlike but you have been in company where this and many
other like frivolous questions have commonly been canuased to and froe, and
nothing at all unfit for your education. But if I should take upon me to
answer this your question, and yield a reason of some betternes in the one of
your propositions, I hadd need to pull some logition by the sleeue, as you have
done me, and crave his aduyce, as yon intend to do mine: for as I take it in
this your question is included an equivocal and doubtful sense, which
requires the artificial tools of Logic, to make it smooth and plain as well
to the ear as to the eye, and I mean not at this time to wade to far, and so
wantonly with you, I will take your words as the lie: and as by common
attendment they are to be taken, and so shall you briefly hear mine opinion
according to your desire: you are not to learn, that one question may be
answered by putti^g forth an other: therefore my friend, admit a man should bring
you two crows, and demand of you whether is the whiter, being both (as
commonly they be) as black as a cole: were it possible your skyll could reach
so far to yield a reason the one to be whiter the^ the other? if I knew you
were a logitian, I would not doubt but you might do some thing with your cunning
fallatio^s: but being as you are, you must be content to take only your
mother wit, and leave that skillful art, and by your natural reason you shall
hardlye prove black to be white, or naught to be good. Therefore your question
being this, whether it is better to be idle, or ill occupied, I may answer
you briefly, nether barrel better herring: where you would have one thing
better then another, you must first allow the one of them to be good: for
better is a degree of comparison from good, and neither of these do good. How
then can I judge which of them is better:

Idleness.
If I may be bold to interupt your talk, how would you behave your self if
this question were demanded, of you in the presence of such who have no
artificial skyll in reasoning at all, as if you were among a number of women
would you not swerve a whitt from art, and fall to some vain and idle reasones
you know full well that they are never brought up either in Logic or
Rethoricke.

Therefore among them, either you must talk according to their
understanding, or else continuallye be scilente, which would argue much
ignorance, or rather great dulnes in you.

Student.
If I were in company of never so many, I confess I could have very little to
say, I do but I should be as the Oule among a number of birds, rather amazed
to hear their continual chirping, then any way able to answer such kind
of questions.

Idleness.
Why sir, and would you also lie as the Oule does, upon your back, and cry
too wit, too woo? I would wish you rather to lie grouelyng upon your belly to
hyde yonr bashful face.

Student
Nay friend iniurye, I am no crooked byld bird, I mind not so to cry, neither
to fall forward nor backward, the place should be very flippery if I kept not
my footing, and besides, I would not grratly stick to endeavor my self to
yield the best reasons I could to feed their fantasies, but I am not yet
among them, we may talk thereof at leisure: I am now only in ye company of an
idle pack, and have granted to debate some matters with you, according to our 2
fantasies at this time alone. And therefore now to proceed toward the end of
my answer unto your headles question, I must put you in mind of a sentence out
of Tully, for being as I have said, that your question is of two evils, we must
prove which is the least, and not ye best, for says he, duoru^ maloru^ minimu^
ma lum est elegendum. of two euilles the least is always to be chosen.

Idleness
Once again you must pardon me, I must be bold to interrupt you. You say it is
the saying of a wise man, that of two or many evils the least is always to be
chosen: surely that your speech does fall out very well at this time to serve
my turn: for even now am I toward a wife, and I have stood in great doubt a
long time with my self, whether were better to chose a big bounser, or a
little lowbithgrou^d: but by this your speech I find now the end of my doubt.
Now surely I will seek out the least woman that possiblye may be found in a
country: and if I may find such a one as may serve my turn, and yet ska^t
able to reach up to my middle, I will think I have found the most precious
jewel in the world: for of two evils you say the least is always to be
chosen.

Student.
Why friend Nimblechaps me thinks you seem rather ready to play with ye shadow
of every thing then wi^ling to understand the substantial matter in any thing:
can you rightly gather upon my speech that a woman is evil? if you do well
understand me, you shall find nothing less, but rather that she is for the
most part one of the greatest good things in this world, and most necessary
of any thing else besides.

Idleness.
Sir in what I spoke of a woman I bilt no part of my speech upon yours I bilt
only upon my own ground, your speech was but an introduction unto me: but if
it be as you say in your country (as for all countries I am sure, you have not
travailed) then do your country and mine greatly differ: for where you say,
she is one of the greatest goods in the world, there is this old saying with
us. Femina rara bona, sed si bona digna corona, a woman is sosildome and so
rarely good, that when she is good indeed, she is worthy to wear a crown of
gold: and besides, where you say, she is most necessary of any earthly thing*
that sowndes something like one way to be true: for we have an other old
saying with us, that draws very near unto that purpose, which is this that
fire, water, and a woman be three of the most necessary evils in world. with
many other like old sayings, which were to long to bring in question.

Student
If al your many, other like old, and du^stical sayings be like unto these two,
none of them all would be worthy the repeting, for of these the one is
meerlye false, the other not rightly understood: for whereas you say, that
fire, water, and a woman, be three necessary evils: that is clean contrary,
for they be three of the necessary goods in this world, for ye preserving and
keepinge of man's life, and besides by common reason it is a thing very
vnceasable, that any evil thing can be necessary, it is rather a thing to be
thought necessary, that there were no evil at all: but in way of reasoning some
will say, that good bears not his name but in respect of evil, and how should
good be known if evil were not, and that one contrary does always set forth
and show an other, and therefore necessary with manyother stronger reasons then
here can be made, yet they shall be but arguments of deceit, for as black is a
color of it self without white and white without bearinge several names for
knowledge of the one from ye other, even so is good a virtue of it self
without evil, and evil a vice of it self without good. Therefore I have said no
evil can any way be necessary and now since a woman by your confession is
necessary how will your rusty sentenses make her to be an evil? my friend, you
may see how your old fayinges (a number of them, by continuance of time be so
greatly corrupted, as most of the^, (bearing a show of truth, in that they be
old) are very false. And now as to your other sentence, Fem. rar. bon. sed si
bon. dig. coron. your interpretation herein is clean contrary to the true
meaning. For rightly it is thus to be understood A woman is a rare good (that
is to say) so rare a good thing, as the like is hardly, or not at al to be
found again in this world, but if good, worthy of a crown of Gold: that is
thus to be understood on the other side, that (since in every kind there be
always some which be evil) if the woman be good (she is so necessary) she
is the^ most worthy to be had in great estimation before all other earthly
things, and therefore it is said she is worthy to be crowned, and now my
thinks time grows away very fast I hope we need not continue any longer in
these your slippes, and wanton bywayes leading clean from our purpose, you may
find how rashlye you have been ready to conceive amiss: and therefore now once
again to enter into your question if you will suffer me to proceed: as I have
said of two euilles the least is to be chosen, and now which is the least
evil, to be idle or to be ill occupied, that must be our question: and for
this time I thynk mine opinion will draw very near unto your good liking: For
in my conceypt of the twain, to be idle is the least evil, and yet I must
agree, that ydlenes is the mother of all mischief, the root of all sin the
ha^dmayd of the devil, and the devils stael, as the oule is for the byrder
under his lyme bush or hydden nett. But to way according unto common reason so
long as a man is idle his mind is occupied about nothing of effect, either good
or bad, and during that time in quality he very much resembles the Jacke daw,
whose nature is being the most unhappy and idle headed bird that flies,
continuallye to pluck strawes from some thatcht house or other, snapping at
every fly which comes in his way, or ramming of every little cranny he fyndes
with some baggagely stuff. For when shall you see the idle man: but either he is
doing his neighbor, or next stander by some petty mischief, catching at
flies, playing with strawes under his feet, champing them with his teeth, or
else busied about some other like idle occupations: being idle the mind always
runs wildly about after every rolling glint of the eye, and being well
marked, it makes the man appear as if he were mad, and being long continued often
times it bringes him to madness indeed, for then he is a ready host and sit
receptacle to entertayne all wicked imaginations, and has stable romth plenty
for the devil, and as many hors^s as he will bring, and whether you think ye
devil daunsing upon horsbacke within a man will make him mad or no, I leave it
to your judgment: we may learn by a familiar example of a simile: daily in
experience among us, that great inco^uenie^ce does come by ydlenes For look
unto those places where great infections of plagues and other like diseases do
raygne: have you not continuallye there the aduyce of wise and learned
physicians, in any case never to go abroad with an empty and idle stomach (lest
infectio^ fynding it empty coms in and take his place filling it full of filthy
corruption, and thereby brings your body sooner to decay: they wish unto every
man a thing most easy always ready to be hadd) a cup of ale and a tossed in a
morninge, which has ever been thought very wholesome, and good to keep the
stomach occupied, though continual tippling ale knights in places of misrule
do greatly sometimes abuse it: yet of it self being moderatly taken it is
nevertheless to be allowed, and it is worthy of commendation, as appears by
this old verse following: sanat, confortat, exhilarat nobilis ala, and dat
iucundu^, nappalis ala viruu^. Thus you may s^ to keep your body in perfect
health, it is ye most necessary thing ye is required at your hands, to keep
it still from emptines: and even so is it with your mind, if you will keep it in
good order, admit as seldom as yon ca^ ye company of ydlenes: for being idle
you are like a man yt knows a number of mad men to stand in a place with
naked swords in their hands and yet venters s^arke naked among them and so is
killed: and would you not judge this wilful man guilty of his own death?
surely he is, and although he cannot live again to this world to receive
worldly punishment, for that his so heinous offense, yet in hell he is sure to
hang, which is a place of punishment everlasting for all such like obstinate,
desperate, and wicked offenders and even so is it with you when you are idle,
for then you hazard your self thus far, you know full well that being idle if
the devil be not with you presently, he will not long ^ary from you: and then if
obstinatly you will still continue in ydlenes, and make him away to creep
further and further, into your head, and so at length to possess your whole
body, are not you then as guilty of your own death as he which kylles
himself? if you continue so long in ydlenes, til the devil (creping so closly
as you can never perceive him) begins to dip in his foot, then surely you are
almost past remedy: but you may sometime perchance be idle, and ^et
presently fall to some exercise again, and then it will be the less hurtful
unto you, so long as no vice has taken possession: and now by this means,
since ydlenes is but a possibility to draw a man to wicked sin: and the other,
which is to be ill occupied, is a sin in act already committed, though (as I
have said) they be both so naught as never to be^ allowed: yet of the two in
mine opini^ ydlenes is the less evil.

Idleness
Now truly sir, my goodwil stande^ upon thorns, till it has yielded d^^
thanks according to your deserved ourtesye, and were it not for the common
proue^ be which daily is had in remembrance, that tomuch of any thing is
stark naught, I would doubtless s^e^d some time wherein it should app are, I
should not be myndful of this your fre^dly counsel: but knowing your have
unto other affairs, least I should keep you to long, I will brieflye proceed
according to the first cause of my commi^g unto you: and therefore now sir,
this is ye other matter, wherein I am to crave your advise.

The lively and cunninge workmanship in the form and favor of a man, so far
passes, and excels all carthlye and artificial skill, as it is not meet
to be named in any spech of comparion, with any earthly or worldly thing: and
therefore here I dare but faintly speak thereof: yet for experience and learning
sake, let me be bold here at this time to crave this one thing of you, to
single out and chose secretlye unto your self ye most amiable and well
favored face that possibly may be seen, with the rarest and most cumly
parsonage that by any means can be found, admitting ye workmanship of nature
so perfectly set forth in hi^, as not to be reprehe^dable, so much as in one
title touchi^ge his form and beautye, and then (committinge your external
ce^ses, with the cumlines and beauty of his outward parsonage to scile^ce) convey
yt secret insight of your profou^d judgment into ye inward parts of the said
cumly man, and if there after a while having made sufficient search and view in
every corner, you find yt nature has not so much as vouchsaft one dram of wit
in his head, nor so much as on good qualitye in his mind, I pray you then
dissemble not your conceit in him, but tell me plainly how you would esteem of
the man.

Student
Your request is very reasonable, though something hard, yet not so hard as
necessary to be understood: I acompt it hard because (though nature bears ye
name) God is the cheifest workman, of this most cunning and skilful piece of
work, which here you have described. Therefore if suddenly I should give any
rash judgment therein, my such unadvised answer would procure ye less credit
unto my speech. But to satisfy your request, my opinion is this: Admittinge him
to be according to your description well favored and cumly of personage, if
therewith he has neither wit, nor any one commendable or skilful quality
besides, yet you ought not any thing at all to despise him: for though he
differs perhaps greatly from you in beauty and favor, and something in
comlines of shape (wherein he far excels you) and you perhaps differ likewise
from him as greatl^ in wit with many skilful and cunning qualityes of the
mind, wherein on the other side you do as far pass and go beyond him. ^et
in truth you be both made of one mould, and he that gave unto him that comely
parsonage and shape of man could as well have given him the vnseemliest shape,
and form of the most vgliest beast in the world, from who^ also your great
gifts of wisdom and understanding, does likewise proceed, whom as well he
could have made a very natural fool. and therefore to be short, though shauing
entered according to your request into the boweiles, and inward parts of this
man) I do plainly se that wisdom and those qualities to be wantige in him,
which do flow in you, and that goodly and cumlye parsonage which is in him, to
be likewise wanting in you: yet I can no way see any great difference of
estimation which rightly and lawfully ca^ be had or made between you: he is as
p^rfite a man in every part either outwardly or inwardly* to serve that intent
and purpose, for the which he was made as you, and you as he.

Idleness.
Sir (not in manner as reprehending you, but with most hearty thanks) you have
troubled your self further then my intent was in this motion at the first to
have troubled you, and done more then I durst desire you: my meaning was not to
have craved your judgment and opinion in the dutiful and equal estimation,
which every man ought to bear one toward an other, in that we be al
brothers, and as children of one father: but according to the common course of
the world (which is, as forreiners and strangers, every man to pull out his
next neighbors throat, for the gayninge to himself a halfepenny) how here
would you judge he should be esteemed.

Student.
As for my trouble it has not been great, for your thanks I do as little
look, and your mind I do very well now understand, and as for mine opinion in
him accordig to the common course of the world, it may so fall out, that you and
I therein shall mecte both in one mind, for the way is so plain as a blind man
almost may easily keep ye path I think he shall be taken and reputed in this
world as a gaye and goodlye painted sheath made at the first for some choice
and special good mettalled knives which now (by misfortune being lost, or
rashly cast away) is ^amde full of dyrtye dross, and rotten sticks: or
otherwise as a brave and lofty house, erected perhaps at the first, and
mayntayned long by some famous, wise, and noble Prelates, and now inhabited,
by a most infamous, ignoraunte, and base pack of spendalles. Who certainly be
persuaded (bearyng so goodly a house upon there heads, though they have little
wit therein besides: and commonly as little money in their purses) that they
be all in such general and great estimation: as they judge ye very birds of
the air, which by chance light upon their houses, comes of purpose to yield
them honor.

Whereas of truth, if some liberal sparing wise me^ were in their roumthes, and
by chance commttinge some such wanton and prodigal oversight, they would
rather think to themselves, that those birds came for to accuse them of their
vain and prodigal folly. But contrary to their such most ignoraunte and
blind perswations, the World, does altogether disalow and condemn them
t^ough perhaps nere unto their such statelye and gallante seats, many knauish
dissembling and slattering merchants, will subtelye give them many a cap and
leg, more for there meat and drinks sake, then either for love or fear,
which the prodigal man does sy^dome see or understand, nor yet does remember
the old proverb, no craft to the clouted shoo, which (but by ^ grave wise,
pollityke, and liberal sparinge me^) never was nor ever shall be kept in any
good or peaceable order, where one blind man leads an other, they both (...)
commonly into some dyke, where two or many fools be, and one of them appointed
to ouersee an other. They never seaue scratching or biting. Where among many
ignorants that have small understanding, as little wit, and less knowl^dge in
any thing at all, one of them notwithstanding does always guide, and teach an
other, how can they find, or if as ^lynd men by chance they stumble upon and
find, how can they keep ye right and plain way, unto what place soever they
seek: what joy would therbe (think you) among the pore britching boys, and
grammar schole children, if it might be lawful for one of them to govern and
teach an other, how joyful would they be if they might have more masters then
one or two, or half a dosen: for then many a waghalter would be in good hope,
that when one of his masters for some offense should go about to britch him,
some of the others perhaps for affections sake will labor as fast to save
him, whereof being divided, they may fall into some jar among them selves,
and thereby the unhappy wagg may happily escape a scowring. Truly to be short,
I think in every thing, one ignoraunte must needs lead an other
ignorantlye, one blind man does lead an other blyndly, one fool an other
foolishly: pa^ke and put to geather many crafty and subtle men, there shall be
nothing but devising continually to wrangle, and one to deceive an other: knitt
likewise to together a knotte of knaves, you shall see nothing but cosenage,
quarellig, brawling and fighting. Perhaps you will say to me, then join wise
men together, and they no doubt must needs very well agree: but the corruption
of this world is such, as I find by experience (though it be against reason, in
that wisdom is so sure and perfect a guide unto them) that they will
oftentimes, and greatly jar. But where you will have ye wisdom and pollecy of
man to bear any sway, place him not to govern and command his equals, and
much less his superiors. But whom is he to command and rule? let him be in
place of auctority above them, and then either for fear or love they will obey
him.

Admit the chief captain in a field of equal countenance, auctority, and
rule with many of his Soldiers, think you that they would le^g agree. I
think rather that the whole camp by their continual disagrementes, that I am
in as great auctoritye as thou: and I as thou* would very easily and soon be
overthrown and therefore according to wisdom and policy, one chief and head
schole master in every schole, does always and only bear the greatest sway,
though sometime he has diverse vshers under him: one chief gouerner and ruler in
every field (though with many under captains and petty leaders) and not
without great counsayl of wise and expert men, does always bear the sword of
rule, and even so in every like.

But where you would have ye blind man well ledd, let his leader be of perfect
and sound sight, where you will have the crafty dissemblinge, and subtle man the
simple fools, the veryest knaves, ye common clowted shoes, and all other
sorts what so ever, kept in their dutyfull due, and cumlye good order, I
would not have you couple together like to like, though the old sayynge may
be had in remembrance. Simile amat simile, for it is most commonly proved
to be true, that man ofte^tymes loves that, which commonly does him most harm.

But commit them under the government and rod of the most grauest, wise, and
pollitick ushers that possi^ly may be ^ound. Whereby the more likely you shall
keep them in awe: and thus my friend to finish my answer unto your question,
as hear you may perceive, ye great wisdom and grave government is not only
needful and requisite, but very necessary for the mayntenaunce of every godly
and gorgious house, and as well for the government of a commonwealth, and that
no man (have he never so gallant or brave a seat) is esteemed in this world
and common wealth worthy of rule, honor, and dignity, unless his wisdom and
policy in good government be agr^eable thereunto, even so is it with your
welfauored and parsonable man, which according to your description wants
both wit and all good quantyes.

Idleness.
Sir you have not now only resolved me of my question but you have entered
(according to your saying yt we should both meet in a mind) into the very
same path wherein ^ my self had determined to walk before a turn or two: for
though my question was of a most welfauored and straight ^^^de man, yet ye
cause thereof was this owtward gorgious, and inward naked house, which you have
here de^cribed, whereof intending to use some speech upon a sentente of ye most
famous and learned ^ratour M. T Cicero I thought good to be boulde first to
creep (by the said simile of the man) into some part of your judgment therein:
wherein now with most hartye thanks you have very well served my turn

Student.
If I have any way pleasured you, I am very glad but whereas it seems by your
words, your intent was to use some speech, let not any thing that I have
said, hinder or stay your proceeding for if it be well or any thing
tolerable I will allow thereof: if otherwise I will wish it amended.

Idleness,
Sir nothing doubting of your friendly acceptau^ce and good counsel: this is
the sentence whereupon I first grounded my purpose and intent.

M. T. Cicero. Non domo dominus, sed domino domus honoranda est.

Idleness
Who list to build a lofty house,
intending there a portly state
Had need lay well his wits in souse,
to keep them fresh within his pate.
A pouldring tub if rightly vsd,
and seasond duly to his kind:
Which alvvayes yeeldes his liquor svveete:
and pleased the taste of every mind.
For buildinges brave be easily made
but hardly then they be mayntaind,
If not by tricks of vvisedoms trade,
which teach vain toys to be refrainde,
But he that should such toys set down
as wisdom vvish we should not use,
Might see him self in folly drown
in that most men would him refuse
For who sees not the world is bent
to pomp and praise in every thing,
And nothing well if vvisely syent
has eyes, but they be flattering.
Conceits of cost, without measure,
are now so grown into delight.
As where no toy there no pleasure,
which pleases not the vvanton sight.
Therefore since we have wealth at will
and time in pleasure mind to spend,
To have of our delites our fill,
let us our self to feasting bend.
And now how shall th^s pleasant day
or drousey if it so befall,
Be brought to end and past away?
Good cheer says some is best of all,
And then now whether shall we sail,
to him says one, where daynty fare
And delicates do never fail.
nor yet of cost is any spare.
For there a world of vvanton vvightes
vveshall not miss, but find most brave
We can not vvish for more delights
then there at all times, we may have.
We shall not there be bid vvelcome
to such poor fare as we shall find,
Nor yet see things only handsome,
but passing fine of every kind.
For biefe, veale mutton, pork or souse,
geese capons* hens with all such like*
They feed the serua^ntes in the house*
and all of Dayntyes v^e must pick,
With ^ausy sallets of al sorte^
of taste pleasant, with cos^ plenty*
VVherof an hundred by reports,
will hardly one mau^atisfy.
No common bread we shall need eat
b^^ cast^^^, towers, and towns of gold
In suget paste, with cost so great
as sildome has the like been could
Nor yet need we drink ale or bear,
choice of VVines be there so plenty,
And dainty lips fit for such cheer
that house is never long empty.
Therefore now let us (as I say)
since time of pleasure serves so well
Go pass away this pleasant day
with him that bears away the bell.
Student.
Oh friend I sigh to hear your vain,
and how this vvanton world is bent
To bring a virtue in disdain,
which is when wealth is vvisely spent.
For then it ought to be of right,
accounted liberality
When otherwise in vvisedomes sigh^
it is but prodigality,
If this which you have said be true
as seems experience has you taught
VVisdome might make your heart to ru^
that you so often such vice have sought.
Idleness,
Why sir, say you thus of to this,
as though it were a pain to hear
Young men delight in fantasies
with honest mirth and daynty cheer.
Student.
I truly it is thought a pain
to all vvile ^en that ever vvrote
That heads so young should beat their brain
to stroy such as they spy to do^e:
For vvisdome vvarneth us to reach
the ignorantes how to avoid
Destruction, yea vvracke, or breach
e^pying them therewith annoyde
And not to trippe the blind man down,
with joy to see him ^umbling there
For so you may deserve the crown
of knavery which many wear,
The which I would be loath to see
my friend should wear a^token plain
Of fol^y fyxt in him to be.
which with the wise bread great disdain
But since we be all well agreed
to pass sometime in pleasant cheer
We vvil not seem to hunt for need
nor yet to buy our sport so dear
That with return our friends shall see
our credits are so cracked with shame
As some svveete syrup suckers be.
for then of right deserve we blame.
Such vvanton steps vvevvil not tread*
as to allure our friends to charge.
Since captain Vanity such does lead,
as love to cloy their friends at large
For by such ^oyes as you have namd,
it is well known that many men
Of much great wealth have been so lamde,
as now to begging they must lean.
Who therefore will be partener.
with such vain vvanoring heads at all,
Must think himself the vvoithier
to bear such blame as does befall.
But if you will take my advise,
with such delights as I think good
We will not choose our fa^e so nise,
nor yet such Oste of vvanton mood.
The auntie^t house we all know well,
which shoring stands upon the hill,
Where such were ever wont to dwell,
as alvvayes had their wit at will:
They ever took delight to lean
unto the saying of the wise,
That measure is a meary mean
and please al men of honest guise,
Which has them taught to guide so right,
that house in hospitality,
As come or go by day or night.
they vvil not feed your iolity
But for all plenty of good fare,
no place to bountye more is bent,
You shall not there find dishes bare
nor yet see want of what is spent
As for pastimes, with plasures fit,
for gentlemen both young and ^^ld,
You can nor vvish by any wit,
more meat, if you be vvisely bold.
And can your vvh^es so vvind at will,
as to be fit at each rebound.
To main with some pretty skill
the balle of wit which tossed is round.
For there you shall not only have
your hunger fed with wholesome cheer*
But you shall find delight to crave
such pleasures often to see and hear.
It is not like your gluttons fare
which happily lasts for a year
For here a wise man rules with care,
and scrapes away all folly clear.
Therefore since now we be so light
as ^apors, which the sun draws up
To be alluerd by vveather bright,
let us first drink of follyes cup.
And then if all agree thereto
this idle time to pass away,
As marchpaind mouthed wantons do
we vvil soon spend this pleasant day
And thus we see in every place
most men to this have great desire.
With who shall shovv the lustiest face
in costly, fine, and brave attire,
Which yeeldes them honor as they think,
in places where they be not known*
And so from place to place they slinke.
and wears perhaps more then their own
VVherby such thankles gluttons feed
themselves full often in many a place
Where many such as have more need
dare not for shame once show their face.
For he that wears not cloth of gould
with ^atten, velvet, or such like
Must not among such gay^^ be bold,
as though he should his mates there seek
When he perhaps that wears his cote
most plain i^ often the better man,
Which wise men alvvayes well do note:
and yet mend none do what they can.
But such as pedlers packes do bear^
if they by wealth advanced be
He that should spy them fitting there,
and tell them of this fond decree.
Might luckely leap to save his head
from knockes, if they might him well rea^
For that in steed of sugar bread.
he sliceth them such sour leach.
And yet to end I do admit
the meanest man deserve may well
Among the best sometime to sit
if wealth be vvonne by great travel.
Or else by virtue of learning
which does the meanest man of all
(As our experience daily bring)
to honor high most easily call.
Whereto when they advanced be,
by force of virtues paynful trade.
They well deserve in their degree
such honor as by laws are made
And yet from whence the vines do spring
of all virtues that ever were,
As in the schools of deep learning,
^^ea^ reasons swarm, who best should bea^
But there they rest and all agree,
as bees which buze abroad avvhile,
That learning well deserves the fee
of honor great, with noble style.
And he whose wits most vvisely wrest
nobility longest to preserve,
Must best be thought among the rest
of right his honor to deserve.
Idleness
SIr, you have now bound me by duty to gieue you most hartye thanks that
thus frie^dly you have been content (for this short time) to banish your self
from your so earnest, grave, and profound study, to accompany me with your
friendly conceit in th^se my dayne and idle inventions. And therefore now lest
I should so long here at this time keep you walkinge with me in this my path
of vanity, as hereafter when we shall have like occation to trouble you in
crauinge your company again, you shall be unwilling to grant the spendinge
of any time (which is ye most precious ^ewell in the whole world) with such an
endless busye, and idle runninge brain: I leave hear at this time to trouble
you any further, commending you unto God, and to your seat and chair of
study from whence you came.

Student
Friend Idleness, though perhaps I am not so curious or coy in spending of my
time for good fellowship and company sake, as you suppose and think me to be:
yet I may not any way blame you, but rather do very well allow of this your
such ready conceipte, and reasonable speech, wherein you seem not only
unwilling greatly to assure or intise me unto any folly: But also as loath, long
to hold or keep me in any path of ydlenes or vanity. For true it is, that
notwithstanding most willingly hitherto, I have concented to bestow both time
and speech according to your request: yet as true it is, I would be very loath
to consume or spend any long time in such frivolous and vain devises.
Though for the company of my friend I can sometime be content to wade with him in
some smoth, clear and shallow flash of folly: yet I confess I would be very
loath to adventure so far with him as to swim in any rongh, dark, or bottomless
pit or puddle of wicked and fylthe vice. I would be loath with a king to
drown in follye, though with my meanest friend (as I have said) I can be
content to wade therein: willinglye I would not (if I could otherwise choose)
go to far in any thing. But bearing always in mind the warninge of a wise
manne to leave the Rack, and Maunger, and to take a snatch and away, with
small hyndraunce unto any of my wayghty affairs. I can at any time in any
honest and cumlye toye of delighte or pleasure, recreate my self and accompany
my friend.

But now as seems unto me, perhaps you have an idle and wanton turn or two
secretly to walk by your self, wherein you would not have me willingly
behold your gesture: and therefore cunningly crauinge the riddaunce of my
company (as though for fear of offense) you comme^d me to my chair,
whereunto being very well content to grant you your such secret, and cunning
request, I am as willing to go, and in likemanner as you commended me unto
God, I also in the same friendly manner, commend you not unto him but to your
own invention. Wishinge you to remember your own counsel now in your self,
and not to walk to long in any your paths of vanity. Yet I doubt very much
(friend Idleness) to dissuade you from vanity, for it will most certainly
persuade a great number to accuse me of vain follye, and perhaps I may so
deeply incur ^ displeasure of so many as during life ever after, (turn
which way I will) the blame of my such folly* shall still continually be blown
in my face: for setting curiosity aside, to be plain, when your thick, and
bushye bee^^l^ head (in shape much like to a hedge hog half vnclosing
himself, and shewinge his bare and naked face) lies rolled under an aperne,
and tumbling in your sweet hearts and wanto^s la^, busying the wabling
belclarppe of your so vayn and idle body, so greatly to her good lyking and
pleasure every wa^, as she seems not only loath to leave your company, but
rather longing still to continue her such pastyme, in playing with the soft and
gentle pricks of that your rowlinge and idle pate, and sometime perhaps at
your often request and flattering intisement: yielding with her smoth and tender
lips to honor your hard and bruselled mouth. If then (this merry gale of wind,
this sturring betwixt you, cuppling your ships to gether, and sailing outward
in your voyage of delighte) you bluntly by chance should boulte cute this my
friendly persuasion (though secretly vouchsafed upon you) moning my speech the
cause of your departure, unto that your loving and wanton mouse, and in the
midst of al your pleasure offer so to depart, then shall my secret, (though
undeserved) and pinching pains begin, then shall I be so toste from tongue to
tongue, from mouth to mouth, from place to place, and so sharply and shrewishly
shaken up among so many, as doubtless it were a thousand times better for any
man, in the like pitiful case a mong them (though not as a dog) to be tossed in
a blanket: they will say, let old grayberde keep his counsel to himself.
We will crave at his hands, his grave advise, when we think good: because now
by continuance of time, he is become from a clarke to a parrish priest, could
he now be content to have no clerks at all? could he now find in his heart to
be reader, singer and belringer, and al in his parish alone, surely it were
not amiss if he were well applied, and kept to his tackle but one month, and
then no doubt we shall see him come creeping lasisy home with weary limnies:
and then if any man will offer to take a rope out of his hand, you shall see he
will be as ready and as willing to let it go as ever he was in his life to
take it up: then shortly after, you shall hear he will as openly publish it, to
be a deed of charity to help the weak and surcharged man, as he has
already secretly whispered in disalowing the wanton service of the strong and
youthful bodies, and then will confess that a helping hand is ^euer to be
blamed, and espetially in those things which must needs be done.

Therefore waying well the vanity of his speech, let us not so easilye part, as
to break of all good company for a white hair. Friend Idleness I know this will
be their saying: and besides this, I know you have many ha^gers on, very
dilligent and daily studients, desirous to immitate you in this your idle art,
and to learn your cunning slayghtes in rockinge in Venus lap, prickinge in,
and picklyng out sometimes pinhes out of her pi^case, thrumming of apern
strings and with many other idle devises: and there fore friend injury, since in
disswadinge you according to my former speech, I shall seem toper swade many a
thousand from that which they will be very loath to leave, and in so vaynly
wastinge my wind shall appear as much an idle pack as the best, I recante my
former persuasion, and thus do commend you only hear unto your natural,
vain, and idle inventions.

Idleness.
Sir you seem so gamesome and pleasant in this your reply upon my late and
friendly farewell, as I think you could be content to remainestil with me,
bathing your self in this my lasye tub (as you term it) and vessel of idle
vanity: therefore know this I am not so inclind unto yt vice of ingratitude, I
have been so vnciuisly or so unmannerly brought up* that when any man friendly
upon good will, as though desirous of my company, shall come unto me, that then
after ^ while either by secret speeches or cunning gestures, I will seem so
weary of him, as rather desirous of his rou^^th then of himself, for truly it
is nothing agreeable either unto my nature or to my bringing up and much less,
when I my self shall be first desirous of his company. But I must confess you
are blameles, though you did mistake me, for you cannot be so well acquaynted
with my nature and meani^g in any thing: as I am with the natural disposition of
you, and of all ye world besides. I agree well with you, if I were according to
the common nature and disposition of men, being in company with my friends and
familiars, I would sometimes wish, and perhaps willinglye c^aue rather their
roumth then their company. For admitting I weee as other me^ be, and as you
your self in your youthful days heretofore have been: then perhaps and not
unlike but it might be with me as it has been with you and many others, that
some famous learned, and skillful Astronomer, has latelye been with me, and by
his or her mystical and wonderful strange knowledge, has given me certainly
to understand, that such a time, day and hour, and in such a place there shall
without fail appear unto me very secretly a glorious, brave and goodly blasing
star: and that the place where it shall appear, must needs be free, and
clear of al company, otherwise it will show it self but as a plain and
common star, without any blasing or stemming at all. Perhaps I have appointed
secretlye to see some tumbling cast, with some pleasant and merry slayghtes of
iugling tricks, and to draw more nerer unto natural and plain understanding,
not unlike but I have appointed to kis some pretye wench in a corner: and now
admittyng all this to be true (as in many men it is daily seen, would any of my
friends, or acquayntance blame me, to show the^ cunningly some color of
desire to crave for a time rather their roumth then their company, I think
none. There is also an other kind of people, which do likewise and very often
cunningly crave the riddaunce of company, which be in ye English frase, the
cormugions and covetous carles of this world, their natural disposition is,
first to scramble and scratch together if he ca^ a living equal with the best
yeman, gentleman, or squyre in his country, then stryuing to shroude himself
under some ragged and little cottage, to serve no further then only for
necessity, or if a large or fair house, then keeping his doors continually
shut as though never at home, contenting hymselse willinglye, and all his
household perforce with a sparinge and pinching diet, does chiefly feed and
altogether delight himself with the often telling and continual sight of his
money, as young men commonly do themselves, in the sight of their lovers. And
now admit some young heads and merye companions knowing his abilitye and
understanding his miserable and beggarly mind husying their brayns cu^ningly to
work him some slayghty, pretty, and slipry trick, do agree among themselves upon
some high and festiual day, knowing yt the^ perhaps he has a piece of biefe, a
calves ^^ad or an ox foot in ye pot, and do apoint ^ meeting of many
neighbors ye very same time to dyne with him, bidden by a messenger in very
good and due order, as though very sollomly bidde^ by him: then dinner time
drawing nere, service being done, and every man departinge to his house, this
pore, miserable and wretched miser does sit still in his seat fearing greatly
that if suddenly he should thronge or press out among the thickest, some or
other would so cu^ingly minister such occation of talk with him, as either to
shame him or else to enforce him home to dinner, but after a while looking
oftentimes backward over his shoulder, and spying some still remaynig behynd,
not musing a little at ye meanig thereof, at length rise th up, and pulling his
cap in his eyes, passes away by the^ sneaking, as though he had nothing to
say or meddle with any of them all: but then every man rysinge up* with him,
greatly to his admiration, and honoring him with cap and leg, accepting that
his gesture as a stately and grave behavior in him. Some of them accompany him
check by cheek with friend^y commendation, and great thanks for his unwonted
and friendly curtesy: and the rest following after hard upon his heels,
plainly to his sight intendinge to accompany him home to dynner, as they think
like bidden and welcome guestes, but as he thinks like mallape^t impudent, and
sausy marchaunts: if now it were possible to behold even at this instant, with
our outward eyes, the strange thoughts and ymaginatio^s of this pore,
distressed, and miserable miser. I think the meriest company of stage players,
that might be found in a country, would hardly make more sport then he him
self would do alone: for to see how glummishly he glyeth aside, like a bear
at a s^ake, and how many stoppes and turns he makes before he comes home, and
how privily he ba^neth them, wishing the Devil and his dam to choke them all,
the sight thereof no doubt, if it were possible one horse face might laugh at
an other, would make any horse in the world to break his halter, I can but
wish that I had either Apelles or Zeuxes skill, in the science of paynting and
that I could as perfectly paynt him, with his countenance according to my
imagination, as Zeuxes painted his grapes, or as Apelles his sheet, which were
so cunninglye done on both parts, as ever since to be had in great
estimation, but never to be paternd: the one of them Zeuxes, (as our books do
report) among many other of his notable works, painted (as before named) a
naked boy with a bu^ch of grapes as though growing upon his shoulders, which
were so perfect to the outward sight, as the very birds of the air, came and
lited upon the boys shoulder and continually picked upon the grapes, and
though they found no sa^: yet as appeared by their often resort, they could not
be persuaded, but ye grapes they must needs be, and in that they could never
pick out any juice, they seemed rather to impute it to ye bluntnes of the
bylles, then to the dryness of the grapes: for they went continually to a
stone which was fast by, and always whet their bylles and so still continued
their resort until it was taken away. The other paynter Apelles hearing of
this excellent piece of work, destred Zeuxes that a day might be appointed of
meetinge betwixt them two before some gentlemen of their friends and
acquaintance, and to pass away sometime, and to delight the sight of their
friends desired him to bring of his works, what he thought good, and that he
would do the like, whereunto Zeuxes agreyng at ye day appointed among many other
wonderful, strange, and notable works he brought this naked boy with ye grapes
upon his shoulders, Apelles among diverse other like wise very cuning and
skilful works, brought a table covered with a white sheet, and then in viewing
every man the others works, Apelle greatly commended ye perfect color and
form of the grapes, and nothing disalowing of all the rest: and then Zeuxes
co^mendinge likewise (no otherwise then just cause does require) the per^it
workma^ship in each point of Apelles, desired after all yt he would take away
the white sheet which covered his table, for he would be glad if he might to
see all, the^ Apelles smiling to himself said, friend Zeuxes, since you are so
desirous, I will not be so ungrateful as to deny you: yet my meani^g was when I
first brought it not ever to uncover it, because I found some fault with my
self therein, and therefore was the more loath to show my fault unto strangers:
but since you have don all this at my request, I will not herein deny you
yours: therefore even at your pleasure go and take it of your self, for I will
be loath to condemn my self, I hadd rather an other manne should condemn
me. Then said Zeuxes, na friend Apelles, if so be yt you doubt any
discredit thereby. I will not desire it for any money. But Apelles answearinge:
I force not for the discredit among my friends: take it of and spare not. Then
Zeuxes drawing nere unto it as one with child, til he had seen what was under,
laid both his hands upon it at both sides, catchinge to take hold of the
sheet, and suddaynly finding it to be but a painted color and no sheet in
truth turnde him about again, with great admiration, and said among the^ al,
that whereas Zeuxes had cu^ningly (as the world thought) deceived the birds.
Apelles has here more cu^ningly deceived Zeuxes, for where as in truth I
thought to have taken of a shete, I have but scratchte at a painted color of
white: and thus with many other pleasant and pretty conceiptes Apelles at yt
time bare away the bell. And now if I had like skill unto either of these,
whether think you that my t^me spent in paynting of this man would be lost or
no. But it is well known (the more is the pitye for this man) I am neither
Apelles nor Zeuxes, but plain ydlenes. And therefore nothing meet to paynte
him out so orderly as the natural shape and countenance of the manne does
require.

But leaving the pleasant show unto the cunning paynter, and admitting this to
be true (as I think it has been put in use) could you or any man else blame
this sylly miserable, and wretched muckemunger or the world to be rather
desirous of the roumth the^ of the company of these secret invited and bidden
guestes: surely for my part I think you cannot but rather you must hold him
excused.

Therefore sir, to conclude this my long and tedious speech perhaps unto you. If
I were (as I have said before) agreeable with the common course and nature of
men, you might well have gathered by my speech, that I was desirous of your
roumth and cleanlye ryddaunce. But mine estate and calling is such, as no
company, be it ever so great can impouerish me, or diminish or take away any
delight from me at all. For the more company, the greater is my riches and
delight if they will content themselves with me and any diet: I am none of
Shamfastes children, I blush not whosoever looks upon me. And therefore
think not that I did commend you unto your study, because I was desirous (as
you took it) to dance a turn or two privily or wantonly alone.

For since you seem so willinge and content with my company, with all my
heart, I will make you partaker in all the rest of my causes, which at this
time I intend to bring in question, and besides, rather then you shall think
me (as you have thought) weary of your company. If you will accept of this my
art and simple skyll. I came and will afford you, for every hour in the day,
for every day in the year, and for every year during your life, several
questions, with many pretye conceiptes at all times to busy and occupye your
self withal: as presentlye shall appear, if you will vouchsafe unto me your
friendly audience.

Student
Friend Idleness, you say, and true it is, that you are acquaynted with ye
nature and disposition of all estates, far better then I am, or ever shall be
able to conceive, and that by reason of your long experience and continual
company with all men: then must I needs now think and certainly persuade my
self, that you are not now unacquainted, nor to learn the qualityes of a
knave. There is an old saying and oftentimes found to be true. ni, fa, pa,
con: admit you were a teacher of the common people, or a scholemayster over
many children as no doubt sometime you are, being a great medler, and busye
body in any thing, and daily intruding your self into every vocation, and
calling from ye highest to the lowest whatsoever, as a most idle and merry
companion: staring as boldlye upon a King as you do upon the meanest and
playnest beggar: if a man may ask you a question: how would you open unto the
common people, or how would you teach your young scholars to understand the
meaning of these 4. words, ni, fa, pa, con.

Idleness
Sir I am no more nice in aunswearing then I am in putting forth. But to tell
you the truth (which I think you do already know) it pertaynes nothing at all
unto me to be a teacher, though sometimes I confess I am in company with
many wise and learned men. for where I acompany most, there they learn and
teach least: and little or nothing tendinge to goodness, is euerbrought in
question, unless it be at a very great chance: and then also am I feign to
depart as one whose company is so little esteemed, as though nothing necessary
at all, and yet the meaning of this short sentence, me thinks I should
easilye understand, and the rather because I have hard it often. I think (to be
short) it is as much to say: as, Nimia familiaritas parit contemptu^. And by
this may a scholar easily understand the meaning and for the instruction of
the common people, it is as much to say, as tomuch familiarity breeds
contempt.

Student.
Friend Idleness I see you are not altogether an ignoraunte, though you
confess your self never to be in company where any godnes is taught: as it
seems knowledge comes to you by inspiration, but whereof I know not: you have
hit the right way of play^^ instruction to a Scholar: but as to the common
people, you have left it as raw as you found it, though you have spoken it in
English, for the ignorant and common people do as well understand English, for
the most part, as they understand greek: though sometime vnderstandi^g
nothing they verily think they understand all: and understanding as much as a
block, they think the greatest doctor in the world can hardly amend them, yet
they will say, is it not english? and am not I an English man? why then I pray
you may not I understand it? but it may be aunsweared, are there not many
English men ignorauntes? yes, why may not you then be an English ignorante, but
there is an old proverb, ignorance is an enemy to knowledge, it is commonly
seem, an ignorant man will always find faults and dissalow of those things
wherein he has no skill^, and fyndes a fault where no fault is to be found,
and especially when impudency is joined unto his ignorance: for then he will
profes him self before either his prince or any wise or learned counsel,
thinking his own wit (when he is a very fool) to be best of al? but as ye old
saying is: who is so bold as blind bayarde? who thinks he knows more then he
that knows nothing at al: for the wise and learned will say, hoc solum scio
quod nihil scio. I only know this yt I know nothing at al. And the fool says,
what know not I? whereupon the wise man says with the Physician it is time
for wise men to hold there peace, when every fool will be a Physician. And
therefore my friend to make this plain English more plain as well unto you as to
the common people: whereas you say, to much familiarity breeds contempt: this
is yet as I have said hard lattine unto ye common people, for it is impossible
ever to be to familiar with a wise and honest man, how therefore now can this
sentence seemetrue in all, since it can not be sometime to much it can not
always breed contempt: and therefore though the sentence of it self be true,
yet to ye common understanding you have opened it to darkly. ye plain english
is this: to much familiarity bredeth co^te^pt, yt is, to be checkmate at any
time, and hail fellow to much with a knave or a fool, and no doubt he will
take thereby such impudent courage, as after a while you shall find to be most
true, that he will not greatly stick in any company what soever, to spyt in
your mouth when you pass the Streets talkinge with your friend, he will not be
ashamed to come and colle you about the neck, if you chance in friendly manner
to give him but one friendlye word, or merye look, you shall not fail of a
thousand again, with many a counterfeit wrong shapen and crooked countenance
if so courteously sometime by chance you entertayne him as to set him at your
board, you shall find him sometime in your lap when you would wish him further
of: if at any time for your pleasures sake, you will vouchsafe to talk with him
in the presence of his betters. Afterwa^d perhaps when you shall be reasoning
with your friend, he will be ready with his sausy tongue to have a choppe at
every word that shall proceed from your mouth, and thinks it a glory unto him if
he be a mean man, your inferior a knave or a fool, that he may so boldlye
chop logic with one that is so far above him, and his better,

And what is the common speech sometime of the veriest knave in a country? will
not he say, (being always in quarrel and continual ^ar with his neighbors,
giving them often times his own name) the proudest ^^aue of you al shall offer me
no wrong, I can go to my Lord and to my ^adye, and to the best gentleman in
the shire early or late, to dinner or to supper, or at any time when soever I
Just, I can speak as boldly unto the^ as I can unto my fa^^^ltar friend and
brother, when a thousand such drummedaries and plain knaves, as you be, must
stand at ye door, or if you chance to come in, then with cap in hand, and many
a low courtesy. And therefore you plain knaves of ye country: how da^e you
abuse me (he might say) the capital and captain knave of the world: and how
can the pore country man answer him since oftentimes they find and see these
his sayings to be true. They have nothing u^ the world to say, but when ye
knave is out of sight, then to whisper among themselves, and say, the more
knave ye better luck: it we could as cunningly play ye knaves, as he, we should
eat sometime veneson, and have other good theere among the best, as well as
he: but since our bringing up has not been to bear cunninglye two faces in
one hood: or like the subtle woulfe, to go wrapped in a lambs skin, or like
a crafty and flatteryng knave to keep continual company among gentlemen in
auctoritye and rule, as though he were the honest est man in the world: we
must content our self as many honest poor men do, to put up, daily iniurye
and wrong at many an arrant knaves hand. The crafty knave does continually
pick out more friendship with his Tongue then the simple man ever could with
his enforced and lamen table tears. Yet we must needs agree that tears at all
times are not to be pitied, for often times in a man they be token great
dissemblinge, unless his cause be the greater, and to a woman some will say
they be natural, and take away her tears, take away her life: and therefore the
less to be blamed, though sometime she weeps for every tryfle: for we see by
experience that she will weep and laugh, and both with one mind oftentimes very
heartily, and that most commonly without any disgrace to her credit or favor at
all: it shows plainly that she will sone be angry and soon pleased, and therein
she kepes still ye nature of the soft and gentle child, and he yt offers a child
wrong, has but small wit and discretion: it has sildome been seen, yt
malice could never rust in a woman's heart: where it continually ebs and slowes
there remains little corruption ye continual runninge rivers we see always
most clear at the bottom, and the standing puddles continually full of ^ilth:
cast as much grauel and stones into ye one as you can, and shortly after with
one flow you shall see it as clean at the bottom as it was before: cast as much
and as little as you will into the other, if you come 7. year after you shall
find it still at ye bottom. this standing puddle we se is never clean, but once
in 7 year it hardly escapes vnfyde, either with a muckrom or with a swords point.
The other we see it so continually clear, as it needs not to be side. in the
one we see duckes and geese continually swilling and bibling for todes* in the
other we see fisher me^ with their silver hooks continually anglinge for fish,
with great pastime and pleasure, the one is for the hog to wallow in and
sometime for the Ox and the Cow to drink in, yt other for gentlemen to hake
at, and sometimes perhaps to watter their nagges in: and thus if your eye
sight be any thing clear, you may plainly see that tears at a woman's eye, be
tokens in her a myld and gentle heart, clear at the bottom from all envy and
malice, though sometimes perhaps at ye first it begins of a cursed and a
shrewish stomach, as for disgrace which sometimes it bringes unto the favor of
her face, it is with women as it is with men: it is a comely sight in some man
to look a loft like a lyo^, in some other it is a thing very unseemly.

Speech and continual talking, becomes some men very well: few words or
rather continual silence, becomes an other man as well, it is a good sight
to see some men in costly and gorgious apparel, according to the vanity of the
time, to see other some it is as good a sight as to see a curre dog in a
satin dublet: for a pretty spaniell it is a great deal better. Is it not a
good and commendable sight to behold some man in his side gown and white
sirples, and every way besides in the best and most co^ly attire which
pertains to a grave and divine minister? Does not a short coat a pair of
hye buckled shoes, and a capp with a butten on the crown, become an other man
as well in his vocation (as the country husband man) is it not as good a sight
to see an egregious offender, and a common breaker of the Princes laws
punished according to his offense, as it is to see the obedient and true
subject, continuallye cherished and made of? to be short, what soever is
thought cumly for an honest man, is never thought meet for a knave, and though
sometime he puts it on it makes him appear but a counterfeit. Put a beluet coat
upon a known natural, and common fool, is he not more to be laughed at then
if he were in his pyde cot^: bring an egregious and known knave in place to
play the part of an honest man, were it not a thing rather to be laughed at then
commended? unless he meant never to reuert again, which is ^ildeme seen? in
the behauioure of man, there be many iestes, and experience teaches us that
every one of the^ becomes not every man alyke. But always according to the
natural dispotition and bringing up of the man, they ye de their comely and
uncomely grace in him, even so is it (to come unto my purpose) as I have said
among ye women: for that which does very well set forth and become one woman,
does as greatly disgrace and disuiger an other. but there a straw: in that I
know (as I have said, women be soon angerd, and then without a sudden ebb,
theirharts will sone sinck in sorrow, therefore I will not meddle to far with
them. yet thus much I hope I may boldlye say with the philosopler, who spoke more
in commendation of the tears of a woman (being rightly wayed) then I will at
this time utter, yt a tear at some womans eye does yield far more beautiful
and comelye grace unto the favor of her, then the fairest and best dyamond
that may be found does unto ye pretiest ring, or most precious jewel in the
world: and thereupon that philosopher said, that a tear in many a woman's eye
is a pearl in a man's. But leaving the Philosopher with all his skill, they never
proceed heartily from them (I think surely) with out some great cause of
unkindness or grief. But as is said, with men no doubt, for the most part it is
taken for dissemblinge, and yet often we see, they are enforced thereto by
naturethough it ca^ not excuse them. But friend Idleness, this leads us with the
Lapwing clean from our matter, touching ye behavior of a knave, and the
construction of my late demand, and whereunto I have replied according to
your answer, as I have thought good: for I have showed you a more playner
Construction of the sentence which I put forth unto you, then you in my
judgment did make at the first and therefore now what think you of my
construction made thereof.

Idleness.
Sir to give up shortly mine opinion (being very loath ^o hinder or interrupt
your purpose in any spech at this time) to my knowledge, you have opened no more
the^ is true: but whether you have declared al ye truth thereof or no I know not.

Student
No friend Idleness I mean not to beat my brains to open all yt is true, for
if I could do so I might fill a house or rather a whole country full of books,
which were unfit for any idle body to take in hand. But admittinge (as you
have granted) that all I have said is true, I have sufficiently obtained my
desire, for then I hope as you in your first question propounded unto me,
crept into my judgment, by a simile, and thereby (as you said) gathered mine
opinion in a further matter which served your turn: even so now have I as well
served mine, in that you have confessed my construction of the sentence put
forth unto you, to be true in every point: for now I think you will easily see
and soon confess your own fault.

Therefore friend injury call your wits together, and remember well your self
when you first took occasion to press your self into my company, desirous
as you seemed very friendlye to crave sometime of conference with me, finding
your speech and behavior so agreeable unto my good lyking, I was content to
entertayne and admit you into my society and company, as heretofore has
appeared, and to allow of your familiar and boulde speech, as if you had been
my chief companion and mate: and now you vau^t of your victory, that you have
won me to lie bathinge my self with you in your lasy and idle tubbe with your
alluri^g sweet water of vanity. And now as though I would not wish ye spe^ding
of one hour willinglye without your company: you offer your self to hang
about my neck, as though you were with me hayle fellow well met. But friend
ydlenes, when I first entertained you (I find now as a boulde geast) I meant
nothing less, nor yet do I mind, to wrap you (as gentlemen and gentlewome^ ^o
their ribonds and chains) about my neck. I would be loath to be seen caryi^g
you (as begers do their childere^) upon my back: therefore since upon this small
familiarity vouchsafed upon you (as one of shameless children) you begin to
creep upon my back, no doubt you will shortly fulfill my former speech, to spit
into my mouth. But friend ydlenes, neither my neck nor my mouth be any fit
places for you, I have otherwayse to employ the^: and now setting partiality
aside, be your own judge whether the old saying, to much familiarity breeds
contempt, be here found true in you or no: and when you know your self to be
the vaynest member in the word, then strive not to dallye any further with me
in defe^ding or answearing of any thing, for I mind no longer to trouble my
self, nor to spend any more time in hearing your idle deuyses: therefore where
as you say, you can feed me with idle questions every hour in the day, every
day in the year, and every year during my life, if I will but grant you
audience: I wish you rather to bestow them and your self also where you list:
and thus in stid of audience I grant you here my rou^th. It has been an old
sainge, many geese many birds, many women many words: but you have idle talk
plenty for a whole country, both of me^ and women, therefore sone as to late,
I yield unto you ye game betimes.

Idleness.
If I should thus be left at every hand, I might well then go and seek a
companion in the Skies. But this is nothing strange unto me, for I am
oftentimes thus banished and sent away and yet after a while presently sometime
and privily intertayned again.

But since now for a time I am very like to be left here all alone, I will
employ my self according to the ydlenes of the place.

Idleness
Primus iucu^dus tolle-RANDVS, ATQVE secundus tertius est vanus: sed fetat
quatridianus.

Primus.
Who geastvvise gape at every feast
his host the first time heartily
Says vvelcome sir, among the rest,
and joys to feed his fantasy,
Secundus.
But if the sweetness of the fare,
glevve still the glutton there to stay,
And that he pyne, if he should spare
to press again the like assay.
The goodman then for manners sake
vvil bid him vvelcome as his friend,
Content his folly so to take,
as though there were no more behynd.
Tertius.
But then if there such root remain
of shameless shifts so ripe in him
As that he can not yet refrain,
But still in follies puddle swim.
He shall the third time come in vain,
with words of vvelcome none at all,
And must have scarsely for his pain,
one drop of drink unless he call.
Quatridianus.
The fourth, the fault does smell amayne
go place sir smell roast then in hall,
Or with lack drum me him entertayne
without the doors with dogs to braule.
His stomach stampes, as hunger slain,
to gorge such geastes it is a pain.
Who vvisely can himself so strain
to match such mates shall greatly gain
For now such suckpaps old do ^aygne,
which after dugges that drop good chea^
Do so much daily fond and feign,
as no place can from them be clear,
For wearing of ringes.
FOr that it is a proverb old,
the vvinners may best wear the gold
We knubby knuckels rusty rough
do see more fit to lead the plough,
Which fond to see their fingers shine,
in steed of fatt, with goulden mine
But vvisely vvayed it is most vain
and bringes such things in geat disdain,
When ringes be knackes for every knave
for then no wise men vvil them crave
But were it trim to ring the nose
I think I might soon find out those
That would to please their daynty gyrles
rend that with ringe and precious pearls.
Disorder marreth every thing
so does misvvearyng of your ringe,
Cost is comely vvher order is
good order therefore should not miss
And such as wear them as they ought
the vvorthier then shall they be thought
But some men think and so do I
that natures flesh when it is bare,
Without such pearls or paultery
if fair, is fittest for the glare.
For when dame Venus plainly shows
her self in natures naked weed
Your eyes then fly not after crovves,
but slayes to feed your vvanton need.
To this the vvisest men of all
As we see daily they be thrall
But as for pearls of precious stones
they pass not for they be but toys,
And gaudy geaugavves for the nones,
which they account as childish joys.
But since they have been greatly vsd
though much perhaps by some abusd
It is not good to take away
such comely costly gold array.
But who so uses it aright
reserues the thumb as for the knight
And here in order as they lie,
your finger rings you may apply.
Miles, Marcator, Stultus, nuptie, and amator.



To wear the ringe upon the thum is for the Knight.

The forefinger for the Merchant.

The middle finger for the Fool

The third finger for the married man.

The little finger for the Lover.



The Knight says in his ring,
no vaunt to victory.
The Merchant in his.
no foe to Fortune.
The Fool in his
no cost to colors.
The Married man in his
no jar to ielousy.
The lover in his
no friend to faith.
1
The Knight in field in armor clad,
in eye of foes which feign his fall
He says he sighs when truse is had:
no vaunt to victory great or small.
2 The merchant saylyng in his Ship,
With traffic far and near for gain,
Still doubring lest he once should slip,
no foe to fortune says he plain.
3 The Fool in folly fettered fast,
led forth fond fancyes most to crave
He cares not what does vvast or last.
no cost to colors (says he) brave.
4. The married man great griefs endure,
and often his heart new panges supply,
And yet nothing can him allure
but says no iar to ielousye,
5 The lover lives and reapes the joys
of all the world, and thus he says
Where true love lackes the rest be joys
the earth does bear no friend to faith.
The rich man restles loath to hear
of all sorts some to speak their mind.
And he to seem of could cheer.
Who can them all in wealth outvvinde.
Says (tumbling up his rusty bags
loath to see his glistering gould
Abroad to fly like tattered rags)
no vvoe to want when I am old.
The King. Omnes vos defendo. I defend you all.
The king and ruler of the Realm
by strength of svvord and counsel grau^
Shrinkes not to s^ryue against a stream
from furious force his seat to save.
He never quayles nor fightes in fear
his hand and heart alvvayes agree,
No force of arms that man can bear.
can stay what he intendes to be.
The strongest streams of rivers vvide
by Princely power are made to fall,
They stop not him to go or ride
for breadth or depth, his foes to gall.
What castle, tovver, or strongest hold
yields not in view of princely force,
And stoupes with crackes as vveake and old
to give him way to take his course.
And grant him, though a country small
of trusty strong and faithful hearts
He never fears as once to fall,
though all the world besides take parts
The earth the substance is of man
from whence all creatures first were made
And thence our lively fode began.
now mayntaynd by this golden trade.
Which once let slack but for a while
it shortly after vvil appear.
Who is most wise vvil use least vvile
and shall most sone show could cheer.
And therefore thus among the rest
to speak the truth he may be bold
That from the vvorst unto the best
he feeds all sorts both young and old.
The Physician.
Omnes vos edo.
I eat you all.
Where liberal Arts do all take root
from thence Phifitions most do spring^
A trade which if they vvin, does boo^e
them greatly all, much vveath to bring
He ^vholly lyeues upon his art,
VVh^^^ (...) all his age
He has no (...) mart
(...) assuage.
Which does all sorts of men so wring
as fevv or none can lack him long.
And where the empty purses cling
they must abide the paynful prong
For if he should of pity spend
With all poor payned souls his time,
He might himself to begging bend,
which were in him a heinous crime.
But rich or pore who has a grote,
though he perhaps be hunger slain,
That vvil not keep it from his throat
to ease his heavy heart of pain.
VVhereto he often with grieved mind
sees men so driven all to spend
And sparing not to speak his kind
says he eats all up at the end.
The light woman.
Omnes vos decipio.
I deceive you all.
This woman is by natures shape,
and form to sight so beautiful
As happy he whose eyes escape
most cleanly there to take a pull.
He never any tenant skeare,
before the cheifest lord of all,
Command him as his messinger,
such tenant to his Lord to call
And then he comes to him in speed
with such a doleful deadly sound,
Which makes the strongest heart to bleed,
and yield his body to the ground.
He spare^no king for all his strength,
nor any man for policy
Nor Woman for beauty at the length
but calls in time them all to dye.
Therefore my harvest time says he,
does never cease some where to fall
But ^ype, or rotten as you be,
my cyth in fine clear sheeres down all*
Youthful age.
But youthful age, thus death do blame,
And shootes this boult with vvanton aim,
That were I Death or Death could be
and were I then as I am now,
Fair women sure should syldome dye
until their age did make them bovv.
If Death did manlike deal his dole,
he could not show that cruelty
To hayle such into ugly hole
which look on him so pitiously.
But wantons some perhaps vvil say
that women they have hearts most strong
And often sing merrily careavvay
soon after many a paynful prong,
Which can not well with reason be,
fince daily sight does teach us this,
They never naked vveapon see
but straight they faint worse skeard then hur^
Her strenghe of body is most small
the weakest man that may be found
If any strength he has at all,
soon tryps her down, she treades so ligh^
Therefore me thinks great reason might*
persuade this raging Death to spare
Such vveaklinges from that paynfull plight,
to choke them with such sour fare.
Then can by art be well displayde,
to Death claymes near affinity
Therefore the lover rightly said
and can by none be well denayed
That sure it is a deadly pain
to love and not be loved again.
And nere therewith I make an end
true love is sure a faithful friend,
When true love parts it is a death
though still in breast remaynes the breath.
More living deaths I might well name
which kepes man's life in death like frame
When clounish clookes of knaves prevail
^o force the guiltles hearts to quail.
But the^e a straw till leisure serve,
such clovvnlike shape in brass to carue
And thus to knitt the final knot
death still vvil be the latter lot,
The which God grant all men may dravv,
with price of everlasting joy,
And then their debts be dubble paid,
whom now the vvorldly vvronges annoy.
FINIS
Mors tua, mors Christi.
Fraus mundi gloria coe^i.
Et dolor inferni,
Sunt meditanda tibi.
That Christ did die, that thou must die,
the vvorldly fraud, the heavenly joy,
The endless bitter pains of hell,
^osse them (as tenis balls) in mind,
But hereat some perhaps will stick,
and say, who alvvaies thinks of death
Shall never look with cheerful face,
but svva^te, and won, and half as dead.
Whereby appears, whom nature has
forbidden beauties silver shovv,
To good more prone and ready be,
then they whom nature has decoerd.
The one I will not maserate
says he my plumround physnomie
My straight made lim^ I will not crook
to think of death, of devil, or God,
The other says my favor is hard,
my body croukie, of all despisde,
The world I leave it loves not me
I joy to think on heavenly things.
The happy blessed man
does loath this vvorldly life.
The wicked stryues in what he can,
to whet still pleasures knife.
The wicked vvighte bevvayles the sight
of deadly naked dart:
To blessed plight it bringes delight,
who gently yeeldes his heart,
Vita principium mortis,
Mors vltima linia rerum.
Life is the first beginning
of Death, and death the
last end of all.
Man peepes no sooner out
his vital breath to take,
But death him compass round about
his subject straight to make
By speech or pen the busy men
Who most in words delight.
Must needs afford the last cold word
to death which is his right.
FINIS.
The Compositor to the Auctour.
AS time does teach and rule the roming mind,
So time has brought thy toyling task to end:
As time has licenst us to seek and find,
So time does warn us count thee as a friend:
And s^th thou toys thy Golden time to spend
For Countries sake some profit pure to be,
Time warnes us all due thanks to render thee.
Who merits fame, renown, or lasting praise
But only those that toil in Countries cause*
Who bears the bell in these our dismal days,
But they which can discribe the curious clause?
Therefore post on my pen and do not pause.
Till thou have played with speed a thankeful part
To lawde and praise the Authors willinge h^rt.
You musing minds that murmur in delight,
Come lend your Ears to hear a word or twain,
Turn back one leaf, cast of all hateful spyte,
To learn this lesson do not now disdain:
Do you not know what hateful words do gain?
Be of good cheer O Thimelthorpe I pray,
Pass not a pin what prating Parrats say.
Thou sowed have the seed for us to reap,
We of thy toil the sugared sweet do taste:
And since it comes to all of us so cheap,
Thereof we will not wantonly make wast:
A friendly look in faith the wise will cast,
For that is all I know that thou do crave,
A thousand thanks therefore be sure to have.
For Memus mates, or for their fury fell,
Pass not a whit, esteem them as they are:
Let them go bathe in Lymbo lake of hell:
Thy fame shall live for ever take no care:
And if that I could learnedly prepare
My pen to paynt out verses pure and brave,
Thy name should live when corpse lie cloesd in grave.
Yet I which have but weak and simple skill,
Can well discern the good from bad I know,
The wyser sort when they have viewd their s^ll
And tossed this Pamphlet over too and froe,
I ken my self what count'naunce they w^^ show:
The faults therein the'il not impute to thee,
But judge the Printers press in part to be,
To the Reader,
Good Reader, sith thou have perus^e the same,
And may again at pleasure thine behold
It faults thou find the Auctor do not blame,
No furious word against him do unfold,
But (use thy pen) in mending ought be bold,
A writer sure as yet he is but young,
Therefore to laud him exercise thy tongue.
So will thou win the worthy praise of all
That here among grave writers do remain.
Of gentle blood account thee sure we shall,
Fly far from taunts which still thy name does stain,
And from the face of false enuyous train,
Eke call to mind what Volumes still we see,
That safe from faults can not excused be.
The Learned man will see, and little say,
The witles w^ght his tongue lies never still.
A good report if wise men show always,
Let prating peysauntes prattle what they will.
When they their venim have spewd out their fill,
The wise will judge what folly merits then
And who does purchase praise the best of men.
Finis, R S.

