THE NEW found world, or Antarctike, wherein is contained wonderful and
strange things, as well of human creatures, as Beasts, Fishes, Fowls, and
Serpents, Trees, Plants, Mines of Gold and Silver: garnished with many learned
aucthorities, travailed and written in the French tongue, by that excellent
learned man, master ANDREW THEVET.

And now newly translated into English, wherein is reformed the errors of the
ancient Cosmographers.

Imprinted at London, by Henry Bynneman, for Thomas Hacket.

And are to be sold at his shop in Poules Church yard, at the sign of the Key.

To the right honorable Sir Henry Sidney, Knight of the most Noble order of
the Garter, Lord President of Wales, and Marches of the same, Lord Deputy
General of the Queens Majesty's Realm of Ireland. Your humble Orator Thomas
Hacket wishes the favor of God, long and happy life, increase of honor,
continual health and felicity.
NOne are more to be commended (right Honorable) than those who were the first
inuenters and finders out of Arts and Sciences, wherewith mankind is beautified
and adorned, without the which gifts he were but naked, barbarous and brutish,
yea and a servile creature. It was not for nothing that the elders in times
past did so much celebrate the instituters of those things: as Herodotus
writes, that the Egiptians before all other men first found out the year by
the course of the Planets, and divided it into.xij. months. Diodorus assigned
it to the Thebanes, the which stands well with the opinion of Herodotus,
because the Thebanes be a nation of Egypt. As Numa added to the year January
and February, Romulus ordered March, April, and May, Augustus an other part,
and so Julius Caesar made up the perfect year, as Polidorus Vergilius
witnesses in his book De inuentoribus rerum. But how much praise is to be
given to such as have invented good laws and statutes for the brideling of the
Barbarous and wicked, and for the maintayning and defending of the just? As we
read that Isis ariuing in Egypt, brideled that Country, and ordained good
common wealths. How did the Scicilians honor Ceres, for that she was the first
inuenter of wheat sowing, with other innumerable? Among all other, none in my
judgment is more worthier to be praised, tha^ the first finders out how to
make ships and vessels nauigable for the sea. Strabo writes that Minos king of
Crete, had the first rule of the sea. But Diodorus says, that Neptunus had the
Empire of it before him, for he invented the feat in rowing of boats, and made
a navy, and was made Admiral of it by his father Saturnus, and Pliny
reports that King Erichthas devised boats first, and rowed in them on the
Red sea. Some say they were ordained by the Troyans in the narow seas called
Hellespontus: some think they were invented in the English sea. Danus as some
write, was the first that used any ship when he sailed out of Egypt into Greece.
But for more assurance, what so ever their opinions be, as touching the
beginning hereof, (as we read in the holy scripture) Noe was the first inuenter
or maker thereof, before the flood. The ingenious industry of man has brought
many things to a notable and good perfection, as well in Cosmography and
Navigations, as in any other art or science: for no doubt, (as it apereth by
this travail or work of Cosmography and such like,) the old ancient writers,
as Ptholomeus and others, were deceived, in that they judged this New found
World, or the West part to be uninhabitable. How much are they to be praised,
that for their Country sake refuse no imminent peril, leaving the Pleasant
bed of Delicacie, and the seat or cradle of Sensuality, their lands and
goods, their Wives and children, which in deed, are dearest unto them, to
abando^ themselves and their swetest lives to the favor of the boystrous
seas, to the hap of the inconstant winds, to the chair of fortune, and
finally to a thousand imminent evils, only to increase the fame and good
renown of their country. Among the which I might rehearse, that this most
noble Seignorie and Territory of England has of late years got the fame
and renown, that it has had in times past, by Navigations lately atempted by
many and sundry of our countrymen, (God grant them still to go forward and
increase in those and such like enterprises, to Gods glory and the benefit of
this common Wealth.) But alas, the greater number of me^ are given to idelnesse
or sensuality, as if I might say now: where are the Tiberians, the Metelli,
the Emili, the Marij and the Catones? Among the number of a great many, and in
the midst of abundance and pleasure, we meditate nothing else but only
security, almost abhorring to hear the name of travel or pain, by which it
may be said to us, in a manner, as it was said of Haniball, after the battle
Trasimenius or Cannas, that his wintering at Capua in pleasure and delicacie
was more noysom and hurtful unto him, than either of the battles before named.
We read after that Alexander had vanquished almost the third part of the
world, having overthrown the mighty King Porrus one of the strongest Kings of
India, with whom (as rehearses Plutarche in the life of Alexander) he among
all other had most to do, having also subdued unto him the mighty King
Darius, hearing the Philosopher Anaxagoras, in a certain lecture, holding this
opinion, that there were Worlds out of number, therewith he burste out
sodaynely into weeping, his friends moved with this sight, demanded whether
any mishap had fallen unto him mete to weep for or no, he said these words:
Oh, have I not good cause to weep trow ye, that there being worlds
innumerable, I am not yet come to be full Lord of one? of whom I gather the
inceasable stomach, glory and renown, how little he esteemed him self and his
Kingdoms, without the name of victorious and mighty. Among and above all (as
affirms Plutarchus) he esteemed the Ilia^ of Homer, because in the same was
declared the excellent prowes of Achilles. Thus (right honorable) we see, the
valiant and curagious personages of the world have brought to pass many
excellent enterprises, so that their fame shall never dye, atcheued as well by
sea as by land, as this worthy traveler Andrewe Theuit, in this his
Navigations of the New found World, which I have dedicated unto your honor, as a
toke^ of my good will, the which after your great and weighty affairs, it may
please you to use, and to pardon this my rash enterprise, wherein I am
enboldned to prefer this toward you, as a thing very rare, and of such
exquisite doing, as before this time the like has not ben heard of, whose
annotations therein be such, as no Cosmographers hereto before have done the
like: desiring your honor so to accept the same, as the good will of him that
gave it. And thus I commit your good Lordship to the tuition of God, who
preserve you and all yours in health and eternal felicity. Amen.

Your Lordships most humble, Thomas Hacket.

An Admonition to the Reader.
I Doubt not gentle Reader, but that the description of this present history
will make thee to wonder, as well because of the variety of things that herein
then may Read, as also of many others which at the first will seem unto
thee rather monstrous than natural. But after that thou have soberly wayed and
considered the great effects of our mother dame nature, I do surely believe yt
such admiratio^s shall have no more place in thee. Also let it not seem to thee
strange the setting forth of many strange trees, as Palm trees and others,
with beasts of the field and fowls of the Air, the which are clean
contrary to the setting forth of our Cosmographers and Anciente writers, who
for because that they have not seen the places, and for the small experience and
knowledge that they had, did greatly err. But if thou herein stand in doubt,
then those that have traveled thither, and those Indians that were brought
from thence, can affirm al things herein contained to be true. Furthermore if
that there be here in this book any words that seem to thee rude or il
placed, thou shall therefore accuse the fever and death, (ye fever) which has
so kept or cleaned to the Author since his return home, that he had no leisure
to peruse his book before that it came to the Printer, being provoked to
deliver it at the commandment of the Cardinal of Sens: and death which
happened to Ambrose de la port, a good student and well seen in the French
tongue, who had taken upon him the whole charge of this present book.
Notwithstanding gentle Readers, our good will herein has not been wanting,
only wishing for recompense, that it may be agreeable to thee. Farewell.

In praise of the Author.
THe farthest scope of heaven and earth also,
The subtle stremes enclosed in the ground,
The mighty Mines of Metals that do gro
In lurking veins, that hidden are profounde,
The Cristall pearl, the Diamond so fair,
The floting fish of diverse kinds of hew,
Of diverse soiles, to which thou may repair,
Of other lands that yet to us be new,
Has Theuet here through travel his and pain,
Educted forth, to satisfy thy mind,
Who well deserves thy thankful speech to gain,
As single eye of judgment thine shall find.
Therefore as craves this his deserved style,
So of his work let judgment thine proceed,
Who of good will this libell did compile,
To further thee, that took the same to read.
IN THEVETVM NOVI ORBIS peragratorem and descriptorem, Io. Auratus, literarum
Graecarum Regius professor.
AVre tenus, sed non pedibus, nec nauibus vllis,
Plurimus and terras, mensus and est maria
Multa tamen non nota maris terraequeue relicta
His loca, nec certis testificata notis.
At maria and terras pariter vagus iste Theuetus
Et visu, and mensus nauibus and pedibus.
Pignora certa refert longarum haec scriptae viarum,
Ignotiqueue orbis cursor and author adest.
Vix quae audita alijs, subiecta fidelibus edit
Hic oculis, terra sospes ab Antipodum.
Tantum alijs hic Cosmograephis Cosmographus anteit,
Auditu quanto certior est oculus.
Vale in Christo.
To my Lord the Right reverend Cardinal of Sens, keeper of the great seals of
France: Andrew Theuet wishes peace and felicity.
MY good Lord, being sufficiently informed, (how greatly) after the most
commendable and no less great and paynfull exercise, to the which it pleased
the King to employe and bestow your prudencie (and forcasting wit) you take
pleasure not only to read, but also to see and taaste, some fair History,
the which among so many cares, might recreat your spirit and give it a
delectable liberty of his most grave and careful business. I have boldened
my self to present unto you this my discourse of a longer far voyage made
into India America, otherwise by us named France Antartike, being partly
peopled and partly discovered by our Pilotes, a land which at this day may be
called the fourth part of the world, not only by the withdrawings of our
orizons, as by the diversity of nature of bests, and temperatnesse of the air
of the country. Also for that none heretofore has sought it out, supposing al
Cosmographers (yea persuading with themselves) that the world was lymitted in
that which the elders to us had showed. And although that this work seems to
me of it self to be very little to be offered before the eyes of your Lordship,
notwithstanding, the greatness of your name will extol the baseness of my
work: seeing also that I am assured well of your wonted cleme^cie, virtue, and
desire to hear wonderful things, that easily you will judge how that my
intention does tend to no other end but only to make you understand, that I
have no other delyght than to offer unto you that thing, of the which you may
draw and receive some contentation, and wherein sometimes, you shall be eased of
the great and troublesome affairs which are offered in this degree and office,
that you hold. For there is no mind or spirit be it never so constant, but
that sometimes is troubled with the quick dispatch, grave and weighty affairs
of a common weal. Therefore it is needful sometimes to ordain as the
learned Physician does to a pacient or sick body, some change of meats to
recreate the appetite of them which by their infirmity and sickness, cannot
broke nor taste one kind of meat continually, be it never so pleasant.

This therefore is the cause why the ancient Philosophers and others did
oftentimes withdraw themselves from being wrapped in or charged with the
public affairs. As also the great Orator Cicero witnesses to have absented
him self many times from the Senate of Rome, (to the great displeasure of the
cytizens) for to remain in his countreyhouse to be delighted in the pleasant
and Harmonicall melody of the birds. Seeing then that among ours, as he among
the Romans, for your singular erudition, prudencie, and eloquence, you are as
chief and principal minister of the triumphant common weal of France: and
such a one as describes Plato in his common weal, that is to know, great
Lord, and a lover of virtue and science, therefore it is not without reason to
imitate and follow him in this point. Even so (my good Lord) as returning all
weak and weary of so long a voyage, I was by you first of your grace received
and welcomed home, which gave me to understand and know, that you are the
singular patron of virtue and of all those, that follow it also to my
judgment, I think I could not direct this my little labor to a better than
to you, the which if it please you to receive so beningly as with a good and
affectioned will I do present and direct it, and also to read and peruse it,
you shall find in my opinion wherein to recreate your spirits, and to hold me
yours for ever. Although that already for many causes I feel my self greatly
bound and holde^ to do most humble and obedient service to your lordship: to
whom I beseech the creator to give all good luck and prosperity.

A Preface to the Reader.
COnsidering with my self how much the long experience of things, and
faithful observation of many countries and nations, also their orders and
manner of life, brings or causes perfection to man, although there were no
exercise more commendable by the which a man may sufficiently deck his spirit
with all kind of Heroical virtue and science: biside my first and formal
Navigations into the country of Leuant, in Grecia, in Turkey, Egypt, and
Arabia, the which in times paste I have put to light, I have again under the
protection and sauegard of the great governor of the universal world, seeing it
has pleased him to show me so much favor being left to the discretion and
mercy of one of the most unconstant Elements, and least assured that is among
the rest, with small vessels of wood so frail that many times there was more
hope of death than of life, for to sail toward the Pole Antartike, the which
was never discovered nor found out by the elders in times past, as it appears
by the writings of Ptolomeus and others, also ours of Septentrion, to the
Equinoctial, and therefore it was thought to be uninhabited. And we sailed so
long that at the last we came to India America, about the Capricorn, a mayn
land of good temperatnesse and inhabited, as we will particularly and more at
large hereafter declare, the which I have taken in hand at the instant request
of many great personages, of who^ the gestes more than Heroical and high
enterprises celebrated by the Histories, cause them to live for ever in
perpetual honor and immortal glory. What has provoked the great Poet Homer so
virtuously to celebrate in his writings Ulysses, but only his long
peregrination and far travel that he made in diverse places, with the
experience of many things as well by sea as by land after the spoil of Troy?
What moved Virgill to write so worthily of the Troyan Aeneas although that he
according to the writing of some Historiographers had most traitorously
betrayed his native country in to the hands of his enemies, but only for that
he had virtuously resisted the fury of the raging waves, and other
inconveniences of the sea, he had seen and endured many sharp shoures, and
finally he came into Italy? Even so as the sovereign creator has made man of
two substa^ces the one differing or exceeding the other, the one elementary and
corruptible, the other celestial; divine and immortal. Also he has put al
things in his subjection, that is contained under the scope or circuit of the
Firmament, to the end that he might know as much as to him was necessary for to
attain to the sovereign gift, leaving him nevertheless some difficulty and
variety of exercise. Man then although that he be a creature maruelously
accomplished, yet he is nevertheless an instrument of virtuous acts, of the
which God is the original, so that he may elect such an instrument as pleases
him for to execute his pleasure, be it by sea or by land. But it may so chance
as it is commonly seen come to pass, that some under this pretexitie make it a
custom to abuse the workemaster by an avarice and an insatiable appetite of
some particular and temporal appetite, ieoparding themselves indiscreetly and
as wickedly, (as Horace in his epistles does manyfestly show) that he is
worthy of praise, that for the beautifiing and eluminating of his spirit, and
in the favor of the common wealth does willingly offer and put forth him self.
This rule or mean Socrates the wise Philosopher knew how to practice, and
after him Plato his disciple, (both the which) not only contented to have
traueled and made voyages into strange countries for to attain to the full
perfection and knowledge of Philosophy, but also to declare it openly without
hope of any reward or recompense. Did not Cicero send his son Mark to
Athens? partly for to hear Cratippus, and of him to learn Philosophy, and
partly also for to learn the manners and living of the citisens of Athens.
Lysander being elected for his magnanimity and worthiness governor over the
Lacedaemonians has so worthily atcheued so many fair enterprises against
Alcibiades, a man prewe and valiant, and Antiochus his Lieutenant on the sea,
that what loss or detrime^t so ever did chance, his heart and manly courage
did never fail him, but pursued his enemy by sea and by land, so that in the
end he brought Athens to his obedience. Themistocles, not less expert in the
feate of war tha^ in Philosophy, for to show what a fervent desire he had to
ieoparde his life for the liberty of his country, persuaded the Athenians,
that the silver that was gathered in the mines the which they were wont to
distribute to the people, was turned and bestowed to furnishe and make ships
and galleys against Xerxes, who for that he had partly distressed him, and
almost put to flight, falling to appointment after this happy victory against
the order of an enemy, made him present with three of the best Cities of his
Empire. What has caused Seleucus Nicanor, the Emperor Augustus Caesar, and
many Princes and noble men to bear in their pendens and standarts the Dolphin
and the anchor, but only to give instruction to al their posterity, that
Navigations is the first and of al others the most virtuous. Here therefore
without any long discourse is an example of nauigatio^: as al things the more
excellent they are, the more difficile or hard is the way to attain to them,
as after the experience Aristotle witnesses, speaking of virtue. And that the
navigations is always followed with peril, as a body is with his shadow, the
which in times past was showed by Anacharsis the Philosopher, who after he had
demanded of what quantity or thickness were the pla^cks or side of a ship:
it was answered, not above four fingers: so much (said he) is the life of him
from death that sayleth with ships on the water. Now gentle Reader in that I
have alleged so many excellent personages, it is not to compare, much less to
think my self equal to them, but I am persuaded that the great power of
Alexander has not let his successors to attempt yea the very extremity of
fortune. Also the deep knowledge of Plato did nothing at all fear or abashe
Aristotle, but that at his own pleasure he has treated of Philosophy. For
this intent therefore not to be found idle and slack among others, no more
than Diogenes was among the Athenians, I have thought good to set out in
writing many notable things that I have diligently observed in my Navigations
between the South and the Weast, that is to wit, the situation and disposition
of places, in what clymat, zone or paralegie it be, as well of the sea costs,
Islands, and main land, the temperatnesse of the air, the form and manner of
living of the inhabitants, the form and property of beasts of the earth and
of the sea, also of trees and roots with their fruits, mines and precious
stones, showing it lively and truly as near as is possible. As touching the
rest I would think my self happy if that it would please you to accept and
receive this my little labor with as willing a heart as I do present it: as
for the rest I am assured that it will be agreeable if the Reader think well and
way in his mind the long and dangerous peregrination that I have taken in
hand, for to see with the eye and to bring to light those things most memorial
that I cold note and gather together, as hereafter shall be seen.

The first Chapter. How the Author took shipping.
ALthough that the firmament and all things that are contained under the Moon,
even to the scope of the earth, seem as the verity is, to have been made for
man, Al things have been made for man.
yet nevertheless it is so that dame Nature mother of all things, has been,
and is always such a one, that she has preserved and kept hid within, the
things that are most precious and excellentest of her work, yea she has
remised her self, contrary to things artificial, the most expertest workman
that ever was, were it Appelles or Phidias, A difference of Art and of Nature.
even so as in the outward show remains the paynting, grauing or decking of
the vessel or statue, and within it remains altogether rude and unpolished.
But in nature we see the contrary. Let us first take example by the humayne
body. All the art and excellency of nature is hidden within: also of al other
natural bodies, the exterior or outward part is nothing in comparison if
that of the interior part it takes not his perfection. The earth shows
outwardly a sorrowful and heavy face, being for the most part covered with
stones, thorns and thistles, or such like: but if the husbandman mind to open
it with the plough, he shall find this virtue so excellent, ready to bring him
forth abundance, and to recompense him a thousand fold. Also the virtue of the
root and of the plant being without a hard barcke sometimes single and
sometimes double, and that part of the fruit that is most precious, wherein the
virtue to bring forth his like, is hid within, as in the surest place or belly
of the said fruit. Even as the laborer or husbandman having tylled the earth,
receives thereby great profit and advantage: How Navigations profits.
others not contented only to see the waters, would in like case sound them
by the way of this noble Nauigatio^ with ships and vessels, and for because
that thereby they have found and gathered inestimable riches, yt which is not
without reason, seeing al things were made for man, the Navigations is become by
little and little so frequented and followed of men, that many not continually
remaining in unconstant Islands, have in the end aborded the main land good and
fruitful, the which before the experience was not thought, neither according
to the opinion of our elders. The cause of the Authors Navigations.
Therefore the principal cause of our Nauigatio^ was for that Mounsieur de
Villegagnon, knight of Malta a very expert gentleman as well in Navigations as in
other honest and comely affairs, having with more deliberation received the
Kings commandment, and for that he was sufficiently informed of my voyage
made into the country of Leuant, and the good and perfect knowledge that I had
in Navigations, did most instantly request me, yea under the Authority of the
King my soueraygne Lord and Prince, to whom I owe all honor and obedience,
charging and commanding me to assist him in the accomplishing of his
enterprise, the which I freely granted, as well for the obedience that I will
give to my natural Prince according to my capacity, as also for the honesty
of the thing, although it was payneful. How the Author took shipping for to
sail to India America.
And therefore the sixth day of May 1555. after that the said Mounsieur de
Villegagnon had given order for the rigging and trimming of his ships, for
munitions and other things of war, but with much greater difficulty than to
an Army marching on the la^d, and to the quality of his men of al estats,
gentlemen, soldiers, and diverse artificers: to be short, all things being made
ready and prepared in as good order as might be, the time being come for us to
take shipping, Why it was called new Haven.
at new Haven a port town (the cause why it was so named I will show before
passing further) being so named to my judgment of this word that signifies
sea or straight, or if you say Haven, ab hauriendis aquis, lying in Normandy,
whereas forsaking the land we hoysed sail, sailing upon that great sea by
good right named Occean, because of his raging, of this Greek word (...) as some
judge, being wholly under the power and mercy of the wind and waves. I know
well that in times past, according to the superstitious Religion of the
Gentiles, many made their Vows, Prayers, and Sacrifices, to diverse Gods, The
superstition of the elders before they would go on the water.
according as their necessity did show, then among those that would go on
the water some before hand would cast some piece of money therein as a
present or offering for to cause the Gods of ye sea to be favorable and to
appease their Ire. Others attributing some deuinitie to the winds, thought to
appease them by strange ceremonies. As we find the Calabrians to have done to
Lapix, a wind so named: likewise the Thurins and Pamphiliens to certain
others. Also we read in Aeneidos in Virgill, if it be worthy of credence, that
notwithstanding the importunate prayer of Juno to Aeolus King of winds, the
miserable Troyan remained on the sea, and the quarrel of the Gods that did
follow. By this we may evidently know the error and abuse, with the which the
Antiquity was blinded, being an erroneous and damnable opinion, attributing to
one of the least creatures and under the power of man, that which appertains
to the only Creator, to whom I cannot sufficiently give praise in this place
for his favor showed to us, in delivering us out of such blinded ignorance.
And for my part, for that of his only grace he has so favored our voyage,
that giving us a good full wind, we have safely and peaceably passed the
streights, and from thence to the Canaries, Islands distant from the
equinoctial.27. degrees, and from our France five hundredth leagues or there
about. Now for many reasons I thought good to begin this my discourse at our
embarkment, and shipping, as by a more certain and sure mean, the which being
done, I think loving Reader, if that you take pleasure to read it, I doubt
not but to guide you from point to point, and from place to place, even from
the beginning unto the end, as right as is possible, observing the longitude
and latitude of countries. Nevertheless whereas I have not used such form and
mean, as the thing and your needful judgment does deserve, I beseech you
to hold me excused, considering that it is very hard for one man alone,
without the favor and maintenance of some Prince or great Lord, for to sail
and discover far countries, observing the things singular, nor to execute
great enterprises, although yt of him self he might. And to my remembrance
Aristotle agrees well to this purpose, that it is impossible and very hard
that he should do any thing of great excellency and worthy of praise, when the
mean, that is to say riches, wants, knowing that the life of man is short
and subject to a thousand fortunes and adversities.

Of the straight aunciently named Calpe, and now Gibaltary. Cap. ij.
COasting Spain on the left hand, with a calm and favorable wind, we came
over against Gibaltar, not striking our sail, nor casting anchor very nere, for
many causes. In yt which place we stayed certain days. This straight is on
the borders of Spain, dividing Europe with Africa, as Constantinople does
Europe and Asia. Many think this to be the original of our sea Meditareum, as
if the great sea being to full, should by this place pour out upon the earth,
of the which writes Aristotle in his book of the World in this manner: the
Occea^ that of all sides does compass us toward the west near to the
columns or pillars of Hercules, Islands and other singularities of Gibaltar.
does pour out by the earth into our sea as in a port or haven by a narow
straight: near to this straight are two Islands near one to the other,
inhabited with slaves and others, the which labor to make salt, and therefore
there is good trade and traffike: of these Islands the one is southwarde and
the greatest made in manner of a triangle, if that ye behold it from far, named
by the elders Ebusus, Ebusus. Ieniza.
and by the modernesse Ieniza, the other is toward the north and named
Frumentaria, and for to sail thither it is very dangerous, Frumentaria.
because of certain rocks that are there, with other inconveniences.
Furthermore there enters diverse nauigable Rivers that brings great
riches, as one named Malue, separating Mauritania from Cesariensia, Malue. Sala.
another yet named Sala, taking his spring in Mountain Dure, the which
trauessing the Kingdom of Fes, divides in form of this Greek letter D and
then runs into this straight: likewise of many others the which at this time
I omit: this much I will say by the way, that this straight passes over the
coast of Afrike to the troppike of Cancer, where as the sea does very little
ebb and flow, but in those parts so sone as one draws near to this great
floude Niger, 11. degrees from the line, the course of this River is not
perceived. In this straight of the sea Meditareum, there be two Mountains of
a wonderful height, one on the cost or side of Africa, in times paste named
Calpe, and now Gibaltar, the other Abyle, the which both together are called
the Colu^nes, Diverse opinions of the erection of the pillars of Hercules.
or pillars of Hercules, for that according to some writers he divided them in
twain that before was but one mountain named Briarei: and there retourning
into Grecia by this straight finished and ended his labors, esteming and
thincking that he could pass no further, because of the Amplitude and
spreading of the sea, which extended even to his orizon and end of his sight.
Others do affirm that the said Hercules for that he would leave a memorial of
his happy conquests, caused there to be erected two columns or pillars of a
marvelous height on the cost of Europe. The manner and custom of noble and
valiant men in times paste.
For the old and ancient custom has been that the Noble and great Lords, did
rear and set up a pillar or column, in that place whereas they did finishe
their voyages and high enterprises, or else at their toombes or sepulturs,
thereby to show and manifest their might and famous acts above others. As we
read of Alexander which did leave certain marks in Asia the great, whereas he
had been. For the like cause the like was erected at Rhodes. As much may be
said of Mausolia numbered among the seven wonders of the world, made and edified
by Artemisia in the honor and for the love that she bare to her husband: the
like of the Pyramides of Memphis, under yt which are embalmed the Kings of
Egypt. Furthermore at the entry of the great sea, Julius Caesar reared up a
hye pillar of white marbell. And for because that many have been of this name
of Hercules, we will say with Arian ye Historiographer, What Hercules it was of
who^ are named the columns Tartesse and ancient City of Africa.
this Hercules to be he, that the Tyriens have celebrated, for because that
they have edified Tartesse on the borders of Spain whereas are the pillars of
the which we have spoken, and there is consecrated to him a temple according to
ye manner of the Phenicians, with such sacrifices and ceremonies as was used in
times paste. Also it has been named the place of Hercules. This straight at
this day is the refuge and succor of thieves, pirates and rouers on the sea, as
Turks, Moors and Barbarians, enemies of our Christian Religion, Gibaltar a
place of Traffic from Europe to Africa.
who lurking and flotting there with their Galleys and barks, rob and spoil
marcha^ts that come to trade as well of Africa and Spain as of France,
England and other places, and that which is more to be lamented, the
captivity of diverse Christians whom they use most cruelly, yea worse than
brute beasts in all their affairs, beside the loss of souls in denying
their Christendom because of their horrible and dreadful torments.

Of Africa generally. Chapter.3.
Sailing beyond this straight, Cap. de canti.
for that we had costed the country of Africa the space of eight days, on the
left hand even right to the Cape of Canti being distant from the
Equinoctial.33. degrees, we will write thereof generally. Africa as Ptolomeus
writes, The fourth part of the world as some writers affirm the opinion of
this word Africa.
is one of ye third parts of ye world, or else the fourth, according as
certain writers have affirmed that have written sine, tchat by nauigatio^s many
countries, in times past being unknown, have been discovered, as India America
of the which we pretend to write, named as Joseph witnesses Africa of Affer,
who as we read in the Greek and Latin Histories, for that he overcame it,
reigned him self and named it after his own name, for before it was called
Libia as some think of this Greek word: (...) the which signifies the South
wind that there is frequented and familiar, or of Lybs that reigned, or else
Africa has been named of this article A, and (...) that signifies cold, and
before called Hisperia. As touching his lying, The situation of Africa.
it begins truly at the Weaste Atlantike and ends in the straight of
Arabia or at the sea of Egypt as Apian witnesses, as in like case in few
words Aristotle does very well write. Others make it to begin at Nyll
toward the North, at the sea Meditareum: furthermore Africa has been called
as Josephus writes in the Antiquities of India, all that is comprehended on the
one side from the North sea or Meditareum, even to the West Meridionall,
nevertheless separated in twain, old and new, the new begins at the
hills of the Moon, having his head at the Cape of good hope in the South
sea.35. degrees above the line, so that it contains of latitude.25. degrees.
As touching the old, it is divided in four provinces, the first is Barbaria,
containing Mauritania, Cyrenia, and Cesariensia, there the people be very
black. In times past this country was little inhabited, but now much more:
also the diverse kinds of people remaining in this country with the
diversity of manners and of their Religion, the knowledge of which would have
made both a long voyage and also a large volume. Ptolomeus has made no mention
of the exterior part toward the South, for because that it was not found out
nor discovered in his time. Many have discribed it more at large, as Pliny,
Mela, Strabo, Apian, and others, and therefore I will not stand therein.

This Religion, as Herodian writes, is fruitful, and well peopled with people
of diverse sorts and manners of living. Pillars of stone where as are writings,
of the Phenicians.
Also the Phenicians in times past came to dwell in Africa, as it is seen by
that which is written in the Phenician tongue in certain pyllers of stone that as
yet are to be seen in the town of Tynge, called at this day Thamar, belonging
to the King of Portugal. As touching their manners even so as is the
temperatnesse of the air according to the diversity of places, also the
people themselves do cause variety of temperance, and by following of manners
for the Simpathie that the soul has with the body, as Galian shows in the
book that he has written. Likewise we see in Europia, in diverse Kingdoms, the
variety of manners and customs, the Africans in general are crafty, The manners
and Religion of the Africans.
as the Syrines covetous, the Sicilians willy, and the Asians voluptuous. There
is also difference in Religions: some worship after an other manner, some are
Mahometistes, other some are Christians after a very strange manner contrary to
us. And as for brute beasts, there are diverse kinds. Aristotle says that the
beasts in Asia are very cruel, and in Africa monstrous. For the scarcetie of
water many beasts of diverse kinds are constrained to assemble where as there
is any water to be had, and there oftentimes they couple together, and thereby
engendereth the diversity of strange and monstrous beasts, The cause why
there are in Africa so many strange kind of beasts
the which causes this argument and proverb, that Africa always brings
forth some new thing. This proverb is common among the Romans, for that they
made thither many vayages, having the Dominion of it of a long time, as Scipio
Africanus says, they always brought from thence some strange thing, which
seemed to engender a rebuke or shame to their city and common weal.

The fourth Chapter treats of Africa particularly.
Now as concerning that part of Africa the which we have coasted toward the
West, as Mauritania, Barharia part of Africa and why it was so called.
and Barbaria, so named because of the diversity and strange manner of the
inhabitants, it is inhabited with Turks, Moors, and others borne in the
country, true it is that in some places it is uninhabited, and as desert as well
for the extreme heat that makes them to go naked saving only their privy
parts, as also for the sterilitie and barennesse of some places being full of
Spiders, and for the quantity of wild beasts, as Lions, Tigers, Dragons,
Leopards, Panthers, and others unknown, the which causes and constrayneth the
people of that country to go in bands and companies to their affairs and
trades, garnished with bows and arowes, and with other weapons, for their
defense. But if by adventure they be suddenly beset with these wild beasts,
being but a small company when that they go a fishing or otherwise, they flee
to the sea, casting themselves in, and so save themselves by swimming, in the
which they are well exercised and accustomed. The others being not so swift in
running, or not having the knowledge to swym, clyme up into trees, and by this
mean they euitate or eschew the danger of those beasts. Ye must also note
that the people of ye country dye more by the rauishment of wild beasts than
by natural death: and this is from Gibaltar to the Capuerd. They keep the
cursed and damnable law of Mahomet, The Religion and ceremonies of the
barbariens.
yea more superstitiously than the natural Turks. Before they make their
prayer in their temples, they wash wholly their bodies, thinking thereby they
purge their soul as well as the body by this outward washing and ceremony
with a corruptible element, and their prayer is made four times a day, as I
have seen the Turks do at Constantinople. In Mecha the sepulture of Mahomet:
the voyage of the Turks to Mecha.
In times past when that the Pagans had first received this damnable Religion,
they were constrained once in their time to make a voyage to Mecha, where as
their gentill Prophet is buried, otherwise they had no hope of the rewards or
benefits that to them were promised, the which things the Turks observe at this
day, and they assemble for to accomplish this voyage with all kind of
munitions and attilery, as though they would go a warfar, for fear of the
invasions of the Arabians that keep the mountains in certain places. What
assemblies I have seen being in Cairea, with the magnificence and triumphs
that there is made. And yet this is more curiously and straightly observed among
the Moors of Africa and other Mahometists so blinded and obstinate are they,
the which has given me occasion to speak in this place of the Turks and of
their voyage before they take in hand the war or any thing else of weight or
importance. And when that principally the mean is taken from them to make this
voyage, they sacrifice some wild or tame beast, as they chance to meet, which
they call as well in their language as in Arabike, Corban, which is as much to
say as present or offering, the which abuse is not used among the Turks of
Leuant, neither in Constantinople. They have certain Priests that are the
greatest deceivers of ye world, they make the common sort believe and
understand, that they know the secrets of God and of their Prophet that
speaks many times to them. Furthermore they use a strange manner of writing,
and do attribute the first use of writing before all other nations. To the
which the Egyptians will never accord to whom the most part of those that have
treated of Antiquities, give the first invention of writing with the
representing by certain figures the cogitations and thoughts of the mind.
And to this purpose writes Tacitus in this manner: The Egyptia^s were the first
that invented writing and letters.
the Egyptians were the first that represented and manifested the conception of
the mind by figures of beasts, grauing upon stones for the memorial of me^,
the things that happened and were done in times past. Likewise they say that
they are the first inuenters of letters. And this invention, as it is found by
writing, was brought into Grecia by the Phenicians, that then ruled on the sea,
being reputed to their great glory as the first, finders out of that which they
had learned of the Egyptians.

The men in this part on the coaste of Europe, use to noynte their joints
with Oil, of the which they have great plenty, before they take in hand any
great exercise: for all soft and pliable things are not easy to break, they
principally make war with the Spanyardes on their borders, partly for
religion and partly for other causes. It is true that the Portingals of late
time have overcome certain places in Barbaria, The holy Cross a town in
Barbary.
and edified towns and Castles, and planted our Religion, specially one fair
town named the holy Cross, for that they arrived and stayed there the same
day, and it is at the foot of a fair mountayn. But within this two years the
wicked people of the country being assembled together, have thrown down from
the said mountain so many great stones, that they had pulled out thereof,
that in the end the poor Portingals were constrained to forsake the place,
and there is always such enimitie or hatred among them, that they trade and
traffic together their Sugar, Oil, Ryce, Lether and other merchandise by
leaving of pledges and hostages. They have quantity of good fruts, as Oranges,
Lemo^ds, Citrons, Pomegarneds, the which they eat for want of better meat,
and Ryce instead of Wheat: also they drink Oils, as we do Wine. They live
many years, more to my judgment because of the sobriety they use, than
otherwise.

Of the fortunate Islands now called the Canaries. Cap. 5.
How the Fortunate Islands lie now named the Canaries.
Leaving Barbaria on the left hand, having always the wind favorable, we knew
by our compass how near we were to the fortunate Islands, lying on the
borders of Mauritania toward the west, being so named by our elders, because of
the good te^peratnesse of the air, Why they were named of our elders the
Fortunate Islands.
and frutfulnesse of the same. Now the first day of September in the foresaid
year, about six of the clock in the morning, we had sight of one of these
Islands, because of the hight of a great Hill, of the which we will speak more
largely and particularly hereafter. These Islands as some do affirm are.x. in
number, The number of these Islands.
of which there are three that the Authors make no mention of, for that they
are uninhabited, the other seven, which are named, Tenerif the I Will of iron,
Gomeria, and the great Island, properly called Canaria, are distant from the
Equinoctial.27. degrees, the other three, Forteuenturia, Palma, and Lencelota,
are.28. degrees, so that by this ye may see, that from the first to the last,
is a degree, the which is.17. Leagues and a half, reckening from the North to
the South, according to the opinion of Pillotes. But without further talk, he
that would find out by the degrees of the firmament the quantity of leagues,
and stades, that the earth does contain, and what proportion there is from
league to degree (the which ought to be observed of him that will write of
countries as a true Cosmographer) let him read Ptolomeus, the which treats
thereof at large in his Cosmography. Ca. 3.4.5. and 6.
Among these Islands there is none of them, but the greatest that is named
Canaria, because of the multitude of great Dogs that there are nourished, as
Pliny shows, and many others after him, that say as yet, that Iuba bare away
twain.

But now they are all named the Canaries without any distinction, for this
only reason before showed. Why the fortunate Islands are now named the
Canaries.
But in my opinion I think they were named Canaries, for the abundance of
Canes and wild Reeds that grow on the sea brink: as for the Canes or Reeds
yt bear Sugar, the Spaniards have planted a great many, since the time that
they have there inhabited, but there did inhabit brutish and Barbarous men
before that there were any Dogs, the which stands by good reason, for I know
well by experience, that in all the countries and Indies yt have been discovered
and found out of late days, they had never knowledge of dog or catte, as
hereafter shall be showed. Yet I know well that the Portingals have brought
thither some, and kept them for to hunte after wild beasts. Pliny, therefore
speaks in this manner: the first is called Ombrion, Ombrion.
whereas there is no sign of house nor building. In the mountains there is a
fountain, and trees like unto that which is named Ferula, Strange trees.
both black and white, out of the which may be wrong or writhen water. Of the
black ones the water is very bitter, and to the contrary the white ones, the
water is pleasant to drink. The other is called Iunonia, Iunonia.
whereas there is but one only house builded of stone, there is seen another
that is next to this, but less and of the said name: another that is full of
great Lizardes. Right over against these before showed, there is another named
the Island of Snow, The I Will of Snow. Canaria.
for that it is always covered with snow. The next to that is Canaria, so
called because of the multitud of great dogs yt it engenders, as we have
before showed, whereof Iuba King of Mauritania, had two, and in the said I Will
there are some appera^ce of old buildings. This country in times past has been
inhabited with wild and Barbarous people, not knowing God, but altogether
Idolaters, worshipping ye Su^ne ye Moon and certain other planets, as
sovereign deities, of the which they thought they received al their benefits,
but in less tha^.58. years, ye Spaniards have subdued and overcome them, and
slain part of them, and the rest they hold and keep as slaves and captives:
and they inhabiting there, have established or set up the Christian faith, so
that at this present there is none of the ancient dwellers left, The inahbitants
of the Canaries converted to the Christian faith.
only a few excepted that are hid in the mountains, as in the mountain of
Pych, of the which we will speak hereafter following: True it is that that
place is the refuge of all the banished of Spain, the which for punishment
are sent thither into exile, so that there is an infinite number also of
slaves, the which serve as well to labor the ground, as to do other labors. I
do much marvel how the inhabitants of these Islands, and of Afrike, for that
they are near neighbors, have so differed in language, in color, Religion and
in manners. Also that many under the Roman Empire have conquered and subdued
the greatest part of Africa, and never touched these Islands, as they have done
in the sea Meditareum, knowing also that they are very fruitful, serving as a
victualer to ye Spaniards, eue^ as Cicilie serves to the Romans and
Geneuois. The bounty of the Islands named Canaries.
This country of it self is good, being so well tilled, it brings great
profit, and the most in Sugers. For within these few years they have planted
many Canes that bring forth great quantity of Sugers marvelous good, not only
in these Islands but in other places that they hold there. Sugar of Canaria.
Nevertheless it is not so good in any part as in these Ila^ds of Canaries.
And the cause why it is there better gathered and desired, is, for that the
Ila^ds in the sea Meditareum on the cost of greek la^d, as Metelin, Rhodes,
and other places bearing good sugar, before the Turk had the dominion of them,
have been spoiled by negligence or otherwise. And in all the country of Leuant,
I have seen no sugar made but in Egypt, Sugar of Egypt
and ye canes yt bear it grow on the brinke of Nyll, the which also is
greatly esteemed of the people and of the merchants yt trade thither as much and
rather more, than Canarie Sugar. The elders before us esteemed greatly the
Sugar of Arabia, Sugar of Arabia.
for that it was marvelous hearty and pleasant, specially for medicine, to the
which use they did put it and to little other. But now adays voluptuousness
is so incresed, specially in our Europe, that there cannot be never so little a
banquet made after our manner of living, but that every sause must be sugered,
and also our meats and drinks. The which thing was defended to the Athenians,
by their laws, as a thing that did effeminate the people: the which the
Lacedaemonians have followed by example.

But of a truth the great Lords of Turkey drink sugered waters, for because
that wine is defended them by their law. As touching the wine that was
invented by the great Physician Hyppocrates, it was only permitted to sick
folk and unable, but at this day it is so common with us, as it is scarce in
other countries. So much have we spoken by the way, on the talk of sugar, let
us now return to our matter. The fruitfulness of the Canaries.
As for corn there is sufficient in these Islands, also of very good wine,
better than the wine of Candia, where as they make Malmesies, as we will
declare entreating of the Islands of Madera. Of flesh also there is sufficient,
as wild and tame goats, birds of all kinds great quantity, Oranges,
Citrons, Lemonds, Pomegranads and other fruits, Palms, and great quantity
of good Honey.

Small trees named Paper.
There is also about the rivers and floudes little trees named Paper, and in the
said rivers and floudes there are fishes named Silures, the which Paulus Iouius
in his book of fishes, thinks to be Sturgion, of the which the poor slaves
feed on, sweating for travel and almost breathless, and oftentimes they
feed thereon for want of other meat. And thus much I will say by the way,
that they are very hardly entreated of the Spaniards, specially of the
Portingals, yea worsse than of the Turks or Arabians. And I am constrained to
speak thereof, for that I have seen it my self. Among other things, there is
found an herb against the hills sides commonly called Oriselia, Oriselia an
herb.
the which they gather with great diligence for to dye color. Furthermore
they make a kind of black gum the which they name Bre, Bre, black gum
and how it is made.
of the which there is great abundance in Tenerif. They take thorns of yt
which there is great quantity, and break them, and lay them by piece one upon
another like crosses, and under each heap there is a little hole of no great
depth, and then they set fire on this woode^ almost at the very top, and then
it rendereth his gum that falls into this hole. Others do make it with
less labor, for the hole being made, they set fire on ye tree: this gum
brings them great profit in their trade that they make to Perou, of the which
they use to calke ships and other vessels for the sea, putting it to no other
use. As touching the heart of this tree being somewhat red, the poor people
that dwell on the hills and mountains cut it by long sticks of the length of
half a fadome, as great as our thumb, and lighting it at one end it serves
instead of a ca^del. Also the Spaniards use it after this manner.

Of the high mountains of Pike properly called Pikehill. Cap. 6.
IN one of these Islands named Tenerif, The wonderful hight and circuit of
Pikehill.
there is a Hill of so wonderful a highth that the mountains of Armenia, of
Persia, Tartaria, neither the Hill Lybem in Syria, the mount Ida, Athos, nor
yet the mount Olympus, so much celebrat by the Historiographers, ought not to
be compared to this Hill, the which contains in circuit at the least twenty
miles, and from the foot to the top 54. miles. This mountain or Hill is named
Pike, at al times snowy, mysty, and full of great and cold vapors, and also of
snow, although that it is not easily seen, (to my judgment) for because that
it extends to the lower Region of the Air the which is very cold, as
Philosophers, and Astronomers hold opinion, so that the snow cannot melt,
because that in that place the Sun cannot cast her beams, and therefore the
superior or upper part remains always cold. This mountain or Hill is so
high, that if the air be clear, it may be seen fifty Leagues on the water
and more, the top and the bottom of this hill though one be near or far of,
is made in manner of this Greek figure O the which signifies Omega. The height
of the hill Etna.
I have also seen the Hill called Ethna.30. Leagues, and on the sea near to
Cypris, I have seen a certain mountain of Armenia, fifty Leagues of, though
I have not the eye sight so good, as Linxius, who from the Promontorie of
Lylibie in Cicilie, did discern and see the ships, in the port of Carthage. I
am sure that some will think this strange, esteming that a man's eye could in
no wise see nor discern so far of: but nevertheless this is most true in
plainness, but not in height. The Spaniards have diverse times assayed to
sound the height of this hill, and for to do it, they have many times sent a
certain number of people with mulles, bearing bread, wine and other munitions,
but they never return again as I have been credibly informed of those that
have dwelled there ten years. And therefore they hold opinion, that in the
said hill, as well on the top as on the circuit, there are some rest or
remnant of these wild Canarians, that thither are retired, and keep the said
hill, living with Roots, and with wild beasts, the which kill and slaye
those that presume to get up the hill, Ptolomeus has known this hill.
to discover the top thereof. Also of this Ptolomeus has had knowledge,
saying, that beyond the Columns or pillars of Hercules. In a certain I Will there
is a hill, of a marvelous and wonderful height, and therefore toward the top
it is always covered with Snow: from the said hille there falls great
abundance of water, that waters all the Island, the which makes it very
fruitful of Canes, Sugers, and other things. And there is no other water than
that which comes from that hill, otherwise the countries that are under the
tropike of Cancer, would remain barren because of the excessive heat. Strange
sort^ of stones.
It brings forth abundantly great stones like to spunges, and are very light,
so that one as great as a man's head does not weigh half a pound: it brings
forth other stoanes like Iron sledges: and four or five Leagues upon the Hill,
are found other stones, that smell like smoke, and therefore the inhabitants
think that in the hill there is some smoky Mine.

Of the I Will of Iron. Cap 7.
AMong these Islands I think good particularly to describe the I Will of Iron
next to Tenerif, The I Will of Iro^ and why it is so called.
so named for because that there are found Mines of Iron, as the I Will of Palm,
so named because of ye multitude of Palm trees, that are there, and so of
others. And although that it be the least of the others, (for his circuit is
not above 6. Leagues) yet nevertheless it is fruitful, for the circuit that
it contains, as well in canes bearing Sugar, The fruitfulness of the I Will of
Iron.
as in beasts, fruits, and fair gardens, above al ye rest. It is inhabited with
the Spaniards as well as ye rest. As touching corn, there is not sufficient for
the dwellers, therefore the greatest part as ye slaves, are constrained to
nourishe them selves with milk and cheese, made of goats milk, of yt which
there is plenty, and therefore they look fresh, well disposed, and marvelous
well nourished, for because that such nourishment by custom is familiar to
their nature, likewise for that the good temperatnesse of the air favors
them. Some half Philosopher or half Phisitio^ (giving always honor to the^
that merit honor) may here demand when- that they using these things, are not
grauelly, knowing yt milk, Milk and Cheese grauelly.
and cheese engender grauel, as may be seen in many in our Europe. I answer
that cheese of it self may be good and bad, grauelly and not grauelly,
according to the quantity that is taken, and the nature and disposition of the
person. True it is that to us which being not contented with one kind of
meat, we take oftentimes even in an hour twenty, or thirty kinds of meats
and drinks, it may be hurtful, but not to them which use one kind only, yea,
and that moderatly.

We see that the Indians live seven or eight months in the war with meal
made of certain hard and dry roots, in the which some would Judge that
there were no nourishment nor sustenance. The inhabitants of Creta and Cypris,
Diverse nourishmentes of diverse people.
live almost with no other thing than milk the which is better than that of
the Canaries for that it is Kowe milk and other Goats milk. Furthermore that
milk is good nourishment, that pro^ptly is converted into blood, Milk is very
good sustenance.
for that it is but blood whitted in ye dug or roother. Pliny in his second
book and.42. Chap. shows that Zorastes lived xx. years in the wilderness
only with cheese, yt Pamphiliens in the war, had almost no other victuals but
cheese made of Asses, and Camels milk, the which also I have seen the Arabians
do, the which did not only drink milk in stead of water passing the Desert
of Egypt, but also gave it unto their horses. Also the Ancient Spaniards for
^he most part of the year lived with Ackornes, as Strabo shows and
Possidonius, of the which they made their bread, and their drink of certain
roots, and not only the Spaniards but many others, as Vergill recites in
Georgicon: but now the season serves us to live more sweeter and more
humaynly. The men in all these Islands are more broken to labor and travel than
the Spaniards in Spain, having no lerning but rustically. To conclude, they of
knowledge that are well seen in the Navigations, as well Portingals as Spaniards,
The I Will of Iro^ is right under the Diametrial line.
say that this Island is right under the Diametrial, as they have noted in their
card Marins, limitating all that is from the North to the South as the
Equinoctial line of Weast and East, the which lines are equal in greatness,
for every one contains.360. degrees, The value of every degree.
and every degree as before we have said, is seuentene leagues and a half.
And even as the Equinoctial line divides the Sphere in two, and the four and
twenty clymats twelve, in the East, and as much in the Weast, also this
Diametriall passing by this former Island, as the Equinoctial by the Isles of
S. Omer, cutteth or breaks the Paralizes and all the sphere by the half of
the North to the South. Other things I have not found in this Island worthy of
memory, saving that there are great quantity of Scorpions, and more
dangerous tha^ those that I have seen in Turkey, as I have known by
experience. Scorpions of Canaries.
Also the Turks gather them for to make Oil, good for medicine, as the
Physician can very well use it.

Of the Islands of Madera. Cap. 8.
WE read not in Authors how that these Islands were discovered, The Islands of
Madera not known of our elders.
but within these sixty years that the Spaniardes and Portingals have hazared
and enterprised many Nauigations toward the Weast, and as we have said
before, Ptolomeus had understanding of the Fortunate Ila^ds even to the Caape
verd. Pliny also makes mention, yt Iuba brought two dogs from the great
Canaria, beside many Authors that thereof have spoken. Then the Portingals were
the first that found out these Islands, of the which we speak, and named them
in their language Madera, What Madera signifies.
the which is as much to say, as Wood, for that it was altogether a
Wilderness full of wood, and not inhabited. These Islands lie between
Gibaltare and the Canaries toward the West, and in our Navigations we coasted
them on the right hand, being distant from the Equinoctial, about.32. degrees,
and from the Canaries.63. leagues. Now for to discover and labor this
Country, as a Portingale being a master Pilot showed me, they were constrained
to set fire in the wood, as well of the highest as of others. Of the greatest
and principallest Island, that is made in manner of a Triangle, as D of the
Greeks, co^taining in circuit.14. leagues, or therabout. Wherein the fire
continued the space of vj. or.vij. days, with such a vehement heat, that
they were constrained to save them selves in their ships, and the others that
had not this mean nor liberty, cast themselves into the Sea, until the smoke
of the fire was past. Incontinently after, they began to labor the ground, to
plant and sow diverse grains: the which profited greatly, because of the good
disposition and temperatenesse of the air. Afterward, they builded and
edified houses and Castles, so that at this day there is found no place so
fair and pleasant. Sugar of Madera, celebrated above others.
Among other things, they have planted great plenty of Canes, that bear very
good sugar: with the which they have a great trade into other Countries, and at
this day the sugar of Madera bears the name. The people that now inhabit
Madera, are much more civil and fuller of humanity, than they of the
Canaries, and they trade with others, as humainely as is possible. Their
greatest trade is Sugar and Wine, of the which we will treat hereafter at
large. Also they have Honey, Wax, Oranges, Citrons, Lemonds, Pomegranads and
Corderians, they make great quantity of Comfets, Comfets of Madera.
the best that may be wished for, and they make them in the likeness of Men,
Women, Lions, Birds, and Fishes, the which is a fair thing to see, and much
better to taste. Also they conserve many fruits, the which by this means do
keep, and they are carried into strange Countries, to the comfort and
recreation of every one. The fruitefulnesse of the Islands of Madera.
This Country is very good, fair, and fruitful, as well of his natural
disposition, because of the fair hills decked with woods and strange fruits,
the which we have not in these parties: as also of fountains and lively
springs, with the which the fields and meadows are watered, being garnished
with herbs and flowers sufficiently, and wild beasts of all sorts. Among
the Trees that are there, Gum.
there are many that cast gum, the which they have learned with the time, to
put to necessary uses. There is also seen a kind of Gaiac, A kind of Gaiac.
but for that it is not found so good as the Gaiac that is at the Antilles,
they set naught thereby: it may also be, that they know not the manner how to
use it. There are also certain Trees, that at certain times of the year,
casts good Gum, the which they call Dragons blood, Dragons blud.
and for to get it out, they pearse the tree foot, opening it wide and deep.
This tree bears a yellow fruit, as great as a Cherrie, the which is very good
to refreshe one, whether he have the Ague or otherwise.

This kind of gum is not unlike to Cynaber of which writes Dioscoridus,
Dioscoridus Cinaber.
saying, as for Cynaber says he, is brought from Africa, and is sold dear,
so that there is not enough to satisfy paynters: it is read, and therefore
some judge it to be Dragons blood, and so has Pliny thought it in his book
the.33. of his natural History the seventh Chapter, of the which as well
Cynaber as Dragons blood is not at this day found among us so natural, as
the elders have described, but the one and the other is artificial: therefore
knowing what the elders have judged it, and that which I have known of this
gum, I would esteem it to be altogether like to Cynaber and Dragons blood,
having a soft, and a cold virtue. I will not here forget among these, so
singular fruits as great Lemonds, Oranges, Citrons, and abundance of sweet
Pomegranads, winish, sweet and sour, little and great, the ryne or peele of
which serve to tanne and harden the skins, for that they are very suppell. And
I think that they have learned this of Pliny, for the treats thereof in his
19. book and thirtenth Chapter of his History. To be short, these Ila^ds so
fruitful and well disposed, do excel in dilicatnesse those of Greece, were it
Chios that Empedocleus has so much extolled, and Rhodes, Apollonius and many
others.

Of the Wine of Madera. Cap. 9.
WE have here showed how much the land of Madera is fruitful and well
disposed, to bear many kinds of good fruit: now we must speak of the Wine
of Madera, the which is above all fruits, for the use and necessity of our
humayne life. I cannot tell whether it meriteth the first degree, at the least I
am assured it meriteth the second in excellency and perfection. The Wine and
Sugar because of an affinity in temperatnesse that they have together, require
a like disposition as does the air and the land. And even as our Islands of
Madera do bring forth great quantity of very good Sugar, Wine and Sugar of
Madera.
so do they in like manner bring forth good Wine from what parts so ever the
plants are come. The Spaniards have affirmed that they were not brought from
Leuant nor from Candia, and yet the Wine is as good and better. The which then
ought not to be attributed to any other thing, but only to the ground. I know
well that Cyrus King of the Medians and Assirians, before that he had conquered
Egypt, made to be planted a great number of pla^ts that he caused to be
brought from Siria, that since brought forth good Wine, but yet they passed not
these of Madera. Wine of Ca^dia
And as for the Wine of Candia, though they are very excellent, so that in
times paste they have been greatly esteemed in the Roman bankets, the which
have been more celebrated than the Wines of Chios, Metheglyn, and of
Promentorie of Aruasia, which for his excellency and pleasantness has been
called Wine for the Gods. But at this day the Wines of Madera, and of the I Will
of Palm one of the Canaries, Wine of the I Will of Palm.
has got the reputation, whereas there grows white, red and claret with the
which they do trade into Spain and from thence into other countries. The most
excellentest is sold at the place where it is made, for nine or ten Ducats the
Pype. From the which country being transported into other places, it is very
hot and burning, and rather poison to men, than nourishment, if it be not taken
with discretion.

Plato esteemed Wine to be a very good nourisher, and very familiar to our
bodies, stirring up or provoking the spirits to virtue and honesty, always
provided that it be moderatly taken. The profit of Wine being moderatly taken.
Also Pliny says, that Wine is a sovereign medicine. The which being well
known of the Persians, esteemed their great enterprises after that they had
drunk Wine (moderatly) to be more worthy than those that were done fasting,
that is to wit, being taken in sufficient quantity according to the
complectio^ of me^. We have here showed, that only the quantity or
superfluity of meats and drinks hurts: therefore to my judgment this Wine
is better the second and third year than the first, when it has the heat of
the Sun, the which heat within time consumes and vadeth, so that then there
remains but the natural heat: for being transported from one place to
another, the burning heat extinguisheth. Moreover in these Islands of Madera,
the trees, herbs, and fruits grow so rank and thick, that they are
constrained to cut and to burn a great part thereof. Instead of which
they plant canes of Sugar that profit very much, bringing their Sugar in,
in.6. months, and those that they plant in January, are cut in June, from
one month to another, and so according as they are planted, the which lets
that the heat of the Sun does not hurt them. Here I have briefly showed that
which I could observe, as touching the secrets of the Isles of Madera.

Of the Promentarie Verd, and of his Islands. Cap. 10.
A Promentary is, that which we call a Cape.
THE elders have called or named a Promentarie, a point of a land that lies
out long in the sea, the which may be seen a far of, and that this day it is
called with us a Caape, as a thing eminent above others, as the head is above
the rest of the body? also some will write Promontorium a Prominendo, the which
to my judgment is best. This Caape or Promentarie of the which we mind to
speak, lies on the coast of Africa, between Barbaria, and Guinny, in the
realm of Senega, dista^t from the Equinoctial.15. degrees, being in times
paste named Ialout, by the inhabitants, and since Caape verd, Ialout now called
Caape verd, and why it was so named.
by those that have sailed thither and discovered it, being so named because of
the multitude of trees both small and great, that are green at all times of
the year, even as the white Caape is so called, because it is full of white
sands, being as white as Snow, without any appearance of Herbs or trees,
distant from the Canaries.70. Leagues: and there is found a goulfe of the Sea,
called by the people of the country Dargin, of the name of a little Island,
Dargina gowlf. Promentarie of Ethiopiae.
near to the main land. Ptolomeus has named this Caape verd the Promentorie
of Ethiopia, of the which he only had knowledge without passinge further, the
which I judge for my part, to be well termed of him, for this country
extends of a great length, and therefore many have said, that Ethiopia is
divided in Asia, and in Africa. Among the which Gemaphrisius says, that the
mountains of Ethiopia, did occupy the greatest part of Afrike, extending to
ye brinkes or borders of ye west Occidental, toward the South, even to the
flood or river Nigritis. This Caape is very fair and great lying far into
the sea, edified on two fair mountains. All this country is inhabited with
rude and uncivil people, not so rude or wild as they of the Indies, very black
as they of Barbary, ye must also note that from Gibaltar, to Prestre John's
land, Calicute, co^taining more tha^.3000. leagues, the people is al black.
Also I have seen in Jerusalem three Bishops on the part of Prester John, that
came thither to visit the holy Sepulcher, that were much more blacker than
those of Barbary, and not without occasion, for it is not to be thought that
generally those of Africa are a like black or like in manners and conditions,
considering the variety and difference of Regions, that are some more hotter
than others. Those of Arabia, and of Egypt, are between black and white,
others brown colored whom we call white Moors, others are clean black: the
most part go all naked, as the Indians, acknowledging a King, who^ they name
in their language Mahouat: yet some of them as well men as women, hyde their
privy parts with beasts skins. Some among the others wear shirtes, and gowns
of course hairy cloth, the which they receive in trading with the Portingals.
The people are familiar enough toward strangers. Before that they take their
sustenance they wash their bodies and members, but in another thing they do
greatly err, for they ordain their meats very uncleanly, also they eat
stinking and rotten flesh, and fish: the fish because of his moistness
putrifieth, and the flesh for that it is tender and moist, is quickly changed,
because of the vehement heat, as we see here in Summer. For moystnesse is sign
of putrefaction, and the heat is as a cause efficient. Their houses and
lodgings are alike, all round in manner of our dove houses, covered with reeds
and Rushes, of the which also they use to lie on, in stead of beds for to
sleep and take their rest. As touching their Religion, they hold diverse kinds
of opinions strange enough, and contrary to the true Religion. Some worship
Idols, others Mahomet, chiefly in the realm of Camber; some think, that
there is one God, the Author of all things, with other opinions not unlike to
the Turks. There are some among them that live more hardly than the others,
having hanged at their neck a little box closely shut and glewed with gum)
like to a little chest, full of certain letters or wrytings, for to make their
inuocations and prayers, the which customably they use certain days without
ceassing, having an opinion that whilst they have it about them, they be out
of danger. As for Matrimony, they join together one with another by certain
promises and agreementes without any other Ceremony. This Nation passes the
time in pleasure, loving daunsing, the which they exercise at evening in the
Moon shine: in their daunsing they turn their face as by some manner of
reverence and worship, the which a very friend of mine has showed me of a
truth, who dwelled there a certain time. Barbazins and Serretsa people of
Africa.
Nere adjacent are the Barbazins and Serrets, with the which those of whom we
have spoken make continual war, although that they be like, (only excepting)
that ye Barbazins are more wild, brutishe, cruel, and hardy. The Serrets are
vacabonds and despearsed, even as the Arabians by the deserts, pilfering all
that they may come by, without law, and without King, saving only that they
bear a certain honor to him among them, that has done some prowess or
valiant act in the war. And this they allege for reason, that if they were
subject under the obedience of a King, he might take their children, and use
them as slaves, as does the King of Senega. They fight for the most part on the
water in little boats made of the bark of a tree, of four fadome long, the
which they name in their language Almadies. Almadies.
Their weapons are bows and sharp poynted arrows enuenomed, so that he is
incurable that therewith is stricken. Furthermore, they use staves of Canes,
garnished at the end with some beasts teethe in stead of iron, with the which
they can well help them selves. When they take their ennimies in the war,
they keep them to sell to to strangers, for to get other Merchandise, (for
there is no use of money) they do not kill them and eat them, as the Canibals
do and they of Bressill. I will not leave out, ye joining to this Country,
there is a fair river or flood named Nigritis, Nigritis now called Senega.
and since named Senega, the which is of the same nature as is Nylle, from
whence it proceeds as many do affirm, the which passes by hie Lybia, and
the kingdom of Orgunea, running through the midst of that Country, watering
it as Nylle does Egypt. And for this cause it was named Senega. The Spanyardes
many times have assayed by this river, to enter into the Country for to subdue
them, and sometimes they have entered well four score leagues: but for that
they could not at no time addulciate nor appease the inhabitauntes, being
strange and stout, for avoiding of further inconveniences that might happen
and fall, they departed home again. The trade of these brutishe men, is Oxen and
Goats, specially their skins, and they have so great abundance, that for a
hundredth weight of iron, you may have a couple of Oxen of the best. The
Portingals make their vaunt that they were the first, yt have carried to this
Caape verd, Goats, Cowes and Bulls, the which have since so multiplied: also
that they have carried thither diverse Plants and Seeds, as of Rice, Citrons
and Orenges. As touching Nyll, it grows in the Country plentifully. Near to
this Caape verde, Island near to Caape verde, not inhabited.
next to the maine land, there are three little Islands, others than those that
we call Islands of Caape verd, of the which we will speak hereafter, being
fair enough, because of ye fair trees that they bring forth, nevertheless
they are not inhabited. They that dwell there near, go thither to fish, from
whence they bring such a multitude of Fish, that they use it in stead of
bread, being once dried, and beaten to dust. In one of these Islands is found a
Tree, A strange tree.
the which bears leaves like to our Fig trees: the fruit is a two foot
long or there about, and great in proportion like to Cowcombers of the Isle of
Cypres. Some eat of this fruit, as we do Myllions or Pompous, and within this
fruit, there is a grain of the greatness of a Bean, wherewith some of them
feed their Apes and Munkeys: others make collers to put about their necks, for
it is very fair when it is dried and seasoned.

Of the Wine of Palm trees. Cap. 11.
Having written as much as is possible, that which merited writing of the
Promentary verde, being here before declared. I am now minded particularly to
treat, seeing it comes to purpose of Palm trees, and of the Wine and
Beuerage, that these black brutishe men have learned to make: the which in
their language they call Mignoll. We see how much God the father and creator of
all things, gives means and ways for the comfort of our life, in such sort
that if one way fails, he shows us another. And although that in that
Country the wine is not so good as in other places: and paraduenture for that
they have not been planted, or so diligently looked too, as it is in many
places of Europe, nevertheless they have by Divine providence recovered by
Art and some diligence, that which otherwise to them was denied. Now this
Palm is a tree marvelous fair and well accomplished, be it in height in
perpetual greenness or otherwise, (of ye which) there are diverse kinds,
Diverse kinds of Palms.
and that grow in diverse places. In Europe as well as in Italy, these Palms
grow abundantly, chiefly in Sicily, but they are barren: in some of the
borders of Spain, they bear fruit vnrelished and sour, not to eat. In
Africa they are sweet, and also in Egypt, in Cypris, in Creta, and also in
Arabia. Likewise in Judah: the wine that thereof is made, is excellent, but it
hurts the brain. Of this tree there is male and female, the male bears his
flower at the branch, the female buddeth without flower. And it is a
marvelous thing, and worthy of memory of that which Pliny and many others do
resite, that in the Forest of Palm trees that naturally grow out of the
earth, if that the males be cut, the females become baren without bearing any
more fruit, as widows that want their husbands. This tree requires a hot
Country, a sandy ground, and brackishe or salt, otherwise they salt the root
before they plant it. As touching the fruit, it bears meat outward, the
which grows first, and within, a nut with a shel, the which is the grain and
seed of the tree, Pliny. lib. 13. cap. 4.
as we see Appels in our Country: and also there grows little ones among
these, without nut, growing al on a branch. Furthermore, this tree being dead,
reuiueth and springs again of it self, Phoenix a bird, and why she is so
named.
of ye which it seems ye bird Phoenix has taken his name, the which in
Greek signifies Palm, for that he reuiueth again of him self, without any
other mean. And yet more this tree so much celebrated, has caused this
Proverb and argument, Proverb.
that is to carry the Palm, as much to say, as the triumph and victory, or for
that in times past they used a crown of Palm in their victories, as a thing
that is always green. And yet every play or game has his tree, as the Bay
tree, the Mirrhe tree, and the Olive tree, or for that this tree, as some say,
was first consecrated to Phoebus before the Laurel or Bay, the which of
antiquity has represented the sign of victory. And the reason thereof
recites Aulus Gelius* when he says, that this tree has a certain property,
The property of the Palm.
that happens to worthy and virtuous men, that is, that the Palm tree never
boweth nor bends, but to the contrary, the more that it is laden the more as
by a manner of resistance it redresseth and bears upward, the which
Aristotle confirms in his Problemes, also Plutarche, Pliny, and
Theophrastus, Lib. 7. Lib. 8. Lib. 16. Chapt. 42* Lib. 5. of plants.
the which seem to agree with the saying of Virgill. Shrink not at all though
fortune at thee frown,
But valiantly resist and beat her down.
Now to our purpose, in the which as well for ye disposition of the air which
is very hot being in the zone Torida distant 15. degrees from the Equinoctial
line, as for the good nature of the earth, there grows abundance of Palm
trees, from the which they draw a kind of Juice for their store and ordinary
drink: The manner how to make Wine of Palms.
the tree being opened with a certain instrument a foot or twain from the
ground, there proceeds a Licor, that they receive in an earthen vessel, and
keep it in other vessels for their use. And for to keep it from corruption they
salt it a little, as we do verioice in our country, so that the salt
consumes or takes away the taast of the tree. As touching the color and
strength, it is like to the white Wines of Anion, the taaste is very good. The
property of the Wine of Palm trees.
This likor is very good for to refresh and quench their thirst, to the which
they are subject because of the extreme heat.

The fruit of these Palms are little Daates sharp and sower, so that they are
not toothsome to eat, nevertheless the Juices of the tree is very pleasant to
drink. And among them they esteem it as we do good wines. The Egyptians in
times past before they did embalme the dead bodies having prepared the^
according to their custom, for to keep them from putrefieng, did wash them
three or four times with this likor, and then anointed them with myrrh and
Cynamon. This drink is used in many countries of Ethiopia, for want of better
Wine. In like manner certain Moors make a kind of drink with the fruit of
an other tree, Another kind of drink.
but it is as sour as veriuyce before they be ripe: for to be short, I will
leave many and diverse fruits and roots the which the inhabitants use for their
sustenance, that they have taken only by experience, so that they know how to
use them in their sickness. For, even as they eschew voluptuousness, and
superfluity, the which among us are very familiar, so also they are more
harder and stronger for to endure outward injuries be they never so great. And
to the contrary we, for that we are over delicate and dayntie, are hurt with a
small thing.

Of the River of Senega. Cap. 12.
ALthough that I am not minded in this my discourse as a true Geographer to set
out the Countries, Towns, Cities, Floudes, Goulfes, Mountains, Distances,
Situatio^s, and other things appertaining to Geography, yet nevertheless it
seems not contrary, to write and set forth at large the most notablest
places when it comes to purpose: as the things that I have seen for pleasure
and contentation of my mind, that the reader might thereby receive some
pleasure and profit. Now this floude so famous among other things, The Kingdom
of Senega.
of the which the country and Kingdom that it waters has been named
Senega, as our sea Meditarium, has or requires diverse names according to the
diversity of countries where it passes, and in Libia, coming to the Caape
verd, of the which we have spoken here before, from the which to the river, the
country is very plain, sandy and barren, for the which cause there are not
so many devouring beasts, as in other places. This floude or River is the
first and most celebrated of the land toward the Weaste side, separating or
dividing the dry and barren country from the fruitful, and it extends even
to the high Libia, and to many other countries and Kingdoms that it waters.
It contains in breadth about a league, the which is very little in the respect
of many rivers that are in America, of the which we will treat hereafter more
at large. Before that it enters into the Weaste, it deuideth, and enters in
by two mouths or openings being separated the one from the other about half a
league, the which are of an indifferent depth, so that small ships may be
brought in. Some in the old time as Solon in his book named Pollycistor,
Julius Caesar and others, The opinion of some of our elders upon the original
of Nill and of Senega Hills of the Moon and of there lying. The original of
Senega.
have written that the great floude of Nill, passing all over Egypt, has the
like spring or Original as Senega, and proceeds out of the same mountains,
the which seems not true. For the original of Nill, is far beyond the
Equator, for it comes from the high hills of Bid, otherwise named of the
Ancient Geographers, hills of the Moon, the which separateth the old and
new Africa, as the hills Pyrannes, divide France from Spain. And these hills
are in Cerenaique, the which is beyond the line.15. degrees. The source or
spring of Senega, of the which we speak, proceeds from two hills or
mountains, the one named Mandro, and the other Thala, being distant from the
hills of Bid, more than a 1000. leagues. And by this may be seen how greatly
many have erred for yt they have not sought out things, as we have done of late
days. As for the hills of the Moon, they lie in the lower Ethiopia, and those
from whence comes Senega into Libia, Hills of Libia.
of the which, the chiefest hills are Vsergate, from whence proceeds the River
of Darda, the mount Mandro, being more spoken of than the others, for because
that all the rivers that run from Salata, to Massa, being distant the one
from the other about seventy leagues, take their original out of this hill.
Furthermore, the mount Gyrgila, from whence their falls a river named
Sympho, and of Hagapole, comes the floude Subo, being full of good fish and
Cocodrils hurtful to their neighbors. True it is that Ptolomeus, having treated
of many countries and strange Nations, has said that which seemed him good,
chiefly of Africa and Ethiopia. And among all the Ancient writers, I find
none that has had so perfect knowledge to my mind as he, when he speaks of
the Promentarie of Phraso, having fiftene degrees of latitude, and that is the
farthest la^d of the which he has had knowledge, as also describes Glarean,
in the end of the description of Africa. In his time the inferior world has
been discribed, None in times past has had perfect knowledge of Africa in
general.
nevertheless he has not wholly speken thereof, for that he knew not a great
part of the land Meridionall, which in our time has been since discovered. And
many things have been added to the writings of Ptolome, that may be seen in the
general table that is properly of him. Therefore the simple reader having not
greatly turned in the Cosmography, nor had experience of things, shall note that
all the inferior world is divided by the elders in three parts unequal, that
is to wit Asia, Europa, and Africa, of the which some have written the truth,
other that which seemed them good, without making any mention of the west
Indies, that at this day make the fourth part of the world, discovered of late
years, as also has been the most greatest part of the East Indies Calicut and
others. As touching those of the Weaste, as France Antariike, Peru, Mexica,
they are now commonly called the New World, The new world.
yea to the.52. degree and a half of the line, where as is the straight of
Magello, and many other provinces on the North side, and of the South on the
coast of Leuant, and to the lower tropicke of Capricorn in the Weast
Meridionall, and the North land, of the which Arian, Pliny, and others
Historiographers, have made no mention that they have been discovered in their
time. Some have made mention of certain Islands that were found out or
discovered by the Carthaginians, The Isles Hisperides discovered by the
Carthaginians in times paste. The I Will Atlantike in the time of Plato.
but I judge the^ to be the Islands Hisperides or fortunate. Plato also says
that in times past there was in the sea Atlantike or Weast, a great main land
or country, and that there was in like case an Island named Atlantike more
greater than Africa or Asia together (the which) was swallowed up with an
earthquake, the which I think rather to be a fable than otherwise, for if it
had been true, others beside him would have written thereof, knowing that the
land of which the elders have had knowledge, deuideth in this manner. First of
the East part it is next unto the unknown land, the which is next to the
great Asia, and to the East Indies on the South side: they have had knowledge
of a few, that is to wit, Ethiopia Meridionall, named Agisimbra or the North
side of the Islands of England, Scotland, Ireland, and the hills Hiperbores,
which are the Further parts of land Northwarde as some do say. Now to
return to Senega, The diuisitie of the country and the inhabitants manners in
Senega.
on the one and on the other side of the floude, even as the ground is diverse
and differing, so are the inhabitants thereof: on the one side the people are
very black, of great stature and strong of body, nevertheless the country
flourishes wc fair trees bearing fruit, on the other side you shall see al
contrary, the me^ of the color of Ashes, and of little stature. As touching
the people of the country of Senega, I can say no other thing than of those of
Caape verd, but that they are rather worse, for that the Christians dare not so
easily descend a land for to trade or to have refreshing, as in other places,
unless they will be killed or taken for captives, and so to be made staves. All
things among them are wild and contemptible saving only peace, the which they
do somewhat esteem one toward another. In like case rest, with some
exercise, sometimes in laboring the ground for to save Ryce: as for corn and
Wine there is none, as touching corn it cannot prosper nor come up as in other
countries for that there falls very little and seldom rain, which is the
cause that the seeds cannot bud out nor flower because of the extreme heat
and dries. So soon as they see their ground watered or dewed, they begin to
sow, and after they have sowed within three months the fruit is ripe ready
to be cut. Their drink is the Juice of Palm trees and water. A fruitful tree
and Oil of diverse properties.
Among the trees of this country there are found some of the greatness of
our Oak trees, the which bears fruit as great as dates: with the nut they
make Oil that has marvelous properties. The first is that it holds water
in yellowe color like safferne, with ye which they dye or color their
little boulles, that they drink in, also there hattes that are made of the
straw of rice. Furthermore this Oil has a smell like to March violets, and
a savor or taast like Olyue Oil, therefore many eat of it with their Fish,
Ryce, and other meats that they eat. Thus much thought I good to speak of
this river and country of Senega, the which extends from the coast of
Leuant, to the land of Thuensar, and from the South part of the Realm Cambra,
from the ponent, to the Weaste sea, keeping always our course, certain days
after we began to enter into the country of Ethiopia, in that part that is
named the Kingdom of Noby, which is of a great circuit, with many Kingdoms
and provinces, of the which we will hereafter speak.

Of the Islands Hisperides, otherwise named Caape verd. Cap. 13.
AFter that we had left our Promentary on the left hand, The lying of the
Islands of Caape verd.
for to keep our course as right as it was possible, making the Southwest a
quarter of South almost a whole day, but about ten or eleven of the clock the
wind came contrary, the which cast us on the right hand toward certain
Islands the which are called by our card Marins, Islands of Caape verd, the
which are distant from the Canaries, about two hundredth leagues, and from the
Promentarie sixty leagues by sea, and a hundredth leagues from Budomell, in
Africa, following the cost of Ginnie toward the pole Antartike. These
Islands are ten in number, of the which there are two well peopled with
Portingals, that first discovered them and brought them to their obedience,
one of them which they have named S. James Island, is better peopled than the
rest, The I Will of S. James.
also thither is made great trading by the Moors as well of those that
inhabit the main land, as of the others that sail to the Indies in Ginnie,
and of Manycongra, in the country of Ethiopia. This Island is dista^t from the
Equinoctial line, fiftene degrees: an other likewise named S. Nicolas I Will, The
I Will of S. Nicolas, others as Flera, Plintana, Pintoria, and Foyon.
inhabited as the other: the others are not so peopled, as Flera, Plintana,
Pintoria, and Foyon, in the which there are a certain number of people and
slaves sent thither by the Portingals, to labor the ground in some places
where they find it best, and chiefly for to get goat skins of the which
there is great store, and therewith make good trade and have thereof a great
vent, and therefore the Portingals pass twice or thrice in a year with ships
and munitions leading with them dogs, and bringing nets, and snares for to
chase and hunte wild goats, the which after they are skinned, they reserve
only the skins, the which they season with salt and earth, in certain
vessels made for that purpose, for to keep them for putrifieng, and so they
carry them into their country, and therewith they make their Marokins,
Marokins of Spain.
that are so greatly esteemed with us. Also they inhabitants of these Islands
are bound to render or pay for tribut, for every one to the King of Portingall,
the number of six thousand goats wild and tame, being salted and dried, the
which they deliver to those, that of the part or for the Kings behoof make
the voyage, with his great ships to the East Indies, as to Calicut and
other places passing by these Islands: and these number of goats are bestowed
for their sustenance during the voyage, which is two years long or more, for
because of the distaunce of places and the great Navigations that they must
make. Moreover the air in these Islands is Pestilent and unwholesome, so that
the first Christians that began there to inhabit, were of a long time vexed
with sickness, as well to my Judgment for the vntemperatnesse of the air
that in such places cannot be good, as also the changing of diet and of
country. Also the burning Agues are there very familier and common to the
slaves specially, and the bloody flixe, of the which neither the one nor the
other proceed not but of humors extreme hot, because of their continual
travail and naughty nourishment: also of the hotnesse of the air, with the
water that is next, and therefore they receive excess of these two Eliments.

Of the Torterels, and of an herb that they call Orselie. Cap. 14.
Seeing yt in our Navigations we are minded to write certain secrets observed
in places where we have been, it shall not be hurtful to speak of Torterels,
that these former Islands do norishe in as great quantity as goats. There is
found four kind of Torterels, Four kind of Torterels.
of ye land and of the sea, the third living in fresh water, the fourth in
marshes. Of the which I mean not to speak particularly, but only of those
that are seen on the sea coasts that compass these Islands. These kind of
Torterels will leap from the Sea to the shore at his appointed time, making
with his claws a hole in the sand, wherein after she has laid her eggs,
(being of the number of eight pair, of the which speaks Aristotle,) covers
them so well, that it is impossible to see them, or to find them until that
the floude comes that uncovers them, then because of the extreme heat that
is there of the Sun, they engender and open (as the Hen of her egg) the
which consists in great number of Torterels, of the greatness of Crabbes
(which is a kind of Fish) the which the flood returning, bears into the
Sea. Among these Torterels, there are some of such a greatness, specially in
these parts whereof I speak, that four men cannot almost bear one, as of a
truth I have seen and understood of men worthy of credence. Lib. 9. cap. 10.
Pliny shows that in the Indian Sea, there are so great Torterels, that the
shel is big enough to cover a mean house, and that at the Islands of the red
Sea, they might make therewith vessels Nauigable. The said author says also,
that there are the like at the straight of Carmania in the Persian sea. There
are many ways to take them. Sometimes this great beast of a desire to swim
more easily, How to take the Torterels.
seeks the upper part of the water a little before noone, when the day is
fair, where as having the back bare and uncovered out of the water, suddenly
their shell is so well dried by the Sun, that they cannot descend to the
depth of the sea, so that they floote above water, will they or not, and by
this means they are taken. It is otherwise said that in the night they come
out of the Sea seking their repast, and after they are full and weary, they
fall a sleep on the water near to the shore, whereas they are easily taken,
for they are heard how they snort in sleeping, beside many other ways and
means, which were to long to rehearse. The thickness of the shells of these
Torterels of the Sea, and why they serve.

Shieldes of the shells of Torterels.


As touching their cover and shell, I leave you to judge of what thickness it
may be proportioned to his greatness. Also in ye coast of the straight of
Magelan, and of the river of plate, the Indians make the^ shieldes, which serve
them for to receive the blows of arrows of their enemies. Likewise the
Amazones on the coast of the peaceable Sea, make their Bulwarks when that they
are assailed of the enemies. And for my part I may boldly say, that I have
seen such a shell of a Torterell, that a hand gun could in no wise pierce.
We need not to ask how many the Insulares, or Island dwellers of Caape verde
do take and eat, as we would do here Beef or Mutton. Also it is like to
Veale, and almost of the same taste. The wild man of India America will in no
wise eat of them, persuading with them selves that it would make them heavy,
as it is an heavy meat, which would be a great let or hinderaunce to them in the
wars, for that being heavy, they cannot pursue lightly their enemies in the
war, neither escape them selves. To conclude, A history of a Portingal
gentleman.
I will rehearse a History of a Gentleman Portingalls, that was a Leper, who
for the great pain that he received of his disease, seeking all the means he
could to absent himself from his Country, as one being in extreme despair,
after he had knowledge of the conquest of these fair Islands by those of his
country, was bent for recreation to go thither, so that he prepared himself
in the best order he could, with ships, men, and artillery, and beasts alive,
specially Goats, of the which they have quantity. And in the end he landed
in one of the Islands, who for the taste that his disease caused him to have,
or for that he was weary of eating of flesh, the which they use customably in
their Country, he had a desire to eat eggs of Torterels, A Portingall healed
of the Leprosy.
the which he did for the space of two years, in such sort, that in the end
he was healed of his Leprosy. Now I would gladly ask, whether that by the
temperatenesse of the air, he recovered his health, which he had changed, or
the meat that he eat. I think verily, that both the one and the other was
the cause. As touching the Torterell, Pliny who speaking as well for
sustenaunce as for medicine, makes no mention that it should be good against
the Leprosy. Nevertheless, he says that it is good against many poisons,
specially against the Salmander by a Antipathia, that is between them two, and
mortal enmity.

Whether that this beast has any hid property against this evil, I leave to
the Philosophers and Physicians: and so ye may see that experience has given
the knowledge of many medicines. Of the which none ca^ give any certain
reason: wherefore I would that some would prove the experience of these of our
Country, the which to my judgment should be more better and more sure than
Vipers, so much commended in this affection, and of which is composed and made
the great Theriaque, knowing that it is not sure to use Vipers, because of the
poison yt they bear, what so ever they say, the which thing was also first
known by experience. It is also said that many upon the example of this
Portingall have gone thither, to whom it has also well succeeded. This much
therefore shall suffice for Torterels, and as for the Goats that this ge^tleman
bare thither, they have there so well multiplied, that at this present there
are an infinite number, and some hold opinion that their original comes from
thence, and that before there was none seen. Now there rests to speak of
an herb that they name in their language Orselie: Orselie a herb.
this herb grows on the tops of high and accessible rocks without any
earth, of the which there is great abundance, and for to gather it, they
fasten ropes on these Mountains or rocks, then they clime upward by the
lower end of this cord or rope, and scraping the rock with certain
instruments that they have, make it to fall as a chimney sweeper does, the
which they reserve, and let it down by a rope, in baskets or other vessels. The
use of this herb, is for to make colors, as here before we have showed.

Of the Island of Fire. Cap. 15.
The I Will of fire, and why it was so named.
AMong other secrets I will not leave out ye i will of fire, so named, for that it
casts continually a flame of fire, such a one, that if the elders had had
thereof any knowledge, they would have written it among other things, as well as
of the Mountain of Vesuue, and of the hill Etna, of the which for a truth
they rehearse maruels. As touching Etna in Sicilie, it has cast the fire
sometimes with a meruellous noise, as in the time of Marcus Emilius, and T.
Flaminus, as writes Orosa, the which many other Historiographers do affirm,
as Strabo, the which affirms to have seen it, and diligently considered. The
which makes me to believe somewhat also in the respect of these men that have
spoken thereof. Also they are not so far off, but yt we may prove whether it
be true or no. I know well that some of our writers would say, that one of the
Islands of Canaria casts continually fire: but let him take heed that he
take not that, of which we speak, for the other. Aristotle in his book of
maruels, speaks of an Island discovered by the Carthaginiens not inhabited,
which did cast flames of fire, beside many other wonderful things.
Notwithstanding, I cannot think that they have known this, much less the
hill Etna, for it was known before the reign of the Carthaginiens. As for the
hill of Pussola, it lies on the maine land, The Hill Pusola.
and if any one will say otherwise, I will notwithstand them: as for my part I
cannot find that ever it was found out, but since a M. D. and.xxx. with others
as well near as far. There is also an other hill in Hirland, named Hecla,
the which at certain times casts stones, as thought they had come out of a
fiery furnace, so that the ground within.v. or.vj. leagues about, is barren and
unprofitable, because of the ashes that proceed out of this hill, wherewith the
ground is covered. This Island of which we speak, contains vij. leagues
compass, by good right called the I Will of fire, for the Mountain having of
Circuit.679. paces, and of height a thousand and fifty fadome or there about,
casts continually fire at the top, the which may be seen thirty or forty
leagues on the sea, much more clearer in ye night than the day, for that by
good Philosophy the greatest light shadoweth the least: the which makes the
Nauigants afraid, that have no knowledge thereof before. This flame has a
very evil smell, and therefore ye need not to think such manner of fire
strange, knowing that they are natural things, as the Philosophers witness,
(that is) those places are full of fire, and hot Mines, of the which proceeds
a vapor hot and dry, like to fire, the which cannot be done without air. Also
from thence proceed waters naturally hot: furthermore in Esclauonie by
Apolonia, there is a fountain coming out of a rock, whereas is seen proceed
a flame of fire, whereby all the waters adjacent are as boiling. This place or
I Will of fire is inhabited with Portingals, as many other are in those quarters.
And so, even as the burning heat of this hill does in no wise let the
frutefulnesse of the la^d, the which brings forth diverse kinds of good
fruits, where as is a great temperatnesse of the air, lively springes and fair
fountains, also the sea that co^passeth it, does not quench this vehement
heat, as rehearses Pliny of Chimera, always burning, Lib. 2. cap. 106.
and quenches with earth or hay, being cast upon it, but with water it is
kindled.

Of Ethiopia. Cap. 16.
ALthough that many Cosmographers have sufficiently described the Country of
Ethiopia, also among our writers, those the which have made many fair
Nauigations by this coast of Africa, in many and far Countries,
notwithstanding this shall not let, but that according to my endeavor, I will
declare some secrets observed in sailing by this said coast into the great
America. Ethiopia therefore extends so far, The spreading of Ethiopia.
that it has part both of Asia and Africa, and therefore they are divided in
two. That part which is in Africa, is named India, or Leuant of the red sea,
and to the North part of Egypt and Africa toward the South part of the flood
Nigritis, the which as we have said, is called Senega. Senega flood, in times
past named Nigritis.
To the ponent it has the whole part of Africa, the which extends to the
bank side or brinkes of the West. And so it has been named by the name of
Ethiops, the son of Vulcane, the which before had many other names. Toward
the West it is hilly, small inhabited in the East, The description of Ethiopia.
others set it out after this sort following. There are two Ethiops, the one is
under Egypt rich and large, and in the same is the I Will Mirva, great among
those of Nylle, and of the same part extending to the East, reigns Prester
John. Miroa an Island.
The other part is not so well known nor discovered, it is of such a
greatness, saving only by ye borders of the sea. Others divide it otherwise,
that is to wit, the one part being in Asia, and the other in Africa, that now
are called the Indies of Leuant, compassed with the red Sea in Barbary,
toward the North, to the Country of Libia in Egypt. This country is very
hilly, of the which ye hills are Bed, Iona, Bardita, Mescha, Lipha. Some have
written that the first Ethiopians and Egiptians, among other were most rude and
ignorant, leading a wild life even as brute beasts, without lodging or
remaining, but resting them whereas they were benighted, worse than at this day
do the Masonists. From the Equinoctial toward the Antartike, there is a great
country of Ethiopians, yt norish great Elipha^ts, Tigers, Rhinoceros, beasts
so named. There is another region bearing Cynamon between the arms of Nylle:
the realm of Etabecke, The realm of Etabecke and Ickthiophages.
on both sides of Nylle, is inhabited with Christians. The others are named
Ickthiophages living only with fish, being in times past brought under the
obedience and subjection of Alexander. The Anthropophages are near to the hills
of the Moon, and the rest extending from thence to Capricorn, and returning
toward the Caape of good hoppe, and inhabited with diverse and sundry people,
having diverse similitudes and monstrous. Nevertheless they are esteemed to be
ye first borne into the world, also the first that have invented religion and
ceremonies, and therefore they were never under the yoke of subjection, but have
always lived at liberty. The love of the Anthropophages toward their King.
It is a wonderful thing to see the honor and amity that they bear to their
King: for if it chance that he be grieved in his body, his subjects or
household servant will be the like, esteeming it a thing vnpertinent to
remain whole, and their King grieved or offended.

The greatest part of these people are al naked, because of the extreme heat
of the Sun, others cover their privy parts with certain skins, others
cover half of their body, Meroa the chief town of Ethiopia, aunciently named
Saba.
and others their whole body. Meroa is the head Town of Ethiopia, in the old
time it was named Saba, and since by Cambises, Meroa. There are diverse kinds of
religion. Some are Idolaters, as hereafter shall be declared, the others worship
the Sun when it rises, but they despise the West. This Country abounds in
miracles and wonders, it nourishes toward India very great beasts, as great
Dogs, Eliphants, Rhinocerous of a wonderful height, Dragons, Basiliscus and
others: furthermore, trees so hie that no Archer can shoot to the top, with
many other wonderful things, as also Pliny reherseth in the second book,
the.xvij Chapter of his natural History. Their corn is customably Mill and
Barley, with the which also they make a certain drink, and they have few
other fruits and trees, saving only certain great Palm trees. They have also
in some places, good quantity of precious stones more than in other. Also it
shall not be out of the way, to say that these people are very black, according
as the heat is more or less vehement, and that that color comes of a
superficial action, being the great heat of the Sun, Why the Ethiopians,
and other are black.
the which is the cause also, yt they are very fearful. The heat of the air
being so violent, draws out the natural heat of the heart, and other interior
parts, and therefore they remain cold within being destitute of the natural
heat, and only burned outward, as we may see in other things. The action of
heat in what thing so ever it be, is no other thing tha^ resolution or
dissipation of the Eliments, when it perseuereth and is violent, in such sort
that the most subtillest Eliments being consumed, there remains but ye
earthly part, keeping color and consistence of the earth, as we see Ashes and
burned wood. Then to the skin of this people so burned, there rests but the
earthly part of the humor, the others being dispersed which causes the
color. I said they were fearful, because of the inward coldness: for
hardiness and manhood comes not, but with a vehement heat of the heart.
The which causes the Englishmen, and those that are under the North Pole,
which contrary are cold without, but marvelous hot within, to be hardy,
courageous, and full of great boldness. Therefore these Neigers have their head
curled, their teethe white, great lips, crooked legs, the women unconstant,
with many other vices which would be to long to rehearse: therefore I will leave
this to Philosophers. Let us come to our purpose. Indians and Ethiopians use
Magique.
These Ethiopians and Indians use Magike because they have many herbs and
other things proper for that exercise. And it is certain and true, that there
is a certain Sympathia in things, and hid Antipathia, the which cannot be
known but by long experience. And because that we coasted a country somewhat
far in this land, named Ginney, I think good to write thereof particularly.

Of Ginney. Cap. 17.
AFter that we had refreshed us at Caape verd, it behooved us to pass further,
having ye wind at Northeast, marvelous favorable for to conducte us right
under the Equinoctial line, the which we ought to pass: but being come to the
height of Ginney, lying in Ethiopia, the wind became clean contrary, because
that in that region, the winds be very unconstant, with rain, tempest, and
thunder, so that the Navigations on that coast is very dangerous. Now the fourth
day of September we arrived into this Country of Ginney, on the West borders.
But somewhat far within the land, it is inhabited with a very strange people,
because of their Idolatry and dark ignorance. Before that this Country was
discovered, and the people known, it was thought that they had lived like the
Ethiopians, having the like manner of religion of those of the higher Ethiope,
and of Senega: but it is found clean contrary, for all they that inhabit or
dwell from the said Senega, The Inhabitants of Ginney, to the Cape of good hope,
are all Idolaters.
to the Caape of good hope, are al Idolaters without the knowledge of god and
his law. And these people are so blinded and ignorant, that the first thing
that they meet in the morning, be it bird, serpent, or other wild or tame
beast, they take it with them bearing it about them all the day, about what
business so ever they have, as a God or protector of their work, if they go a
fishing in any of their little boats of bark, they will put it in one of the
ends of the boat well wrapped with some leaves, having an opinion and
believing that it will bring them all the day good luck, be it on land or on
water: nevertheless they believe in God, alleging yt he is there above
immortal, but unknown, for that he will not be known to them sensibly. The
which error differs nothing from the error of the Gentiles in times past,
that worshipped diverse Gods, under the color of Images and similitudes. But
yet this is a thing worthy to be noted, though it be superstitious and
abominable: that these pore, ignorant, and brutishe men, had rather worship
corruptible things, than to be reputed without a God. Diodorus the Sicillian
writes, that the Ethiopians had the first knowledge of the fained gods, to
whom they began to vow, and to sacrifice. Also Homer signifies that Jupiter
with other Gods went into Ethiopia, as well for that they were there honored
and sacrificed unto, as for the wholesomnesse of the Country. The like you
have of Castor and Pollux, Castor and Pollux, called the bright stars, and
lanternes of the sea.
the which going on the sea at the request of the Greeks against Troy, were
vanished in the air, and were never after seen again, the which gives
opinion to some to think yt they were ravished and placed among the stars of
the Sea: also many name them the clear stars of the sea, attributing their
names Caster and Polux, to two fair and bright stars. The said people have
neither temples nor churches, nor other places appointed for sacrifice and
prayer. Besides this, they are without comparison much more wicked than those
of Barbary or Africa, in such sort that the strangers dare not aborde them,
nor set foot on land, but by pledges: The manners and order of living of those
of Ginney.
otherwise they would take them, and handle them like slaves. These Villains
or wicked impes go all naked, saving some since the time that their Country
has been somewhat frequented, have worn a little shirt of Cotton, or some
such thing, the which is brought them from other places. They make not so
great trade with beasts, as in Barbary: there is very few fruits, because of
the dryness and extreme heat, for this region is under ye sign Taurus: they
live a good many years, and yet seem not old, so that a man of a.C. years
old, would be judged with us not above.xl. Nevertheless, they live with the
flesh of wild beasts, without seething, roasting, or well preparing of it:
they have also some fish, and great abundance of Oysters, more larger some
than half a foot, but they are more dangerous to eat, than any other fish,
they cast a liquor like to milk, and yet the inhabitants eat thereof without
any danger, and they use as well salt water as fresh. They commonly make war
with other nations: their weapons are bows and arows, as the other Ethiopians
and Affricans. The women of this Country frequent the war as much as the
men, and they bear for the most part, a large buckle of fine gold or other
metal at their ears, lips, and also on their arms. The waters of this
country are very dangerous, The air of Ginney, is unwholesome.
and also the air is unwholesome, for that to my judgment, the South wind
being very hot and moist, and familiar in that country, is subject to all
kind of putrefactions, the which we feel many times in this Country. And
therefore they that of our Country, and of other Countries of Europe that
travail to Gynney, cannot remain there long, without receiving some
sickness, the which chanced to us, for many of our company died, and others
remained a long time sick, and with great pain they recovered their health.
For the which cause we remained not there long time. Maniguetta, a fruit much
esteemed among spices.
I will not omit that in Ginney, the fruit that is most rife and common, and
with the which the strangers of strange Countries lade their ships, is named
Maniguetta, being very good, and well esteemed above other spices, with the which
the Portingalles make a great trade. This fruit comes up in the fields like
an Onion. The other that comes from Molucquer and Calicut, is not so well
esteemed by a great deal. This people of Ginney trade with certain Barbariens
adjacent, gold and salt after a strange fashion. There are certain places
ordained among them, where as each one of his part brings his Merchandise,
those of Ginney, salt, and the others gold molten in lumpes, and without any
other talk together, because of the small trust and confidence one of another,
as the Turks and Arabians, and some of America with their neighbors, they
leave in the place before spoken, the gold and the salt of each part. This
being done, these Ethiopians of Ginney if they find there gold enough for
their salt, they take it away, otherwise they leave it, and let it lie. The
which the other seeing that their gold will not satisfy, they add unto it
until that there be sufficient: then they bear away that, that to each one
does appertain. You shall understand furthermore, that the Neigers
hitherwarde are more civil and better nurtered than these of Ginney, because
of the great resort of Marchantes that trade thither: also they provoke others
to barter for their gold, for things of small value, as knives, glasses, and
such like. The trade of Iuorie.
Also the Portingals trade and bargain with the Mores of Ginney, beside other
things, for Iuorie, that we call Eliphants teethe. And one among others, showed
me that at one time they have lade^ twelve thousand of these teethe: among the
which there was one found among the other, that wayed a hundred pound weight:
for as we have said, the land of Ethiopia nourishes Eliphantes, the which
they take at the chase, as we do here wild Boares, and so they eat the
flesh, which many affirm to be very good: the which I had rather believe than
taste, or to stand disputing thereof. I will not therefore in this place stand
to reason or set out the virtues and properties of this beast, the most
gentlest, and approaching to humain reason than any other, Elipha^t, a beast
approaching to humain reason.
seeing that this beast has been so much celebrated of our elders, and also
by those of our time: and knowing that Pliny, Aristotle, and many others have
sufficiently treated thereof, and of his flesh, the which some say is
medicinable, and good against the Leprosy. The teethe that we call Iuorie,
does comfort the heart and the stomach, and it will also help with all his
substance, the part or belly of the mother. I will not therefore write that
which they have written, for that it is not to our purpose. Nevertheless I
will not leave to speak that which I have seen: the which is, if that they can
get any young Eliphantes, they teach them many pretty knackes. For this beast is
very apt, and of a good understanding.

Of the Equinoctial line, and of the Islands of S. Omer. Cap. 18.
Leaving therefore this part of Gynney on our left hand, after we had stayed
there but a while for the infection of the air, as we have before showed, we
kept our course, coasting always to the height of the Caape of Palms, and of
that which is called the three points, where as runs a fair River, able to
bear great ships, by the reason whereof there is good trade all over the
Country, A river or flud bearing Mines of gold and silver.
and the which bears gold and silver abundantly in lumpes, and therefore
the Portingalles have landed there, and being in favor with the Inhabitants,
they have builded there a fair Castle, the which they have named the Mine
Castle: And not without a cause, for their Gold is without comparison more finer
than that of Calicute, or of India America. It is on this side the Equinoctial
about three degrees and a half. There is found a river that comes from the
Mountains of the Country named Cania, Cania and Rhegium rivers.
and another more lesser, named Rhegium, the which bears or brings very
good Fish, also Cocodrils very dangerous, as Nylle, and Senega, and they eat
them as we do Venson. I will not forget what was showed me to have been seen
near to the Mine Castle: a sea monster having the shape of a man, that the
flood had left on the shore, the which was heard cry. Two sea mo^sters like to
man and wife.
In like case the female came with the next flood, crying aloud, and sorowing
for the absence of her make: the which is a wonderful and strange thing. By
this may be known, that the Sea does nourish and bring forth diverse, and
strange kind of monsters, as well as the land. Being now by our iourneys come
even under the Equinoctial, I mind not to pass any further, without noting
somewhat. This line Equinoctial, The description of the Equinoctial line.
or Circle Equinoctial, or else Equator, is a trace imagined, of the Sun by
the midst of the world, the which deuideth in two equal parts, two times the
year, that is to wit, the fourth of September, and theleuenth of March, and
then the Sun passes directly by the Zenithe of the earth, and leaves us
this imagined Circle, equal to the Tropicks and others that may be judged
between the two Poles, the Sun going from the East to the West: it is true
that the sun goes all the year by the Ecliptike to the Zodiake, saving on
the days above named, and stands directly over them that inhabit there.
Furthermore they have right course, without ye one of the Poles be more erected
than the other: the day and the night are to the^ equal, and therefore they
were named Equinoctial, From whence comes the name Equinoctial.
and according as the Sun does depart from the one to ye other Pole, there is
vnequalities of days and nights, and elevation of the Pole. Then the Sun
declining by little and little from this point Equinoctial, goes by his Zodiake
almost to the Tropike of Capricorn, and passing no farther, causes the
Solstice of winter: then returning, passes by the said Equinoctial, till that
he come to the sign of Cancer, whereas is the Solstice of Summer: therefore he
makes vj. signs parting from the Equinoctial to each one of these Tropikes.
The elders have esteemed this country or Zone among the Tropikes to be
uninhabitable because of the extreme heat, as those that are near to the two
Poles, because of the cold. Nevertheless, within these few years this Zone
has been discovered by Nauigations, and inhabited for that it was found
fruitful, and abounding in many good things (notwithstanding the heat) as the
Islands of S. Omer and others, of the which we will speak hereafter. Some
under this line co^paring the coldness of the night, with the heat of the
day, have taken this argument: that in that respect there might be good
temperatenesse, The temperatenesse of the air, under the Equinoctial line.
biside many other reasons yt I omit for this present. The heat that is there
seemed to me no hotter than it is here at Midsomer. Furthermore there is much
tempest, thunder, lightnings and raines, and therefore at the Islands of S. Omer,
as also in a another Island named the I Will of Rats, there is as much verdure or
grenenesse as is possible. These Islands under the Equinoctial line are marked
in our cards Marins S. Omer, The I Will of S. Omer, or of S. Thomas.
or S. Thomas, inhabited at this day by Portingals, although that they be not
so fruitful as certain others.

Also there is gathered a certain sugar, but they trade with the Barbarians and
Ethiopians, Gold molten, Pearls, Musk, Rhubarbe, Beasts, Birds and other
things according to the country. Also in these Islands the seasons and times
are unequal and differing from other countries, the people more subject to
sickness than they of the North part, the which difference and inequality
comes of the Sun, the which shows his qualities by the air being between
him and us. It passes as every one knows, two times the year customably
thereby, and then ye Equinoctial descrieth him, in the months of March, and
September. Abundance of diverse fishes under the line.
About this line is found such abundance of fishes of sundry and diverse
kinds, that it is a marvelous and a wonderful thing to see them above water,
and I have heard them make such a noise about the ships side, that we could not
hear one another speak: whether this is because of ye heat of the Sun or for
any other reasons, I leave that to the Philosophers. There rests now to
show that even about our Equinoctial, The sea water is sweet under the
Equinoctial.
I taasted the water the which was more sweeter and pleasa^ter to drink tha^
in other places, whereas it is very salt, though that many affirm the
contrary, judging that it should be rather more salter, for that it draws
to the line whereas the heat is most vehement, knowing that from thence
comes the saltness of the sea, and therefore that should be more sweeter
that is toward the Poles. I do verily think that from the one Pole to the
other even to the line, that as the air is not equally temperat, so in like
case the water is not temperat. But under the line the temperatnesse of the
water does follow the temperatnesse of the air. Therefore there is a good
reason, why the water in that part is more sweeter than in other places. Being
passed this line, we found the sea more and more calmer and peaceable, keeping
our course toward the Caape of good hope.

That not only all that is under the line is inhabited, but also all the world
is inhabited contrary to the opinion of our elders. Cap. 19.
Man has great desire to knew and se things.
IT is evidently seen how great the curiosity of men is, either for a desire
to know things, or for to attain to possessions, or else to avoid Idleness,
that they have hazarded them selves (as the wise man says, and beside him the
Poet Horace says in his Epistles) to all dangers and travels, for to eschew
poverty, to lead a more quiet life without trouble or pain. Notwithstanding
it might be enough for them to know and understand that the soueraygne
workmaster, has made with his own hands this world al round, so that the
water has been separated from the land, to the end that more commodiously
every one might inhabit in his proper Eliment, or at the least in that place
whereas he thought most best. Nevertheless not content with this, they would
know if it be all over inbabited. Notwithstanding for such finding out, and
diligence, I esteem them for my part as much and rather more worthy of praise,
than our late writers and Nauigators, for that they have first opened to us
these things. Otherwise with great pain we could not have known them nor
comprehended: but Thales, The opinion of many Philosophers, that say all the
world is not inhabited.
Pithagoras, Aristotle, and many others as well Greeks as Latins have said,
that it is not possible that all parts of the world should be inhabited, the
one part for the great and vnsuportable heat, another part for the great
and vehement cold. Other Authors dividing the world into two parts called
Himisperes, (one of ye which) they say can in no wise be inhabited. But the
other part in the which we are, must of necessity be inhabited. And so of
four parts of the world they take away three, so that to their opinion there
should rest but two, that be habitable. And for the better understanding
thereof to each one, excepting those that have knowledge thereof, I will
declare this more playner, Five Zones by the which the world is measured.
minding therefore to prove that all the world is inhabited. They suppose that
there is five zones in all the world, by the which they will measure, and
compass all the earth, of the which two are cold, two temperate, and the
other hot. And if you will know how they gather these five Zones, extend your
left hand toward the Sun rising, being the fingers spredde abroad, and by
this mean Probus Grammaticus did teach, or instruct. Then when you have
beheld the Sun, thorough the lower parts of your fingers, bow and bend them
every one in form or manner of a Circle. By the thumb ye shall know the
cold zone, which is the North, The cold zone.
the which by the excessive coldenesse (as they do affirm) is uninhabited.
Nevertheless the experience has showed within few years, that all those
parts well near to our Pole, also under the Paralezey Artike joining to the
Hyperbores, The temperat Zone.
as Scauia, Dacea, Swetherlande, Gotlande, Norway, Denemarcke, Thilia, Lyuonia,
Pilapea, Pruse land, Russia, Muscouia, Ruthenie, whereas there is nothing but
Ise, and continual coldness, to benotwithstanding inhabited with froward and
brutish men. The which to our English Marchantes is well enough known.
Therefore the Ancient writers in this do greatly err, and are not to be
believed, having only spoken by guess and thought, and not by experience. Let
us speak of the other zones: the other finger next to the thumb, does
signify the tempeperat zone, the which is inhabited, and extends to the
tropicke of Cancer, though yt in drawing near it be more hot than temperat, as
that which is justly in the midst, that is to know between this tropicke and
the Pole. The third finger does represent the zone placed between the two
tropickes named Torrida, Zone Torida.
because of the extreme heat of the Sun, the which rests and burns up
all, and therefore it was judged uninhabitable. The fourth finger is the other
zone, Another temperat zone.
temperated of the Antipodes, a mean between the tropicke of Capricorn, and
the other Pole, the which is inhabited. The fifth which is the little finger
signifies the other zone cold, Another cold zone.
the which in like case they have esteemed uninhabited for the like reason as they
alleged for the former Pole, of the which we may say as much as we have said
of the North part, for the like reason is of both. After then that this rule
or example is known, it is easily known what parts of the World are
inhabited, and which are not, according to the opinion of the Ancient writers.
Pliny, diminishing that which is inhabited, says, that of the five parts
that are named zones, we must take away three because they are not inhabited,
the which has been showed by the thumb, the great finger and the little
finger. Also he takes away all that occupies the Weast sea. And in another
place he writes that ye earth that is under ye Zodiac, is only inhabited.
The causes that he allegeth why these three zones are uninhabited, is, the
vehement cold, which for the far distance and absence of the Sun is in ye
Region of the two Poles, and the great and extreme heat that is under the
zone Torrida, is because of the continual presence of the Sun. As much do
our late Theologia^s affirm and write. The contrary notwithstanding, may be
showed by the writings of these Authors before alleged, by the authority of
Philosophers, specially of our time, by the witnessing of holy Scriptures, and
then by experience which passes all, the which by me has been made. Strabo,
Mela, and Pliny, although that they disprove the zones, write nevertheless
that there are men in Ethiopia, in the Island named by the elders Aurea, and
also in the I Will Tabroban, Malaca, and Zamotra, The zone Torida and hills
Hyperbores are inhabited.
under the zone Torrida: also that Scandenauia, the hills Hyperbores, and the
country adjacent near to the North, of the which we have before showed, are
peopled and inhabited although according to the saying of Herodita, these hills
are directly under the Pole. The first that found out the land contained
under the two temperat zones to be inhabited, as Plutarche writes, was
Parmenides.

Many have written that not only the zone Torida, may be inhabited, but also
well peopled. The which Aueroys proves by the witnessing of Aristotle, in the
fourth Chapter of his book entitled, of the world and of the firmament
Auicen in the like case, in his second doctrine, The zone Torida, more
commodious and wholesome tha^ the others.
and Albertus Magnus, in his sixte Chapter of the nature of Regions, efforcing
to prove by natural reason, that this zone is inhabited, yea more profitable
for our human life than those under the tropickes. So that by this means we
will conclude and say that it is better, more commodious, and more wholesome
for our humayne life, than any others. For even as the cold is an enemy, so
in like case the heat is friendly to our bodies, knowing that our life is
nothing but heat and moisture, to the contrary death is cold and dryness. By
this therefore ye may knew that all the earth is peopled, and is never without
dwellers neither for cold, nor heat, but for barennesse, and whereas it is
unfruitful it may be inhabited, as I have seen in Arabia, and in other
countries. Also man was created of God for that he might dwell and live in what
part of the world he would, were it hot, cold or temperate: for he him
self said to our first parents: Grow, increase and multiply. The
experience furthermore teaches, (as many times we have said) how large the
world is, and commendable to all creatures, the which we may see by the
continual Nauigations on the sea, and by the long iourneys on the land.

Of the multitude and diverse kinds of fishes being under this line
Equinoctial. Cap. 20.
BEfore the departing out of our line, I think it good to declare particularly
of the fish that is found about seven or eight leagues on this side and beyond
the line of diverse colors, and such a multitude, that it is not possible to
number them, or to heap them together, the which are as a great heap of
corn in a barn. And ye shall note that among these fishes many have followed
our ships more than three hundredth leagues, specially the Dorades, of the which
we will speak hereafter more at large. The Marsouins or sea Hogs, after that
they had perceived our ship from far, did swim a main against us, the
which gave to the Mariners a certain sign and forshewing of that part from
whence the wind ought to come, for these Sea beasts (say they) will swim
against one, and in a great company as four or five hundredth together. This
fish is named Marsouin, Marsouin and why it is so named.
of Marissus, in Latin, which is as much to say as a sea Hog, because that he
is like almost to Hogs on the earth, for he has the like grunt or noise, and
has the snoute like the end of a Can, and on the head a certain cundite
or opening, by the which he yaunneth or purges, even as the Whale. The
Mariners take many of them with certain gynnes of Iron being sharp, and
pointed at the end and crooked, and they do eat but little thereof, having
other better fish: but the liver and lights is very good and delicate being
both like, and also in taste to a Hogs harscelet. When they are taken, drawing
toward their death they cast great sighs as we see our country Hogs do
when they are let blood. The female brings but two at a time. It was
therefore a wonderful thing to see this great number of fish making a
marvelous great noise without comparison, the which some peradventure will
think strange and incredible: but I will affirm it to be so, for that I saw
it. As I said before, that there is fish found of al colors, red, as those
who^ they named Bonnites, the others Azure, and like gold, shining brighter
than fine Azure, as those named Dorades, others green, gray, black. Yet I
will not say, that out of the sea they should keep those colors. Pliny
rehearses that in Spain, A fountain that shows fish like gold.
in a fountain, the fish are of the color of gold, but out of the fountain
they are like to others, the which may come of the color of the water, being
so between our eye and the fish, even as a glass being of a green or blewe
color represents the things that are within of the same color. Now to
retourn to our Dorade, many as well Ancients as others have written of the
nature of fishes, but very homely, for that they have not seen but heard say,
and specially of the Dorade, Aristotle and Pliny of the Dorade.
Aristotle writes that she has four finnes, two above and two under, and
that she makes her young ones in summer, and ye female remains hyd a certain
time, but he tells not how long. Pliny to my judgment, has borrowed or
learned this of Aristotle, Lib. 6. cap. 16.
speaking of this fish, saying that she hides her self in the sea a certain
time, but in passing further he has defined this time to be when it is extreme
hot, for that it cannot endure so great a heat. There are found great ones
like Samons, The description of the Dorade.
others that are lesser: from the head to the tail it has a creste and all
that part colored like fine Azure, in such sort that it is impossible to
excogitate or think a more fayrer color: the inferior or lower part shines
like fire gold and for this cause it was named Dorade, also of Aristotle, in
his language (...), that the interpretors call Aurata, and it is very fierce on
the flying fish, the which she follows, and chaseth in the water, as the
hounde chaseth a haare in the fields, for she lives by pray, casting her
self hye above water after this flying fish, and if that she fails at one
time she recouereth at another time. This fish followed our ships the space of
seven wekes without once forsaking of them, yea night and day, until that she
found the sea unsavory or not for her nature. I know well that this fish has been much celebrated and esteemed in times paste among Noble men, for that she is
very delicate and pleasant, to eat. For we read of Sergius, that found the
means to have one brought to Rome, the which was served at a bancket to the
Emperor, Dorade the fish has been greatly esteemed in times paste among the
Romans. Among these Dorades those were most set by that were brought from
Tarenta being made fat at the lake Licryn as witnesses Martial in the third
book of his Epigrams.
whereas it was meruelously esteemed. And since that time has this fish Dorade,
been greatly esteemed among the Romans, so that there was no sumptuous banquet
but that it was served for a great dayntie dish. And whereas this fish is
scant in summer, and hard to come by, Sergius the Senator, found the means
to keep it with food alive, to the end that this fish should not fail them
in no season: and for this curiosity it was named Aurata, or golden fish. This
fish is in much better savor in Winter than in So^mer, for all things have their
season. Cornelius Celsus ordained this fish to the sick, specially, to those
that had the Fever or Ague, for it is light fish and not heavy, but may be
well digested: there are found more store in the West sea, tha^ in the East
sea. Moreover all kind of fishes are not found in every place of the sea.
Helops a singular fish is not found but only about Pamphilia, Ilus and
Scaurus, only in the sea Atlantike, and so of many others. Alexander the great
being in Egypt bought two Dorades for two mark of gold, for to prove if that
they were so delicate and fine meat, as it was showed him, so that there were
two a live brought him from the Weast sea, to Nemphis, whereas he remained, as
a Jew being a Phisitio^, showed me by a History being at Damasca in Siria.
Thus much gentle Reader I have learned as touching the Dorade, for that thou
should see what the elders have written thereof, and among others, my lord
William Pellicier Bishop of Mountpellier, who has treated of the nature of
fishes as faithfully and truly, as any in our time.

Of an Island named the Ascension. Cap. 21.
THE twenty sixth day of October, being eight degrees beyond our line
Equinoctial, we found an Island not inhabited, the which at the first we
thought to name the I Will of Birds, because of the great multitude of Birds
that are in the said Island, The I Will of the Ascension, an why it was s. named.
but looking in our card Marin, we found that before time it was found out by
the Portingals, and named the I Will of the Ascension, because that on that day,
they arrived thither. We therefore seeing those Birds flying on the sea, made us
to think that there was some Island near hand, and the nearer we came, we
saw such a multitude of birds of diverse sorts with colored feathers, that
the like was never seen in our time, Diverse kinds of strange birds and in
great number.
the which came flying to our ships, and would rest upon us, so that we might
take them with our hands, and with great pain could we be rid of them.
For if one had stretched out his Arm they would have rested upon it, even
like tame birds, and not one of them like to the birds of our country, the
which to some seems incredible. Being cast of from our hands they flyed not
away, but let them selves be taken again as before.

Furthermore in this Island there is a certain kind of great birds that I
have heard called Aponars, Aponars birds.
they have little wings, and therefore they cannot fly. They are great and
hye, like hearnshawes, the belly white and and the back blake as cole, the
byll like to a cormorant, when they are killed they cry like hogs.

I thought good to speak of this bird among others, for that there are found
a great number of them in an Island lying toward the Caape, of good Speed,
on the cost or borders of new found land, Caape of good have I Will of
Aponards and why it is so named.
the which was named the I Will of Aponards: Also there are such a multitude, that
on a time three great ships of France, going to Canada, did lade each of them
two times their cockboates with these birds on the brinke of the said Island,
and it is no maistrie to go into the Island and to drive them before them to
their boats like sheep. This therefore has given me occasion to speak so
much thereof. As touching the rest of the I Will of Ascension, it is indifferent
fair and pleasant, being of circute six leagues, with mountains garnished
with fair green trees, herbs, and flowers. Not forgetting the number of
birds, of the which we have spoken, The I Will of thascention not yet inhabited
as many others.
I suppose that if it were labored and tilled with many others that are in the
Weaste, as well beyond, as on this side the Equinoctial, it would render as
good profit, as Tenedos, Lemnos, Metelin, Negrepont, Rhodes, and Candia, or any
others that are in the sea Helispont, and the Cyclades: for in this great
Weaste sea, there are Islands that are more then.80. leagues compass, and some
less, among the which the greatest part are desert, and not inhabited. Now
after that we had passed this Island, there did appear four stars of a
wonderful greatness made in manner of a cross, nevertheless far enough
from the Pole Antartike. The Mariners that sail that way name them charets.
Some of them think that among these is the South Star, the which is fixed
and immovable, as the North star that we call the lesser bear, the which
was hyd before that were under the Equator, and many others that are not seen
at this side to the Northwarde.

Of the promentarie of good hope, and of many secrets observed in the same,
likewise our Ariuall to the Indies, America, or France Antartike. Cap. 22.
AFter that we have passed the Equinoctial live, India Meridionall.
and the Island of S. Homer, following the cost of Ethiopia, the which is
called India Meridionall, it behooved to follow our course eue^ to the Tropike of
winter, about the which time we discovered the great and famous Promentarie of
good hope, the which the Pilots have named Lion of the sea, Caape of good hope,
why it is called Lion of the sea. Rhinoceros or beasts of Ethiopia.
because that it is feared and redouted, being so great and difficil. This
Caape on both sides is compassed with two great mountains and hills, of the
which the one beholds the East, and the other the West. In this country are
many beasts named Rhinoceros, for that they have a horn under their snout.
Some call them Oxen of Ethiopia. This beast is very monstrous, and keeps
perpetual war and hatred with the Elephante. And for this cause the Romans
have taken great pleasure to make these two beasts fight, for a spectacle of
greatenesse, chiefly at the creation of an Emperor or some other high or
great magistrate: as they do at this day mark Bears, Bulls, and Lions. He
is not altogether so high as the Elephant, nor such as we paynte him or set him
out in our country. And that which moves me to speak, is, that traueling
from Egypt to Arabia, I saw a very Ancient monument, whereas was engraued
certain figures of beasts instead of letters as it was used in the old
time, among the which was the Rhenoceros, being without horn and mayles, not
like as our painters sets him out. This beast for to prepare him self to
fight, as Pliny rehearses, sharpeneth his horn against a certain stone, and
always draws to the belly of this Elephant, for that it is the part of the
body that is most softest. There is also great quantity of wild Asses, and
another bearing a horn between both there eyes of two foot long. I saw one
being in the city of Alexandria, that is in Egypt, that a Lord Turk brought
from Melcha, the which horn he said, had the like virtue against poison as
had the horn of an Unicorn. Aristotle calls these Asses with horn, Asses
of India. About this Promentarie, is the departing of the way to the East and
the Weaste Indies, for they that will go to the East Indies, as to Calicut,
Tabrobane, Melinde, Cannonor and others, they take on the left hand, costing
the I Will of S. Laurence, guiding the head of the ship to Weast or Southweast
having the wind at Weaste Northweaste. This country of the East Indies
extends so far, that many judge it to be the third part of the world.
Mela, and Diodorus, The spreading of East India.
writes yt the sea compassing these Indies, from the South to the East is of
such a greatness, that with much pain they can pass though the wind be
favorable in the space of forty days, but I dare affirm twice forty. This
country therefore is on that side compassed with the sea, which because of
that, is named, Sea Indique.
the Indian sea or Indique confining toward the North to the hill Cancasa,
and is named India, of a River named Indus, as Tartaria of the River Tartar,
passing by the country of the great King Chan. Yt is inhabited with people of
diverse kinds as well in manners as in Religion. A great part is under the
ohedience of Prester John, the which holds the Christian Faith: the others
are Mahometists, as we have before showed speaking of Ethiopia: and others are
Idolaters. The other way at the departing of this Caape that is on the right
hand, leads to America, the which we followed having the wind good and
favorable, nevertheless we remained a good long time on the water, as well for
the distaunce of the places, as for the wind that afterward fell contrary,
the which made us to linger even to the eightene degree of our line, A sign to
the Nauigants that they drew near to America.
and then again it began to favor us. Before passing any farther I will show
a thing that is worthy of memory. Aproching or drawing near to America,
within fifty leagues we began to smell the air of the land, otherwise than
the smell of the sea, with such a sweet and pleasant smell of the Trees,
Herbs, Fruits, and Flowers of the country, that never balm were it the balm
of Egypt, that ever smell sweeter or pleasanter. Therefore I leave you to
think or judge what great joy the poor Nauigantes had, although that of a
long time before they had eaten no bread, also being out of hope to recover
any for their return. The next day which was the last day of October about
nine of the clock in the morning, The hills of Croistmouro^.
we discried the high hills of Croistmouron, although that was not the place
whereas we pretended to go, wherefore costing the land a three or four
Leagues, not minding to descend a land, being well informed that the
inhabitants there are allied with the Portingals, and therefore for nothing we
would aborde or descend there, keeping on our way till the second of November,
that we aryued to a certain place named Maqueh, Maqueh.
for to enquire of things, specially, of the King of Portingals Army, whereas
preparing our boats and barges, for to come a shore, and set foot on land,
there appeared four old men of the country, for that the young men were gone
to the war, the which old men at the first, fled away thinking we had been
Portingals, their enemies, but showing them a token of assurance in the end
they came near us. Nevertheless staying there not above four and twenty
hours, we hoyssed sail for to draw toward Caape de Fry, Caape de Fria.
distant from Maqueh, twenty five leagues.

This country is marvelous fair, in times past inhabited by the Portingals,
the which gave it that name, which before was called Gekan, Gekan.
and there they reared a tort, minding there to remain, for because of the
goodness of the place. But within a short time after, The manner of these
Barbarous men is to eat their enemies.
for what cause I know not, but the Barbarous men of the country made them
all to dye, and eat them up as they use customably their enemies. And at our
ariuall they held two Portingals, that they had taken in a little boat, and
to them they though to do the like, to whom our coming was a pleasure, for by
us they were recovered out of the hands of these cruel inhabitants.
Pomponius Meleus, calls this Caape, of which we speak, the front of Africa,
for that beyond it bends like an Angle, and retourneth by little and little
into the North and East, there whereas is the end of the main land and of
Africa, of the which Ptolomeus had never any knowledge.

This Caape also is the chief or head of New Africa, the which toward
Capricorn, extends to the mountains of Habacia and Gaiacia, the flat
country is little inhabited, it is very brutish and Barbarous, yea monstrous,
not that the men are so disformed as many have written, as though that in their
sleep they had dreamed it, being not afraid to affirm that there are people
of whom their ears hang to their heels, others with one eye in the foreheade
as Arismases, others without head, others having but one foot but of such a
breadth, that therewith they may shadow them selves against the heat of the
Sun, and they call them Monomeres, Monosceles, and Sciapodes, certain others
being ignorant do write yet more strangeness yea: late writers, writing
without judgment reason or experience. I will not altogether deny the
monsters, which are unnatural approved by the Philosophers, and affirmed by
experience. But I do impugn things that are so far out of reason: let us
return to our Promentarie. There is found diverse kinds of dangerous beasts,
and venomous, among others the Basiliscus, hurtful to the inhabitants, also to
the strangers and to those that go to fish on the Borders. This Basiliscus as
every man may know, is a venomous beast, that kills a man with his only
look, the body about nine inches long, the head like fire, upon yt which there
is a white spot in manner of a crown, the mouth red, and the rest of the face
of black color, the which I know by the skin that I did see in the hands
of an Arabian: he chaseth away all other Serpents with his hissing (as Lucian
says) for to remain alone master of the field. To be short, I may say with
Salust, that there dies more people by wild beasts in Africa, than by any
other inconvenience. This much thought I good to speak by the way.

Of the Island Madagascar, otherwise of S. Laurence. Cap. 23.
THE great desire that I have to let slip nothing that is necessary and
profitable to the Readers, binds me that I think it the office and duty of
a writer to treat of al things that partayne to his argument, without leaving
one word out, the which thing has stired me up to set out in this place this
Island so notable, having seventy eight degrees of longitude, no minut, and of
latitude aleuen degrees and thirty minutes, very well peopled, and inhabited
with black wild men, (within a certain time) the which keep or hold the
like manner of Religion as the Mahometists, The fruitfulness of the I Will of S.
Laurence.
some being Idolaters, but after another manner. It was first discovered by
the Portingals, and named S. Laurence, and before Madagascar in their language,
rich and fruitful of all things, for that it lies well. And also the trees
bring forth fruit of themselves without planting, grafting, setting or sowing:
nevertheless their fruits are as good, sweet and pleasant to eat, as if the
tree had been grafted. We see in our country that the fruits of the fields,
that is to wit, those that the earth brings forth without laboring, is rude,
wild, sour, sweet, and without any good taste, the others are contrary.
Therefore in this Island, is much better fruit than on the maine land, although
that it be under one Zone and temperatenesse, among the which there is one that
they name in their language Chicorin, and the Tree that bears them, is like
to a fether tree of Egypt, Chicorin, a fruit that we name nuts of India.
or Arabia, as well in height as in leaves. The which fruit is seen here, the
which the ships bring, and we call them Nuts of India, the which the Merchants
hold dear, for they are very fair and proper to make bottels, for the wine
being a certain time in these vessels, has a marvelous sweet smell and
pleasant, because that the fruit has a smell like Musk. Furthermore, those
that customably drink in these cups or vessels, as I was informed of a Jew,
are preserved from the head ache, and from the ache in the flanks, and
provoke urine. The which being noted of Pliny and others, they say that al
kind of Palms, are healthful and good for many things. This fruit whereof we
speak, is altogether good. The Indians and Ethiopians being visited with
sickness, peele the fruit, and drink the juice or liquor, the which is white,
like to milk, and therewith they are eased: also with this fruit, they make a
kind of sustenance, being mingled with certain meal of dried roots or dried
fish, of the which they eat after that it is well boiled together. This liquor
is not to be kept long, but for the time that is may be kept, it is without
comparison better for the party that takes it, than any kind of conserues
that may be found. And for the longer keeping of this fruit, they boil the
liquor, the which when it is cold, they put into vessels therefore appointed:
others put therein Honey, to make it pleasant to drink. The tree that bears
this fruit, is so tender, that if it be never so little touched or pricked with
any sharp or pointed thing, the juice will come forth, the which is pleasant
to drink, and very proper to quench thirst. All these Islands that are found
on the coast of Ethiopia, The I Will of Prince.
as the Isle of Prince, having.35. degrees of longitude minute.0. and of
latitude minute.0. Mopata, Zonzibar, Monfia. S. Apolin, and S. Thomas, under
the line are rich and fruitful, almost all full of these Palm trees, and
other trees bearing fruit, that are marvelous good. There are found diverse
other kind of Palm trees bearing fruit, although that not all, like those of
Egypt, and in all the Indies of America and Perou, as well on the maine land,
as in the Islands are found of seven sorts of Palm trees, all differing in
fruit the one from the other. Among the which I have found some that bear
Dates good to eat, Seven sorts of Palm trees in the Indies of America.
as those of Egypt, of Arabia, Felicia and of Siria. Moreover in this said
Island, are Melons of a meruellous greatness, being as great as a man may
compass or embrace, of a ruddy color. Also there are some white, and others
yellow, but much more wholesomer than ours in Europe. There are also diverse
kinds of good herbs and health some, among the which there is one, Spagnin a
kind of herb.
the which they name Spagnin, the which they use for their wounds and sores,
also against the biting of Vipers and other venomous beasts, for it draws
out the venime or poison. Furthermore there is found great quantity of good
Saunders in the woods and groves. As touching beasts wild and tame, fishes
and birds, our Island norisheth of all sorts, and in as great quantity as is
possible. In the which Island there is a strange bird, made like a puttocke or
ravenous foul, the bill like a Hawk, her ears hanging down to her throat,
the feet very rough and full of feathers, being of a white shining color like
to silver, Pa a strange bird.
only the feathers on her head are blackishe. This bird is named in their
language Pa, in the Persian tongue Pie or Lege, and this foul lives with
Serpents, of the which there are great quantity, and of diverse kinds. Also
there are other kind of birds not like to those in our Country. As for
beasts, there are a great number of Eliphants, and beasts with one horn being
of two kinds. Of the which the one is the Ass of India, having the foot not
cloven, as those that are found in the land of Persia, The Ass of India, Orix.
the other is named Orix or cloven foot. There are no wild Asses, but only
on the dry land. Whether yt there be any Unicorns I know not, but being at the
Indies of America, certain of the Indians came to see us above.lx. or.lxxx.
leagues of: whom as we did question with of many things, they showed us that
in their country there was a great number of certain great beasts, like to a
kind of wild cowes yt they have, having one only horn in their forehead,
about a fadome long, but to say yt they are Unicorns I am not sure, having no
perfect knowledge thereof. I have before showed yt this country or Island
norisheth great store of serpents and Lezards of a marvelous greatness, yt
which are easily taken without dangers. Also ye Neigers eat these Lezards, so do
the Indians of America. There are lesser ones of ye bigness of a lege, that
are very good and delicate to eat, beside many good fish and foul, which they
eat when they see time. Among other secrets, because of the multitude of
fish, there are great store of Whales, out of the which the inhabitaunts of
the Country draw Amber, the which many take to be gray Amber, a thing that is
here very ska^t and precious. Gray Amber very cordial.
Also it is very hearty, and good to comfort the most notable parts of our
human body: and with the same they make a great trade with strange
Merchants.

Of our arrival to France Antartike, otherwise named America, to the place
named Caape Defria. Cap. 24.
AFter that by divine providence, with so many travails common and ordinary
to so long a Navigations, we were come to the maine land, not so soon as our
hearts desired, which was the tenth day of November, and in stead of taking
our rest, it behooved us to discover and seek out proper places, to make or
rear new siedges, being no less astonished or amazed, that the Troyans were at
their arrival into Italy. Having therefore stayed but a while at the former
place, where as we landed, as in the former Chapter we have showed, we spread
again our sa-les, Caape Defria.
sailing toward Caape Defria, whereas we were well received of the Indians or
wild men of the Country, showing according to their manner, evident signs of
joy: nevertheless we stayed there but.iij. days, they welcomed us one after an
other, according to their custom, with this word Carainbe, which is as much
to say as welcome, or ye are welcome. And for to show their good wills, Cahonin,
a drink in America.
one of their great Morbicha Onassonb, that is to say, King, feasted us with a
kind of meal made of roots, and with their Cahonin, which is a drink made
of Mill is named Auaty, and it is great like a pease: there is both white and
black. And for to make this drink, they let this Mill boil with other
roots, the which after it is boiled, has a color like to Claret wine: and
these Indians find it so good, that therewith they will be dronken, as men
will be with wine in our Country. It is thick like to wine lees. Here I will
show you a superstition that they use, to make this drink, after the straungest
manner in the world. The superstition of these Indians in making this drink.
After that it has boiled in carthen vessels made for that purpose, there
shall come certain virgins or maidens that shall chawe or champe in their
mouths this Mill being so boiled or sodden, then they shall put it into a
another vessel thereunto appointed, or if that a woman be called thereto, she must
first abstain certain days from her husband: otherwise they think that this
Byuerige or drink, will never come to good perfection. This being done, they
will make it boil again, until that it be purged or cleansed, as we see the
wine boiling in the tun: and then within certain days after they drink
thereof. Now after that they had entertained us after this sort, they brought
us afterward to see a large stone of five feet long or there about, in the
which appeared certain strokes of a rod or small wand, and the print of two
feet, the which they affirm to be of their great Caraibe, whom they have in
as great reverence, as the Turks have Mahomet, for because (say they) that he
has given them the use and knowledge of fire, likewise to plant roots, for
before they lived but with leaves, as do the brute beasts. Being thus guided
and led about by their King, we forgate not diligently to know and visit the
place, whereas among other commodities requisite and necessary, we found that
there was no fresh water to be had but far from thence, the which let us to
stay there any long time, for ye which we were sorry considering the bounty of
the country. A River of salt water.
In this place there is a River of salt water passing between two hills,
separated the one from the other about a stones throw, and enters into the
country about.36. leagues. This River has great quantity of good fish of
diverse kinds, chiefly great moulets, so that whilst we were there we saw
the Indians catch of these fishes above a thousand in a short space. Birds
with diverse colored feathers.
Furthermore there are many birds of diverse kinds with strange feathers, some
as red as fine scarlet, others white, ashey, and other colors. And with these
feathers the wild men or Indians, make hats, and garments, either for to cover
them or for beauty. When they go a warfare or when they have any skirmish with
their enemies. Others also make them Gowns and Caps, A gown made of feathers
brought from America.
after their manner: and for a manifest truth it may be known by a gown that I
brought home, with the which gown I made present to Monsieur Troisteux, a
gentleman of the house of my Lord, the right reverend Cardinal of Sens. Among
these number of birds al differing from those of our Himisperia, there is one
which they name in their language, Arat, the which is a very hearon in
proportion, Arat a red bird.
saving that his feathers are red as Dragons blood. Furthermore there are seen
trees without number being green all the year long, of the which the most
part renders diverse kinds of gum, as well in coiour as otherwise. Also
there is growing on the sea banks little vines (which is a kind of cockle of
the greatness of a pease) the which the wild men bear or hang about their
neck like pearls, specially when they are sick, for they say it provoke
the belly, and serves for a purgation, some of them make powder thereof and
eat it. Moreover they say, that it is good to stay a bloody flixe, the which
seems to me contrary to his purging virtue. Nevertheless it may have both,
because of the diversity of his substances. And therefore the women bear it
more oftener at their necks adn arms than the men. Likewise there is found in
that country, and on the sea borders on the sand great plenty, and a kind
of fruit that the Spaniards name sea beans, being round like a Teston, but
more greater and more thicker of a ruddy color, so that if you saw them you
would say they were Artificial: the people of the country set naught by them,
nevertheless the Spaniards carry them into their country, and the Women and
Maidens, commonly hang them about their neck, being set in gold or silver, the
which they say has virtue against the collicke, the pain in the head, and
others. To be short, this place is pleasant and fruitful, and they that enter
farther into that country shall find a flat country, covered with strange
kind of trees, the like are not in Europe, being also beautified with fair
Rivers and springs and very clear waters: among the which there is a fish very
monstrous for a fresh water fish, this fish is of the largeness and
greatness of a herring, armed from the head to the tail, like a little beast
of the earth, named Taton, the head without comparison greater than the body,
having three bones in the chyne, and very good to eat, at the least the
Indians eat of them, and they name it in their language Tamonhata.

Of the River of Ganabara otherwise called Ianaria, and how that the country
whereas we arrived, was named France Antartike. Cap. 25.
Having no time to remain any longer at Cape de Fria, for the reason before
showed, it behooved us to depart, so the we wayed our ankers, and hoised up
sails to sail to some other place, to the great displeasure of the Indians of
that Country, that thought we would have stayed a longer time, following the
promise that we had made them at our first arrival. Therefore we sailed the
space of four days until the tenth, that we found this great river of
Ganabara, Ganabara so called, because of the likeness to the lake.
being so named of the inhabitaunts of the Country, for that it is like to the
lake, or otherwise Ianaria, by those that first did discover it, being distaunt
from the place from whence we departed.30. leagues: and by the way, the wind
became contrary. Now therefore that we had passed many little Islands on the sea
coast, and the straight of our river being about a gunne shot broad, we were
determined to enter in at that place or straight, and with our barks to take
land, whereas incontinently the inhabitants received us very courteously, and as
having knowledge of our coming, they had rered fair Palace according to the
manner of the Country, strewed and decked with leaves, and boughs of trees,
and sweet smelling herbs, by a manner of honor, showing of their part great
signs of joy, inuitating us to do the like. The most eldest which are as
Kings and governors, received us one after an other, and with an admiration
they saluted us in their language according to their manner, and then they
conducted us to the place that they had prepared for us, to the which place
they brought us vitailes of all sides, as meal made of a root, which they
name Manihot, Manihot a rote that the wild men use to eat.
and other great and little roots, very good and pleasant to eat, and other
things according to the Country. So that being there arrived, after that we had
prayed and given thanks, (as the true Christian ought to do, to him that had
pacified the Sea and the winds) to be short, to him that had showed and given
us the mean to accomplish this voyage, we rested us upon the green grass: as
the Troyans did after so many shipwracks and tempests when that they met with
the good Lady Dido, but Virgill says that they had good old Wine, and not
fair water. After that we had rested there the space of two months, and
viewed as well the Islands as the maine land: the Country was named Far about,
the which by us was discovered France Antartike, whereas we found no place so
proper and well standing for to rear or edify a hold, as a little Island,
co^taining only one league of circuit, lying almost at the original beginning
of this river which we have before spoken of. The which Island with the hold
that we there edified, was named Villegagnon. This Island is very pleasant, A
pleasant and comfortable Island, in the which the Lord of Villegagnon fortified
him self.
for that therein grows Ceader trees, and many sweet smelling Trees that are
green throughout the year. In deed there is no fresh water to be had near
hand: nevertheless the Lord of Villegagnon fortified himself there, for to be
sure and out of danger of the wild men that will be sone offended. And also
against ye Portingals, least they should at any time make thither, so that he
strengthened himself in the Island, as well as was possible. Now as for vittails
the Indians or wild men brought us thither such as the land or country
brings forth: As fish or Venison and other wild beasts, for they norish them
privily, as we do here a dog or a cat. Also they brought us meal of those
roots of which we have before showed, having neither bread nor wine. The
which victels we had for a small value, as little knives, loking glasses, and
nets to take fish. Moreover among other things noted in this river, nere to ye
straight, there is a lake that proceeds out of a high stone or rock, A rock
from whence proceeds a lake.
being of a marvelous height, being to look to, as high as the clouds and very
large, the which is a thing almost incredible. This rock is environed or
compassed with the Sea.

Of the fish that is in this great River before named. Cap. 26.
BEfore that I proceed any further, I mean to treat particularly of the fish
that is found in the fair River of Ganabara, otherwise named Ianaria, which
are in great abundance, Oysters having pearls.
among the which there are oysters, of which the shell shines like fine
pearls, yt which oysters, the wild me^ do commonly eat with other little fish
that the children fish: and these oysters are like to those that bear pearls,
of the which also there are found in that country, The manner of these wild
me^ to take fish.
but not so fine as those of Calicut, and other places in the East. Moreover
these wild men fish for other great fish, of the which there is great plenty.
Their use and manner to take them is, that they being naked in the water, be it
fresh or salt, shoot at them with their arrows, to the which they are very
expert, then they draw them out of the water, with a cord made of cotton or of
the pille of some tree, or else the fish being dead, floateth of himself above
the water. Among these fishes there is one very monstrous, Panapana a kind of
fish.
the which they name in their language Panapana, like to a Dog fish, the skin
whereof, is very rough: this fish has six holes or spurgings on each side of
the throat like to a Lampron, the head monstrous, and the eyes almost at the
end of the head, so that from the one eye to the other, there is distant a
foot and a half: this fish is geason, A kind of thornebacke.
notwithstanding the flesh is not so excellent to eat, for it has the taste
of a Dog fish. Moreover, there is in this flood or river, a great multitude of
thornebacke and skaate fish, but not like to ours in Europe, they are twice as
large and more longer, the head flat and long, at the end of which there is
two horns, being a foot long a piece, and between these horns are the eyes,
and her tail is two foot long, and sclender like a Rats tail: the wild men
of the country will not eat of them for no good, neither of the Torterel. For
they imagine and think that even as this fish is slow in swimming, it would
also make them heavy and slow, by the which means they might be taken of
their enemies, so that they could not run, nor follow nimbly the course.
Ineuonea.
They name this fish in their language Ineuonia. The fish of this river
generally is good to eat, so is the sea fish that coasteth that country, but
not so delicate as the fish under the line, and in other places of the sea. I
will not forget nor leave out now that I am in purpose of fish, to show a
marvelous thing, and worthy of memory. In this land or country about the
river before named, are trees growing on the sea borders or brinkes, covered
with oysters always to the very top: you shall understand, that when the sea
swells, it casts the flood very high, and far on the land twice in.24.
hours, so that the water covers oftentimes these trees, so that the oysters
being brought in by these springtydes, take hold, Trees bering oysters.
and close against the branches, being of an incredible multitude, of the which
when the wild men mind to eat, they cut the branches of the tree being so
charged and laden with oysters, as we do here a branch of a pear tree, being
laden with pears, the which they eat more commonly than greater oysters that
are in the sea, for because (say they) that they are more wholesomer and have a
better taste, and that they will not engender fevers, so soon as the others.

Of America generally. Cap. 27.
Now that I have treated particularly of the places whereas we did most remain
after that we had taken land and chiefly of ye whereas the Sieur of Villagagnon,
does inhabit with other French men even at this day. Likewise of this most
notable river which we name Ianaria, the circumstances of the places, for that
they lie in a land discovered and found out in our time, there rests now to
wright that, the which we have learned and known for the time that we remained
there. America not known of the Cosmographers in times past.
It is most true that this land was not known to the writers in times past,
neither yet to the ancient Cosmographers that have divided the earth to be
inhabited in three parts, Europa, Asia, and Africa, of the which they only had
intelligence, but I am sure that they had no knowledge thereof, for if they had
known it, they would have noted it for the fourth part of the world, for it is
much more greater than any of the others. This la^d by good right is called
America, taking name of him that first found it out, being named Americus
Vespucia, Americus Vespucia did first find out America.
who was a very expert man in the Art of Navigations and in other high
enterprises. But since him, diverse men have discovered the greatest part lying
toward Temistitan unto the Country of the Giants, and the straight of
Magellan. Why it should be named India I know not, but the East country that is
named India, has taken his name of that notable flood or river Indus, the
which is very far from America. It shall therefore suffice to call it America,
or France Antartike. It lies between the two Tropikes even beyond
Capricornus, the west side extending toward Temistitan and Moluques, The lying
of America.
toward the South to the straight of Magellan, and on both sides of the West
sea and peaceable: true it is that near to Darienna and Furna, this Country
is very straight, for the sea on both sides enters very far into the land.
Now will I write of that part which we have most known and frequented,
which lies about the Tropike Brumall, and yet beyond that it has been and is
inhabited at this day, besides the Christians that have dwelled there since
Americus time, What the inhabitants of America are.
with a marvelous strange wild and brutish people, without Faith, without Law,
without Religion, and without any civility: but living like brute beasts, as
nature has brought them out, eating herbs and roots, being always naked as
well women as men, until such time as being more visited and frequented of
Christians, they may peradventure leave this brutish living, and learn to live
after a more civil and humayne manner. And therefore we ought greatly to
praise our maker that has illuminated our hearts, not leaving us so brutishe
as these poor wild men. As touching the ground or land of America, America
is a very fruitful country.
it is very fruitful in trees bearing very excellent fruit without labor or
seed. And it is not to be douted, yt if the land were tilled, it would bring
forth very good things, considering how it does lie with fair mountains and
dales, What part of America is inhabited by the Spaniards and Portingals.
rivers bearing very good fish, fat Islands likewise firm and main land. At
this day the Spaniards and the Portingals do inhabit and dwell in a great part
thereof, the Entilles on the West sea, Moluques on the peaceable sea, from the
main land, unto Dareiena, Parias, and Palmaria, the others more toward the
South as in the land of Bressill, so much thought I good to write of this
Country in general.

Of the Americans Religion Cap. 28.
WE have before showed how that these poor people live without Religion, and
without Law, the which is very true, but there is no creature living that is
partaker of reason (so blinded) seeing the heaven, the earth, the Sun, the
Moon so ordained, the sea, and the things that are daily seen, but that will
judge these things to be made by the hand of some greater worckemaister than
man. And therefore there is no Nation be they never so brutish, but that by
their own natural reason have some religion, and some cogitatio^ of God: they
all therefore confess, that there is some power and soueraygntie: but what a
one it is, few there are that know it, and that has caused the division of
Religion. The Religion of the Americans.
Some have acknowledged the Sun for sovereign, others the Moon, some others
the Stars, and others otherwise, as Histories do recite. Now to our purpose,
these wild men of America, make mention and tell of a great Lord, whom they
name in their language Toupan, Toupan.
the which they say is above, and makes it rain and thunder, but they have
not the mean to pray nor to honor him at one time or other, neither yet no
place appointed. If one show them of God, as I have many times done, they will
give an attentive ear thereunto with an admiration, and they will ask if it
be not that Prophet that has taught them to plant their great roots, Hetich
roots.
that they name Hetich. And they have heard say of their fathers, that before
they had the knowledge of the roots, they lived but with herbs and wild
roots, like brute beasts: there was they say in their country a great
Charaiba, Charaiba.
that is to say a Prophet, yt which came to one of their young mayde^s, and
gave her certain great roots named Hetich, showing her, that she should cut
them in pieces, and then plant them in the earth, the which she did, and since
they have always continued from father to son: the which roots have so well
prospered, that now they have so great abundance that they eat little other
food, and it is as common with them as bread is with us. Of this root I find
two kinds of one greatness: the first when it is sodden or boiled becomes
yellow, and the other white, and these two kinds have the leaf like to a
mallow, it never bears seed, and therefore these wild men do plant again
this root, being cut in pieces, so that they being replanted multiply
excedingly. When that this country was first discovered and found on,
America first discovered in the year. 1497
as before we have showed, which was in the year. 1497. by the commandment
of the King of Castilia, these wild men being amassed to see the Christians in
the order as they had never before seen ye like: likewise their manner, gesture
and doings, they esteemed them as Prophets and honored them as Gods, until
they perceived that they became sick to dye, and to be subject to the like
passions that they were, then they began to dispraise them, and to entreat
them worse than they were accustomed as they that afterward went thither
Spaniards and Portingals: so that if they be angered, they force no more to kill
a Christian and to eat him, than if it were one of their enemies: but this is
in certayned places, and specially among the Canibals, that live with none
other thing, The Canibals are a people that live with human flesh.
as we do here with biefe and mutton. Also they have left calling them Carabes
or half Gods, and now they call them as in reproach Mahira, the which was the
name of one of their anciente Prophets, whom they did detest and abhor. As
touching Toupan, they esteem him great, not resting in one place, but going
about here and there, and they say that he declares his greatest secrets to
their Prophets. This therefore shall suffice for the Religion of these wild men,
the which I knew and understood by a french expositor that had dwelled there
ten years, who understood perfectly the language.

The manner and custom of the living of these Americans as well men as women.
Cap. 29.
WE have here before showed speaking of Africa, the which we costed in our
Navigations, that ye Barbarians and Ethiopians, and others in India went
customably naked excepting their privy parts, the which they cover with
certain vailes or aprons of cotton, or beasts skins, the which without
comparison is more tolerable than in our Americans, How these America^s live.
that live all naked even as they come out of their mothers womb, as well men
as women without any shame. If you would know whether they do it of
indigencie, or for the extreme heat, I answer that they may make themselves
clothing of cotton as well as to make them beds thereof to rest in, either they
might cloth them with beasts skins, as well as those of Canada, for they have
great plenty of wild and tame, easy to be taken. They have this opinion, that
being naked and without apparel, they are more nimbler and better disposed to
all kind of exercises.

Moreover if any time they be clad with any thyn and light shirte, the which
they have peradventure gotten by great pain: when they mete with their
enemies they put it of before they set hand to their weapon (whose weapons)
are a bow and Arowes, for they think yt this garment or shyrte would take
away their dexterity in their fight, also that they could not easily fly nor
remove their iointes before their enemies: yea they say that they should be
taken of their enemies by such garments. And therefore they had rather be
naked, so ignorant are they and ill advised. Nevertheless they are very
desirous of gowns, shirts, hats, and other clothing, and they esteem them so
precious and costly, that they will rather let them mar and take harm, than
once to wear them, least that by that means they should hurt them. In deed
sometimes they will put them on when that they remain at home, drinking and
making good cheer after the death of their parents and friends, or in some
solemnity after that they have obtained victory of their enemies. Moreover if
that they have on any garment, they will put it of when that they sit down on
the ground, and cast it on their shoulders for fear of soyling of it. There
are old men and women among them, that hide their privy parts with leaves.
Some have said that in Europe when it was first inhabited, the men and women
went al naked, only their secret parts covered, as we read of our first
parents. Nevertheless in that time the men lived longer than they do in our
age, being not subject to so many diseases as we are, so that they have
affirmed that all men ought to go naked as Adam and Eve our first parents did,
when they were in Paradise. As touching this nakedness, we find it not by
Gods commandment, I know that there are certain heretics called Adamians,
that maintain this nakedness, the which sect lived all naked, as these
Americans of which we speak. Adamians a kind of heretics, that maintained
nakedness.
And they assembled in their sinagogs for to pray, al naked, and by this ye may
know their opinion to be false, for before the sin of Adam and Eve, as it is
showed in the scripture, they were all naked, but afterward God gave them
garments of lether to cover their nakedness, as the Canadians use at this day.
The opinion of the Turlupins, and the Philosophers of Ciniques, concerning
nakedness.
The which error others have maintained, as the Turlupins and the Philosophers
named Ciniques, yt which allege for their reasons, and do teach it publicly,
that a man ought not to hide that, which nature has given him. By this ye may
see that these heritikes are more impertine^t, having had the knowledge of
things than our Americans. The Romans though they were very strange in their
livings, yet they never remained naked. As touching ye statues and images, they
were made and reared up in their temples all naked, as Titus Liuius shows,
having neither hat nor coife upon their heads: as we find of Caius Caesar, who
being balde before, was wont to bring his hair that grew behind, Julius Ca^^^
did wear a cap against the order of the Romans.
forward for to cover his forhead: and therefore he had license to wear a cap
or coife on his head, for to hide that part of his head that was balde. So
much thought I good to speak, treating of the wild men of America. Moreover
I have seen those of Perou use to wear little garments made of Cotton after
their manner. Also Pliny shows, that in the farther part of the East Indies,
(for he never had no knowledge of America:) on ye borders of Gangis, there is a
kind of people cladde with broad leaves, which people are of a little stature.
I will say moreover as touching our wild men, yt they have a very fearful
look, bold of speech, their language is short and obscure, and yet more easier
to learn than the Turkishs speech, and others of the East parts, the which I
may affirm by experience. They take great pleasure to speak distinctly, and
to vaunt of the victories and triumphs that they have had over their enemies.
The elders among the^ will keep their promise, and are more faithful than the
young men, and yet they are all subject to theft, not that they steal one from
another, but if they find a christian or a stranger, they will rifle him (of
their gold and silver they will take none) for they have not the knowledge nor
use thereof, but their garments. They use great threatenings, specially when yt
they are angered, not only to smite but to kill. Though they be uncivil, yet are
they prompt and ready to do one service, yea for a little reward, even to guide
a stranger.l. or.lx. leagues into the Country for fear of difficulties and
dangers, with other charitable and honest deeds (more than among Christians.)
Now these wild men being naked, have a tawny color, The stature and natural
color of the Americanes.
the reason thereof I leave to the judgment of natural Philosophers, and why
they are not so black as the Neigers of Ethiopia. To the rest, well formed and
proportioned of their members, but their eyes are evil made, that is, black
and louring, and their look like to the look of a wild beast: they are of a
high stature, well disposed, quick and nimble, seldom grieved with sickness,
unless they be hurt with arowes in the war.

The manner of their eating and drinking. Cap. 30.
IT is easy to be known, The wild me live without laws.
yt these wild men of America have no more civility in their eating, than in
other things, for as they have no laws to take the good, and to eschew the
evil, even so they eat of al kinds of meats at al times and hours, without any
other discretion. In deed they are of themselves superstitious, they will eat
no beast nor fish, yt is heavy or slow in going, but of all other light meats
in running and flying, as Venison and such like, for because that they have
this opinion, that heavy meats will hurt and anoy them when they should be
assailed of their enemies. Also they will eat no salt meats, nor yet permit
their children to eat any. And when they see the Christian eat salt meats,
The Americanes detest and abhor salt meats.
they reprove them therefore as a thing impertinent, saying that such meats will
shorten their lives: their ordinary meats are roasted after their manner, as
Rats of diverse kind, and great ones, a certain kind of Toades greater than
ours, Cocodrils and others that they roast all whole, with the skin and the
bowels, and this they use without any difficulty, yea these Cocodrils and
great Lezards as great as a pig of a month old, The Lezard of America.
the which is a fine meat (as they say that have eat thereof.) These Lezards
of America are so privy, that they will come near unto you, and take their
repast, if that you will take it without fear or difficulty. Their flesh is
like a Chickens flesh, and they kill them with shooting at them with their
arrows. The meats that they boil, are Oysters and other shell fish of the
sea. In taking of their food, they observe no hour, but all times and hours
that they feel them selves to have a stomach or appetite, be it in the night
after their first sleep, they will rise to eat, and then lay them down to
sleep. In their repast they keep a marvelous silence, How these Americans
keep silence at their meat.
the which is more to be commended, than amongst us that babble and talk at our
tables, they do seethe and roast very well their meat, and eat it measurably
and not rashly, mocking us that devour in stead of eating: they will not
drink when they eat, nor eat when they drink, so that they will forbear
drink a whole day. When they make their great bankets and solemnities, as when
they have obtained some great victory on their enemies, then they will sit
drinking a whole day without eating. They make drinks of great Mill white and
black, the which they call in their language Auaty. Auaty a drink.
Nevertheless after that they have sat drinking, being once departed the one
from the other, they will eat such as they can find. The poorest sort live
more with sea fish, and other like meats than with flesh, they that are
far from the sea, do fish in rivers. Also they have diverse kinds of
fruits, as nature brings them forth, and yet they live long in health and
well disposed. Here you must note that our elders in times past lived with
fish. The laws of Triptolomeus, as Xenophon writes, did defend and forbid
the Atheniens the use of flesh. Therefore it is no strange thing for to live
with fish. First in our Europe, and before that the ground was tilled, men
lived more hardly without flesh or fish, having not the mean to use them, and
yet notwithstanding they were stronger, and lived the longer, The more delicate
a man is nourished the less strength he has.
being nothing so feminate as now in our age. Now these wild men use flesh and
fish, as we have before showed. Some lie and eat in their beds, at the least
they sit and eat in their beds, specially the master or chief of the family
shall be in his bed: and the others about him doing him service, as if nature had
taught them to do honor and reverence to the aged.

Moreover they have this honesty, that the first that has taken any great
pray, be it on water or la^d they will distribute to every one specially to
Christians, if there be any, and they will request and desire them freely to
eat thereof, esteming it a great injury if you refuse it. Also so soon as you
enter into their lodgings, they will ask you in their language Marabisser,
what is thy name? and you may be well assured, that if they once know it, they
will never forget it, their memory is so good. Were it Cyrus the King of
Persia, Cyneas legate to the King Pyrrhus, Metridates, nor Ces^^, the which
Pliny writes of, to have been of so good a memory, and after you have
answered them, they will ask you, Marapipo, what will thou say? and many other
things.

Against the opinion of those that think these wild men to be all heary. Cap.
31.
FOR because that many have this foolish opinion, that those people, whom we
call wild men, as they live in the woods and fields almost like to brute
beasts, so in like manner they are beary all over their bodies, as a Lion, a
Bear, or such like. Also they are so pictured and painted in their tablets and
clothes. To be short, in setting out a wild man, they set him out al hairy,
even from the head to the foot, the which is altogether false and untrue. I
have known some so obstinate, that they would affirm it with an oath, as
those that had seen it of a truth. As for me I know and affirm the contrary,
for that I have seen it. The wild men as well of the East Indies, as of
America, come forth of their mothers womb as fair and as well pollished as
ours of Europe. And if that hair grow by succession of time on any part of
their bodies, as it does to us and others in what part of the body so ever it
be, they scratche it of with their nails, saving only the hair of their
heads, so greatly they do detest and abhor it, as well women as men. And the
hairs that grow on their brows, A kind of herb that cutteth like steel.
the women do shave it of with a certain herb that cutteth like a raser:
this herb is like to Sage or Iouncke, that grows by the water side. As
touching the hair Amatory, and their beards, they pluck it of, as well as of the
rest of the body. Within these few years they have found the mean to make
little pinsers, with the which they pull of their hair, for since that they
have been frequented of Christians, they have learned the way how to forge
Iron. And therefore believe not hereafter the common opinion of ye painters nor
their doings in this point, for they have liberty to paint things to their
own discretion, even as Poets have to forge and invent lies. If it should
chance that a child should come forth of his mothers womb hairy, and that
the hairs should grow and increase all over his body, as the like has been
seen in France, this were an accident of nature, as if a child should be
borne with two heads or such like. A monstrous form of a child covered with
scales.
These are not things so wonderful and strange, considering that Physicians
can show the reason. I have seen a child in Normandy, covered with scales
like a Carpe. These are imperfections of nature, according to ye Gloss on
the.xiij. Chapter of Esaias, showing of certain monsters having the shape of men
named Satires, living in the woods, hairy like wild beasts. And of this the
wrytings of Poets are full of Satyrs, Faunes, Nymphs, Dryades, Hamadryades,
Orcades, and other kind of monsters, the which at this day are not to be
found, as they were in times past: by the which means the Devil sought to
deceive man, changing himself into a thousand similitudes and likenesses. But
now that our Lord Jesus of his mercy has revealed himself to us, these
wicked spirits have been chased and driven out, and has given us power to
resist the^, as witnesses the holy scripture. Moreover in Africa are to be
seen at this day certain monsters disformed, for the reason that we have
before showed in the beginning of this book, with others that at this present
I will leave out. Further more as touching these Americanes, they make their
hair grow as Monks were wont to do, the which passes not their ears, they
cut their hair of before, for this occasion as I have been informed, for if
they should wear their hair long before, and their beard long, it should be
occasion that they should fall into the hands of their enemies, which would take
them by their hair and by their beard. Also they say that their ancestors have
showed them, that to have their head and beard thus cut and shaue^, causes
them to have a marvelous great audacitie and courage. It would be thought, yt
if these wild men have frequented Asia, Abantes a people in Asia.
they should have learned this of the Abantes, ye first found this invention of
shauing or cutting of hear. For to be as they say, more valiant and hardy
among their enemies. Also Plutarke shows in the life Theseus, that ye custom
of the Athenians was, The manner of the Athenians.
that they that were constituted as tribunes in their common wealth, were
bound to offer the locks or hear of their heads to the God in the Ila^d of
Delphos, so that Theseus having shaued the hear of, on the forparte of his
head was thereto provoked by the Abantes, a people of Asia. Moreover we find,
that Alexander the great, caused his men to take the Macedonians by the hear
of their head, and by their bearde: for at that time there was no barbars for
to polle and shave, and the first barbars that were seen in Italy, came out
of Sisily. This much as touching the hear of these Americans.

Of a tree named in the Americans tongue Genipat, with which they make colors.
Cap. 32.
Genipat a tree, and the fruit.
GEnipat is a tree, the which the wild me^ of America do greatly esteem for the
fruit that it bears being of the trees name, not that it is good to eat, but
profitable to other things that they apply it too. It is like of greatness
and of color to our peach, of the juice whereof, they make a certain color,
with the which sometimes they color al their bodies. The poor brutish men
not knowing the mean to draw out the juice or liquor of this fruit, are
constrained to chew it, as if they would swallow it down, The manner how to
make color of this tree Genipat.
then they take it out and wring juice out with their hands, as you would
wring water out of a sponge, the which liquor or juice is as clear as cristal,
so that when they are minded to make any enterprise or feate, or to visit one
another, and to make some solempnitie, they wet all their bodies with this
juice or liquor, The manner of these wild me^ to color their bodies.
and the more it dries upon them, the more perfecter color it attaineth. This
color is between an Azure and a black, and never in his perfect color,
until it have been the space of two days upon their bodies, and so these pore
people be as well content with that, as we be with Velvet or Satin, or any
other costly garment when we go to a feast or a wedding. The women do more
oftener color them selves therewith than men. Furthermore ye shall note in
this place, that if the men are minded to go ten or twelve leagues off to drink
or make good cheer with their friends, they will pille some kind of Tree,
where within shall be red, yelowe, or some other color and they will stamp
it very small, and then they will take gum out of another tree, the which they
name Vsub, Vsub a kind of Gum.
with the which they will rub al their body over, although it be good for wounds
and sores, as I have seen by experience, and then upon this Gum they will
pour of these colors before showed. Others in steed or for want of these
trees or colors, will sow many little feathers together of all colors, some as
red as fine scarlet, and others of others colors, and about their heads they
will have garlands of these feathers maruelloues fair. This tree Genipat has
leaves like to a nut tree, and ye fruit grows at the end of the branches one
upon another on a strange fashion and manner. There is also a another tree named
Genipat, of which the fruit is greater, and good to eat. An other tree named
Genipat.
There is a another secret herb which they name in their language Petun, the
which most commonly they bear about them, for that they esteem it marvelous
profitable for many things, this herb is like to our Buglos. Petun an herb,
and how it is used.
They gather this herb very charely, and dry it within their little cabanes or
houses. Their manner to use it, is this, they wrappe a quantity of this herb
being dry in a leaf of a Palm tree which is very great, and so they make
rolls of the length of a ca^dle, and than they fire the one end, and receive
the somke thereof by their nose and by their mouth. The say it is very wholesome
to cleanse and consume the superfiuous humors of the brain. Moreover being taken
after this sort, it keeps the parties from hunger and thirst for a time,
therefore they use it ordinarily. Also when they have any secret talk or
counsel among them selves, they draw this smoke, and then they speak. The
which they do customably one after another in the war, whereas it is very
needeful. The women use it by no means. If that they take too much of this
perfume, it will make them light in the head, as the smell or taste of strong
wine. The christians that do now inhabit there, are become very desirous of
this parfume, although yt the first use thereof is not without danger, before
that one is accustomed thereto, for this smoke causes sweates and weakness,
even to fall into a Syncope, the which I have tried in my self. And it is not
so strange as it seems, for there are many other fruits that offend the
brain, though that the taste of them is plesa^t and good to eat. A fountain at
Lyncestis, and his property.
Pliny shows, that in Lyncestis there is a fountain that makes the people
dronken, that take thereof, likewise an other of Paphlagonia. Some think this
not to be true, but altogether false, ye which we have spoken as touching this
herb, as though nature could not give such power to things, yes truly much
more greater, also to beasts, according to the Countries and Regions. Wherefore
should it then leave this country void of such a benifite, being temperate
without comparison more than others? And if there be any not content of this
our witnessing or affirmation, let him read Herodita, which in his second book,
makes mention of a people in Africa, living only with herbs. Apian reherseth
that the Parthians being banished and driven out of their Country by Marcus
Anthonius, lived with a certain herb that took away their memory:
nevertheless they had opinion that it did norish the^, though yt in a short
time after they died. Therefore ought not ye story of our Petun be found
strange.

Of a tree named Paquouere. Cap. 33.
Seeing that we are now come to the rehearsal of trees of our America, I think it
good to set forth some, not for the amplifying of this work, but for the great
virtue and secretenesse of things, and for that there is found no such in our
Europe, neither in Asia nor in Africa. Therefore this tree that the wild men
name Paquouere, is peradventure the wonderfullest tree that ever was seen. The
description of a tree named Paquouere.
It is not more higher from the ground to the branches, than a fadome or there
about, and of greatness as much as a man may gripe with both his hands, when
that it is come to his full grows. And the tree is so tender, that it may be
easily cut with a knife. As touching the leaves, they are in breadth two foot,
and of length a fadome, a foot and iiij. fingers, the which I affirm and
assure of a truth. I have seen almost of that kind, in Egypt and in Damasco
returning from Jerusalem. Notwithstanding, the leaves are not half so great,
as those of America, likewise there is great difference in ye fruit, for ye
fruit is a good foot long, I mean the longest sort, and great like a Cucumber
much like unto it, as touching the proportion: this fruit which they name in
their language Pacoua, Pacoua the fruit.
is very good when it is come to his ripeness, and of a good relish. The wild
men gather them before they be ripe, which fruit being gathered, they bear
into their lodgings, as we do our fruit. It grows on the tree by clusters,
xxx. or.xl. together, and close to another upon little branches near to the
trunck. And that which is more to be marvelled at, this tree never bears
fruit but once. The greatest part of these wild men that dwell far within the
country, do norishe themselves with this fruit a good part of the year, and
of an other fruit that comes up in the fields, which they name Hoyriri, the
which to look on, would be judged to grow on some tree. Notwithstanding it
grows in a certain herb that bears leaf like to a Palm, as well in the
length as in largeness, it grows in the midst of the leaves very round, and
within it be little Nuts, of the which the kernel is white and good to eat,
saving that overmuch thereof, as well as of other things, hurts the brain. The
which force and strength is in the Coriander seed, if it be not trimmed and
dighted. Likewise if the other were so dressed and trimmed, it would take away
this vice. Notwithstanding the Americanes eat thereof, chiefly ye little
children. The fields ar very full within two leagues of Cap de Fria, near to
the great marish grounds yt we passed, after that we had set foot on land at
our return. This much will I say by the way, that biside ye fruit that we saw
by ye way, we found a Cocodril dead of the greatness of a good calfe, that was
come out of the marshes, and had been there killed, for they eat the flesh of
them, A dead Cocodrill. Iacareabson.
also of great Lizards, of the which we have before showed: they name the^ in
their language Iacareabson, and they are greater than those of Nyll. The people
of the Country say, that there is a marishe being a.v. leagues compass, on
the side of Pernomeri, distant from the line.x. degrees toward the Canibals,
whereas there are certain Crocodrils as great as oxen, that cast out a mortal
smoke by their mouth, in such sort, that if ye come near them, they will go
near to kill you, as they have heard tell of their ancestors. In the place
whereas grows this fruit of which we speak, are a great number of Hares
like to ours, but not so great, nor yet like in color. There is also found
another little beast named Agoutin, as great as a Hare, the hair like to a
wild Bore brisled, the head like the head of a great Rat, the ears and the
moosel like to a Hare or Wat, the feet cloven like to a Hog, and the tail
not above a finger length, they live with fruits: also the wild men norishe
them for their pleasure, their flesh is very good for to eat.

How these Americanes or wild men do disforme them sleues, esteming it a
great glory. Cap. 34.
IT is not sufficient for these wild men to be naked, to paint their bodies,
and to scratch and pluck of their hair: but also for to make them selves more
disformed, they pearce their mouths being young with a sharp and pointed herb,
so that the hole increases and grows as their body, for they put therein a
certain kind of fish, having the skin very hard, of which fish the greater end
is within, and the lesser without (on the nether lip.) When that they are
great, ready to be married, they put into these holes great stones, being much
like to the color of an Emerauld, the which they do so esteem, A stone of
the color of an Emerauld.
that it is not easy to recover any of them, without some great reward or
present, for they are very rare and scant in their Country. Their neighbors
and nie friends bring these stones from an hie Mountain, that is in the
country of the Canibals, the which they pollish with an other stone for ye
purpose, so runningly, that it is not possible for the best and most expertest
workman that is, to do it better. And I think there might be found in this
forsaid hill very Emeraulds: for I have seen of these stones, that you could
not discern from Emeraulds. These Americanes as I say, do disfigure themselves
after this sort, and do disforme and mishape themselves with these holes and
stones in their faces: in which they take as great delight and pleasure as a
Lord or gentleman will do in a rich and precious chain of gold or some other
Jewel: so that among them that bears the most, is esteemed their King or
greatest Lord, and not only on their lips and mouth, but also on both sides
the cheek: these stones that the men carry, are as broad as an Angel or
sovereign of gold, and as thick as a finger breadth, which lets their
speech, so that one can skant understand their speech, for they speak as
though their mouth were full of meat: when these stones are taken out, if that
they speak, you shall see them slauer at these holes, the which is a filthy and
ugly fight to behold. Also when these brutish beasts are disposed to mock, they
will put their tongues out of these holes, the women and maidens are not so
disformed. In deed they have hanging at their ears pretty little stones and
shells, that they have in the sea, also bracelets of certain shells. They esteem
much little beads of glass, yt the frenchmen have carried thither. Because of
their disformitie and changing of their natural color, these men and women
are for the most part black, for that they color themselves with colors that
they make of ye fruit of trees, as we have before showed, they color one an
other. The women they color and deck the men, we do not read that other
nations have done the like. We find that the Scythians going to the funerals
of their friends, did painte their faces with black. The women of Turkey do
paint their nails with colors red and blew, thinking by this to be more
fairer, but not ye rest of their body. I will not here forget yt these women of
America do not only paint their childre^s faces with black, but also their
bodies, and that with diverse colors, specially of one color like to a
vernishing, yt which color will continue the space of.iiij. days, and with ye
same color the women paint their legs, so yt for to look a far of, you would
judge them to be hosed with fine black kersey.

Of visions, dreams and illusions, that these Americans have, and of the
persecution that they receive of wicked spirits. Cap. 35.
IT is a wonderful thing, that these pore men although they be not reasonable,
for yt they are deprived from the right use of reason, and from the knowledge
of God, Why the Americanes are tormented of wicked sprites
are subject to many fantastical illusions and persecutions of wicked spirits.
We have said that before the coming of our savior Jesus Christ, we were in like
manner vexed: for the devil studieth only to seducte that creature that has no
knowledge of God. Even so these pore Americanes do oftentimes see a wicked
spirit, sometimes in one form, Aguan a evil sprite in their language.
and sometimes in an other, the which they name in their language Agnan, the
which spirit persecuteth them day and night, not only their soul, but also
their body, beating them, and doing them much injury, so that you shall hear
them make a pitiful cry, saying in their language, (if there be any christian
by or near,) see thou not Agnan ye beats me, defend me if thou will that I
shall serve thee, and cut thy wood: for many times they will trauail to the
Brasel wood for a small reward. Therefore in ye night they will not go out of
their cabens or houses, without bearing fire with them, the which they say, is
a sovereign defense and remedy against their ennimie. And I thought that it had
been a Fable when it was showed me first, but I have seen by experience this
wicked spirit to be driven out by a christian, in inuocating and naming Jesus
Christ. Also the people of Ginney, and of Canada are likewise tormented,
chiefly in the woods, whereas they have many visions, and they call this sprite
in their language Grigri. Grigri.
Furthermore these wild men of America being this disprouided of reason, The
opinion of the wild men, as touching their natural dreams.
and of the knowledge of verity, are easy to fall into many foolish errors.
They note and observe their dreams diligently, thinking that all that they have
dreamed, should suddenly come to pass. If they have dreamed that they shall
have victory of their enemies, or to be vanquished and overcome, you shall not
persuade them the contrary, but they believe it assuredly, as we do the Gospel.
Of a truth there be Philosophers which hold opinion, that some dremes will
naturally come to pass, according to the humors that reign, or other
dispositions of ye body, as to dream of fire, water, black things and such
like. But to believe and affirm the other dreams, as those of these Americans,
it is a thing impertinent, and contrary to the true religion of Jesus Christ:
and to my judgment so are al other, Macrobius in the dreme of Scipion, says
that some dreams come to pass, and happen because of the vanity of ye
dreamers. Other dreams come of things that we have too much apprehended.
Others beside our Americanes, do give creadit to dreams, as the Lacedaemonians,
the Persians and certain others. These wild men have an other strange
opinion which is an abuse, they esteem some among the^ to be very Prophets,
whom they name in their language Pages, Pages. Prophets.
to whom they declare their dreams, and the others do interpret them, and
they hold opinion that they tell truth. These may be compared to Philon the
first interpreter of dreams, and to Trogus Pompeius, that therein was very
excellent. I might here bring in many things of dreams and diuinations, and
what dreams are true or no. Likewise of their kinds and the causes thereof, as
we have been instructed of our elders. But for that it is repugnant to our
religion, and for that defense is made to give thereto any credit, we will leave
it, and lean only to the holy scripture, and to that which is commanded us,
and therefore I will speak thereof no more: but sure I am that for one yt hitteth
right, there are a number contrary. Let us return to our wild men of America,
they bear great reverence to these Prophets, otherwise named Pages or
Charaibes, which is to say, half Gods, Pages or Charaibes.
and they are truly idolaters, even as were the ancient Gentiles.

Of false Prophets and Magicians, that are in this country of America, the
which invoke and call upon wicked spirits, and of a tree named Ahouai. Cap.
36.
THis people being so far from the truth, beside the persecution that they
receive of wicked spirits, their errors and dreams, yet are they so far out
of reason that they worship the devil, by the mean of some of his mynisters
named Pages, of the which sort we have spoken already. These Pages or
Charaibes, What these pages and Charaibes are and of their deceit.
are men of a wicked life, the which are given to serve the devil for to
deceive their neighbors. Such deceivers for to color their wickedness, and
to be esteemed honorable among others, remain not continually in one place, but
they are vacabunds, wandering here and there, through the woods and other
places, and returning with others, at certain hours, making them believe that
they have co^ferred and counseled with the sprits, for public affairs, and
that they must do so and so, or that this or that shall happen, and then they
are received and intertayned honorably, being nourished and intertayned for
this their doing: and they esteem them selves happy, that may remain in their
favor and good grace, and give or offer to them some present. Likewise if it
happen, that any of them have indignation or quarrel against his neighbor,
they come to these Pages, to the end that they mare dye with poison him or
them to whom they will evil. Among other things they help themselves with a
tree named in their language Ahouay, bearing fruit venomous and mortal, the
which is of the greatness of a little chestnut, and it is very poison,
specially the nut. The men for a light and little cause will give thereof to
their wives, being angered, and the women likewise to the men: likewise these
wicked women when they are with child, if their husbands have displeased
them, they will take instead of this fruit a certain herb, for to make
their fruit of their womb to come before their time, this fruit being white
with his nut, is made like this greek letter D Delta, and of this fruit the
wild men when the nut or kernel is out, they make bells, and hang them on their
legs, the which makes as a great a noise as the Moris daunsers in our
country. The wild men will in no wise give of this fruit to strangers being
fresh gathered, likewise they forbid their children in no wise to touch thereof
before that the kernel be fallen away. This tree in height is like to our
pear trees, the leaf of two or three fingers long, and two fingers broad,
being green or springing all the year long, the barcke is whitishe. When
there is a branch cut thereof, it renders a white juice or lyquor almost
like milk, the tree being cut it casts a marvelous stinking smell, therefore
the wild men will put it to no use, not to make therewith fire wood. I will
forbear here to set forth the properties of many trees, bearing fruits
marvelous fair, nevertheless as much and rather more venomous than this tree
of which we speak. Furthermore ye must note that the wild men have these Pages
in such honor and reverence, that they worship them or rather do Idolatry to
them, specially when they return from any place: ye shall see this people go
before them prostrating them selves, and praying them, saying, Make that I be
not sick, that I die not, neither I nor my children, and such like things.
And they will answer, thou shall not die, thou shall not be sick and such like.
If it chance that these Pages speak not truth, and that things happen
otherwise then they have predestined, they make no difficulty to kill him or
the^, as unworthy of that title and dignity of Pages, every Village nourishes
of them, some one, some two or three, according to their greatness, and when it
behooves to know any great thing, they use certain ceremonies and deuilishe
inuocations, the which are made after this manner. First is made a new lodging,
in the which never man before has dwelled, and there within they will rear or
make a new white bed and clean according to their manner. The ceremonies of
these Prophets to call upon the wicked spirit.
Then they will carry into the said lodging great quantity of vittels, as
Cahouin, which is their ordinary drink made by a virgin of ten or twelve years
of age, likewise of their food made of roots, the which they use instead of
bread. So al things being thus prepared the people being assembled do guide
this their gentle Prophet to this new lodging, whereas he shall remain alone,
after yt a maid has given him water to wash withal, but ye must note, before
this mystery he must abstain from his wife the space of nine days, being in
the house alone: and the people gone a little back, he lies flatt down on
the bed, and begins to invoke and call the wicked spirit for the space of
an hour, and furthermore making his accustomed ceremonies, in such sort that
in the end of his inuocations, the spirit comes to him hissing, and
whisteling, as they say. Others have showed me, that this wicked spirit
comes sometimes in the presence of all the people, though they see him not,
but they hear a fearful noise, then they cry all with one voice in their
language, saying: we pray thee to tell the truth to our Prophet, that tarieth
for thee there within: What the intorrogations are that they make to the wicked
spirit.
their intorrogatio^s is of their enemies, to know who shall have the
victory, with the like answers, that say, who shall be taken and eaten of their
enemies? who shall be hurt or offended with any wild beast or such like. Some
of them among other things, showed me that their Prophet had forshewed our
coming. Houioulsira.
They call this spirit Houioulsira: this and many other things have Christians
affirmed me of, that had dwelled there a long time. And they never take any
great enterprise in hand, before they know the answer of their Prophet.
When this mystery is accomplished, the Prophet comes out, who being
compassed about with people, makes a long narration unto them, wherein he
reherseth all that he has heard of this spirit: and God knows the
greetings, rewards and presents that are made unto him. The Americans have
not been the first that have practiced magike, but before them it has been
common in many nations, until the coming of our Savior Jesus Christ, whose
presence did efface and overthrow the power of Satan, by the which means the
devil sought to begile and deceive ye world: it is not therefore without a
cause, that it is forbidden by the holy Scripture, yea by Gods own mouth. Of
this Magike, Two kinds of Magike.
we find two chief and principal kinds, one is in having familiar and secret
talk with wicked spirits, who opens and shows the most secretest things
of nature in deed, the one is more wickeder than the other, but they are both
naught and full of curiosity. Why should we, seeing that by the providence of
God we have all things that to us is necessary and needful, go about to seek
out the secrets of nature and other things, which our Savior Jesus Christ
has observed to him self: such curiousness in us, shows an imperfect
Judgment, want of faith and true Religion, Against those that believe sorceries
and witchcraftes.
and yet the simple people that believes such things is most abused: Surely I
cannot but marvel, specially in a country (where good and politic laws are
used) why such filthy and wicked abuses be left unpunished, with a company of
old witches, which put herbs to arms, writings about necks, with other
mysteries and ceremonies, as to heal Feauers and other things, which are very
Idolatry, and worthy of grievous punishment. But at this day such wickedness
may be found among those that are in Authority, of which sort we should have
good counsel and judgment, but they themselves are first blind.

Therefore it is no marvel, if that the simple and ignorant be soon seduced,
seeing that men of wisdom and gravity, are so blinded. O blinded ignorance,
wherefore serves the holy Scripture? wherefore serves Laws and other good
sciences, the which our Savior Jesus Christ has opened and showed unto us, if
we live in error and ignorance as do these wild men, and more brutish than
the very brute beasts? Nevertheless, we will be esteemed, to know much, and make
a large profession of virtue. And therefore it is not to be marueled at, if our
elders not knowing the truth are fallen into errors, seking it by all means
much less of these wild men, of which we speak: but the vanity of this
world, shall cease when it pleases God. Now to our matter, we began to show,
that there is a kind of Magike most damnable, that is called Thurgia, or
Goetia, full of enchantementes, words, Thurgia a damnable Magike.
ceremonies, and inuocations, having yet under her certain other kinds, of
the which as it is said, was inuenter Zabulus. Zabulus, Which is the right
Magike.
As touching the true and perfect Magike, the which is to seek and know heavenly
things, to celebrate and honor God, it has been commended of many noble and
grave personages, such had the three Kings that went to seek out Christ, and
such Magike, is taken to be perfect and pure wisdom. What Magus in the Persian
to^g signifies
The Persians would not receive any into the dignity of their Empire unless
he had learned this Magike, that is, if he were not wise. For Magus in their
language is wise in ours, and (...) in Greek is Sapiens in Latin. Zalmoxis
Zorastria.
Of the which was the inuentor as it is said Zalmoxis and Zorastria, not he
that is so common, but he that was son to Oromasia. Also Plato in his
Alcibiades says, that he verily thinks that the Magike of Zorastria, is no
other thing, but to know and celebrate God, the which to know, and understand
he him self with Pithagoras, Empedocles, and Democrites, hazarded themselves
both by sea and by land, going into strange countries, for to learn and know
this Magike. I know well that Pliny and many others have enforced themselves
to attain thereto. As for me I thought good to speak thus much by the way,
seeing it comes now in purpose as touching our wild men.

How these Americans believe the soul to be immortal. Cap. 37.
THis poor people although they be ignorant and err, yet their error and
ignorance is more to be borne with all, than the Arians of our time which being
not content to have been created to the image and likeness of the eternal God,
perfect above al creaturs, against all scripture and miracles, they will show
themselves like brute beasts without law or reason, and therefore because of
their obstinate error, they should be handled like beasts, for there is no
beast be he never so wild and brutish, but will obey and serve man, as the
very image of God, the which we daily see. But it will one day come to pass,
that these wicked Imps shall well know that there rests somewhat after the
death of this world that at the later day shall appear before the majesty of
God, there to give account of their wicked and damnable error. Now therefore
these poor people do think ye soul to be immortal, the which they name in
their language Cherepicouare, Cherepicouare The opinion of the wild men on the
immortality of the soul.
the which I knew in asking of them what became of their soul when they were
dead. The souls said they of them that have valiantly faught with their
enemies, goes with many other souls to places of pleasure, goodly woods,
gardens, and orchardes, but to the contrary those that have not well defended
their country nor resisted their enemies shall go with Agnan, that is, to the
wicked spirit that tormented them. On a time I boldened my self to ask or
inquire of a great King of that country as touching the immortality of the
soul, who was come above thirty leagues of, to see us, but he answered me
fiercely in his language these words. Know thou not said he that after we be
dead, our souls go into a far country whereas they be found altogether in
fair and goodly places, as our Prophets do say that visit them oftentimes and
speak unto them, the which opinion they believe and hold of a truth. Another
time we went to visit another great King of that country named Pindahouson,
Pindahouson a King in the wild country.
whom we found sick in his bed of an Ague, who among other things demanded
of me what became of the souls of our friends, and others when they dyed, and
I made answer that they went with Toupan, the which he did easily believe, upon
the which he answered me these words: come hither said he, I have heard thee
speak much of Toupan, This Toupan is to be understood, the almighty God
that can do all things, speak to him for me that I be healed, and if I can
be made whole, I will give thee many fair gifts, yea I will be clad, and
arrayed as thou art, bear such a great bearde, and honor Toupan, as thou
do. And in deed when that he was whole, the Lord of Villegagnon was
determined to have him baptized, and therefore he kept him always with him.
They have another foolish opinion, the which is, that being on the water, be it
sea or River, for to go against their enemies, if that in the mean time there
arise a tempest or rage on the water, The superstition of the wild men.
as many times there does, they think that it comes of the souls of their
parents or friends, but wherefore they cannot tell, and for to appease the
tempest they cast some thing into the water, in toke^ of a present or offering,
thinking by this means to appease the winds? Furthermore, when any of them
die, be he King or other, before that they lay them in their grave, if that
there be any that has any thing belonging or partayning to the dead body, they
will not keep it back, but will bring it and deliver it openly, and restore it
before them all, for to be put into the earth with him: otherwise they do
think, that the soul after that it is separated from the body, will come and
molest them that keep their goods. I would to God, that many amongst us were
of the like opinion, (I mean without error) then would they not keep back
dead men's goods, from poor orphelins and others. Now they having restored to
the dead man that which is his, he is surely bound with ropes of cotton, and
of the pithe of trees, so that it is impossible as they think for him to
revive and come again, the which they do greatly fear, saying, that to the
elders it has so chanced, and that has made them since to look better to it.

How these wild men make war one against another, specially against those
whom they name Margageas and Thabaiares. Also of a tree which they name Hayri,
of the which they make their weapons for war. Cap. 38.
THese people of America are great quarrellers against their neighbors,
chiefly against those whom they name in their language Margageas, and
Thabaiares, and having no other mean to appease their quarrel, they fight
cruelly one with another: They gather together upon a.6000. men, sometimes ten
or.12000. village against village, or otherwise as they do meet, the like do
those of Perou and the Canibals. And before that they execute any great
enterprise, be it in war or otherwise, they assemble and come together,
chiefly the eldest sort, without their wives or children, with such a grace
and modesty, that they will speak one after another, and be that speaks shall
be heard with atte^tiue silence, who having declared his mind, gives place to
another, and so following in order, the Auditors sit down on the earth, unless
it be some ancient men, that lie on their beds, the which considering with my
self, comes to my remembrance the most commendable custom of the governors
of Thebes, an ancient City in Grecia, the which for to co^sult together of the
affairs of the commonwealth would always sit down upon the ground: the which
manner of doing is esteemed an argument of prudence. Furthermore it is a strange
thing that these Americans do never make amongst them any paction or concord,
though that their hatred be great, as other nations do be they never so cruel
and barbarous, as the Turks, Moors, and Arabians: and I think that if
Theseus, the first inuenter of peace among the Greeks, were among them, he
should be more troubled, than ever he was: this people have certain sleights
of war to trap one another, as well as in other places. Therefore these
Americans have perpetual enimitie one against another at all times against
their neighbors before showed, seeking their enemies, and fighting as furiously
together as is possible, the which causes each village to fortify, and to
make themselves strong with people and weapons. They will assemble together on
the nights in great number for to keep watch and ward. For they are wont to
skirmish togethers, more on nights than on days: if that they have knowledge
thereof before hand, or otherwise do suspecte the coming of their enemies,
they will plant in the ground round about their lodgings the compass of a
bow shot, sharp pointed pins of wood, the which are so set in the earth, that
they are sca^t perceived: this kind of policy they use to gal and pierce the
feet of their enemies, which are al bare and naked, as well as the rest of
their bodies, to the end that by this means they might entangle their enemies
for to kill some, others for to take prisoners. It is a great honor to them,
the which depart out of their country, for to assail their enemies on the
borders: and when that they have taken many of their enemies prisoners in their
countries, he that has taken most prisoners, is honored and celebrated among
others, as a great King or a great Lord: when he has most killed, and when
they mean suddenly to assail a town or village, they will hide them selves in
the woods like Foxes, lurking there for a certain time, until they have
espied the time and vantage to come forth suddenly to beset their enemies. When
they be come to a village, they know the mean to set fire thereon, for to make
them come forth with their wives and children, bag and baggage: being come
forth, they assail one another shoting of their arrows: also with their Maces
and Swords of wood, that to behold them it is a good passetime: they will bite
one another with their teeth in all places whereas they ca^ take hold, showing
sometimes the bones of those whom they have vanquished and overcome before
times in the wars, and eaten: to be short, they do ye worst they c^n to fear
and anger their enemies. Some ye shall see taken prisoners bound and manacled
like thieves. And when those return from war far in their own countries
(vanquishers) God knows the noise and passetyme that they make. The women
follow their husbands to the wars, not for to fight as the Amazoness do, but
for to minister to their husbands food and other necessaries, requisite in the
wars; for sometimes they make journeys of five or six months before they
return: he that is greatest among them, has most wives to serve him. And
when they make any great journey, they set fire on their houses, and if they
have any good thing, they hide it under the ground until their return. Their
vittels that they have is such as the land bears, that is, roots very
delicate and pleasant to eat, and flesh of wild beasts, and fish dried in the
smoke: their beds of cotton are carried with them: the men bear nothing but
bows and arrows in their hands: their weapons are also great Swords and
Clubs of wood very heavy: their bows are as long as our bows in England:
their arrows are made pointed, some of Canes that grow on the sea coast, and
others are made of a kind of a woodde named Hayri, Hairi a tree.
bearing leaf like to a Palm tree, the which is of the color of black
Marble: therefore many say it is hornbeame, but it seems to me otherwise, for
the right and perfect hornebeame is more shining. Hornebeame a tree.
Furthermore the Hornebeame tree is not like this, for this is very thorney al
over. The best Hornbeam is to be had in Calicut, and in Ethiopia This wood is
so heavy, that it sincketh to the bottom of the water like Iron, therefore
these wild men make therewith their swords and clubs, to fight with in the
wars. It bears a great fruit, somewhat pointed at one of the ends, within
it a whit kernel, of ye which fruit I have brought home with me a great many.
Besides this the wild men make fair collers of this wood: also it is so hard
and tough as I have before showed, that ye arowes that therewith are made, The
buckler that they use.
are so strong that it will pearce a good corselet or Harneis: their third
weapon or defense is a great buckeler, the which they use in the wars, it is
very long, made of the skin of a beast, like in color to the Neat or Oxen in
our country, and so diverse in colors. The bucklers are of such strength as
the bucklers Barcellonoys, so that they will bear out the shot of a handgunne.
And as touching handguns, many of them have and carry with them to the wars,
the which the Christians have given them, but they know not how to use them,
but oftentimes they shoot them of only for to fear their enemies.

Their manner of fighting as well on the land, as on the water. Cap. 39.
The cause why the wild men fight one against another
IF you ask me why these wild men make war one against an other, seeing that
they are not greater Lords one than another, also for yt they do not esteem
worldly riches, and that the earth brings forth more than serves their
necessity, you shall understand that the cause of their war is evil enough
grounded, it is only a desire of vengeance, that they have without any other
reason or cause, but even like brute beasts, that cannot agree one with another
by no honest mean: and to conclude, they say, that they have been always
their mortal enemies. They meet together then as we have said before, in
great numbers, for to go and find out their enemies, (if that they have
received any injury before hand) whereas they meet together, and shoot one at
another, and after they join together, taking hold of their head, ears, and
biting one another by the arms, yea buffetting one another with their fistes.
There is no speaking of horse. They are very obstinate and courageous, in such
sort, that before they join to fight, being separated one from another the
space of gunne shot, sometimes for the space of a whole day or two, they will
behold, and threaten one another, showing angry, cruel and fearful looks,
shouting and making such a terrible noise, that ye could not here God thunder:
also showing their affections by signs with their arms and hands holding
them up, The wild me^ obstinate and courageous.
and shaking their swords and clubs of woodde at their enemies. We are say
they, valiant and hardy, we have eaten your parents, also we we will eat you,
with many other threatenings. In this they observe (in my judgment) the
ancient custom that the Romans used in their wars, who before they entered
into battle made great boastes and crakes, with great cries and larums, the
which since has been used among the Galls in their wars, as Titus Liuius
rehearses, both the which doings I think differs much from the doings of
the Acaians, of the which Homer speaks of, for that they being ready to give
battle to their enemies would make no noise, but kept themselves from
speaking. The greatest vengeance that these wild men use, The custom of the
Americans is to eat their enemies.
and that seems to them most cruel, is to eat their enemies. When that they
have taken any in the wars, if they be not strong enough to carry them away,
then if that they can before any succor come, they will cut of their legs and
arms, and before they will leave them, they will eat them, or at the least
every one will carry a piece away little or much: if they can get any prisoners,
that they may without danger lead into their country, they will in like manner
eat them. The ancient Turks, Moors, and Barbarians, used in times past almost
the like manner, (so that yet remains this proverb, A proverb.
I would I had eaten his heart with salt:) they use almost like weapons as our
wild men do, but Christians have forged for them and have taught them to forge
Armors, with the which we our selves are now beaten, and it is in dout that
they will do the like to these Americans and others. Furthermore this poor
people do venture them selves upon the water, for to find out their enemies,
as those of the great river of Ianaria, The inhabitants of Morpion are enemies
to those of Ianaria. Almadies made of the barcke of a tree.
against those of Morpion, in which place do inhabit the Portingals, enemies
to the Frenchmen, as the wild men of that same place are enemies to those of
Ianaria: the vessels that they use on the water, are little Almadies or boats
made of the barcke of trees, without nails or wooden pins, being in length
five or six fadome and three foot broad. And you shall understand that they
covet not to have them greater, thinking that then they could not make them
row fast, for to escape or for to follow their enemy. They hold a foolish
opinion and superstitious to vnbarke these trees, The superstition of the men
in taking of the barks of the trees.
that day that they do take of the bark, the which is done even from the
root to the top, they will neither drink nor eat, fearing (as they say) that
otherwise there would happen unto them some mysfortune on the water. These
vessels being thus made, they will set a floate five or six score of them, and
in every one forty or fifty men and women, the women serve to cast out of
these little boats the water that comes in many times with a little dish made
of the fruit of some tree, the men are assured therein having their weapons, and
row a long by the bank sides, and if they find a village by the way, they
will set foot on land and spoil it, putting it to fire and sword, (if that
they overcome it.) A little before our ariuall those Americans that are our
friends, had taken on the sea a little barcke of Portingals, being hard by
the shore in some place, but what resistance so ever they made as well with
their gunnes as otherwise, nevertheless they were taken and the men eaten,
saving a few that we ransomed, and bought at our ariuall. By this ye may know
that the wild men that are resident, where the Portingals be, are enemies to
the wild men, that inhabit where the Frenchmen arrived. Well to conclude, they
fight as well on the water, as on the land, if it happen at any time the sea
to rage and to swell, they cast therein Partrige feathers, or some other thing,
thinking by this means to appease the waves of the sea. In like manner do the
Turks and Moors, being in the like danger, A foolish opinion of the wild men
and of the Turks and Moors.
washing their bodies with the water of the sea. Now our wild men, returning
with victory, show all signs of joy, sounding Flutes Trompettes, Drums,
and singing after their manner, the which is pleasant to hearewith their
Instruments a like made of certain fruits hollow within, or with the bones
of some beast, or else of their enemies: their instruments for war are richly
decked with goodly colored feathers, as we do ours in our country with
banners of silk and such like. Their Fleutes, Drums, and other instruments,
seems to relieve the spirits half gone, even as a bellows does relieve a fire
half dead. And to my judgment there is no other mean to stir up the spirits
of men, Drums Flutes and other Instruments do stir up the spirits.
but only by the noise of these instruments, and not only men, but also
beasts (nevertheless not making comparison seem to leap for joy) the which
has been observed at al times. It is of a truth, that these Americans and
Barbarous men in their assaults and combats use great cries and fearful
noise as here after shall be showed of the Amazones.

How these Barbarous and wild men put their enemies to death, that they have
taken in the war, and eat them. Cap. 40.
Now that I have showed how that the wild men of America, lead their enemies
prisoners, into their lodgings, after that they have taken them in the wars,
there rests now to show how they do entreat them at the last. Thus
therefore they use them, the prisoners that they take and bring into their
country, How they entreat their prisoners.
shall be very well entreated, a five days after shall be given him a wife,
peradventure his daughter to whom he is prisoner, for to minister to him his
necessities, as well at his bed as otherwise, in the mean time he is served
with the best meats that can be found, minding to fatten him like a crammed
Capon against he shall dye, the which time he may easily know by a collar made
of cotton, on the which they hang certain round fruits, or the bones of some
beast of fish made in manner of beads, the which they hang about their
prisoners neck. And so many Moons as they are minded to keep him, the like
quantity of these Beads will they hang about their necks, and so take of
every Moon one, until that ye Moons are expired. And some in stead of these
Beads, will hang as many little collers about their necks, as they have Moons
to live. Furthermore ye shall note, that these wild men do not reckon never
above five, and they observe neither days nor hours, neither months nor
years, but they count only by Moons. This manner of counting or reckening, was
in times past commanded to be used by Solon to the Athenians, that is to
observe the days by the course of the Moon. Now to our purpose, if that of
this prisoner, and of the wife that is given him, there are borne any children
for the time that they shall be together, they shall be kept and nourished for a
time, and than they will eat them: saying, that they are their enemies
children. This prisonner, after that he has been well entertained and made
fat, they will put him to death, thinking it to be a great honor. And for to
celebrate this slaughter, they will send for their farthest friends and
kinsfolks, for to eat their part thereof: the day before the execution, he
shall be laid in his bed, and chained with Iron, the which use they have
learned of the Christians, singing after this sort: The Margageas our
friends, are good men, strong and mighty in the war, they have taken and
eaten a good number of our enemies, likewise they will eat me when it please
them. But as for me, I have killed and eaten his parents and friends, The
wild men fear not death.
to whom I am prisoner, with many such like words. By this ye may know,
that they fear not death. I have sometimes (for pleasure) devised with such
prisoners being fair and strong men, demanding of them if they did no more
care to be thus slain and murdered from day to day, to the which they
answered, laughing and scoffing: Our friends said they, will revenge our
death, showing a hardy and an assured countenance. And when that I did show
them, that I would redeem them out of the hands of their enemies, they took
it in mockage and derision.

How the women and maiden prisoners, are entreated.
As touching the women and maids that are taken in the war, they are kept like
prisoners as the men are for a certain time, and then used after that manner.
They are not kept so much in captivity as the men are, but they have liberty
to go about, and they are set to dress Gardens, and to fish and gather
certain shell fish. Now when that they are returned from this slaughter or
murder, Ceremonies against the execution of their prisoners. Cahouin a drink.
the owner of the prisoner, as we have already showed, will request all his
friends to come to him against that day to eat their part of their bootye,
with good quantity of Cahouin, which is a kind of drink made of Mill, with
certain roots. Upon this day of solempnitie, all the assistantes will deck
them selves with feathers of diverse colors, or else they will painte their
bodies. Specially he that does the execution, shall be decked after the best
manner that is possible, having his sweard of wood, wherewith he does his
office, richly adorned with fair Feathers: but the prisoner, the shorter time
that he has to live, the more greater sign of joy does he show. He shall be
brought surely bound with cords of Cotton into a public place, being
accompanied with ten or twelve thousand of the wild men his enemies, and
there he shall be smitten down like an Ox in the Shambles (after many
Ceremonies.) This prisoner being dead, his wife that has been given him,
shall mourn a certain time for his death: but the body being cut in pieces,
they take the blood, and therewith bathe their male children, for to make them
the more hardye, as they say, showing them that when they come to age, they do
the like to their enemies, as their fathers before them had done. By this ye
may know, that the like is done to them, if they be taken in the war. The
prisoner being put to death after this sort, and hewed in pieces, and prepared
according to their manner, shall be distributed among them all, be they never so
many, every one a morsel or piece: as for the bowels or inner parts, the
women eat them up commonly, and they reserve the head to set it on a poll out
of their houses in sign of triumph and victory. And above all other, they
have a pleasure to use the Portingals after this sort. The Canibals are
mortal enemies to the Spanyardes.
The Canibals, and those of a river named Marignan, are much more cruel to the
Spanyardes, making them to die a cruel death, and then they eat them.

We find not in no History of any nation, be it never so strange and
barbarous, that has used the like cruelty as these have done: but only
Josephus writes, that when the Romans had besieged Jerusalem, under Titus,
Vespasians son, after that the famine or hunger had devoured all, the mothers
were constrained to eat their own children. And the Anthropophages, that are
a people inhabiting in Scythia, lived also with humain flesh as these wild men
do.

Now he that has made ye execution straightly, after that he has done, goes
home to his house, and there remains all the day without meat or drink in
his bed. Likewise he shall abstain certain days, and in three days after he
shall not set foot on ground. If he be minded to go to any place, he is borne
on men's shoulders, having among them this fond and foolish opinion, that if
he should not so do, there would happen unto him some mischief, or else the
like death. This being done, with a little saw made of the teethe of a beast
named Agontin, he will race his skin on his breast, or on other places, so that
it shall appear all rent and broken. And the cause why they do these things,
is as I have been informed of some of them, that they do it for pleasure,
esteeming the murder that by him has been committed against his enemy, a
great glory and honor to him ward. Unto whom, minding to show the cruelty
of the thing, disdaining my words, said unto me, that it was a great shame to
us for to forgive and pardon our enemies, having once taken them in the wars.
Moreover he said, that it is much better to put them to death, to the end
that they move not war against us an other time. By this ye may see with what
discretion these poor brutishe men do rule and govern themselves. Also the
maidens do use such Ceremonies with their bodies the space of three days
continually, after that they have had the first purification of women, so that
sometimes they are very sick. Also the same days they do abstain from
meats, not coming out of their houses, nor setting foot on ground, as we
have before showed of the men, sitting only upon a stone appointed for that use.

How that these vvilde men covet greatly to revenge their harms and injuries.
Cap. 41.
IT is not greatly to be marvelled at, if that these people walking in
darkness, and ignorant of the truth, prepares not only vengeance, but
puts it in ure: Considering that the Christian, although it be straightly
forbidden him by express commandment, Vengeance is defended to Christians.
cannot keep himself from it, following the error of one named Melicius, who
held opinion, that we ought not to pardon our enemies, the which error has of
a long time polluted the Country of Egypt. Therefore to prepare vengeance, is
to hate our neighbor, the which is wholly repugnant to the law. But in these
people it is not strange, the which as we have before showed, lives without
faith and without law. For all their war proceeds only of a foolish
opinion of vengeance without cause or reason. And think not but that this
foolish opinion has held them from the beginning, and shall do until the
end, if that God for his mercies sake illuminat not their hearts. This pore
people are so ill taught, that only for the flying of a fly, they will
prepare mischief. If that a thorn prick them, or a stone hurt them, they
will stamp it in a thousand pieces, as if the thing were sensible or had
understanding, the which comes not but for fault of good judgment.
Furthermore this is of a truth, the which I am ashamed almost to speak, that
for to revenge them selves of Fleas and Lice, they kill them with their teeth,
a thing more brutishe than reasonable. And when they feel them selves offended
or grieved, be it never so little an offense, they will never be reconciled
without vengeance. Such opinions are taught, and be observed from age to age.
Ye shall see them instruct and teach their children being a three or four
years of age, to handle a Bow and an Arrowe to learn to shoot: also they
exhort them to manliness, to take vengeance of their enemies, and not to
pardon any, whom so ever it be. Moreover, when they are prisoners one to
another, think not that they require to be redeemed by any composition what so
ever it be, for they hope no other thing than very death, esteeming it an
honor and glory unto them. And therefore they can very well mock us, that
deliver our enemies that we have in our power, for money or such like things,
the which they say, is unworthy to a man of war. As for us say they, we use
no such things. Upon a time it chanced that a Portingall being prisoner to
these wild men, thought by fair words to have saved his life, so he began to
preach to them by fair words as gentle and as lowly as might be.
Nevertheless his flattering words could not prevail, A history of a
Portingall, being prisoner to the wildemen.
but he to whom he was prisoner, shot him to death with his arrows: Go thy
ways said he, thou haste not merited to die honorably as others, neither yet
among company.

On a time there was brought a young male child of these wild men of America,
of the Country and lignage of those whom they name Tabiares, which are
mortal enemies to those wild men, with whom the French men are in concord
and peace by certain Merchants of Normandy, the which was afterward
baptized, norished and married at Roan, living like a Christian man. But he was
minded to return into his country with us, being of the age of two and twenty
years. It came to pass that being there, he was discovered of his ancient
enemies, by the means of certain Christians, who incontinently as mad Dogs
furious and woodde, ran to our ships which were at that time destitute of
men, where as by casual chance they found him, so they fell upon him, and
rent him in pieces, not touching any other of the company there present, who by
the providence of God, enduring this pitiful death, exhorted them in the
Christian faith, so this poor man died among their hands a good Christian
man, whom they did not eat, as they did other of their enemies. What opinion
of vengeance is more contrary to our law? Notwithstanding, there is found
among us many, so obstinate that they will revenge as well as the wild men.
Furthermore, this is among them, if one smite an other, let him be assured to
receive as much again, and rather more, for they will not leave it
unpunished: it is a fair sight to see them quarrel and sight together. As for
the rest, they are faithful one to an other, The faithfulness of the wild
men, but not to Christians.
but to Christians the most affectioned and subtellest thieves, although they
be naked, that are possible, and they esteem it a great virtue, that they may
steal any thing from us. This I speak, for that I have proved it my self,
for being there about Christmasse time, came a king of the Country to see the
Sieur of Villegagnon. They of his company did steal away my apparel being
sick. Thus much by the way concerning their fidelity, after I have showed of
their obstination and desire of vengeance.

How these vvilde men of America, are married. Cap. 42.
THis honorable estate of Matrimony, shows that we have brought some
natural reason from our mothers womb. Otherwise we should be counted as
brute beasts, if that God of his mercy did not illuminate our hearts.
Therefore ye may be well assured, that these Americanes are no more discrete in
their marriages, than in other things. They mary one with another, cousins with
cousins, the uncle with the niece, but not the sister and the brother. A man,
the more worthy and valiant he is esteemed, How they of America do marry.
the more wives is permitted to serve him, and to the other less: and for to
say the truth, the women trauail more than do the men, that is to wit, to
gather roots, make meal, drinks, gather together the fruits, dress
gardens, and other things that appertains to household. The man only goes
sometimes a fishing, or to the woods to take Venison for their sustenaunce.
Others occupy themselves to make bows and arrows, leaving the rest for their
wives to do. They will give you a maid to minister unto you necessaries
whilst you be there, The deflouring of maids, before they be married.
or otherwise if ye will, and it shall be lawful for you to restore her again
when you think meet, and this they use customably. As Soon as you be come
thither, they will say to you in their language: come hither, what will thou
give me, and I will give thee my daughter that is fair, she shall serve thee
to do thy necessaries and other things. But for to avoid this, the Sieur of
Villegagnon at our arrival defended upon pain of death, not to acquaint our
selves with them, as a thing not lawful for Christians.

In deed when the women are married, A defense made by the Lord of Villegagnon,
that the French men should not acquaint them selves with the wild women.
it is not lawful for her to play the harlot with any others: for if she be
taken in adultery, her husband will not stick to kill her, for they have such
things in disdain. And to the man that is taken with her, he will do nothing,
thinking that if he should touch him, he should procure the displeasure of all
the others friends: for so there should engender and rise perpetual war
between them: but he will put away his wife, which is lauful for them to do for
adultery, and also if that they be bareyn, and can bear no children, and for
other occasions. Furthermore, they have never company with their wives in the
day time but only the nights, neither in public places, as many in our
country think they have, as the Cryb, a people of Thracia, and other
barbarous men in certain Islands of the sea Magilanike, a thing very detestable
and unworthy of christendom, to whom may serve for example these poor
brutishe men. The women for the time that they be great with child, shall not
bear or carry any heavy burdens, neither shall do any great labor for fear
to be hurt. The woman being brought to bed or delivered, the wives shall carry
the child to the sea to be washed, or to some River, and then will bring it to
the mother, who shall remain in her child bed twenty days, and four
hours, the father shall cut the childs navel with his teeth, as I my self
have seen: as for the rest, they handle and use the women in child bed, as
tenderly as we do here: the norishment of the little child is the mothers
milk, notwithstanding that within certain days after his nativity, they will
give it grosser sustenance. The father shortly after the child is borne, shall
give him a bow and arrow in his hand, as a beginning and protestation of war
and vengeance of their enemies. But yet there is one thing that marreth al,
that is, that the fathers and mothers before they marry their daughters, will
give them to be abused, to the first co^mer for a little value, principally to
Christians, that trade thither, if they will couple with them, as we have
before showed. We find in some histories of certain people, living in manner
as these wild men do in their marriages. Seneca in one of his Epistles, and
Strabo in his Cosmographie writes, The ancient custom of the Lydians
Armenians, and the inhabitants of Cypris.
that the Lydians and Armenians had a custom to send their virgins and
maidens to the sea borders, there in offering them selves to all comers to get
them husbands, or else their dowries. As much says Justinius, did the
virgins of Cypris, for to get their dowries and marriages, which when they were
quit and well justified, offered to the Goddess Venus, a present or offering.
We may find at this day amongst us, that making great profession of virtue and
religion would do the like, and rather more, without offering present or
candle, the which I know of a truth. As touching the consanguinitie in
Marriage, Saint Hierome writes, that the Athenians were woonte to marry the
brethren with the systers, and not the Auntes with the nephews, the which is
contrary to the order of the Americanes. Likewise in our country a woman of
late had liberty to marry her self to five husbands, and not contraried.
Beside this we see the Turks and Arabians took many wives: I speak it not
for that it is honest and allowable, but for that we christians should avoid
such things. To conclude, our wild men use the manner and order that we have
showed, so that a maiden is seldom married, having her virginity, but being
once married, they dare do no fault: for their husbands do look straightly
to them, having a suspicion of Jealousy: she may leave her husband if that
she be evil entreated, the which oftentimes comes to pass, as we read of
the Egyptians that did the like before they had any laws. In this
plurality of women that they use, as we have said, The wyld me^ have many
wives.
there is always one above the others, most favored, which is not subject
to so much travel as the others. All the children that proceed by the marriage
of these wives, are reputed legittimate, saying, that the first Author of
generation, is the father and not the mother, which is the cause that many
times they kill the male children of their enemies being prisoners, because ye
such children in time to come might be their enemies.

Of the ceremonies, burial, and funerals, that they use to the deceassed.
Capit. 43.
Seeing that I have showed you their doing and manner of living, and other their
orders and ceremonies, there rests to speak of their Funerals and burialls.
For all that these kind of people are brutishe and uncivil, yet have they
this custom and opinion to lay the dead bodies in the earth, after that the
soul is separated from the body, in the place where as the deceased in his life
time took most pleasure, The manner of the wild men to burye the dead.
thinking so as they say, that they can not put him in place more notable than
in the earth that brings forth the men, that bears so many fruits, and
other richesse profitable and necessary for the use of man. There have been
many lewd and unadvised Heathen Philosophers, that took no care what should
become of their bodies after their decease, whether it were cast out to ye
beasts in the fields or birds of ye air, they forced not: As Diogenes, The
opinion of Diogenes for the burial of the body.
who after his death, commanded that this body should be cast out to the
fowls of the air, and beasts of the field for to be eaten and devoured,
saying that after his death, his body should feel no more pain, and that he
loved much better that his body should serve for sustenance than to putrify and
rot. Likewise Lycurgus, among the Lacedaemonians, did give straight
commandment, as Seneca writes, that after his death his body should be
cast into the sea, others that there should be burned to ashes. These poor
people of America, though they be brutish and ignorant, show them selves after
the death of their parents or friends, with out comparison more reasonable,
than aunciently did the Parthians, who for all that they had laws, instead of
putting their dead bodies into the earth, cast them out to be a pray for
souls and dogs. Also the Taxilians, did cast their dead bodies to the souls
of the air, and the Caspians in like manner. The Ethiopians did cast the dead
bodies into the waters: the Romans did burn them to ashes, as many other
nations have done. By this ye may see, that the wild men are not so void of
honesty, but that they have some knowledge of good, considering that without
law or faith they have this knowledge and advise, that is to wit, as much as
Nature has taught them, The funeralles of the dead is approved by holy
scripture.
Therefore they burye the dead bodies in the earth, as we have already said,
in like manner as did aunciently the Nasomones. Now the burial of the dead is
approved as well by the old, as by the new testament: Likewise the ceremonies
if they be duly observed, as well for that they have been vessels and
instruments of the soul divine and immortal, as also to give hope of the
resurrection to come. Here might I bring in many things as touching this matter,
but for that it is not my argument I omit it, and let it pass. Now
therefore among these wild men if that a householder happen to dye, his wives,
and his near kinsefolke and friends shall make a marvelous mournyng, not for
the space of three or four days, but four or five months, and this
greatest sorrow is four or five of the first days: ye shall hear them make
such a noise and harmony as dogs and catts, ye shall see as well men as
women laid on their beds sorrowful, others sittyng down with their bare
buttockes on the ground, imbracyng one an other, saying in their language: Our
father and friend was so good a man, so valiant in the wars, that has caused
many of our enemies to dye, he was strong and myghtie, he labored so well,
and dressed our gardens, he caught beasts, fowls, and fishes for our
sustena^ce, alas he is dead, we shall see him no more, but after we be dead
with our friends in the countries where our Pages say they have seen them,
with many such like words, the which they will repete above ten thousand
times continually day and night for the space of four or five hours not
ceassyng to lament. The children of the deceassed, a month after these
mournyngs, will desire their friends to make some feast or solemnity for his
honure, And there they will come together painted with diverse colors, decked
with feathers, and otherwise after their manner, making a thousand ceremonies
and passetymes, with daunces, plays,, tabour playing with Flutes made of the
arms and legs of their enemies, and other instruments after the manner of
their country. The others as the ancient sort, all the day long, will not
cease to drink, without eating of any thing, and they are served by the women
and kinrede of the deceased: the which their doings is as I am advised, to
stir up the hearts of young children, and to move and provoke them to war,
making them bold against their enemies. The Romans used almost the like
manner: The use and custom of the Romans and others at the funerals of a
Citizen.
for after the decease of any Citizen that had greatly travailed for the common
wealth, they made plays, pompes, and funeral songs to the praise and honor of
the dead man. Likewise to give example to the younger sort, for to employ their
might for the liberty of their country. Pliny says, that one named Lycaon
was the inuenter of such things. Also the Argiues, a people of Grecia, in
memorial of the furious Lion overcome by Hercules, they made plays and games.
Alexander the great.
And Alexander the great, after that he had seen the sepulcher of the worthy
and valiant Hector, in memory of his worthynesse, commanded, yea he him
self did make many gamboldes and solemnities. Here might I rehearse or bring in
many histories how the elders in times past have diversely observed funeral
rites according to the diversity of places, but for that I will not be tedious
unto you, I omit it: it shall suffice at this present to know the custom of
these wild men, for because that as well the elders in times paste, as also
those of our time, have made many excess bankettes in their funeral pompes,
more for a vain and worldely glory, than otherwise: but to the contrary, ye
must understand, that those that are made to the honor of the deceased, and
for respect of his soul, is commendable, declaring him by this means
immortal, and foreshewyng the Resurrection to come.

Of Mortugabes, and of the charity that they use toward strangers. Cap. 44.
Seeing that our argument is now of the savage men we will say somewhat of
their order and living. Mortugabes, lodgings of the wild men and how they be
builded.
In their country there is neither town nor Castle of any greatness, saving
those that the Portingals and other Christians have edified for their
commodity, the houses wherein they dwell are little lodgyngs, the which they
name in their language Mortuga^es, assembled by hamlettes or villages, such as
we see in some places here. These lodgyngs are of two or three hundred paces
long, and of bredthe twenty paces, or thereaboutes, builded of woodde, and
covered with palm leaves, laid on so trimmely, as possible may be. Every
lodgyng has fair coueryngs, but they are so low, that one must stoop to
go in, as he would do at a wicket, in every one there is many rooms, and every
one for him self and his family, three fadome of length. This I find much
more tolerable and less grievous than of the Arabians, and Tartarians, The
Arabians and Tartaria^s have no place to remain in.
that never build nor edify a place for to remain and dwell in, but they stray
about here and there like vagabundes: nevertheless they govern them selves by
certain laws, but our wild men have none, but only as Nature does govern
them. Now therefore these wild men in these little houses, are many
housholdes together, in the midst of which their beds ar hanged every one
in his quarter unto pyllers mighty strong and square, the which beds are made
of good Cotton woll: for thereof they have great plentye, the which a tree
bears, Trees that bear cotton.
being of the height of a man like unto great Buttons, or Akornes: but
nevertheless they differ from those of Cypris, Malta, and Syria: The said
beds are not thicker than a linen clothe of this country: and they lyde
down therein all naked, as they are accustomed. This bed in their language is
called Iny, Iny. Manigot.
and the Cotton wherewith it is made, Manigot. On both the sides of the bed of
him that is master of the household, the wives make him fire day and night, for
the nights are somewhat cold. Every household keeps and lays up in store a
kind of fruit, great as an Estrige egg, the which is of the color of our
Cucumbers that we have here in England, being fashioned like a bottell
pierced at both ends, passing through the midst a stycke of Hornebeame a
foot and a half long, one of the ends being planted in the earth or ground,
the other end is decked with fair feathers of a bird named Arat, Arat a
bird.
that is altogether red: the which thing they have in such honor and
reputation, as if it did merit no less. And they take this to be their
Toupan: For when their Prophets come toward them, they make that to speak,
that is within them, knowing by this means the secrets of their enemies, and
as they say, they know and hear news of the souls of their friends
deceased. This people about their houses norish and bring up no domestical
beasts saving certain hens and cocks, which are very rare and scant, Hens.
and they are but in certain places, whereas the Portingals have first brought
them: for before they had no intelligence of them, nevertheless they set so
little store by them, that for a little knife ye shall have two hens: the women
for no good will eat of them, taking great displeasure when they see a
Christian eat at one repast four or five hens eggs, the which they name
Arignane, thinking that for every egg they eat a hen, the which would
suffice to repast two men: besides this, they nourish and bring up Popingays,
the which they change in trading with the Christians, for small iron tools.
Popingayes.
As for gold and silver they use none: They having on a time among the^ taken
a Portingale ship, where there was a great number of pieces of silver, that was
brought from Morpion, No use of gold nor silver among them.
they gave al to a Frenchma^ for four hatchets and certain little knives, the
which they esteem very much, and not without a cause: for they are necessary
to cut their woodde, the which before they were constrained to cut with
stones, or to set a fire the trees, for to beat them down, and for to make
their bows and arrows they use no other thing. Moreover, they are very
charitable, and as much as their law of Nature does permit them. The charity
of the wild men one toward an other.
Those things that they receive of Christians, they set much store by, but of
such commodities as grows in their country, as sustenance, beasts,
fruits, and fish, they are very liberal (for they have little other thing)
not only to us, and among them selves, but also to any other nation, provided
that they be not their enemies. For so soon as they shall see any a far off,
enter into their country, they will present unto them victuals, lodgyng, and
a maid for his service, as we have before showed. Also against this pilgrim
or stranger, the women and maidens will come, and then they will sytte down
and cry and weep for joy, the which if thou wylt endure, casting out tears,
they will say in their language: Thou art welcome, thou art of our best
friends, thou have taken great pains to come and visit us, and many other
greetings. Also the father and chief of the family shall be in their beds
weeping even as the women: If they journey thirty or forty leagues be it by
water or land, (they live common together) if one have, and others want, he
shall distribute to the needeful, the like do they to strangers. And moreover,
this people are curious of new things, and wondreth according to the proverb,
Ignorance is the mother of wonder: but yet for to get from a stranger that
thing that he fansieth, they can so well flatter, that it is hard to say them
nay. First the men, when any does visit them in their lodgyngs or cabans,
after they have saluted them, they will draw nere to you, with such
familiarity and assurance, that they will straight ways take your cappe or
hatte, and putting it on their heads one after an other, they will behold and
wonder at them selves, having opinion to be the fairest: others will take your
dagger, sword, or other knife, if ye have any: and therewith will with words
and iestes threaten their ennimies: And to be short, they will rifle you, and
ye must refuse them nothing, for if ye do, ye shall neither have grace,
favor, service, love, nor friendship, in deed when they have rifled ye, they
will restore and give you again your trinkettes: as much will the women and
maidens do, being much greater flatterers than the men, and always for to
get to them some thing: this is of a truth that they will be contented with a
trifle, they will come to you even with the like grace as do the men, with some
fruits or other things of small value, with the which they use to make
presents, saying in their language, Agatouren, which is as much to say, how
good thou art, by a manner of flattery, Fory ass pia, show me such things
as thou haste, being very desirous of new things, as little glasses, and little
heads of glass. Also ye shall have following of you a company of young
children, and they will ask in their language Hamaba pinda, Give us some fish
hooks, the which they use to take little fish with. And they are well
instructed in this term before said, Agatouren, Thou art good, if ye give
them that which they demand, otherwise with a froward look, they will say
to ye Hippochi, go thou art naught, Daganaiepa aionga, thou must be killed,
with other threatenings and injuries, but they will not give any thing, unless
ye give them. besides this, they will mark ye and know ye again, for the
denial that you have made them.

The description of a sickness named Pians, to the which are subject these
people of America as well in the Islands as the maine land. Ca. 45.
KNowing well yt there is nothing, not from the earth unto ye first heaven, what
making or proportion so it has, but that is subject to changing and
alteration, the air then that compasses us, being not simply an air, but
made and composed, is not alwais like in all times nor in all places, but now
of one fashion, incontinent of an other. And for that all diseases (as our
Physicians show us) come or happen either of the air, or of the manner of men's
living, I am determined to write and set out here a sickness or disease very
rife and common in these countries of America, and of the West, discovered in
our time. Pians a sickness in America, and his oirginall.
Now this sickness named pians, by the people of the country, comes not of
the corruption of the air, for it is there very good and te^perat, which
shows by expeence, the fruits that the earth brings forth, with the
benefit of the air, without ye which nothing is made, be it of Nature or
artificial. Also that the sycknesse proceedyng of the corruption of the air,
hurts as as well the young as the old, the rich as well as the poor,
notwithstanding the internal or inward disposition. The wildmen are very
lecherous and carnal.
Therefore it must needs be, that it proceeds of some misgouernement, as
to much carnal and fleshely frequentation the man with the woman, considering
that this people is very lecherous, carnal, and more than brutishe, specially
the women: for they do seek and practice all the means to move man to lust.
This sickness is no other thing than the pocks that reigns, and has power
over all Europe, specially among the Frenchemen: For of us it is named the
French pockes, the which disease as the Frenchmen wright, The true original
of the French pocks, as the French men write.
was first taken at a voyage into Naples, and thither it was brought by the
Spanyardes, from the West Indies. For before it was discovered and made
subject to the Spanyardes, there was no mention thereof. It is not only here
in Europe, but also in Grecia, in Asia, and in Africa. Well let us return
unto the wild men's evil, and to the remedies that they do use therefore.
Now this evil takes the parties, as well wild men as Christians that are
there, by contagion or touching, even as the pockes does in the realm of
France. Also it has the like Symptoms, and it is so dangerous, that if it
be waxen old, it is hard and dangerous to heal: for sometimes it does
afflict them even to the death. As for the Christians, which do inhabit in
the land of America, if they couple them selves with the women, they shall
never be rid of the same, but shall fall into the danger thereof, much more
sooner than they of the country. The curing of this disease.
For the curing of this disease likewise for a certain alteration that
oftentimes comes with this evil, they make a certain decoction of the bark
of a tree, named in their language Hiuourahe, of the which they drink,
Hiuourahe a tree.
more easier to cure than with our medicine, and they are more easier to be
healed than others, to my judgment for their temperatenesse and complexion,
which are not broken out with infections, as the Frenchmen are. Thus much
thought I needful to speak in this place. And he that will make any
difficulty to believe my words, let him ask the opinion of the most
learnedest Physicians of the original and cause of this disease, and what
internal parts are soonest grieved, where it is nourished. For I see at this
day many contradictions (but not among the learned.) And to my seeming, I find
very few that touches the prick, specially of those that take upon them to
heal it: among the which, there are men and women so ignorant, that they cause
many mishaps unto the poor pacientes: for in steed of curyng and healyng of
them, they make them worse and worse. The wild me^ are afflicted with
ophthalmies, and from whence they proceed.
There are other kind of diseases, as ophthalmies, of the which we have
already showed, that comes of overmuch smoke, for that they make their fires
in many corners and places of their lodgings, the which are great, for that
they assemble a great number; for to take up their lodgings. I know well that
al ophthalmies come not of smoke: but where of so ever it be, it comes of the
ylnesse of the brain, All the pains of the eyes with ophthalmies.
being by some means grieved. Also all the diseases of the eyes are not
ophthalmies, as may be seen among the inhabitauntes of America, of which we
speak: for many have lost their sight, having no inflammation in their eyes.
And this fullness and abundance of troubles of the brain, as I may learn and
understand, comes of the air, and southwindes hot and moist very common in
America, The southe wind and ill token.
the which suddenly fylleth the brain, as Hippocrates shows. Also we feel
in our selves, our bodies to wax heavy, specially the head when the wind is at
south. For to heal this pain of the eyes, they cut a branch of a certain
tree, very soft rind, like to a kind of palm tree, the which they bring home
to their houses, and they let drop the juice being read, into the eye of the
pacient. Moreover, this kind of people is always subject to the leprosy,
paralysey, and other exterior vices as we are in this country, but they are
always whole and well disposed, walkyng with a great courage and boldness,
their heads lifting up like a stagge or heart. This much by the way of this
sickness, the most dangerous that is in France Antartike or America.

Of the diseases most rife and common in America, and the mean that they
observe to cure them. Cap. 46.
THere is none be they never of so rude and gross memory, but that knows
well, that these Americanes are made of four elements, as all natural bodies
are, so that by this means they are subject to the like affections that we
are. In deed diseases and sickneesss may be diverse and contrary, according to
the temperatenesse of the air, and manner of living. Those in that country
that inhabit near the sea, are subject to rotten diseases, as Fevers,
Catarres, and others. In the which these poor people are so persuaded and
abused of their Prophets, of whom we have spoken, the which are called for
to heal them when they have these diseases: and they have this foolish
opinion, that they can cure them: The foolish opinion of the wild men in
their prophets and of their diseases.
we can not better compare these impes, tha^ to a company of new fond foolish
and ignorant Physicians in our days here in our realm yt persuade the pore
people, and make profession that they can heal all kind of diseases curable
and incurable, the which I would very well believe, if that science were
become ignorance. Therefore these Prophets make them to believe, that they do
speak unto the spirits and souls of their parents, and that nothing to them
is impossible, also that they can cause the soul to speak within the body.
Moreover, when soever any sick man feels his stomach to swelle by the
occasions of some humors in the stomach and liver, the which by debilitie or
otherwise he can not cast or vomit up, he thinks that it is his soul that
complains. Now these goodly Phrophetes for to heal this disease will suck
with their mouth the place where the sore or disease lies, thinking that by
this means they draw it out. Likewise they suck one an other, but not with
such belefe and opinion: the women use other means, A method mean to heal
the disease observed of these wild men.
they will put into the pacientes mouth a threede of cotton a two foot long,
the which afterward they suck, thynkyng also by this threede for to get
away this disease or sickness. If one of them do hurt an other in ernest or
otherwise, he is bound to suck his wound until the time that he be healed.
And in the mean time, they do abstain from certain meats, the which they
think is contrary: They have ye mean to let blood between the shoulders,
with a kind of herb very cutting, or with the teeth of some beast. The manner
how to diet the pacient is this: How the pacient lives when he is sick.
They will never give him no meat nor sustenance before he do ask it, and
they will rather let him languish a whole month. They are not so often grieved
with sickness as we be, although they go all naked day and night: also they
use no excess or superfluity in their meats or drinks. In other things they
are very curious to know the trees and fruits, they will not taste of any
fruit that is perished, unless it be thorough ripe: The fruit of which they
commonly eat in their sicknesses is named Naua, Naua, an excellent fruit.
being great, made in manner of a Pine apple, this fruit when it waxes ripe,
becomes yelow, the which is very excellent, as well for his sweetness as his
relish, as pleasant as fine sugar and more: It is not possible to bring of them
into this country, but conserved, for being ripe they will not long keep.
Furthermore, it bears no grain, wherefore they pla^t them by little slippes, as
the fruits that are grafted in our country: Also before it be ripe, it is so
roughe in eating, that it will pull of the skin of your lips: the leaf of
this tree when it grows, is like to the leaf of a large Iounck or sags. I
will not forget, that among their diseases they have one marvelous
indisposition, which comes by little worms that enter into their feet, Tom,
a kind of worms.
named in their language Tom, that are little ones and I think that they
engender in their feet: for there will be sometimes such a number in one place,
that they will raise a knob as big as a bean, with doloure and pain in that
place, the which pain also chanced to us: for being there, our feet and our
hands were covered with little clothes, in the which when they were broken,
was only one white worm with filthe. And for to shun this grief, the wild
men make a certain oil of a fruit named Hibonconhu, like unto a Date,
Hibonconhu a fruit, and for what use.
the which is not good to eat: they preserve it in little vessels of fruits,
named in their language Caramenio, and therewith they rub the places that are
grieved, a thing very necessary as they do affirm against these worms. Also
sometimes they anoint therewithal their bodies when they be weary. Bisides
this, the oil is proper for wounds and sores, as they have known by
experience. Thus much as touching their infirmities, and the remedies that
these Americans use.

The manner how to trade among these people: of a bird named Toucan, and of
the spicerie of that Country. Cap. 47.
ALthough that in America, there is diverse kinds of people: nevertheless
brutish and of diverse sorts and fashions, accustomed always to make war one
with another. Notwithstanding, they let not to trade and trafike as well among
themselves, The trafike of the wild men.
as with the christians and strangers, specially those that are near to the
Sea, with such commodities as is to be had in the Country. Their greatest
trade is with Estridge feathers, garnishings of swords made of feathers, and
other feathers much set by and esteemed, the which are brought from the higher
Country to the sea side, above a hundredth or six score leagues, also great
quantity of colors white and black, also of the green stones that they
bear hanging in their lips, as we have before showed. The others that dwell on
the sea coast, where as the Christians to trafike receive certain hatchets,
knives, daggers, swords, and other iron tools, beads of glass, combs,
loking glasses, and other little trifles of small value, which they trucke with
their neighbors, having no other mean saving only to give one merchandise for
an other, and they use after this manner: give me that, and I will give thee
this, without any further talk. On the sea coast, the most frequented
Merchandise, is the feathers of a bird, that is named in their language Toucan,
the properties of which I will describe, seeing it comes to purpose. This
bird is of the greatness of a Pigeon: there is an other kind like to a Pie,
The description of Toucan, a bird of America.
of like feathers that the other have, that is to wit, both twain black,
saving that about the tail, there are some red feathers among the black. Under
the breast, the feathers are yellow about four fingers broad, as well in breadth
as in length, and it is not possible to find yellow more excellent, nor finer
color than is the feathers of this bird: at the end of the tail, there are
little feathers as red as blood. The wild men take the skin of that part
that is yellow, and they use it to make garnishings of swords after their
manner, and certain garments, hattes, and other things.

I the author of this work, brought a hatte of feathers very rich and fair
out of America, A strange hat made of feathers
the which was presented to the King of France, Henry by name, as a precious
jewel. And of these birds there are none found but in America, beginning
from the river of Platte, unto the river of Amazones. There are some seen at
Perou, but they are not so great as the others. At new Spain, Florida,
Messique, and new found land, there is none to be seen, because the
countries are to cold, of the which they stand in great fear. Moreover this
bird lives with no other thing among the wooddes, where he makes his
residence, but with certain fruits that the Country does bring forth: some
might think that this were a water bird, the which is not so, for that I have
seen the contrary. To the rest, this bird is disformed and monsterous, having
the bill more greater and more longer than the rest of the body. I have also
brought one of them from thence that was given me, Secrets brought by the
author into France or America.
with the skins of many of diverse couloures: some as red as fine scarlet,
others yelow, blewe, and others of diverse colors. These feathers be much set by
of ye Americans, with the which they trafike and trade, as we have before
showed.

This also is of a truth, that before the use of money, they traded after this
sort ware for ware, so that the wealth and richesse of men, yea of Kings,
Princes, and Magistrates, did consist in beasts, sheep, goats and Camels, of
the which ye have examples in Berosus and Diodorus, the which show us by
wrytings, the manner and use that the elders before us used to trade one with
another, the which use I find to differ very little from the Americanes order,
and other barbarous people. So that in times past one thing was given for an
other, as sheep for corn, woolle for salt, and such like.

The trafike of one Country with an other, The order of the world, before the
use of money.
if we consider it well, is marvelous profitable and necessary, for by it civil
society is kept: also it is much esteemed throughout all nations. Pliny in
his seventh book does attribute the first invention and use thereof to be
among the Venicians. The trade that many of the Christians use with the
Americanes, is brasell wood, Popengayes, cotton and other things, What the
christians and Americans do trade together. A kind of spice.
in trucke and change of those things before showed: they bring also from
thence a kind of spice, which is the grain of an herb or little tree of
three or four foot high, the fruit is like to our country strawberies, as
well in color as otherwise. When it is ripe, there is within it a seed like
to fenell seed. Our christian Merchants do load this kind of spice being
nothing so good as the spice that grows on the coast of Ethiopia, and in
Ginney, also it is not to compare to the spice that is had at Calicut, or of
Tabroban. And this ye shall note by the way, that though it be named Calicut
spice, ye must not think that it is all of Calicut, Of the spice of Calicut.
The Ila^d of Corchel.
but comes a fifty leagues off, from Islands unknown, and chiefly from an
Island named Corchell. Notwithstanding Calicut, is the chiefest place whether
all the Marchaundise of the East countries is brought, and there it is shipte,
and therefore it is called the spice of Calicut, the which is better than the
spice of America. The King of Portingall as every one knows, has great
profit of the spices, that he receives from thence, but not so much as in
times past, for because that since the Spanyardes have discovered the Island of
Zebut, The Island of Zebut.
rich, and of a great compass, the which ye shall find after ye have passed
the straight of Magellan. This Island bears a Mine of Gold, Ginger, and
great abundance of white Purselaine. Afterward they found out Aborney,
Aborney. The Islands of Moluqus, and of the spice that comes from thence.
five degrees from the Equinoctial, and many other Islands inhabited with
Neigers, until they came to Moloqus, where as is Atidora, Terenata, Mata, and
Machian little Islands somewhat near the one to the other, as are the Canaries
of the which we have spoken. These Islands are distant from France, more
than.180. degrees lying to the West, they bring forth many good spices, much
better than those of America. This much by the way of Moloquus, having first
treated of the trafike and trade that the wild men use of America.

Of birds most common in America. Cap. 48.
AMong many kinds of birds that nature diversely brings forth, setting out
her gifts by particular properties, (truly worthy to be marvelled at,) the
which she has given to every living beast. The description of Carinde, a bird
of excellent beauty.
There is not one found that exceeds this bird, commonly seen in America,
named of the wild men Carinde, decked with so pleasant and fair feathers, that
it is not possible for no man but to wonder at the like work. This bird
exceeds not the greatness of a Crow, and his feathers from the belly to the
throat, is as yellow as fine gold: ye wings and the tail, which are very long,
are of the color of fine Azure. To the likeness of this bird, there is
another found of his greatness, but differing in color, for in stead of
having the breast feathers yellow, this has them as red as pure scarlet
color, and the rest Azure. These birds are a kind of Parats, and of like
form as well in head and bil, as in feet. The wild men of the Country sell
them dear, for that three or four times a year, they pluck their feathers
for to make hats, garnishe bucklers, swords of woodde, and other things
requisite, the which they do commonly. The said birds are so privy, that
all the day they will sit upon the trees, round about the wild men's
lodgings. And when the night comes, these birds withdraw them, some into
the houses, and some into the Woods, but they fail not to return the next
morrow, even as our privy or tame Doves or Pigeons, that will neastle in
houses. They have diverse other kinds of Popengayes differing in Feathers the
one from the other. There is one kind more greener than those that are brought
into our Country, Aiouroub a green bird.
the which they name Aiouroub, others having on their heads blewe feathers,
others all green, the which the wild men do name Marganas: there are none
found gray as in Ginney, Marganas.
and in high Africa. The Americanes keep all these birds in their lodgings,
but they are not taught to speak, as they are with us, I mean being made
privy when they are young, according to the custom of our elders, as Pliny
shows in the tenth book of his natural History speaking of birds, where he
affirms that Strabo was the first that put birds into Cages, the which before
had liberty to go and come. Who it was that first caged birds.
The women in like manner nourishe some, the which they set such store by,
that they call them their friends. Furthermore our Americanes do learn these
birds in their language to ask for meal made of roots. But they teach them
most commonly to say and profer, that they must go a warfare against their
enemies, for to take them, and for to eat them, and other things. They will
for no good give them fruit to eat, neither great nor little, Great plenty of
Popengayes in America.
for they say that it engenders a worm that pierces their heart. There is a
multitude of other Popengayes that are in the wooddes, of the which they kill a
great many with their arowes for to eat, and they make their nests in the
tops of trees, for fear of stinging beasts.

The time has been, that these birds were not known to the ancient
Romans, and other Countries of Europe, but even since as some do witness,
that Alexander the great, sent his lieuetenaunt Onesecriteus into the Island of
Tabroba, who brought from thence a certain number, and since they multiplied
so well, as well in the East country as in Italy, and chiefly at Rome, as
Columella says in his third book, of the sayings of the elders, that Marcus
Portius Cato, (of whom the life and Doctrine was an example to all Rome), as
he felt him self slaundered, said on a day to the Senate.

O Fathers ouerseene, O wicked Rome, I know not I, The exclamation of Marcus
Cato, against the abuses of his time.
to what days we are fallen, seeing that I see in Rome such dissolute living,
that is: for men to bear Popengayes on their hands, and to see the women
norishe in their deliciousness, little dogs.

Well, let us return to our birds, that are found there of an other kind,
and more stranger, as that bird named Toucan, of the which we have before
spoken, all differing from the color of those of our Himisperie, as may be
known by these before rehearsed, and of many others, of which I have brought
home the bodies garnished with feathers, some yellow, red, green, purple,
Azure, and of many other colors, the which were presented to the king as
singular things, that was never seen with us in our realm. There rests now
to describe and set forth certain other kind of birds being rare and
strange. Among the which there is found one kind of the like greatness and
color, as little crows, saving that before their breast, they have a spot as
red as blood, and they are named Panon, his bil colored like ashes, which bird
lives with no other thing, then wc a kind of Palm named Ierahuua, Ierahuua,
a kind of Palm. Quiapian a bird.
there are another kind found like to our Merlions, as red as Dragons
blood, the which in their language they name Quiapian, there are another kind
of the greatness of a little Munkey, a bird so named, Annon a bird.
the which is all black, living after a strange manner. When he is full with
Ants, and another little worm that he eats, he will fly to some little tree,
and there will flutter from one branch to another without ceasing: the wild
men name it Annon. Among all the rest of the birds that are there to be seen,
there is found another kind that the wild men will not by no means kill nor
hurt: Another kind of bird.
this bird has her voice very pitiful, and these poor men say, that her
song causes them to remember their friends that be dead, thinking that this
bird is sent by them, bringing to them good hap and fortune, and naughty
luck to their enemies. This bird is no bigger than a stock Dove, being
colored like to ashes, and living with a kind of fruit, of a tree that they
name Hiuourahe. Hiuourahe a tree.
I will not yet forget another bird named Gouanbuch, Gouanbuch, a bird very
little.
the which is no bigger than a great Fly, the which for all that it is little,
is so fair to see too, that it is impossible to see a fairer: his bill is
somewhat long and slender, and his color grayishe, and although to my
judgment it is the least bird living under the sky, nevertheless it sings
very well, and pleasant to hear. I omit here the water birds, as well of the
fresh water, as of the salt, which are all variable to those that are in our
Country, as well in proportion of body, as diversity of feathers. I doubt not
Reader, but those that have written of the kinds and properties of Birds,
will find these things very strange that I have rehearsed, but without shame
it may be reputed to their ignorance, being ignorant of these Weast parts, and
also the small knowledge that they had of strange things. This therefore shall
suffice thee which I have truly gathered of the strange birds that are in
America, or France Antartike, for the time that we did there remain.

Of Veneson and wild beasts that these wild men take Cap. 49.
I Think it necessary gentle Reader, seeing that I have treated of strange
Fowls, somewhat to speak as touching the wild beasts that are found in the
woods, and hills of America, and also to show how the inhabitants of the
country take them for their nourishment. I remember that I have said in some
place, How the America^s take wild beasts.
that they nourish no domestical beasts, but there are in the woods great
quantity of wild beasts, as Hearts, Hyndes, wild Bores and others. When
these beasts straye abroad to seek their living, they will make a deep hole
covered over with leaves, in the place where the beast does most frequent, the
which is made so cunningly that with great pain shall he escape. And they will
take him alive or kill him in that hole sometimes with their arrows. The wild
Bore seems to me more dangerous, he is altogether like to the wild Bores in
France, but more fiercer and more dangerous, and has the tooth more longer
and more apparent: he is altogether black and without tail, moreover he
bears a vent on his back like to a sword fish. The wild Bore of America.
This wild Bore will make a fearful noise, also ye shall here his teeth make a
noise together when he is feeding or otherwise: the wild men on a time brought
us one bound, the which notwithstanding escaped in our presence: the Heart and
the Hind have not their bear so smoth and even, as with us, but more rougher
and longer, The Heart of America.
the Hearts have their horns more short than ours, the wild men set much by
these horns, for because that after they have pierced their childrens lip,
The property of a Hearts horn
they put most commonly into the hole a piece of Hearts horn for to increase
it, thinking that therein is no poison nor danger, but to the contrary, it
lets and keeps that at that place of the lyppe there will engender no
evil. Pliny shows that a Hearts horn, is a remedy against poison. Also
Physicians put thereof among Medicines that are cordial, as a comfort to the
stomach, as Iuorie and others: the smoke of this horn burned has power to
drive away Serpents. Some will say, that the Heart has every year new
horns, and casts her old ones, and when he is without his horns, he hides
himself. The elders have taken it for an ill sign for a man, to meet a
Dear, or a Hare, but we think the contrary: also the same superstition is
foolish and repugnant to our Religion. The Turks and Arabians, A fond opinion
of the wild men.
are at this day in that error. To this purpose: if our wild men take an
opinion he thinks it true and it shall be hard to persuade them the contrary,
the which is, having taken a Buck or a Do, they dare not bear it into their
houses, before that they have cut of the haunches and the legs behind,
thinking that if they should bear it with the four quarters, it would take
from them and from their children the mean to take their enemies in running,
beside many other foolish opinions, whereof their head is full. They have no
other assurance thereof, but that their great Charaibe showed them so, as
their Pages and false Seductors do affirm. They will dress their Venison by
pieces, but with the skin, and after it is enough it shall be distributed to
every household, that inhabit under one roufe altogether, as scholars in
colleges, they will never eat the flesh of no ravening beast, or that does
feed on unclean things, be he never so privy, but they will not force to
keep privy such a beast, as one which they name Coary, as great as a Fox,
The description of Coary a strange beast.
having the moosell a foot long, black like a Molle, and little like the
moosell of a Ratte, her hear rough, a sclender tail like to the tail of a
wild Cat, spotted white and black, having ears like a Fox. This is a
ravenous beast, and lives of pray or spoil, about the water side.
Furthermore there is found kind of Fesantes, as great as a Capon, A kind of
Fesantes.
but black fethered, only the head which is graye, having a little red
comb, hanging like a Turkey Hen and read feet. Also there are Partriges,
named in their language Macouacanna, that are greater than ours. Macouacanna.
a kind of Partriges, Tapihire a beast.
Also there is found in America, great quantity of those beasts which they
name Tapithire, the which is much desired for his deformity. Also the wild
men follow them at the chase, not only for the flesh which is very good, but
also for the skins, with the which they make bucklers that they use in the
wars, and the skin of this beast is so strong and tough that a Crosbow can
skant pierce it, and they take them as they do the Heart or the wild Bore,
The description of Tapihire.
of the which we spoke even now. These beasts are of the height of a great
Ass, but they have a greater neck, and the head like the head of a young
Bull of a year old, the teeth sharp and cutting, nevertheless he is not
dangerous. When she is chased, she makes no other resistance, but to flee
away, seeking some conueniente place for to hide her, running more swifter than
a Heart, she has no tail, but a very little one of a finger length, the which
is without hair, and of such beasts without tail there are found a great
number, she has cloven feet, with a very long horn almost as much before as
behind, his bear is brown color like some Mules and Oxen in our country.
And for this cause the Christians that are there, name such beasts Kine, not
differing much from Kine, saving only she wants horns: and truly to my
seeming it is as like an Ass as a Cow. For there are few beasts of diverse
kinds that be like in all points, without some great difference. A kind of
strange fish.
As also fishes that we have seen in the sea on the coaste of America, one
among the others had the head like a Calf, and the body slender. So that in
this ye may see the industry of nature, that has altered the beasts
according to the diversity of their kinds, as well on the land as on the
water.

Of a tree named Hiuourahe. Cap. 50.
Hyuourahe a tree.
I Will not by no means leave out for his excellency and secretnesse, a tree
named of the wild men Hyuourahe, which is as much to say as rare a new. This
tree is of a high stature, having the bark shining like silver, and within
half read. It has almost the taaste of salt, the which I have many times
tasted, the bark of this tree has a marvelous property among al others: also
it is in such reputation among the wild men, as the wood Gaiac: also some
think it to be very Gaiac, ye which I deny, for it is not to the purpose, that
all that has the like property that Gaiac has, is Gaiac. Notwithstanding it
serves instead of Gaiac to the Christians, for the wild men are not so
subject to this common disease, of ye which we will speak in another place more
at large: the manner to use it is this, they take a quantity of the barcke, the
which gives milk when it is separated from the wood, the which being cut in
little pieces, The usage of the barcke of this tree.
they make it to boil in water the space of three or four hours, till that
the color be changed like claret wine, and of this they drink the space of
fiften or twenty days continually, making or keeping a little diet, which
helps well as I do understand. And the said barcke is not only good for the
said affection, but to all diseases for to bring out ill humors, of the which
in like manner use our Americans in their diseases: and besides, The excellency
of the fruit of this tree.
this drink is pleasant to drink in your full health. Another singular thing
there is in this tree bearing fruit of the greatness of a little prune, as
yellow as fine Angel Gold. And within it, is a little nut very pleasant and
swet, being good for sick folk to digest. But another thing is peradventure
strange and almost incredible to those that have not seen it, that is, that it
bears not fruit, but from fiften year to fiften year: some would have
made me believe, from twenty year to twenty. But I heard the contrary, being
sufficiently informed of the anciente people of the country. I have caused
them to show me one, and he that showed it me, said that in his life time, he
had eaten but three or four times of the fruit. I remember of the good fruit of
the tree named Loath, of which the fruit is so pleasant, as Homer shows, that
after that Scipions men had tasted, Loath in Homer.
they forced not but forgot to return to their ships to eat any other
meats or fruits. Furthermore there are trees that bear Cassa, but it is not
so excellent as that of Arabia and of Egypt.

Of a tree named Vhebehason and of the honey Bees that frequent it. Cap. 51.
GOing on a day unto a village distant from the place whereas was our remaining
a ten leagues, being in my company five wild men, and a Christian to
interpret, I was myndefull to behold on all sides the ttees, of the which
there were diverse sorts, among the which I stayed to behold that of the which
I mind to speak, The description of a tree named Vhebehason.
the which to see to, would be judged to be an artificial work, and not of
nature. This tree is very hye the branches passing one with in another, the
leafs like the leafes of a Colwoort, every branch laden with his fruit, the
which is a foot long. Therefore asking one of the company, what kind of
fruit it was, he showed me and bid me behold a company of flies or honey Bees
about the same fruit, the which then was green, with the which these honey
Bees do live and nourish them selves, of the which Bees there were a great
number in a hole that was in the tree, whereas they made honey and wax. There
is two kinds of the honey Bees, Two kind of honey Bees.
one kind are as great as ours, the which comes not only but of good
smelling Flowers, also their honey is very good, but their wax not so yellow
as ours: there is another kind half so great as the others, their honey is
better than the others, and the wild men name them Hira, Hira honey Bees.
they live not with the others food, which to my judgment makes their wax
to be as black as coals, and they make great plenty, specially near to the
River of Vasses and of Plate: there is also found a little beast named Hyrat,
Hirat a beast.
which is as much to say as a honey beast, for that this beast seeks but
all parts of this tree for to eat the honey that these flies make. This
beast is tauney, and as great as a Cat, The usage of honey much commended of
diverse people.
and knows the mean to draw out the honey with his paws, without touching
the flies, nor they him. This honey is much esteemed in that country for
because that the wild men give thereof to their sick people, mixed with
meal, that they use to make of roots: as for the wax, they put it to no use,
but to make their feathers hold together about there head, or else they
occupye it about their great canes, in the which they put their feathers (the
which) is the best and chiefest treasure that these Americans have.

The aunciente Arabians and Egyptians, did use to minister unto the sick,
honey, more than any other medecin, as Pliny witnesses. The wild men that
inhabit about the River of Marignam, eat almost no other meat but honey, with
certain boiled roots, the which honey in those parties droppeth down from
the trees and rocks, as Manna from Heaven (the which) unto these Barbarous men
is a good sustenance. To this agrees very well Lactantius in his first book
of Divine Institutions (as far as I can remember) that Melissus King of
Creta, Melissus King of Creta.
the which did first sacrifice unto the Gods, had two daughters, Amalthea
and Melissa, the which did nourish or feed Jupiter with goats milk, Why the
Poets have feigned that the honey Bees flied into Jupiters mouth.
when he was a child, and also with honey. So that the people of Creta, seeing
and perceiving that honey was a good sustenance, began therewith to feed
their children. The which thing has caused this argument amongst the
Poets, to say that honey Bees did fly into Jupiters mouth. The which also
being known of Solon, did permit that they might transport al kind of fruit
out of the city of Athens and many other victuals, except honey. Likewise the
Turckes have honey in as great estimation as is possible, thinking after this
life that they shall go into some pleasant places replenished with all kind of
sustenance, and chiefly of honey, the which opinion is fantastical and
foolish. Now to return to our former tree, it is greatly frequented of these
flies or honey bees, although that the fruit is not good to eat as many
others are in that country, for because that it comes not to his ripeness,
but is eaten of these honey bees as far as I can perceive. Moreover this tree
brings forth a red gum, Red gum.
good for many things, as they know well how to use it.

Of a strange beast named Haut. Cap. 52.
ARistotle and many others since his time have with all their diligence and
industry enforced themselves to find out the nature of Beasts, Trees,
Herbs, and other natural things. Notwithstanding it does appear by their
writings that they never had intelligence of America, America not known of the
ancient writers.
for that it was not discovered before (nor in their time) nevertheless their
writing has given us some comfort and contentation. Therefore if we set out
here and show of those that are unto us strange and unknown, I trust it will
not be taken in il part, but to the contrary I trust it will bring some
contentation to the Reader, that loves to hear of rare and singular things,
the which nature will not shall be common to every country. This beast for to
be short, is as much disformed as is possible, and almost incredible to those
that have not seen her. They name her Hau or Hauthy, The description of a
beast named Hauthy.
of the greatness of a great Munky of Afeca, having a great belly, and the
head almost in proportion of a Childs head. She being taken, casts out
sighs like a Child feeling pain, her skyn colored like ashes, and rough like
a little Bear, having on each paw three nails or claws, a four fingers long,
and made like the fyn of a Carpe, with the which she climeth on Trees, abiding
there more than on the ground. Her tail is three fingers long, with lyttel
hear thereon. Another thing there is worthy of memory, that this strange
beast was never seen eating, for the wild men of the country have watched her
to see if she would feed, but all was in vain, as they them selves have
showed me. Bysides this I would never have believed it if I had not proved it,
for a captain of Normandy, and the Captain Mogneuylle, borne in Picardy,
walking on a time in the great thick woods, did shoot with a Handgunne at two
of these beasts, which were in the top of a tree, so that they fell both to
the ground, the one sore hurt, and the other only amassed or astonned, the
which was given to me for a present, so it was well kept the space of.xxvj.
days, and in the mean time it would never eat nor drink, but always at one
estate, but in the end it was strangled by certain Dogs that we brought
thither: some think that this beast lives only with leaves of a certain
Tree named in their language Amahut, this Tree is the highest Tree in that
country, bearing leaves very small and thin: and for that this beast is
commonly in this Tree, she is named Haut. Furthermore this beast is very loving
to man, when she is tame, coveting to be always on his shoulders, as if her
nature were to remain on high places, the which doings the wild men of the
country cannot abide for that they are wicked, for this beast has very sharp
claws, and longer than the claws of a Lion, or any other beast that ever I
saw. To these wonders I have seen by experience certain Chameleons in
Constantinople, Chamellion.
that lived only with the air. And by this I knew it was of a truth, that the
wild men showed me as touching this beast: moreover if that this beast be
abroad in the greatest rain that is, The wonderful works of Nature.
yet she will be always as dry as before. By this ye may see the wonderful
works of nature, how that she can make things strange, great, incomprehensible,
and wonderful to man's judgment. Therefore it is a thing impertinent, to seek
out the cause and reason, as many daily go about to do. For this is a very
secret of nature, ye knowledge whereof is reserved and kept to the only
creator: also of many others that might be here alleged, but for that it is
not my argument, I omit it for to finish the rest.

How these Americans kyndle Fire: of their opinion of the drowning of the
World, and of their Iron works. Cap. 53.
NOw yt I have showed you of some singular pla^tes and unknown beasts not
only to us, but as I think to all the world, for that this country was never
known nor discovered but of late days, being minded to make an end of this
discourse of America, I will show you the strange manner and practice that
these Barbarous people use to get fire, as well as we do with a flint stone
and a tinder box, the which invention truly is celestial, The manner of the
wyld men to get Fire.
given by divine providence to man for his necessity. Now these wild men have
another mean, almost incredible to get fire, greatly differing from our use,
that smite a flynt stone with an Iron. And ye must note, that they use
customably fire for their necessities as we do, and rather more, for to resist
the wicked spirit that tormenteth them, for the^ which cause they never lie
down in what place so ever they be, but that they have first fire lighted by
their beds side. And therefore as well in their houses or other where, be it in
the forest or in the fields, whereas they are constrained to remain a long
time, as when they go a warfare or hunte for Venison, they bear commonly with
them their instruments to make fire. Therefore they will take two sticks
unequal, the one which is the least shall be a two foot long or thereaboute,
made of a certain dry wood, having a rind or pith, the other somewhat more
longer. He that will make fire, will lay the lesser stick down on ye ground
pierced through ye midst, ye which he holding with his feet, will put the
end of the other stick into the hole that is in the other, with a littell
cotton and dried leaves, then with turning of the stick, there engenders such
a heat, that the leaves and cotton begin to burn, so that by this means they
light fire, the which in their language they name Thata, Thata. Thatatin.
and the smoke Thatatyn: and this manner or way to make fire so subtly, they
say came by a great Charaibe, more than a Prophet, the which taught it to
their Elders, with other things also, of which they before had no intelligence
or knowledge. I know well there are many fables, as touching ye invention of
fire. The first inue^tio^ of Fire.
Some say yt certain pastors or shepherds were ye first yt inverted to make
fire, after the manner that these wild men use, with certain wood, being
destitute of Iron and flint stone. By this we may evidently know, fire comes
neither of stone nor Iron, Vulcan inuentor of Fire.
as Aphrodisius disputes in his probleames. Dioderus writes, ye Vulcan was ye
first inuenter of fire, the which for this respect was elected King by the
Egiptians. Also the wild men are almost of this opinion, the which before this
invention of fire, The opinion of the wild men against a deluge.
did eat their meats dried in the Sun. And this knowledge was brought to
them, as I have before showed, by a great Charaibe, one night in their sleep
after a great deluge of waters, (the which) they maintain to have been in times
past, although they have not memorial by writing, but only from age to age,
so that they will bear in memory things four or five hundredth years past, the
which is to be marvelled at. And by this means they are very curious to teach
and instruct their Children things done and past, which are worthy of memory.
The ancient men after their sleep in the night, do no other thing but
declare ancient stories to the young men, so that to hear them, you will say
they are Preachers or Readers of Lectures: now say they, the water was so
exceeding great in this Deluge, that it covered the highest mountains in that
country, so that all the people were drowned, the which they tell of a truth,
and believe as steadfastly as we do, that which was in Noes time, that is read
of in holy Scripture. Nevertheless it is easy for them to fail, considering
they know nothing but by memory, and as they heave heard said of their Fathers.
How the wild men do number.
Also they number by stones or other like things, for otherwise they cannot
number, but only to five, and they count ye months by ye Moons, (as we have
before made some mention) saying it is so many Moons since I was borne, and so
many Moons since the Deluge was, the which time faithfully considered, comes
to a five hundredth years. They affirm and stiffly stand in opinion of their
Deluge. And if ye say the contrary, they will efforce by certain arguments to
sustain the contrary. They say after that the waters were gone back and
retired, there came a great Charaibe, the greatest that ever was among them,
that brought thither a people from a far country, that people being naked as
they are at this day, The original of these Americans.
the which has since so multiplied, that of them they say they are descended.
It seems to me not repugnant to reason, that there has been countries drouned
since Noes time, (throughout the whole world) but seeing we have none but that
the holy Scripture shows, I will let it pass. How the wild men did first use
to cut wood.
Therefore let us return to these wild men's fire, the which they use for many
things, to roast and sees their meats, to burn down Trees, until that they
found since the means to cut wood with stones, and now of late days with
Iron, the which they have learned of the Christians that have gone thither. I
dout not that Europa, and other countries have been without Iron. But Pliny
writes in the seventh book of his natural history, Dedalus the first
inuenter of a Forge. Pedris inuenter of the Saw A kind of Fish.
that Dedalus was the first inuenter of iron work, or forge, with the which he
forged him self a wedge, an axe, a saw, and nails. Notwithstanding Ovid in
the eight book of his Metamorphosis, says, that one named Pedris, of the
kindred of Dedalus, invented a saw like to the finne of a fish. And of that
kind of fish (passing at our return under the Equinoctial line,) we took
one that had the fynne upon ye back, above a foot long. Therefore these wild
men desiring ye use of iron work of late days, for to serve their necessities,
have learned to forge, being first instructed by Christians.

Of the River of Vases, likewise of certain beasts that are found thereabout.
And of the land named Morpion. Cap. 54.
The lyeng of the River of Vases.
THis River of Vases, being there so much esteemed as Charanta Loyre, or the
River of Said, being twenty five leagues from Ienaria, where we did remain,
and where as at this day do inhabit Frenchmen, is much frequented, as well for
the habundants of good Fish, as for the Navigations and other things necessary.
This flood waters a great country, as well the hylls, as the plain. In the
which is found a certain Mine of Gold, the which brings no great profit to
the owner, for because that by the fire, it consumes almost all into smoke.
There about are many Rocks, and likewise in many other places of America, the
which bears great quantity of wedges, shining like fine Gold, but not so
fine as those of the East country, also other littell shining stones. There
are found no Rubies, Diamonds, nor other rich stones: besides this, there is
great plenty of Marbell and Jasper stones. And in the said place I hope may
be found Mines either of Gold, or Silver, the which as yet we dare not under
take, because the enemies are near hand. In those hills are seen rauishing
beasts, as Lybards, wild Stags, but no Lions, nor Wolves. There is also
another kind of beast that the inhabitants name Cacuycu, Cacuycu.
having a beard on the chin like a Goat. This beast is greatly inclined to
lechery. Also there is found another kind of yellow beast named Sagauius, not
only in this place, Sagauius a beast.
but in other places, ye wyld men chase them for to eat them. And if they
perceive that they are followed, they will get their young ones on their necks,
and run their ways. Of the former beasts there are gray and black ones in
Barbaria, and at Peru, like to the color of a Fox. There are found no Apes as
in Africa, but to the contrary, there are found great number of Tattons,
Tatton a beast.
that are beasts armed, of the which some are of the greatness and height of a
great pigge, the others less, and this much will I say by the way, their flesh
is tender and pleasant for to eat. As touching the people of that country,
they are more warrelyke than in any other place of America, because they border
their enemies, the which forces them to exercise the fears of war.
Quoniambe^ a King redouted.
Their King in their language is named Quoniambec, the most feared and redouted
that is in all the country, and so is he martial and a worthy warrier* And I
think that never Menel^us King and ^uider of the Grecians Army, was ever so
feared nor redouted of the Troyans, as this King is of his enemies. The
Portingalls, fear him above all others, for he has caused many of them to
die. Ye shall see his palaces which in a lodging made of purpose; but yet like
to ye others, hanged without round about with Portingalls head. For it is
the custom to carry away the heads of their enemies, and to hang them at their
lodgings.

This King having knowledge of our coming, came straightways to see us at the
place where we were, and there remained the space of eightene days, occupying
the most part of the time, specially three hours, to recite and tell his
victories and noble acts against his enemies. Moreover, threatening the
Portingals, with certain iestes and countenances, whom he named in their
language Peroes. Peroes.
This king is the most renoumed of all the country, his village and land is
great: fortified all about with earth, planting therein certain pieces of
Artillary, as Fauconnets, that he has won from the Portingales. As touching
towns and houses of stone, there is none, but as I said before, they have
lodgings very long and broad, the which at the beginning was not had, for the
people that then were, did so little esteem to be in sauegard, yt they forced
not for walled Towns, nor strong holds, but they wandered abroad, as do the
wild beasts, without having any certain place for to take their rest, but
they rested the^ even in that place where the night ouertooke them, without
fear of any thieves, ye which the Americans do not though they be very wild.
Now to conclude, this King of whom we speak, thinks him self very great,
and has nothing else to rehearse, but his greatness, reputing it a great
glory and honor, to have made to die many people, and to have eaten them by and
by, yea to the number of five thousand as he said. I cannot remember that there
has been the like inhumanitie, How many it is to be thought that Julius Caesar
has slain in his battles.
as is in this people. Pliny shows that Julius Caesar in his battles as it
is judged, has slain nintie two thousand and eleven hundredth men. And there
are showed of many other wars and great slaughters, but they have not eaten
one another. Now to our purpose: this King and his subjects are in continual
war with the Portingalles of Morpion, The description of the land of Morpion.
and with the wild men of the country. Morpion is a place bending toward the
River of Plate, or to the straight of Magnellan, distant from the line twenty
six degrees, being subject to the Portingales, so that the King of Portingale
has there a Lieutenant general, with a great number of people of all estates,
and slaves, whereas they behave them selves so well, that there comes from
thence great profit to the King of Portingale. The fruitfulness of Morpion.
At the beginning they began to plant great quantity of Canes to make Sugar.
But since they have not greatly travailed therein, but have occupied them
selves to a better work, since that they have found out Mines of Silver. This
place has great quantity of good fruit, with the which they make Conserues,
after their manner, and chiefly of a fruit named Nauas. Nauas.
Among these Trees and fruits, I will rehearse one named in their language
Cochine, bearing fruit as great as Pompion, the leaves like to a Baye tree,
the fruit made like an Estryge egg, it is not good to eat, but pleasant to
behold when the tree is full. The wyld men (beside that they make thereof
vessels or cups to drynk in,) they make a certain mystery as strange as is
possible. After that this fruit is hollow, they fill it with certain grains
of Myll, or such like, then with a stick having one end in the ground, the
other end coming thorough, being decked all over with fair feathers, will
keep every household after this sort in their house two or three of them with
great reverence, thincking these poor idolaters in handling and sounding this
fruit, that their Toupan speaks unto them, and that by this means they have
reuellation of all, by the means of their Prophets, so that they esteem and
think therein to be some deuinitie. And they worship no other thing sensible,
but this instrument that sounds when it is handled. And for a rare and
strange thing I brought one of them home, the which I got secretly from one,
with many skins of Birds of diverse colors, of the which I made present to
Monsyer Nicolas of Nicolay, the Kings Geographer, a witty man, and a lover,
not only of the antiquity, but also of all virtuous things. And since he
showed them to the King, being at Paris, in his house, who came of purpose to
see the book that he caused to be printed of the East parts, and he showed
me, that the King took great pleasure to see such things for that they were
until then unknown. Moreover there is plenty of Orenges, Citrous, Canes of
Sugar. To be short, this place is very pleasant.

There is also a River not very great, whereas there are found little Pearls,
and great store of Fyshe, chiefly of one kind, Piraipouchy.
the which they call Piraipouchi, which is as much to say as naughty Fish: it
is maruellously disformed, breeding or ingendrieg on the back of a dog
Fish, and being young follows her as his principal tutor. Furthermore in
this place of Morpion, the which is inhabited by the Portingalls, are now
nourished many domestical beasts, the which the said Portingalls have brought
thither, the which enrytcheth greatly, and sets out the country, beside his
natural excellency, and husbandry, the which is daily more and more
excercised.

Of the River of Platte, and the country adjacent. Cap. 55.
Seeing that we are so far in talk, The river of Platte, and why it is so
named.
I think it good to speak a word or twain by the way of this fair floude of
America, the which the Spaniards have named Platte, either for his largeness,
or for his Mines of Silver that are found hard by, the which in their language
they name Platte. The wild men of the country name it Paranagacu, which is as
much to say, as Sea, or great congregation of water. This River contains of
largeness, twenty six leagues, The first voyage attempted by the Spaniards to
the River of Platte*
being beyond the line, five degrees, and distant from Caape Saint Augustine,
six hundredth and seventy leagues. I think that name of Platte, has been given
by those that first did discover it, for the reason before showed. Also at
their first arrival thither they received a marvelous joy, thincking that
this river so large, had been the straight of Magellan, the which they sought
for to pass on the other side of Ameryca, nevertheless knowing the verity of
the thing, they delibered to set foot on land, the which they did. The
wild men of the country were maruellously amazed, having never seen
Christian before so to aborde their lymittes. But by succession of time, the
Spaniards acquainted them with the wild men, alluring them by gifts and
otherwise, so that in viewing the Country, they found many Mines of Silver,
and after that then had thus viewed the Country, and marked the place very
well, then they returned having laden their ships with Erasill. The second
voyage.
With in a short time after they made ready three great ships with men and
munitions for to return, being covetous of the Mines, and being aryued at the
same place where before they had been, they prepared their skiffes for to take
land. First ye Captain, having with him four score Soldiers, for to
withstand the wild men of the country, if that they had made any
insurrection. But the wild men at their arrival fled here and there of
purpose, to catch the Spaniards in their danger, A slaughter of Spaniards.
so that when they were landed, there came upon them three or four hundredth of
the wild men, which in their fury and rage like hungry Lions, they killed and
devoured, as their custom and manner is, and afterward they showed their bones,
legs and arms, unto the rest of the Spaniards that were in their Ships,
threatening them with the like, if that they did descend on land: the which
things were showed to me by a Spaniard that was in one of the ships. Also the
wild men of the country will show thereof, as a thing worthy of memory, when
it is in their minds. The third voyage.
After this, the Spaniards returned again thither with a band of two
thousand men, with other ships, but for because that they were afflicted
with sickness, The fourth voyage.
they could attempt nothing. But afterward the Captain Arual, in Anno. 1541.
having with him only two hundredth men, made a voyage thither, The policy of
Captain Aruall.
having also with him a fifty Horses, wherewith he used such policy, that he
made the wild men of the country afraid, which thought that these Horses
had been deuouryng beasts, (for to them they were unknown,) this being done,
he caused his men to be armed with bright shining Armor, having painted upon
their Harnies many dreadful Images, as heads of Lions, Leopards, Bears,
Wolves, and such like, with their mouths gaping, and figures of horned devils,
ye which sight did so affraie ye wild inhabitants of the country, yt they
fled away, and by this means they were driven out of their country, so that
the Spaniards remained there Lords and Masters, beside many other lands
adjacent, that since they have conquered even to Moluques in the Ocean, to the
West of the other coast of America, so that at this day they have in possession
a great deal of land about this fair River whereas they have builded Towns
and holds. And some of the wild men adiace^t, are reconciled with them, and
become Christians, True it is that about a hundredth leagues beyond, there are
other wild men that make war with them, being stout men and of great
stature, Wild men as great as Gya^ts.
almost like Giants. And they live with littell other food than human flesh
as the Canibals. This kind of people go so swyftly on foot; that they will
easily take wild beasts in their chase: they live longer than any of the
other wild men do, as a hundredth and fifty years, and the other less, they
are very prone and subject to that damnable sin of lechery, heinous before
God, the which I omit, not only for the respect of this country of America,
but also many others. The richesse of the country about the river of Platte.
These Giants make war as well with the Spaniards as the wild men about them.
Now to our purpose. This River of Platte with the country adjacent, is now
very rich as well in Silver as in stones: this River swells or increases
certain days in the year as does Aurelana that is at Perou, and Nyll in
Egypt. At the mouth of this River there are many little Islands, of the which
some are inhabited, the others not: this country is very full of Hylls and
Mountains, from the Caape S. Mary, unto the white Caape, specially that
toward Saint Helenes point, distant from the River.65. leagues, and from
thence to Arnes Govvrdes.30. leagues, then from thence to Basseas, to the other
land so named because of the great valleis that there are. And from Basseas to
the Abbey of Fonda.75. leagues. The rest of the country has not ben
frequented of christians, extending to the Caape Saint Dominik, or Caape
Blanke, and from thence to the Promentary of the eleven thousand Virgins.52.
degrees and a half beyond the Equinoctial, and thereby is the straight of
Magellan, of the which we mind hereafter to speak.

As touching the flat country, it is at this present very fair, by an
infinite number of Gardens, Fountains and Rivers of sweet fresh water, in the
which are great plenty of very good Fish. And to the said Rivers, there
haunteth a kind of beast, that the wild men name in there language
Saricouiemia, Saricouieme a dainty beast.
which is as much to say, as fine or dainty beasts; the which beast remains
more in the water than on the land, and is no bigger than a little Cat. The
skin of this beast which is intermedled with gray; white and black, is as
fine and smooth as velvet, his feet made like the feet of a water Foul. And
as for his flesh, it is very pleasant and good for to eat. More over, in this
country toward the straight, there are many strange and monstrous beasts, but
not so cruel as in Africa. And to conclude, this country now is brought to so
good a form, that it would not be taken for a strange country: for the wild
men of the country have invented of late days by the means of Christians,
arts and sciences very ingeniously, so that they may be a very spectacle to
many people of Asia, and of our Europe, I mean of those that curiously observe
and keep the damnable law of Mahomet, and other fond and deuilish Doctrine.

Of the straight of Magellan, and of Daryen. Cap. 56.
Seeing that we are come so near to this notable place, it shall not be out of
the way to write somewhat thereof. Now this straight, called in Greek
Poeidinos, as the West between two lands, named in Greek Istmas, a straight or
a point of land between two waters, as that of Daryen confineth America
toward the South, and there seperateth with an other land discovered but not
inhabited, even as Gebaltar does Europe with Africa, and that of
Constantinople does Europe with Asia, being named the straight of Magellan, by
his name that first did discover it, The lyeng of the straight of Magellan.
lyeng fifty two degrees and a half beyond the Equinoctial, containing of
breadth, two leagues by one only height straight East and West, two thousand two
hundredth leagues from the North to the South, furthermore, from the Caape of
Essead, which is at the entering of the straight, unto the other South Sea
seventy four leagues, until the first Caape or Promentary, which is forty
degrees. This straight has been long time desired and sought, more than two
thousand, eight hundredth leagues, for to enter by this straight into the Sea of
Magellan, to attain to the Islands of Moluques.

Americus Vestucia, one of the best Pylots that ever was, has coasted almost
from Ireland unto the Cape of Saint Augustine, by the commandment of the king
of Portingale the year.1501. And since another Captain the year.1534. sailed
unto the Region named of Giants. In this Region between the River of Platte,
and this straight, the inhabitaunts are very mighty, named in their language
Pategones, Giants, because of their high stature, and form of bodies. They
which first discovered this country, took one of them finely, being twelve
foot long, who was so uneasy to hold, that.25. men had enough to do about
him, and for to keep him it behooved them to bind his feet and hands in their
ship, notwithstanding they could not keep him long alive, but for sorrow and
thought (as they say) he died for hunger. This Region is of like temperatnesse
as Canada and other countries near to our Pole, and therefore the inhabitants
are clothed with the skin of a certain beast named in their speech Su, which
is as much to say, as Water, for because (to my judgment) that this beast for
the most part remains in the waters and floods. This beast is a ravenous
beast, made after a strange manner: besides this if she be chased or pursued,
as the people of the country use to do, for to have the skin, she takes
her young ones on her back, and covering them with her tail that is thick and
long, saves her self with running. Nevertheless the wild men of the country
use a policy for to take this beast, making a deep pit in the ground near
to the place where she makes her most residence, the which they cover over
with green leaves, so that in running knowing not of this pit, the poor
beast falls in with her young ones: and she seeing her self thus taken, in
her rage she kylleth her young ones, and makes such a terrible noise, that she
makes the wild men afraid. But for all this, in the end, they kill her with
darts and arrows, and then they take her skin. Now to our purpose. This
captain Fernandus of Magellan, a courageous man, The voyage o^ Frrnandus of
Magellan.
being informed of the riches that might be found in the Islands of Moluques,
as great quantity of spice, ginger, musk, gray amber, myrabolanes, rubarbe
gold, pearls, and other richesse, specially in the Islands of Matel, Magian,
Tidora, and Terenata, nere enough the one to the other, thinking by this same
straight to find a way more shorter and necessary, was minded to attempt it,
departing from the Canaries, to the Islands of Caape verde, keeping his right
course to the promontarie of saint Augustine eight degrees, beside the line,
The Caape of Virgins.
coasting near to the Caape of Virgins, distant from the Equinoctial fifty
two degrees, near to the straight before spoken. And after he had sailed the
space of five days from the east right to the West on the Ocean, the which in
swelling or flowing, carried them without sail right to the South, the which
made them joyful and glad, although the most part of their men were dead by the
inco^modities of the sea and the air, but chiefly by hunger and thirst. In
this straight are many fair Islands, but not inhabited, the country about is
very baren: full of hills and mountains, and there is found nothing but
rauishyng beasts, birds of diverse kinds, chiefly Estriges, woodde of diverse
sorts, Cedres, and others. Also an other kind of tree bearing fruit almost
like a cherie, but much more pleasant to eat. This is the occasion, and how
this straight was found out: since they have found out an other way, sailyng
upon a great river on the coast of Perou, in the land of Chagra, four lagues
from Panana, and from the goulfe S. Michel.25. leagues. Not long after a
captain having sailed a certain time upon these floodes, adventured to visit
the country. And the king of the wild men of that country, Therea.
named in their language Therea, received him very gently with presents of
gold and pearls, as certain Spaniardes have showed me, that were in their
company, although yt in going on the land they were not without great
danger, as well for the wild beasts as other incommodities. They found
afterward a certain number of the inhabitauntes of the country very wild,
and more to be feared than the first, to the which for the small trust and
confidence that they had in them, they offered and promised their service and
friendshyp, specially to their King, whom they call Atorizo, Atorizo.
of whom also they received certain presents, as great pieces of gold,
waying ten pound. After that they had given to him also of such things, as
they had and thought would be most to his contentation, the which was small
iron wourke, shirtes and gowns of small value: In the end with good guide
they came unto Daryen, The straighte of Daryen.
from thence they entered in, and discovered the south sea, on the other coast
or side of America, The Islands of the Moluques.
in the which are the Moluques, where as they having found ye commodities before
showed, have fortified them selves hard by ye sea, so yt by this straight of
land, they have without comparison shortened their way, without entering into
the straight of Magellan, as well for their tradings as for other commodities.
And since that time they trafike and trade to the Island of Moluques, the which
are great, and at this present inhabited and converted to the christian faith,
the which before was peopled with very cruel people, much more cruel than
those of America, which were blinded in ignorance, and having no knowledge of
the great riches and tresure that the country brought forth. About this place
of the west sea, there are four Islands desert inhabited (as they say) only
with Satyrs, therefore they have named them Islands of Satyrs. Likewise in this
same sea are found ten Islands named Manioles, inhabited with wild men, the
which are of no religion, nere to the which there are great rocks that draw the
ships unto them, because of the iron wherewith they are nailed. For the which
cause those that trade into that country there, are constrained to use small
ships or skiffes pinned with wood for to eschae the danger of these rocks or
adamant stone. Thus far as touching ye straight of Magellan. Now as touching
the other land named Australl, The land of Australl.
which in costing ye straight is left on the left hand, is not yet known of
christians, but only of an English pylote, being a man as well seen and esteemed
in navigations as any that can be found, who having passed this straight,
showed me that he had descended on land so that I was bold to demand of him
what people did inhabit in ye country, he showed me yt they were mighty black
men, which I know to be contrary: knowing that this land is almost of the
height of England and Scotland, for the country is of such a temperatnesse,
that it is subject to winter with continual frostes and snowes.

How that those that inhabit from the river of Plate unto the straight of
Magellan, are our Antipodes. cap. 57.
ALthough we se as well in ye sea as in rivers, many Islands divided and
separated from the maine land, yet nevertheless ye element of ye earth is
esteemed to be one alone, and only body, the which is no other thing than
this largeness of the earth, the which seems unto us all full for his great
and wonderful amplitude. And such was the opinion of Thales Milesius, one of
the seven wise men of Grecia, and other philosophers, as Plutarke shows.
Oecetes the great philosopher, To know that there are two worlds or no.
and Pythagoras ordained.ij. parts of the world, that is, this wherein we
inhabit which we name Hemispheria, and that of the Antipodes, which we likewise
call the lower Hemispherie. Theopompus the historiograph says after Hermogenes,
that Silenas showed king Midas, that there was an other world and globe of
earth than this which we are in. Macrobius last of all, does most amply treat
of these two hemispheries and parts of the earth, to whose works ye may have
recourse if that ye mind to know farther on the opinions of Philssophie. But
thus much must be known, whether that these two parts of the earth ought to be
altogether separated as earths that differ, and so to be judged to be two
worlds, the which is not true, considering that there is but one element of
the earth, the which we must judge, is cut by the sea in two parts, as Solin
writes in his polyhistor, speaking of the people Hyperbores, but I had rather
say, that the whole world is separated into two equal parts by this imagined
circle which we name equinoctial. Furthermore, if ye behold the image and
figure of the world in a globe or a earde, ye shall clearly see how the sea
divides the earth in two parts, not altogether equal, which are the two
hemispheries, so named by the Greeks, one part of the world contains Asia,
Africa, and Europe, the other contains America, Florida, Canada, and other
regions comprehended under the names of the occidentall of West Indies, in the
which many think our Antipodes to inhabit. Diverse opinions of the Antipodes.
I know well that there are many opinions of the Antipodes: some judge and
think that there are none, others that there are, and that they are those yt
inhabit the other Hemispherie, which to us is hid. As for me, I am of this
advise, that those that inhabit under the two Poles (for we have showed yt they
are inhabited) are Antipodes, one to ye other. For example, those that inhabit
the North, the nearer they draw to the pole, the higher it is: What people
the Antipodes and Antichtones the one to the other.
the pole opposite is abased, to the contrary, so that it must needs be, that
such are Antipodes, and the others, the farther they withdraw to the Poles,
approchyng to the Equinoctial, are less Antipodes. Therefore I take for right
Antipodes, those that inhabit the two Poles, and the two others taken
directely, that is to wit, East and West, and the others in the midst
Anticthones, rather than Antipodes, to those that inhabit in Lima, Luzco,
Eariquipa, or Perou, to those that about this great flood Indus, in the
country of Calicut, the Island of Zeilan, and other lands of Asia, the
inhabitants of the Islands of Moluques, from whence the spices come, to those of
Aethiopia, now called Ginney. And for this reason, Pliny has well spoken,
that it was Tabroban, where as were the Antipodes, A difference between
Antipodes and Antictones.
confinyng as many Antipodes, with Anticthones. For truly those that live in
these Islands are Anticthones, to the people that inhabit that part of
Aethiopia, taking from the river of Nyll, unto the Island of Meroa. Although
that those of Mexicona, are directely Antipodes, to the people of Arabia,
Felicia, and those that are at the ends of the Caape of good hope. Now the
Greeks have named those Antipodes, that go with their feet overthwart one
over an other, as those of which we have showed. And Anticthones, Anteci.
those that inhabit a land divided, as those whom they call Anteci, as the
Spaniards, Frenchmen, and Almaynes, to those that inhabit nere to the river of
Plate, and the Patagones, of the which we have spoken in the former Chapter,
which are nere to the straight of Magellan, are Antipodes, the others named
Pateci, Pataeci.
that inhabit one only zone, as Frenchmen, and Almaines, contrary to those
that are Antaeci. And although that these two proprely are not Antipodes,
notwithstanding they are commonly called so, and many mix them one with an
other. The manner of going of the Antipodes was not well known nor approved of
the elders.
And for this reason, I have noted that those of the Caape of good hope, are
not to us altogether Antipodes, but those whom they call Anteci, the which
inhabit a land not opposite, but divided, as those that are beyond the
Equinoctial, to us that are here, even to come to the Antipodes. I doubt not
but that many do mystake this manner of going of the Antipodes, which has been
ye cause that many have not approved it. Saint August. lib. 15. of the City of
God.
Also S. Augustine in the.xv. book of the City of God. chap. ix. but he yt
would diligently consider shall find it very easy to comprehe^d. If it be so that
the earth is round like a globe, hanging in the midst of the world, it must
needs be, yt it be beholden of the firmament on all sides. Therefore we that
inhabit the higher Hemispherie, as touching us, we see one part of the
firmament to us propre and particular. The others inhabiting the lower
Hemispherie,) we being to them superior) they se the other part of ye firmament
which to them is appropried. There is like reason of the one as of ye other: but
ye shall note that these two Hemispheries have one only and common centrie in
ye earth. Thus much of ye Antipodes: now to our matter.

How these wild men exercise husbandry and make gardens of a root named
Manihot, and of a tree that they name Peno absou. Ca. 58.
Our Americans in the time of peace, have little other occupations but to make
gardens, The common occupations of the wild men.
or when the time requires, they are constrained to go to the wars, but some
of them as we have before showed use certain trades, nevertheless necessity
constrains them to labor the earth as we in our countries. And they in a
manner follow the custom of the elders, who after that they had endured and
eaten the fruits that proceeded from the earth without any labor or industry
of man, so that being not sufficient to nourishe and sustain all that lived
on the earth, it caused rapines and invasions, preparing each one a certain
portion of land, which they separated by certain limits, and then among men
began the state of the people and commonweals. How these wild men labor
the earth
And thus our wild men of America have learned to labor the earth, not with
oxen and horses or other domestical beasts as we have here, for they have none
such, but with the sweat and labor of their bodies, as the like also in other
provinces, notwithstanding that which they labor is very little, as certain
gardens distant from their houses about two or three leagues, where as they
sow only Myll, and no other grain, but they plant certain roots, the which
they gather two times a year, at Christmasse, which is their Summer, when the
Sun is in Capricornus and at Pentecost: this Myl is as great as a pease,
commonly white and black, Myll white and black.
the herb that it bears is like to sea reeds. Now the fashions of their
garden is after this sort and manner; When after that they have cut seven or
eight acres of wood, leauyng nothing but the foot or body of the tree about a
man's heygth, they put the fire therein, and burn it, and the grass about it,
being all in a valey or low country: they scratche the earth with certain
instruments of woodde, or of iron, since that they have had the knowledge,
then the women plant this Myll and roots which they name Hetich, Hetich.
making a hole in the ground with their finger, as we plant Beans in this
country: To fatten and amend the earth, they have no practice, but it is
fruitful enough of it self, being never left untilled, as we do many lands
in our Europe. Notwithstanding, it is a wonderful thing that it will not bear
our corn, such as we have and use. I my self have sometimes* sowed, for we
carried corn with us for to prove, but it would never profit. And to my
judgment, it is not long of the ground, but of some other little vermin that
eats it in the earth: Nevertheless, those that are remaining there, may in
time make a surer trial and experience. In America no use of corn. Husbandry
has been of a long time.
As touching our Americanes, it is not to be marvelled, though they never had
the use of corn: For likewise in our Europe, and in other countries, at the
first men lived with such fruits as the earth brought forth of her self
without any man's labor. True it is that husbandry is very ancient, as
appears in Holy Scripture by Abell and Cain. The first use of Corn.
But though that they had corn since the beginning, yet they knew not the
use thereof. Diodorus writes, yt the first bread was seen in Italy, being
brought thither by Isis, Queen of Egypt, the which showed the mean how to
grynde corn, and to bake bread: for before they did eat the fruits of the
earth, as Nature brought them forth, whether that the earth was labored or
no: but that all men universally on the earth have lived like as do the brute
beasts, it is rather a fable than a true story fained by Poets, and of such
as imitate them, as Virgile shows in Georgicon. But I believe rather the holy
Scripture that makes mention of Abell, and of his first fruits that he
offered to God. Well the Americanes make meal of those roots that are called
Manihot, which are as great as my arm, Meal of rotes Manihot.
a foot and a half long, and they are writhen or crooked most commonly. And
this root is of a little tree in height from ye ground about four foot, the
leaves are like to those which we call Patallionis, which are in number six or
seven at the end of every tree, and every leaf half a foot long, and three
fingers broad. Their manner to make this sustenaunce or meat is this: they
bruise these roots either dry or green, with a large bark of a tree,
garnished about with very hard stones: this being done, they make it hot in
some vessel of earth on the fire with a certain quantity of water, so that
it gathers into small lumpes, and it is very good when it is thus used, and a
good nourisher. And ye shall understand, that from Perou, Canada, and Florida,
in all the lands and countries between the Ocean and Magellan, as America,
Caniball, even to the straight of Magellan, they use this kind of food, the
which is very common, and yet there is distant from the one end to the other
more than two thousand leagues by land, and they use it with their flesh and
fish as we do bread. These wild men use a strange manner in their eating,
The strange manner of eating of the wild men.
for they never bring their hands to their mouths, but cast their meat into
their mouths more than a foot off, to the which they are very apt. Also
they mock christians that use otherwise. All the labors about these roots
are remitted to the women, thynking it not decent for me^ to occupy them
selves therein. A kind of white beans
These Americans do plant beans, the which are all white and flat, more
large and longer than ours. Also they have a kind of white gourdes, not
differing to those that grow in Turkey and Italy, they boil them and then eat
them with salt, How they make salt.
the which salt is made with salt water boiled, when it is consumed to half,
with an other thing they make it turn into salt.

Bread made of spice and salt.
Likewise with this salt and a kind of spice of grains, they make loaves of
bread as byg as a man's head, of the which many eat with flesh and fish,
chiefly the women. Beside this, they mingle many times spice with their meal,
not beaten to dust as we do, but as it is gathered. Bread of dry fish.
Moreover, they make bread with dried fish very good to eat, with other
things mingled with it, which I do not know: I will not forgette here a kind
of colewort leaves, almost like to the broad leaves that grow on ryuers sides,
the which they call Nenuphar, Nenuphar, a kind of colewort.

Peno absou a tree.


with an other kind of herb, growing like our thistles. Now there rests to
speak of a tree, which they name in their language Peno absou. This tree
bears a fruit of the greatness of a good big apple round like an egg,
the which is not good to eat, but rather dangerous, as poison. This fruit
has within six nuttes like our Almondes, but somewhat more larger and flat,
in the which is a kernel, which (as they say) is good to heal wounds and
sores, when that they have been hurt in the war with the Arrows of their
enemies or otherwise. I have brought of them into France, which I have given
unto my friends: the mean to use them is this: First they draw out of this
kernel certain oil, the which they put upon the wound. The bark of this
tree has a very strange smell, and the leaf always green, of the
thyckenesse of a testorne, and made like the leaves of Pourslane. In this tree
frequenteth a bird, having a great bushe of feathers on her head as yealowe as
fine gold, A bird of a strange and wonderful beauty.
the tail black, and the rest of her feathers yealow and black, with some
strikes of diverse other colors, read about the chappes, between the byll
and the eyes like scarlette, and she keeps this tree only for her food,
which is littell worms that she fyndeth in the said tree. To make short,
leauyng many kinds of trees, I will say thus much, that there are five or
six kind of palm trees bearing fruit, not as those of Aegypte, that bear
Dates, for these bear none, but other kind of fruits, some as great as an
egg, the others less. Among the which palm trees, Gerahuua. Iry.
is that which they call Gerahuua, a another named Iry, the which bears a
another kind of fruit, differing: there is also that does bear their fruit
all round, and as great as a prune or damsyn, being of the like color when
it is ripe, the which before has a taste like veriuyce: it bears a white
kernel of the greatness of a hasyll nutte, the which these wild men do
eat. Thus much as touching our America, the which I have thought good to
set out after that I had known the secrets thereof, the which we may
hereafter set forth more at large. Likewise of many trees, herbs, and other
secrets with their propreties, according to the experience of the people of
the country, the which we have left out to avoid prolixitie. Also we have
thought good by the way somewhat to speak as touching the land of Brasile.

How and after what sort the land of America was discovered, and Brasill
wood found: with many other trees seen no where but in that country. Cap. 59.
THis we know of a truth, that Americus Vesputia is the first that discovered
the main land between the two seas, The land of Brasile discovered by the
Portingales.
though not all the land, but the most part. And since the Portingals many
times being not content with their limits, have always hazarded themselves to
discover and find out countries, even as they found the commodities, and as
they were entertained of the people of the country. They therefore visiting the
countries, and seeking as the Troyans did in the land of Carthage, they saw
diverse fourmes and manners of feathers, with the which they did trade and
traffike, specially read ones, which were colored, so that they were
desirous to know the mean how to make this color. The people of the
country showed them the Brasille tree, which they do name in their language
Oraboutan, Oraboutan, the brasile tree.
and is very fair to look on, the bark thereof is of a gray color without,
and the woodde is red within, and chiefly the heart, the which is more
excellent than the rest, whereof they do occupy most, so that then the
Portingales brought home their shyps laden therewyth. And since that we have
had the knowledge of yt, thereof is made a very great trade. The
Portingales can not abide that any other people or Nation should trade thither,
for that they were the first that discovered that country which is of a truth.
This brasill tree bears leaves like unto box, so little but very thick, it
renders no gum as others do, neither bears it any fruit: It has been
better esteemed tha^ it is at this present, specially in the east countries: at
the first it was thought, that this was of that kind of wood that the Queen
of Saba brought to king Solomon, as is showed in the first book of the Kings.
A voyage into the east country by Onesicritus captain to Alexander the great.
Also the great Captain Onesicritus, in a voyage that he made into the Island
of Tabroban, lying in the Ocean sea, toward the east Indies, brought a great
quantity of this wood and other things requisite, the which his master
Alexander did highly commend and esteem. As touching this Brasill, that
which is on the side of the river of Ianaria, Morpion, and Caape de Fria, is
better than that of Caniball, and on the coast of Marignan. When that the
Christians are there for to laade Brasill, the wild men of the country cut it
them selves, and sometimes they bring or carry it three or four leagues to the
ships. I leave to your judgment their pain and travel, and al for to get
some poor or course weed and shirt. Moreover in that country is found an
other wood yellow, with the which some make their swords. Likewise an other of
the color of purple, Yelow wood. Wood of the color of purple
with the which to my judgment may be made fair and goodly works. I am in
doubt whether it be that woodde which Plutarke speaks of, saying that
Caius Marius Rutilius, the first Dictatour of the public weal among the
Romans, caused to be drawn in a purple woodde a battle, A battle drawn
in purple wood.
wherein the personages were not greater than my three fingers. And this woodde
was brought from hye Africa. Furthermore, there are found other trees, of
which the woodde is as white as paper, white wood.
and very tender, and therefore the wild men set not by them. The property of
which trees I could not otherwise learn, saving only it comes to my
remembrance of white woodde, whereof Pliny speaks, L^^. 10. ca. 19. Betula.
the which he names Betula, white and tender, of the which were made the
wandes that were borne before the Magistrates of Rome. And even as there are
found and seen diverse kynds of trees differing in form, color and other
propreties, so in like manner is found diversity of ground and earth, some
fatter than others. Diversity in earth.
Also clay ground, of the which they make earthen vessels, after their manner
as we do for to eat and drink. Thus much as touching our America, though not
so much as I have and might have seen, but so much as I thought worthy to be
noted and written, for to satisfy and content the gentle good will of the
loving Readers, if that it please them to take as great pleasure and patience
to read it, as I have taken pains after so many travails and pains in this
hard and dangerous voyage to set it forth. I am sure that some will find
this my discourse t^ long, others to short. Therefore I seek to keep a mean
to satisfy and content every man's desire.

Of our departing from France Antartike, or America. Capit. 60.
WE have here before gathered together, and showed amply and at large of these
nations, the which of ancient Historiographers was unknown. Now therefore
after we had remained there in that countreye, as long as opportunity did
serve, and also needful for the contentation of the mind, we began to make
provision for our return, being not minded to remain there any longer.
Therefore under the conducte of Mounsieur Albois the County, How the Author
returned from America.
Captain general of the French kings ships into America, a worthy
Gentleman, and well seen in navigations, as if all his life time he had
exercised it, beside other virtues. We took a clean contrary way to that which
we came, because of the winds that are propre to return: but our return
was longer by five hundredth leagues than the way we went, and more dangerous:
so the last day of January at four of the clock in the morning, we took
shypping with those that carried back the ships, we sailed out of the River
of Ianaria, into the great sea on the other side, drawyng toward the Weste,
leauyng upon the right hand the coaste of Aethiopia, the which we coasted
thytherwarde. At the which departure, the wind was to us very favorable, but
not of long continuance: for suddenly the wind did change even right a
head to the North, and Northwest, the which with the sea ragynge and
unconstant in those parts, kept us from our right course, castyng us now
here and there, until at the last with great difficulty, we discovered Cape
de Fria, where as we came a land at our first coming thither. And again, we
stayed there the space of eight days, And the nynthe day the Southe wind
began to blow, the which did conducte us nynetie Leagues into the Main
sea, leauyng the lower country, and coastyng a far off Mahouac, because of
the dangers. For the Portingals keep that quarter, and the wild men, which
unto us are both enemies (as I have showed) where as within these.ij. years,
they have found Mines of gold and silver, which has caused them to build in
that place, and to strengthen them selves there to inhabit. Now we sailyng
continually upon the sea with great peril, until we came to the height of
Caape saint Augustine, Caape Saint Augustine.
the which to double we remained the space of two months or therabout, being
very great, lying far out into the sea: Caape of good hope, why it is called
Lion of the sea.

Caape of saint Michell.


And no marvel, for I know some of good memory, that have been doubling of
this Caape three or four months: and if the wind had not been favorable, we
had been in danger to have stayed longer, although there had happened no other
inconuenie^ce. This Caape is of length.8. leagues distant from the river from
whence we be departed.302. leagues. It enters into the sea nine or ten
leagues at the least, and therefore it is as much feared of the nauigants or
sailers on that coast, as the Caape of good hope, on the coast of Ethiopia, the
which for this cause they have named Lion of the sea, as I have already,
showed: Or like to that which in the sea Aegee, in Acaia, the which is now
called Moorelande. Also Caape S. Angel, the which also is very dangerous.
Very dangerous lands discovered by captain Pynson.
This Caape was so named by those that first did discover it, which was as some
say, one Pynson, a Spanyarde. Also it is so marked in our Card Marins. This
Pynson with his son have maruellously discovered unknown countries, not
before found out. The year.1501. Emanuell king of Portingale sent him into
the base America, for to find the straight of Forna, and Daryen, that they
might pass more easier to Moluques, without going to the straight of Forna,
and Darye^, that they might pass more easier to Moluques, without going to ye
straight of Magellan. And they sailing on that coast discovered this fair
Promentary, whereas setting foot on land they found the place so fair and
temperate; although it be but.340. Degrees of longitude minute.0. and eight of
latitude, mynute.0. that they there stayed, to the which place since are gone
other Portingals, with a number of ships and people, and by succession of time,
having allured the people of the country by gifts, and pacified them, they
made a hold named Castle Marin, Castle Marin. Fermanbow.
and since they have edified another near unto this named Fermanbow, trading
there one with another. The Portingals laade cotton, wild beasts skynnes,
spices, and among other things prisoners that the wild men of the country take
in the wars of their enemies, the which they carry into Portingall for to
sell.

Of the Canibals as well of the main land as of the Islands, and of a tree
named Acaion. Cap. 61.
THis great Promentary being this doubled and affronted with great
difficulty it behooved us to attempt fortune and to shorten our way as much as
was possible, not keeping far of from the main land, chiefly ceasting
somewhat near to the Island of S. Paul, The Ilrude of S. Paul.
and other little Islands not inhabited near to the main land, whereas are
the Canibals, the which country deuideth the King of Spayns land from the
King of Portingall, as hereafter shall be showed. Seeing that we are come to these
Canibals we will speak our word. This people from the Caape S. Augustine, and
beyond, near to Marignan, is the most cruellest, and inhumayne people that
are in America. These imps eat most commonly humayne flesh, as we do biefe or
mutton, and have thereunto more appetite and delight: and this is of a truth,
that when they have any of their enemies in their hands, it is hard to get them
from them, for the great desire that they have to eat them, like Ravening
Lions. There is no beast in the wilderness neither in the desartes of Africa
or Arabia, that longs so sore or that is so gredie of humayne flesh, as these
wild and brutish people. Also there is no nation that can be acquaynted with
them, neither Christians nor others: And none can trade into their country
without leaving of pledges, so mistrustfull they are, thinking themselves of
more credit than others. For this cause the Spaniards and Portingals, have
played them some ill tricks, in memorial whereof, when that they may get any of
them, God knows how they are handled, for there is no other way but death,
and so to be eaten and devoured of these imps. Therefore there is continual
war between them and these people, and many Christians they have devoured.
These Canibals have on their lips, Continual war between the Spaniardes and
the Canibals.

The fruitfulness of their country.


stones green and white as the other wild me^ have, but without comparison
more longer, for they descend even to their breast. Moreover the country is
fruitful enough, better than belongs to such wicked beasts, for it bears
great quantity of fruits, herbs and wholesome roots, with a great number of
trees, named by them Acaion, bearing a fruit as big as my fist, fashioned like
a Goose egg: some of them therewith make a kind of beuerage, although the
fruit is not good to eat, at the top of this fruit grows a kind of nuts,
made like a Cunneys tail, and the kernel within is very good to eat, after it
has had ye heat of the fire. The shel is very full of oil, having a sharp
taaste, with the which the wild men may make more store and plenty, than we
can of our nuts: the leaf of this tree is like to the leaf of a pear tree, a
little more pointed and red at the end: the barcke of this tree, is tauney and
bitter, the wild men put this wood to no use, for that it is somewhat tender
and soft. In the Islands of the Canibals, whereas there is great plenty of
these trees, they cut the wood to burn, for that they have little other wood,
and also Gaiac. This much as touching this tree Acaion. There are also other
trees whereof the fruit is dangerous to eat, among the which there is one
named Haouay. Furthermore this country is full of hills and mountains, Haouay
a venomous tree.
with good mines of gold. There is a high and rich mountain, where these
wild men get their green stones, that they bear at their lips, and therefore
it is not impossible, but that there may be found emerauldes and other riches,
if this obstinat people would permit, that we might go in sa^egarde: likewise,
there is found white Marbell, The riches of the country of Canibals.
and black, Jasper, and Porphire. And in all this country from the Caape S.
Augustine, unto the River of Marignan, they use all one manner of living, as
the others do, at Caape de Fria: the same River separateth the land of Perou,
from the Canibals, The River of Marignan separateth Perou from the Canibals.

Aurelane a River of Perou. The Ila^d of the Trinity very rich.


and has in breadth at the mouth fiftene leagues or thereabout, with some
Islands peopled and rich in gold, for the wild men have found, a mean how
to try it, and to make broad rings like to buckles, and others, that they
hang on their nostrels, and on their cheeks, the which they carry for
magnificence. The Spaniardes say, that the great River that comes from
Perou, named Aurelane, and this, do meet: upon this River there is another
Island named the Trinity, distant ten degrees from the line, having in length
about.30. leagues, and in breadth about.8. leagues, the which is the richest
Island that may be found in any part, for that it bears al kind of metals.
But for that the Spaniardes, landing there many times for to bring it to their
subjection and obedience, have cruelly handled the inhabitants, therefore they
have been rudtly repulsed, and the better part destroyed. This Island brings
forth abundance of a certain fruit, A kind of tree like to a Palm tree.
the tree whereof is like to a Palm tree, with the which they make drink.
Furthermore, there is found good Frankincense, and Gaiac: likewise in many
other Islands near to the main land. Also there is between Perou, and the
Canibals, many Islands named Canibals, somewhat near to Zamana, of which the
chiefest is distant from the Spanish Island.30. leagues, all the which Islands are
under the obedience of a King, whom they call Sassique, of his subjects he is
well obeyed. The greatest Island has in length.60. leagues, and of breadth.48.
rude and full of mountains, almost comparable to the Island of Corsa, in the
which their King keeps customably. The wild men of this Island are mortal
enemies to the Spaniards, after such a sort, that they can by no means trade.

Also these people are ugly to behold, hye minded, and courageous, very
subject to theft, there are many trees of Gaiac, and another that bears a
fruit of the greatness of an Egg, very fair to behold, nevertheless it is
venomous, therefore they temper therewith their arrows, that they use to aid
them selves with against their enemies in the juice or lykor of this fruit.

There is yet another, of the which the lykor that comes forth is poison,
notwithstanding the root is very good to eat, and therewith they make bread
as in America, although that the truncke, the branches, and the leaves do not
greatly differ. The reason why this tree should bear both sustenance and
poison, I leave to the Philosophers to judge and contemplate. Their usage in
war is, as the Americans and other Canibals, of which we have showed.

Of the River of Amazones, otherwise named Aurelane, by the which ye may sail
into the country of Amazones, and into France Antartike. Cap. 62.
Whilst that I have pen in hand for to write of places discovered and
inhabited beyond our Equinoctial, between the South and the West, for to
bring things to light, and to give more evident knowledge, I am determined to
set out in writing a voyage as far, as difficile and hard and most
dangerously adventured of the Spaniards, as well by water as by land unto the
Territory of the peaceable sea, The seapacifick or peaceable or the sea of
Magellan.
otherwise called Mare Magellan, or the sea of Magellan, whereas are the Islands
of Moluques and others. And for that ye shall note this better, ye shall
understand, that the King of Spain has under his obedience much land in the
West Indies, as well in Islands as mayn land at Perou and America, the which by
succession of time he has obtained and gotten, by which means at this day he
receives great profit from thence. Now among others, a Spanish Captain being
in his princes behofe at Perou, Mhe lying of the River of Plate.
minded on a day to discover as well by land as by water to the River of Plate,
the which is distant from Caape S. Augustine. 700. Leagues beyond the line,
and from the said Caape to the Islands of Perou, about three hundredth leagues.
This Captain not waying the difficulty that there was in the long way,
neither in the excessible high mountains, neither yet in the people nor in the
wild beasts, but only in the executing of this high enterprise, beside the
wonderful riches, which being done he should get him self an immortal fame,
for him and all his posterity.

This Captain having therefore made all things in a readiness, and in good
order as the case required, carrying with him certain Merchandise whereby to
get vittails by the way, and other munitions, having in his company fifty
Spaniards, with a certain number of slaves, for to labor and to do other
service, with certain Indians, that had been made Christians, as well for to
conduct them, as for to intreprete the languages set forward with certain
Caruels or small Skifs on the River of Aurelana, The lying and wonderful
greatness of the River of Aurelana,
the which I may well testify is the most longest and largest, that is in all
the world, his breadth is.59. leagues, and his length more than a thousand.
Many call it the sweet sea, the which proceeds from the sides of the high
mountains of Molubeba, with the River of Marignan: notwithstanding their
entry or beginning is distant.104. leagues one from another, and they are
mixed above six hundredth leagues, within the plain country, the sea or
floode entering in above.40. leagues.

The original of Nyll.
This River increases at certain times of the year as does Nill, that passes
by Egypt, proceeding from the mountains of the Moon, according to the opinion
of some, the which also I think to be so. It was named Aurelana, by the name
of him, that first made upon it a long Navigations. Aurelana or the River of
Amazones.
Nevertheless, before it was discovered by some, that have named it in their
Cards, the River of Amazones: it is very dangerous because of certain rocks,
and other inconveniences which cannot be avoided but with great difficulty.
Being entered somewhat far into the River, there are certain fair Islands,
of which some are peopled, the others not.

Moreover this River is dangerous all a long, for that it is peopled as well in
the Islands as on the banckes, with many strange and Barbarous people, the
which of a long time have had enimitie and hatred to Spanyardes, and others
strangers, fearing least they should aborde their country, and spoil them.
Also if that by misfortune they get any, they kill them without remission. And
eat them roasted and boiled, as they do other flesh.

Therefore taking ship in one of these Islands of Perou, The Ila^d of the Holy
Cross.
named the Holy Cross, in the great Sea, for to get the straight of this
floode or River, with a fair wind they set of, coasting near enough to the
land, for to view and know the country, the people, and for many other
commodities. Coasting then in their Navigations now here now there as the
commodity did permit, the wild men of the country showed themselves in
great number on the banks, with certain signs of admiration, seeing this
strange Nauigatio^, and array of people, vessels and munitions proper for
war. In the mean time, the Nauigantes were not a little astonyed for their
part for to see such a multitude of uncivil people and altogether brutish,
which by their countenance showed, that they would destresse them, the which
occasion caused them to sail and row a long time without casting anchor, or
setting foot on land. Notwithstanding, at the last, famine and other
necessities, caused them in the end to strike sail and let fall anchor. The
which they having done, about a handgunne shot from the land, there rested no
other thing, but with flattering signs, and other means to win the favor of
the wild men, for to get some vittails, and space to rest their weary bones.
So that some of the wild men being in their little boats made of the barcke of
trees, being allured with these fair shows, did ieopard themselves to approach,
not without some doubt, having never seen Christian come so near to their
limits. Notwithstanding their fear, the Spaniards made sign of more
friendship, showing them knives and other small Iron works shining, the which
caused the^ to approach. And after yt they had made unto them presents of
small value, this wild people went with all diligence to purchase and get them
some vittails, so at length they brought them great plenty of fish, fruits of
marvelous excellency according as ye country brought forth. Among other
things one of these wild men having been the day before in skirmishe, The
stature of these wild me^.
had taken four of his enemies Canibals, and presented to them two members
roasted, the which the Spaniards refused. These wild men as they said, were of
high stature, fair bodied and all naked as others are, bearing on their
stomachs broad pieces of Gold, the others great pieces shining of fine
Gold well poolished in form of round looking Glasses. Ye need not demand,
if that the Spaniards change their merchandise for such riches, I believe truly
they escaped not so, at the least they did their good will. Now these poor
Pilgrims, being thus refreshed and vitteled for that time, reserving somewhat
for after claps, before they took their leave, they gave more presents as
before, and then for the continuance of their voyage it was needful to set
sail and to shorten way. From thence they sailed more than a hundredth
leagues, before they took land, beholding about the River side diverse kinds
and a multitude of wild people, as before, the which I will not stay to
describe for to avoid prolixitie: but it shall suffice to understand the
place, where as at the second time they aboorded.

How certain Spanyardes arrived into a country, where they found Amazones.
Cap. 63.
THe said Spanyardes did so much by their iourneys, that they arrived in a
Country, where as were inhabiting Amazones, Amazones of America.
the which would never have been thought, for that Historiographers have made
thereof no mention, because they knew not this country late found out. Some may
say, that they are not Amazonists, but as for me I judge them such, seeing
that they live even so, as we find the Amazonists of Asia to have lived. And
before passing further, ye shall note, that these Amazones of which we speak,
are retired, inhabiting in certain Islands which are to them as strong holds,
having always perpetual war with certain people, without any other
exercise, even as those of whom have spoken the Historiographers. Now then
these warlike women of our America being fortified in Islands, are most
commonly assailed of their enemies that seek them on the water, with barks
and other vessels, and there they fight with bows and arrows: contrariwise,
the women defend them with the like courageously, with threatenings, noise and
countenaunces, the most fearful that is possible: they make their bulwarks of
defense with mighty great shelles of Torterels. And because it comes to our
purpose, to speak of the Amazonists, we will write somewhat in this place. The
poor people find no great comfort among these rude and savage women. I find
by the histories, that there are.iij. sorts of Amazones, Three sorts of Amazones.
all a like, differing only in places and dwellings. The most anciest sort were
in Africa, among ye which were Gorgonists, that had Meduse for their Queen.
The other were in Scythia, near to the river of Tanais, which since have
reigned in a part of Asia, near to the river of Hermodoon: and the third sort
of Amazones, are those which we do treat of. There is diverse opinions why they
were called Amazones. The most common is, for because that these women did
burn their breasts in their youth, to be more apt in the war. Many opinions
on the naming and Etimology of Amazones.
The which I find very strange, and report me to medicines whether they can
burn those parts without death, knowing that they are tender, and also near
to ye heart, nevertheless the most part are of this opinion. If it were so, I
would think that for one that escapes death, there dies a hundredth. Others
take the Etymology of this vowell A. privative, and of Maza, that signifies
bread, for that they live not with bread, but with other things, which is as
absurd as the others: for in that time they might call many that lived without
bread Amazones, as the Troglodites and many others, in like manner all the
Indians. The others of A. privative and Mazos, as those that have been norished
without woman's milk, the which is most likeliest to be true, of which opinion is
Philostratus, Philostratus.
or else of a nimphe named Amazoni, or of an other named Amazone, virgin to
Diana, and Queen of Ephesus, which I do better believe, tha^ burning of their
paps or breasts, let them that list, dispute of the contrary. Amazones are
warlike women
Well, how so ever it is, these women are named warlike: and moreover ye shall
note that the Scithians which we name Tartarians, being driven out of Egypt,
subdued the better part of Asia, and made it all tributary, and under their
obedience. In the mean time whilst the Scythians remained in this long
conquest, and expedition of Asia, their wives being wearied of their so long
absence, (as the good Penelope, of her husband Vlixes,) did admonish them by
many gracious letters and messages to return, otherwise, that this long and
intolerable absence would co^straine them to make new aliances with their next
neighbors, considering that the ancient lignage of the Scithians began to
decay. Notwithstanding without having regard to the sweet requests of their
wives, kept and inhabited Asia with an obstinate courage, Asia tributarie to
Scithia, the term of.500. years.
yea until the time that Ninus did deliver it from this miserable thraldom and
bondage. During which time, these women never made aliaunce of Matrimony with
their neighbors, esteming and thinking that Matrimony was not a mean of
liberty but of thraldom. But they with one accord and virtuous enterprise,
consented to take their weapons and begin war, thinking yt they were
descended of that mighty Mars, god of wars, which they executed so virtuously
under ye government of Lampedo and Marthesia, their Queens yt governed one
after another, Lampedo and Marthesia, the first Queen's of Amazones.
that they not only defended their country from invasion of their enemies, in
mainteining their liberty, but also made many goodly conquests in Europe and in
Asia, even unto ye river of which we showed before. In which place, specially
at Ephesus, they caused to be made many castles and holds. This being done,
they sent some of their ba^ds into their country, with the riches, booty, and
spoil of their enemies, and the rest remained in Asia. Finally these good
women for to keep their stock and posterity, did willingly offer them selves
to their neighbors, without any other kind of marriage. And of the fruit that
proceeded, they killed the male children, keeping always the female for the
wars, the feat whereof they would learn them with all diligence, they exercise
the feats of chiualry and hunting above al other things. Their weapons were
bows and arowes, with certain bucklers, of which Virgill speaks of in his
Aeneidos, when that during the siege of Troy, How the Amazones of America lived.
they went to help the Troyans against the Greeks. Some say also that they
were the first that began to ride a horse, and to fight on horseback. Well,
now it is time to return to the Amazones of America, and to ye Spaniards. In
that part they are separated from men, and frequent them very seldom, but at
sometime secret in the night, or at some appointed time. These women inhabit
in little lodgings and caves against the rocks, living with fish and wild
beasts, with roots and some good fruits that this land brings forth. They
kill their male children inco^tinently after they are delivered, or else they
deliver him to ye man, to whom they think it does pertain. If it be a female,
they retain it to them selves, even so as did the first Amazones. They make
war ordinarily against some other nation. How these Amazones put their
enemies to death.
And those whom they take in the war, they use most cruelly and inhumainely
for to make them die, they hang them by one leg on a tree, and leaving them
after this sort, they go their ways, and if it happen that they be not dead,
when they return, they will shoot at them above ten thousand times, but they
eat them not as others do, but they burn them until they be consumed to
ashes. The original of the Amazones of America are uncertain.
Furthermore, these women when that they approach to fight, they make
marvelous cries and shootes for to affray their enemies. Of the original of
these Amazones in that country, it is uncertain: some think that after the
war of Troy, for thither they went (as we have before showed) under the
conducte of Pantasilla, they scattered abroad, and wandered here and there.
Others think that they are come from certain places of Grecia i^ Africa, from
whence a cruel king chased them. We have many histories of their acts and
feats of war, and of other women, the which I will leave for to continue our
purpose: for there are many Histories, Greeks, Latins and others, that show
thereof at large. We have begone to show how that the Spanyardes remained there
but a while, for to rest them only, How the Spaniardes arrived into the
country of Amazones, and how they were received.
and to get victuals, for that these women as all amazed to see such an array
(which unto them was strange) came together above ten thousand of them, in
less space than three hours, maids and women all naked, saving bows and
arrows in their fastes, beginning to make a great noise, as though they had
seen their enemies, so that they began to loose of their arrows: the which
the Spaniards seeing, would make no resistance but retiring, wayed their ankers,
and hoised sail: but at their departing saying Adieu, they saluted them with
certain gunshot, among the thickest of them, so that these women escaped not
without some loss and detriment.

How the Spanyardes continued their voyage to Morpion, and of the river of
Plate. Cap. 64.
FRom thence they continuing their way, well a Cxx. leagues, they knew by their
Astrolobia, How the Spanyardes continued their voyage to Morpio^.
what height the place was where they were. The which is so necessary for the
good Navigations, that those that sail into far Countries, can have no
assurance of their voyage, if that this practice fail them: wherefore this Art
of the height of the Sun exceeds all other arts. And this cunning our
elders have greatly commended and practiced, also Ptolome and other great
authors. These Spaniardes leaving their skiffes and caruels they sunk them,
then every man laded them selves with the rest of the victailes, munitions, and
other marchaundise, chiefly the slaves that were there for that purpose, they
went for the term of.ix. days, by and over mountains and dales decked with
all sorts of green trees, herbs, flowers and fruits. In so much that at the
last by their journeys, they came to a great river proceeding from the high
Mountains, whereas they found other wild men, among the which some for fear
fled their ways, others climed upon trees, and there remained in their
lodgings none but a few old men, to the which in sign of friendship and
favor, they made presents with certain knives and glasses, the which to them
were agreeable, so that they went and called the others, showing them that
these strangers new arrived were some great Lords, that in no wise would hurt
them, but make to them presents of their riches. The wild men being moved with
this liberality went to fetch them victails, as fish, venison, and fruits
according as the country brought forth. The which the Spanyardes seeing, were
minded there to pass away the winter, and in the mean time to discover the
commodities of the country, and to see if that there might be found any Mine
of gold or silver, or any other thing whereby they might gather any profit. By
this means they remained there.vij. months together, and seeing things fell
not out according to their mind, they took their journey forward, having to
guide them.viij. of these wild me^, that brought them on their way about.lxxx.
leagues, passing always through the midst of other wild men, more rude and
less tractable tha^ they before, for the which their guides were unto them as
necessary as profitable. Finally, they knew of a truth, that they were come to
ye height of a place named Morpion, then inhabited of Portingals, some of them
being weary of so long a voyage, were determined to repair to the place before
named: others to ye contrary, said it were better to persevere and go forward
to the river of Plate, distant farther by land.300. leagues. In which, Division
of their company, for to k^pe on to the river of Plate.
for to make agreement according to thaduise of the captain, the one part kept
their way to Plate, and the others drue toward Morpion. Near to which place,
these poor pilgrims beheld if they could epsy any booty, until that they
found a river running at the foot of a hill, in which they that drank, A very
good Mine of silver.
did perceive certain stones shining like silver, of the which they bare a
certain quantity to Morpion, distant from thence.18. leagues, which place
after proof was found to bear good and natural silver. And since ye king of
Portingall has had from thence an infinite deal of silver after that he had
sou^ded the Mine, and brought it to good perfection. After that these
Spaniardes had rested the^ selves at Morpion, with the Portingall their
neighbors, they set forward to follow the others, and to keep the way to Plate,
being dista^t from Morpion, by sea.250. leagues, Mines of gold and silver.

Plate a river, and why it is so named.


and by land.300. whereas the Spaniards have found many Mines of gold and
silver, and have named it Plate, which signifies in our language, silver. And
for to inhabit there, they have edified certain castles and holds: and since
some of the^ with other Spaniards, newly come to that place, not content with
this fortune, have enterprised to sail even to the straight of Magellan, The
straight of Magellan.
so named by him that first found it out which joins with America toward the
South. And from thence enters into the peaceable Sea on the other side of
America, The peaceable sea.
where as they have found many fair Islands: and in the end they came to
Moluques, Islands of Moluques inhabited by the Spanyardes.
which they keep and inhabite^t this day. By the which means there comes a
great tribute of gold and silver unto the King of Spain. This much in effect
of this voyage, the which I thought good to note by the way, being showed me in
my Navigations, by those that of a truth had been in the voyage.

How the lands of the king of Spain, and of Portingall are separated. Cap.
65.
THe kings of Spain and of Portingall, after that they had obtained many happy
and fortunate victories, as well in the East, as in the West in places by sea
and land, not before known or discovered, deliberated for the greater
assurance to divide and limit all the country that they had conquered, The cape
of three points.
and also to avoid quarrels that here after might rise, as they did of the
mine of gold that they had at the Cape of three points which is in Guiney as
also the Islands of Cape verd, and many other places. Also every one may know,
yt one kingdom will not have two kings, no more than the world will receive two
Suns. The lands of the king of Spain in the Indies.
So it is that from the river of Marignan, between America and the Islands of
Antilles, that join at Perou, unto Terra Florida, near to new found land,
belongs to the King of Spain, the which has also great Lordship in America,
coming from Perou toward the South, on the West side toward Marignan, as is
before showed. The land that the king of Portingal has in the Indies.
To the King of Portingal did befall all that is from the said river of
Marignan toward the South unto the river of Plate, which is.36. degrees from
the Equinoctial. And the first place toward Magellan, is named Morpion, the
second Mahanhoc, in the which place has been found many mines of gold and
silver. The third Port Sigoura, near to Caape S. Augustine. Fourthly the
point of Cronest Mon^ou, castle Marin, and Fernanbow; bordering the Canibals of
America. To declare particularly the places from one river to an other, as
Curtana, Caribes, near to the sweet or fresh river, and royal. Likewise
their lyings with other things, I will forbear at this time. It shall suffice
only to know, that in those places before named, the Portingals are inhabited,
and ca^tel how to entertain the wild men of the country, so that they live
together in peace, and trade many rich merchandise. And there they have
bartered and builded houses and castles to resist their enemies. Now to
return to the Prince of Spain, he has done the like for his part, Countries
not yet discovered.
the which is as we have showed from Marignan toward the West unto Moluques,
as well on this side, as beyond in the West, and in the sea peaceable, the
Islands of these two seas, and Perou in the maine land, so that altogether
extends of a great compass, beside the country adjoining that in time may
be found out, as Cartagera, Cata, Palmaria, Parisa, great and little. The which
two nations, specially the Portingals have discovered much land in the East
country for their trade, the which notwithstanding they enjoy not, as they do
many places of America and Perou: For to bear rule in that Country, they must
get the love and favor of the Indians: otherwise if that they revolt, they will
destroy all that they find, so yt they must frame themselves so to their
ways, that they by no wise may be offended. Now ye must note that their
attempts and discouerings, was not without great bloodshed: specially of poor
Christians, that have ieoperded their lives without having respect to the
cruel inhumanitie of these people. To be short, there is no difficulty be it
never so dangerous, that withdraws a man's manly heart. We see in our
Europe, how much the Romans at the beginning, minding to enlarge their
Empire but with a little land, to the respect of that which has been gotten
within this sixty years, have shed the blood as well of them selves as of
their enemies. What furious and horrible dissipations of laws, disciplines and
honest conversation has reigned throughout the world, biside the civil wars
of Sylla and Marius, Cina, and of Pompey, of Brutus, of Anthony and Augustus,
more hurtful than the rest: also has followed the ruin and decay of Italy by
the Goths, Hunns, and Wandallians, which also have invaded Asia, and
overthrown the kingdom of Greece, to the which purpose, Ovid seems to have
spoken these words.

We see how things do change and come to pass,
And now a people reign that nothing was.
And he, the which had might and pour,
Does them homage, obey, and eke honor.
To conclude, all human creatures are subject to change more or less
according as they be, rich or poor, high or low, little or great.

The division of the West Indies in three parts. Cap. 66.
BEfore that I pass any farther to describe this country by good right (as I
think) named France Antarctike, or before America for the reasons that we
have alleged, because of his largeness which is without comparison, I am
minded (for that I would the reader should the better understand it) to divide
it in three parts: for since the time that other Countries have been
discovered, all the Country of America, Perou, Florida, and Canada and other
places adjacent, to go from the straight of Magellan, have been commonly
called the west Indies, and is for because the people live al naked, barbarous
and rude, as those that are yet in the East Indies. The which Country meriteth
well the name of India, of the flood or river Indus, as we have before showed.
This fair river entering into the East sea called Indique by seven mouths or
openings, as Nyll does into the sea Meditarium, takes his original of the
Mountains Arbiciennes and Beciennes. Also the river Gangis in like case
enters in by.v. openings into this sea, dividing India into two parts,
separating the one from the other. Therefore this region being so far from
America, for the one is in the East, and the other comprehe^deth from the South
unto the west, we cannot say that others tha^ those that have first discovered
these lands, have added this name of India, seeing the beastly behauior and
cruelty of this people, so brutish without faith and without law and not
unlike to diverse people of the Indies of Asia and of Ethiopia, of which Pliny
makes most ample mention in his natural history. By this means has America
obtained the name of India to the likeness of that which is in Asia, for yt
they agree in manners, beastly brutishness, and other things, as we have before
showed of the Occide^tal people, to those of the East parts. Therefore the
first part of this land, contains toward the South unto the straight of
Magellan, which is.52. degrees.30. minutes of the Equinoctial line, I mean of
the Austreall line, comprehending no part of the other land that is beyond the
straight, the which was never known nor inhabited of us, saving only from
that straight coming from the river of Plate. From thence drawing toward the
West, far between these two Seas, are the provinces of Patalia, Paranaguacu,
Margageas, Patagones or region of Giaunts, Morpion, Tabaiares, Toupinambou,
Amazones, the country of Brasil, unto ye Cape of S. Augustine, the which
is.viij. degrees beyond the line, the Country of Canibals, Anthropophages,
the which regions are comprehended in America, compassed with the Ocean sea,
and on the other side toward the South of the peaceable sea, which is otherwise
the sea of Magellan. We will therefore end this Indian land, at the river of
Amazones, the which even as Ganges makes the separation of one Indies from
another toward the East: also this notable flood, the which has of breadth.50.
leagues, may make separation of India, America, and of Perou. The second part
shall begin from the said river, containing many kingdoms and Provinces at
Perou, the straight of land containing Daryen, Furna, Popaian, Anzerma, Carapa,
Quimbaya, Cali, Pasta, Quito, Canares, Cuzco, Chila, Patalia, Parias,
Temistitan, Mexica, Cataia, Panuco, the Pigmeis eue^ to Florida, which
lies.25. degrees of latitude on this side the line. I leave the Islands out,
not comprehending them, although that they are of no less compass and
greatness, than Sicilia, Corsica, Cypris or Candia, nor yet of less value,
therefore shall this part be limited toward the South to Florida. There
rests now only to describe the third part, the which shall begin at Noua
Espania, or new Spain, comprehending all the provinces of Anauac, Vcatan,
Eulhuacan, Xalixa, Thalco, Mixtecapan, Tezeuco, Guzanes Apalachen, Pancho,
Aute, and the kingdom of Micuacan, from Florida unto the land of Bacalles,
which is a great Region, under the which also is comprehended the land of
Canada, and the province of Chicora, (which is.33. degrees on this side the
line) the land of Labrodor, new found land, compassed with the frostie Sea on
the North side. This Country of the West Indies being thus divided, not
specifying many things from the one end to the other, that is to wit, many
things from the one end to the other: that is to wit, from the straight of
Magellan, at the which we have begone, unto the end of the farthest land of the
Indies, it is more then.4800. leagues of length, and by this ye may descerne
the bredthe, excepting the straight of Parias before named, therefore they are
now called ye great Indies, being without comparison more greater than the East
Indies. As touching the rest, I desire the reader to take in good part this
little division, until it please God to give us mean to make one more greater.
Likewise to treat more at large of this country, but thus much I thought
needful in the mean time to bring to light.

Of the Island of Rats. Cap. 67.
Leaving these Canibals for the small comfort yt there was to be had, having
the wind at South, we sailed to a very fair Island, distant from the
line.iiij. degrees, the which is very dangerous in the aboording of it, for it
is no less dangerous to a front tha^ some great Cape or Promentary for that
it enters far into the sea, and for rocks that are about it, and ranged on
the coast side. This Island was vnluckely found out to the mishappe of those
that first did discover it. Some Portingall ship passing by on that coast, for
default of good government, The shipwrak of a Portingal.
striking against a rock near to this Island, brake in pieces and drowned,
excepting.xxiij. me^ that saved them selves in this Island, in which place they
remained the term of two years, whereas they died only two excepting, which in
the mean time lived with Rattes; Birds, and other beasts. And as on a time
there passed by a ship of Normandy, that returned from America, they set their
skiffe out for to rest in that Island, whereas they found these two poor
Portingalls, that were only left of this shipwrake, The Island of Rats and
why it was so named.
the which they brought away with them. And these Portingals had named it the
Island of Rats, because of the multitude of Rats of diverse kinds that there
are, so that they say, that their companions died only being vexed with these
vermin. These beasts live with eggs of Torterels, that they make on the Riuage
of the Sea, and with birds eggs, whereof there is great store. Also when we went
for to seek fresh water, whereof we had such great need, that some amongst us
were constrained to drink their own water or bryn, the which dured the term
of three months, and the famyn four months, we saw there so many birds,
and so privy, that we might have laden therewith our ships, nevertheless we
could not recover fresh water, unless we had entered very far into the
country. As for the rest it is fair decked with many fair trees, being
green the most part of the year, even like a goodly green medowe in the
month of May, although it be within four degrees of the line. Though that
this Island is not inhabited, The co^modites of the Island of Rats.
yet it is not impossible no more than others in the Zone, as the Islands of S.
Homer, under the Equinoctial, and others. And if it were inhabited, I am well
assured, that it would make one of the fairest places in all the World and
rich, there might be made very good Sugar, Spices and other things of great
value. The Zone between two Tropickes are inhabited.
I know well that many Cosmographers have had this opinion that the Zone
between the two Tropickes was uninhabited for the extreme heat of the Sun,
notwithstanding yt experience shows the contrary without any farther
contention, even as the Zones to the two Poles, because of the cold.
Heroditus and Solon, affirms that the hills Hiperbores, are inhabited, and
likewise Canada, drawing near to the North: and other count yet more near
approaching the cold Sea, A boundance of Rats.
of the which we have already spoken. Therefore let us return to our Ila^d of
Rats. This place by good right is so named, for because of the abundance of
Rats that live there, of the which there are diverse kinds, one kind among
the rest that the wild men of America eat, named in their language Sohiatan,
and they have their hair gray, Sohiatan a kind of Rats.

Hiexousou another kind of Rats.


the flesh good and delicate, like a little leueret. There is another named
Hiexousou, greater than the others, but not so good to eat, they are as great
as those of Egypt, called Pharaos Rats. Others there are as great as Wezels,
that the wild me^ eat not, for because that when they are dead, they stink
like carrion, the which I have seen: also there are found diversity of
Serpents named Gerara, Gerara a kind of Serpent. Theirab.
the which are not good to eat, but there are others named Theirab, that are
good, for of these Serpents there are diverse kinds, that are nothing
venomous, nor like to those of our Europe, so that their biting is neither
mortal, nor any thing dangerous: there are to be seen read ones scaled of
diverse colors: likewise I have seen green ones, as green as the bay leaf,
they are not so great of body as the others, notwithstanding they, are very
long. Therefore it is not to be marueled at, how these wild men there aboutes
eat these Rats without danger, and Serpents even as they do Lezardes, as
before we have showed. Likewise near to this Island is found a kind of fish,
and also upon the coaste of America very dangerous, also much feared and
redoubted of the wild men, for that she is a ravening fish, and as dangerous
as a Lion or a Woulfe famished: this fish is named Houperou, in their language,
and eats other fish in the water, excepting one that is as great as a little
Carpe, the which follows him always, as if there were so^^^ Sympathia or
secret love between them, or else he follows him for to be preserved and kept
sure from other fishes. So that the wild men fishing all naked, as they do
always fear him, and not without a cause, for if he catch them, he will
either drown them, or strangle them, or look where he touches, he carries
away a piece with his teethe. Also they will take heed how to eat of this
fish: but if yt they can take him alive, as they do many times, for to be
revenged of him, they kill him with arrows. Being therefore there a certain
space of time, turning here and there, I beheld many straungs fishes that are
not in Europe: among the which, I saw two very monsterous, A kind of strange
fish.
having under the throat like two Goats dugge^, a thing on the chin; that for
to see too, was like a Goats beard. Behold how nature the great
workemistresse, takes pleasure to varifie her works, as well by water as by
land, as the co^ning workman beutifleth his work, exceeding the common trade of
his Art and science.

How we continued our course, with a declaration of the Astrolabia of the
sea. Cap. 68.
FOr because that we found no great consolation, nor comfort of our trauails in
this Island. It behooved us without any tarying, to hoise sail with an
indifferent wind, The evil disposition of the air by the Equinoctial.
until we came under the Equinoctial, whereas the sea and the winds are also
unconstant. Also the air is always seen there troubled: if one side be
fair, the other is troubled, and threatens foul weather, so that for the
most part there is rain and thunder, which can not be without danger to ye
Nauigants. Now before they come near to this line, the good Nauigantes,
Pilots, and Mariners, being expert, take counsel or behold always their
Astrolabia, for to knew the distance and lying of places from thence where
they are. And because this so necessary an Instrument for Navigations comes
now in talk, I will speak there of lightly by the way, for the instruction of
those that will follow the sea, being so great that the understanding of man
cannot well comprehend it. And that which I speak of the Astrolabia, as much
may I say of the Rule or nedell of the sea, by the which they may also conduct
right the ship. This Instrument is so politic, that with a little paper or
parchement, as broad as the palm of my hand, and certain lines marked which
signifies the winds, and a little Iron with the which this Instrument is
made, by his only natural virtue that a story gives him, and blows in his
proper moving, and without any touching, shows where is the East, the
Weaste, the North and the South, and also all the thirty two winds belonging
to Navigations, and it shows them not only in one place, but in all places of
the world beside other secrets, that I omit for this present, whereby it
plainly appears that the Astrolabia, the nedell or compass, with the Card
Marin, are well made, and that there showing and perfection as is a wonderful
thing, for that a thing so great as the Sea, is pictured in so little a space,
and so agreeable that by the same men undertake to sail round about the
world. The signification of the Astrolabia.
Then the good and perfect Astrolabia, is no other thing than the Sphere
pressed and represented in a plain, accomplished in his compass with.360.
Degrees, that answer to the circute of the World, divided in like number of
degrees, the which again must be divided into four equal parts in our
Instrument, that is.90. in every part, the which afterward ye must part by
five and five, then holding your Instrument by the ring, raise it or hold it
toward the Sun, so that the Sun beams may enter in at the hole, then
looking to your declination in what year^ month and day ye are in when ye take
the height of the Sun. And if the Sun be toward the South which is on the
coast of America, and ye be toward the North, ye must take from your height
as many degrees as the Sun has declined, from the line of ye which we speak
toward the South. And if that in taking of the height of the Sun, ye be
toward the South beyond the Equinoctial, and the Sun be in the North, ye
must in like manner take away so many degrees, as the Sun has declined from
the line toward our Pole, as for example: if ye take your height the Sun
being between the Equinoctial and you, when ye have taken the said height, ye
must for to know the place where ye are, be it in sea or land, add your
degrees which the Sun is declyned from, far from the line with your height,
and ye shall find that which ye demand, the which is to be understood as
much of the Pole Artike, as Antartike. Thus much by the way Gentle Reader of
our Astrolabia, leaving the rest of the knowledge and usage of this Instrument
to Astronomers and Astrologians, that make daily profession thereof. It shall
suffice that which I have spoken, the which I know to be necessary and
needful to Navigations, chiefly for those that are ignorant and not yet
exercised therein.

Of the departing of our Equator or Equinoctial. Cap. 69.
I Think there is no man of Spirit, but that knows that the Equinoctial is
a trace or circle, imagined by the midst of the World, from the East to the
Weast, in equal distance of two, so that from the fayde Equinoctial to each
one of the Poles, it is.90. Degrees, as we have at large treated before, and of
the temperatnesse of the air, that is there about, of the Sea and of the
fishes. There rests now somewhat to speak in our return, of that which
before we left out, passing therefore about the first day of April with a
favorable wind keeping our right course with sail spread right to the North,
How the Author departed from Thequinoctiall.
nevertheless we were molested with one ill commodity, the which was, that
day and night it ceased not to rain, the which notwithstanding came well to
pass for us to drink, considering our necessity, for the space of two
months and a half, enduring thyrst for that we cold get no fresh water.

And God knows whether we drancke not our fill eue^ with open throat,
considering the extreme heat that burned us: it is true that the rain water
in those parres are corrupted for the infection of the air, from whence it
comes: for that whereof the rain engenders, is depraved in such sort, that
if a body wash their hands therewith, there will rise pushes and bladders.
Certain rain water corrupted.
I know well that many Philosophers hold opinion, that some rain water is
unwholesome, and they set difference between these waters, with ye reasons which
at this time I will not allege avoiding prolixitie: well what corruption so ever
came of it, yet nevertheless it behooved us to drink thereof though it had cost
us our lives. Furthermore this water falling on a clothe would stayne it and
leave a spot that scant would be gotten out. Now therefore after we had passed
the line, it was needful for our conduct, to begin to count our degrees,
from thence unto our Europe: as much must be done of them that go thither,
after that they are come under the sayde-line. The Ancient Cosmographers,
measured the earth the which we may also do, by stades, paces, and feet, and
not by degrees as we do, as affirms Pliny, Strabo and others, but Ptolome
did since inuente degrees, for to measure both the Sea and the land, which
before was not a like measured, and this is much more easy. It is then Ptolome
that has compassed the whole world by Degrees, as well in length as in breadth,
finding 360. Leagues, and in every degree.17. Leagues and a half, as I
understand of our Pilots, that are expert in Navigations. So that the whole
world having the Firmament and the Elements in his conference, contains.360.
degrees equally by twelve signs, whereof every one has 30. The division of a
degree.
degrees, for.12. times.30. make just.360. A degree contains.60. minutes, a
minut.60. thirdes, a third.60. fourthes, a fourth.60. fifthes, unto.60.
tenthes. For the proportions of the firmament, may be parted in so many parts,
as we have said. Then by the degrees we find the longitude, latitude and
distance of places, the latitude from the line to our Pole, whereas there
is.90. degrees, and so much beyond, How ye may know the latitude longitude and
distance of places.
the longitude is taken from the fortunate Islands to the East. Wherefore I
say to conclude, that the Pilot that would sail, ought to consider three
things, the first in what hight of degrees, he finds himself, and in what
hight the place is that he will go to, secondly the place where he finds
himself, and the place whether he hops to go, that is to know, what
distance and length there is from one coaste to another. Thirdly to know what
wind or winds will serve for Navigations, all the which he may know and see
by his compass and other Instruments of the Sea. Following always our course
six degrees at this side our line, keeping the Caape on the North of us until
the.15. day of April, at which time we knew the Sun to be directly under
our Zenith, the which was not without enduring great heat as ye may well think,
if ye consider the heat yt is hetherwarde the Sun, being in Cancer, which is
far from our Zenith to us that inhabit in Europe. Now before going any farther,
I will speak of certain flying fishes, that I left out when I spoke of fishes
under the line. It is therefore to be noted, that under the line ten degrees on
this side, and beyond there is found abundance of flying fish, that flies
hye in the air, being followed of another fish that would devour him. So that
by the quantity of him that flies, ye may easily conjecture the quantity of
the other living by pray. Among the which the Dorade (of whom we have before
showed) does follow him above all others, for that his flesh is very delicate
and tender: of the which also there are two kinds, the one is like a herring,
the which is, that which is so chased of others, this fish has four wings,
two great ones, like unto the wings of a bat, and two other little ones near
to the tail: the other is made like a Lampron, of the which kinds there are
few found, but only.15. degrees on this side, and beyond the line, the which
to my judgment is the cause that those that have set out books of fishes,
Pirauena.
have left them out beside many others. The Americans name this fish Pirauena
he flies like a Partrige, and the little one flies much better and higher
than the other, and sometimes they are so near chased and followed, specially
by night, that many times they strike against the ship sails by heaps, and
there remain. There is another fish, which is called by them Albacore,
Albacore a fish
much more greater than the Porpas, the which is also a deuourer of the flying
fish as well as the Dorade, and he is very good and excellent to eat above all
other fishes in the sea, as well of the Weast as of the East. He is uneasy to
be gotten, and therefore they make a counterfeit fish of white linen, the which
they make to spring above water, as does the flying fish, and by this means
he is most commonly taken.

Of Perou, and of the principal places contained in the same. Cap. 70.
NOw keeping our course, having the wind very fair we coasted the land of
Perou, and the Islands being on the coaste of the Weast Sea, called the Islands
of Perou, Perou a third part of the Spanish Indies.
even to the height of the Spanish Island, of the which we will speak
hereafter particularly. This country as we have divided it, is one of the
three parts of the Weaste Indies, having in length.700. Leagues, taking from
the North to the South, and in breadth.100. Leagues, from the East to the
Weaste, being a firm land, from Themestitan passing the straight of Daryen,
between the West and the sea, Of whence Perou took his name.
which they name pacifik, and it was so named of a River called Perou, which is
in breadth about a little league, as many other provinces in Africa, Asia and
Europe, have taken their names of their most famous Rivers, as also we have
showed of Senega. This Region is then enclosed, with the Weast and the South
Sea, garnished with thick forestes and mountains, the which make the country
in many places inaccessible, so that we cannot there drive our Carts, The
most renomed provinces of Perou. Quito a Regio^.
and Horses laden there as we do here. In this country of Perou, there is
many fair provinces among the which the most chiefest toward the North is
Quito, the which extends in length from the East to the Weast about 60.
Leagues, and in breadth.30. Next to Quito is the province of the Canaries, The
province of the Canaries
having toward the East the River of Amazones, with many mountains and
hills, and inhabited with a Barbarous and wild people not yet converted:
besides this there is the province that the Spaniards have named S. James of
old port, S. James of old port. Taxamilca.
beginning within a degree beyond* the line Equinoctial. The fourth which they
call in their language Taxamilca, extends to the great City of Tongilla,
the which after that their King Atabalyba was poisoned, Pizare seeing the
fruitful commodities of the country, caused there to be edified a Town and a
Castle There is yet another named Cuzco, One Cuzco. The kingdom of the Iugies.
in the which the Iugies have long time raygned, being a people so named,
which have been in times past mighty Lords. And this word Iugies is as much
to say as Kings. And in their time their Kingdom and limits was so great and
large, that it contained above a.1000. Leagues from one end to another. Also
this country bears the name of the chiefest City, as does Rhodes, Metelin,
Candia and other countries taking their names of the most renomed Towns and
Cities, as I have showed. Furthermore being on a time at Caape Finistra in
Spain, a Spaniarde showed me, that in this country of Cuzco, there is found
a people that have their ears hanging down to their shoulders, having hanging
on their ears, great pieces of fine and pure shining Gold, well pollished
and better than any other Gold in Perou, to whose words I will sooner give
credit, than to many Historiographers in these days, that writ by hear say,
reporting to us things that they never saw. To this purpose I remember that
they would persuade us, that in high Africa, there was people that had ears
hanging down to there hales, the which is nothing so but a manifest fable and
lie. Canar a very cold country.
The fifth province is Canar, having on the west side the South Sea, the which
is a marvelous cold country, for the Frost and Snow lies there all the year
long. And although that in others Regions of Perou, the cold be not so
violent, and that there comes and proceeds great plenty of good fruits, yet
there is not such te^peratnesse in Summer, for in Summer in other places the
air is extreme hot and intemperate, the which causes a corruption chiefly in
the fruits. Also that venomous beasts are not found in cold countries as
they are in hot regions. Therefore al being considered, it is hard to judge
which of these countries ought to be preferred before the other: to this we may
reply that there is no commodity, but that has his incommoditie. Moreover
there is yet another named Calao, The province of Calao.
wherein is more trading and occupying than in any other country in Perou, the
which also is the cause, that it is better peopled. It extends from the East
coast, to the mountains of Andes, and from the Weaste to the mountains of
Nanades: the people in this country is named Xuli, Chilan, Acos, Pomata,
Cepita and Trianguauaco. Although it be wild and Barbarous, yet it is
nevertheless very tractable, because of the merchandise and trade that there
is used, otherwise, it would not be less confirmable than the rest of
America. In this country there is a great laake named in their language
Titicata, Titicata a Lake
which is to say, Island of Feathers, for that that in this Lake there are
certain little Islands, Laake. Carcas a country of Perou, Platte a large and
rych City. The land of Perou, is like the figure of a Tryangle.
in the which are found a great number of byrds great and small, and of such
diverse kinds as is almost incredible. Now the last country that is in Perou,
named Carcas, next adiace^t to Chila, in the which stands the famous and rich
City of Platte, the country being very rych, because of the fair Rivers and
Mines of Gold and Silver. Therefore this great country contains, and is
called all that is comprehended from the River of Platte unto Quitto as we have
already showed, and of which we have declared ye eight principal countries and
provinces. This maine land being so long and broad is like to the figure of a
triangle, although that many call it an Island, the which cannot, or else will
not make a difference between an Island and that which we call almost an Island.
By this means ye need not to doubt that from the straight of Magellan.50.
degrees of latitude, and.30. minutes, and.303. degrees of longitude beyond the
line, being more than.68. degrees, on this side is the maine land. In deed if
that this little land between new Spain and Perou, having in breadth but.17.
leagues from the Ocean to the South, were cut from the one Sea to the other,
then Perou might be called an Island, but Daryen, a straight of land, Daryen a
straight of land.
so named of the River of Daryen, does let it, yet it behooves somewhat to
speak of Perou. As touching the Religion of these wyld men of that country, A
great superstition of certain people of Perou.

Bohitis certain Priests.


which are not yet reformed to our Faith, they hold a very strange opinion of
a great ^^ttell that they keep secretly, saying that the Sea in times past
passed out thereof with all his Fishes, and that out of a another thing proceeded
the Sun and the Moon, the first Man, and the first Woman, the which their
false and deceitful priests have persuaded and showed them, named Bohitis,
and they have believed and given credit thereto a long time, until that the
Spaniards have dissuaded the most part of these dreams and delusions. Besides
this these people are very idolatrous above others. The Idolatry of these people
One worshippeth according to his mind what pleases him. The fishers worship
a fish named Lyburon, and the rest worship certain beasts and byrds: Those that
labor the ground and make gardens, worship the Earth, but they all in general
take the Sun to be a great God, likewise ye Moon and the earth, thinking
that by the Sun and the Moon, all things are ruled and governed. In swearing
or taking an oath, they will lay their hand on the Earthz and behold the
Sun, they also hold opinion that there has been a Deluge as those of
America, saying that there came a Prophet from the North parts, that did
maruels, the which after he was put to death, had nevertheless power to live.
The Spaniards are lords of all Perou.
The Spaniards occupy all this main land from the River of Marignan, unto
Furna and Daryen, and yet more further on the west coast, which is the
straightest or narowest place of the main land, by the which the way lies to
Moluques. Furthermore it exte^deth to the River of Palm, The riches of the
Islands of Perou.
whereas they have so well edified and peopled all the country, that it is a
marvelous thing to see the riches that at this day, that country brings
forth, like unto a great kingdom. First to begin almost thoroughout all the
Islands of Perou, there are Mines of Gold or silver, with certain Emerauldes
and Turkesses, neuertheless e having not so lively a color as those yt come
from Malaca and Calicut. The most welthiest people of all the country of
Perou, Iugas a valiant and rich people.
are those yt they name Iugas, valiant above other nations, they worship
cattle and all other kind of domestical beasts, in greater number than we
do here, for the country thereto is given in such sort, that beasts hydes
and skyns of all sorts, is their chief merchandise, and they kill the beasts
only for their skynnes. The greatest number of these domestical beasts are
become wild, because that there are so great multitude, so yt they let them
stray in the woods day and night, for that they have no place to harbor the^ in
their houses. And for to take: the^, they set snares and chase them as we do
Venison. Corn will not prosper nor grow in America.

Cassade a kind of sustenance.


As for Corn as I understand, it cannot profit there nor grow in no part of
Perou, no more than in America. Therefore as well gentlemen as others, live with
a kind of sustenance yt they name Cassade, which is a kind of cakes made of a
root named Manihot. Furthermore they have great plenty of Myll and fish. As
touching wine there grows none, instead whereof they make other kinds of
beuerege. This much as touching the circuit of Perou, the which with his Islands
of the which I will treat hereafter, is brought to such a form, that at this
present ye shall find towns, castles, cities, b^^oughes, houses, bishoprics,
commonweals, and all kende of livings, so yt ye will judge it to be a another
Europe. By this we know how great the power and goodness of our God is, Perou
may be thought to be a new Europe.
and his providence to all people, for even as ye Turks, Mores and heathen
people seek to destroy Christ's religion, so co^trarily, in other places it
does more increase. Thus far touching Perou, which in our return we coasted
on ye left hand, as in sailing thither we costed Africa.

Of the Islands of Perou, and chiefly of the Spanish Island. Cap. 71.
NOw yt I have showed of ye land of Perou, seeing yt in ye course we have in
our return costed certain Islands on the Weast Sea, The Island of Spain
before named Haiti and Quisquia.
called the Islands of Perou, for that they border the land, I think it good
in like case somewhat to write thereof, for because we were some to the height
of one of these Islands named the Spanish Island by those that first did
discover it, being before named Haiti, which is as much to say, as sharp or
sower land. The Prome^taries of the Spanish Island, Tiburou, Higney, Lobos,
Orane a River, Saint Dominic the chiefest city in that Island.

The most renoumed rivers in Noua Espania.

The ancient Religion of the inhabitans of this Island.


Also it was named Quisqueia the great, and of a truth it is so fair and
great, that from the east to the west, it is.50. leagues long, and of breadth
from the North to the South.40. and in compass or cyrcuit more than.400. and
is beyond the Equinoctial line.18. degrees, having toward the East the Island
of Saint John with many other small Islands, much to be feared and dangerous for
Sailors, and toward the West, it has the Islands of Cuba and Iamaica, on the
North side the Islands of the Canibals, and toward the South the Cape of Vela,
planted on the main land. This Island shows like to Sycilly, in times past
that first was named Trinacria, for yt it had.3. prome^taries very emine^t,
like unto that of which we speak, the which has three standing very far
into the Sea, of the which the first is named Tyburon, the second Higney, ye
third Labos, which is a side of ye Island, which they have named Beata, almost
full of ye wood Gaiac. In this Spanish Island, are found many fair Rivers,
among ye which yt chiefest named Orane, passes round about ye chiefest City
named by ye Spaniards Sainst Dominick, the others are Nequa Hatibonice and
Haqua, full of very good fish and pleasant to eat, the which is because of
the temperatnesse of the Air and goodness of the ground and of the water:
these Rivers run about into the Sea almost all on the East side, ye which
meeting together, make a very large River bancked on both sides, before that
this Island was discovered of yt Christians, it was inhabited with wild men
that were Idolaters, worshipping the devil, who showed him self to them in
diverse similitudes and likeness. Also they made many and sundry Idols,
according to the visions and sights that they had, as they do at this present
in many Islands and maine land of that country: the others worship many gods,
chiefly one above the rest, the which they esteem to be a maker of all things:
and they represe^t his figure in an Idol of wood, being set in some tree
garnished with leaves and feathers. Likewise they worship the Sun and the
Moon, and other celestial creatures, the which now the inahbitants that are
there do not use, for that they are reformed to yt Christian faith and to all
kind of civility: I know well that in times paste there have been some yt have
not regarded it.

We read of Caius Caligula, an Emperor of Rome, C. Caligula Emperor of Rome.
though he dispraised and hated yt divine power, yet nevertheless he quaked
and trembled for fear, when yt there appeared any show or toke^ of gods wrath.
But before yt this Island of which we speak, was brought to subjection under
the Spaniards, (as I have been informed of those that were at the conquest) the
wild men killed above ten thousand Christians, until yt the Spaniards had
fortified the^ selves in certain places: after which time they killed a great
multitude of ye inhabitants, ye rest yt were left they led captive into diverse
countries, and made them slaves. And after this sort they have used them of ye
Islands of Cuba, of S. John Iamaique, the holy cross, and the Canibals, with
many other Islands and maine countries. For at the first the Spaniards and
Portingals, for that they would have the better dominion and rule, learned to
live after their manner, alluring them by gifts and fair words, always keeping
them in their favor, until that in process of time they saw how that they were
able to mate and overcome them, then they began to reuolte from their former
use, taking this rude people and using them like slaves, they provoked them to
labor the earth, otherwise they had never come to the perfection of their
enterprise. The mightiest kings of this country, are in Casco, Casco, and
Apina rich and plentiful Islands.
and Apina, rich and famous Islands, as well for the Gold and Silver that there
is found, as for the fruitfulness of the land. The inahbitants wear nothing
but Gold about them, as large bouckles of two or three pound weight ye piece,
hanging at their ears, the weight whereof makes their ears to hang half a
foot long, the which causes the Spaniards, to call them great ears. This
Island is very rich in Mines of Gold, The fruitfulness of this Island named
Noua Espania.
as are many others of that country, for there are found few or none but
either has Mines of Gold or Silver. Furthermore, it does abound with horned
beasts, as Oxen, Kyne, Sheep, Goats and an infinite number of Hogs, also very
fair Horses, the which beasts for the most part are become wild as we have
showed of the maine land. As touching Corn and wine they have none but that
which is brought from other places, and therefore instead of bread, they eat
much Cassade, made of the meal of Roots, and in sted of wine, they have very
good and sweet drynks made of diverse fruits, as the Syder of Normandy. They
have an infinite number of good fish, of the which some are very strange, among
the which there is one named Manaty, the which is taken in the ryuers, and also
in the Sea, but the greatest store are in Ryuers. This fish is like to a Bucke
or Goats skin, being filled with oil or wine, having two feet on both sides
of the shoulders, with the which he swimmeth, and from the breast to the tail
deminisheth of greatness, Description of Manati a strange fish.
his head is like to the head of an Ox, having a slender face, the chyn full
and great, and very little eyes: this fish is ten foot broad and twenty foot
long, having a graye skin, heary like to an Ox hyde, so that with his skin
the people of the country make shows according to their manner: his feet are
all round, garnished each one with four long claws like to the feet of an
Oliphant. This fish is more disformed and misshapen, than any kind of fish in
that country. Notwithstanding very good to eat, having a taste more like to
vele, than fish. The inhabitans of that country do gather the grease of the
said fish, for that it is very good for their Goat skyns of the which they
make very good marokyns: the black slaves or Neigers, do anoint their bodies
there with to make them better disposed and their joints to be playable, as the
Africans do with oil of Olyue. Within the head of this fish are found
certain stones, of the which they make great store, Stones good for the colyke.
for yt they have proved them to be good against the colyke, be it in the
Raynes or in the bladder. The femals of this fish bring forth their young ones
quick, with out egg, as does ye Whale and the Grampyn, also she has.ij.
rothers like beasts on ye earth, with ye which they give suck to their young
ones. A Spaniard that had dwelled long time in this Island showed to me, yt a
gouerner of ye country did norish one in a cesterne, ye term of.30. years,
the which in process of time became so privy, yt she would almost suffer one to
lay his hand upon her. Diverse fair works made by the wild men with feathers.
The wyld men will take this fish hard by ye shore as she feeds upon ye
grass. I leave to speak of many byrds clad with diverse rich colored feathers,
with which they make tapissary, and figurs of me^, and women, beasts, birds and
other things, they trim them upon some lynnen clothe, and therewith they
garnish hats, caps and gounes, the which is very fair and pleasant to behold.
Of strange four footed beasts there are none found, but only those of which
we have spoken. Nevertheless there is found two kind of little beasts,
Hulias and Caris a kind of strange beasts.
as little as Coneys, the which they name Hulias, and Caris, good to eat. That
which I have said of this Island, I may in like manner speak of the Island of S.
James before named Iamaica, on the east side it has ye Island of S. Dominike.
There is a another fair Island named Bouriquan, S. James Island. S. John's Island.
in their country spech, but in the card Marius, it is named S. John's Island,
ye which on the East side has lying the Island of the holy cross, and other
little Islands of the which some are inhabited, the others are deserte. This
Island from the East to ye west contains about.52. leagues, of length.300.
degrees no minutes, and of latitude.18. degrees no mynutes. To be short, there
are many other Islands in those parts, the which because of the multitude I
omit. Also for that I could have no particular knowledge of them, I will not
here forget, that in all these Islands there are found no ravening beasts no
more than in England, and in the I Will of Creta.

Of the Island of Cuba, and of Lucaiae, Cap. 72.
NOw there rests of all the Islands of Perou, to rehearse some secrets of the
Island of Cuba, The description of the I Will of Cuba.
and of certain others adiace^t, and yet to say the truth there can be little
more spoken than that which has been already said of ye Spanish Island. This
Island is more greater and larger than the others, for it is reckned from the
Promontarie that is on the East side, to the other that is on the west side
three hundredth leagues. And from the North to the South seventy leagues. As
touching the disposition of the air, there it is temperate, so that there is
no excess of heat, nor yet of cold. There are found rich mines of Gold and
silver, likewise other metals. On ye sea side are found fair rivers that
proceed from the high hills, the waters whereof are excellent, with great
quantity of good fish. Moreover before it was discovered, it was better
peopled with wyld men than any others, but at this day the Spaniards are lords
and masters. The myddest of this Island has two hundredth nintie degrees of
longitude, no minutes, and of latitude twenty degrees no minutes. There is a
hill hard by the Sea side that is all salt, A salt hill. Salt of the Earth.
more higher than that of Cipris, great number of trees of cotton, brasyll,
hornebeame, also salt of the earth proceeding out of a another mountain very
high and brackishe. And of this kind there is found in like manner in the
Island of Cipris, named of the Greeks, Oryctos, the which also is gotten in a
mountain hard by the Sea. Furthermore, there is found in this Island great
store of Azer, Vermilion, Alume and other things that are taken out of the
bowels of the Earth. A kind of Partriges.
As touching byrds and fowls of the Air, there is a kind of Partrige very
little, being of a red color, and also of diverse other colors, their flesh is
very delicate. The rusticall people of the mountains do nourish a number of
them in their houses, as we do here pullein, and many other things worthy to be
noted and written. First there is a valley that is in length three leagues
between two mountains, where as are found an infinite number of bowls of
stone, great and little, being naturally engendered in that place, although some
would judge them to be made artificially. Sometimes there is found some so
great, that four men would be combered to carry away one, the others are less,
and some so little that they exceed not the quantity of a little egg. A
wonderful lykor proceeding from a hill.

Bre a kind of lykor.


The second thing worthy to be noted is, that in the same Island there is a
mountain near to the riuage of the Sea, out of the which runs a licor like
to that which is made in the fortunate Islands named Bre as we have before
showed, the which runs down into the Sea. Quintus Curtius in his books
which he has made of the Iestes of Alexander ye great, shows that he being
come to a city named Memi, was desirous to see a great pit or cave, in the
which there was a fountain that rendered great quantity of gum very strong,
being used with other things, so that the author thinks for this only
reason the walls of Babylon to have been so strong, Why in times past the wales
of Babylon were so strong The Islands of Lucaia.
for that they have been made of such things, the which is not only found in
the Island of Cuba, but also in the country of Themistitan, and on the coast
of Florida. As touching the Islands of Lucaia, (being so named for that they are
many in number) they are northward of the Island of Cuba, and of S. Dominike,
they are more than.iiij. hundredth in number, all little ones and not inhabited,
unless it be the greatest that bears the name of all the others named
Lucaia. The inhabitants of this Island commonly go to traffic on the maine
land, and to other, Islands. They that inhabit there, as well men as women,
are whiter and more fairer than in any of those parties or countries. Seeing
that I am in talk with these Islands and of their riches, I will not forget
somewhat to speak of the riches of Potossi, the which takes his name of a
high mountain yt has in height a great league, and half a league compass.
The mountain of Potossy, very rich in Mines.
This mountain is marvelous rich, because of the great Mines of silver, tyn,
and brass which has been found almost at the top of the mountain, and this
Mine of Silver has been found so good that in one quintall of the Mine is found
half a quintall of pure Silver. The slaves do no other thing but work and
fetch Silver from the Mine, and they carry it to the principal and chief town
of that country, the which was edifyed at the bottom of the hill by the
Spaniards. Since this Mine was found out, all the countries, Islands and main
lands be Inhabited with certain wild men all naked as in other places of
America. Thus much as touching Perou, and of his Islands.

A description of Noua Espania, and of the great city of Themistitan edified
in the west Indies. Cap. 73.
FOr because that it is not possible for all men to see se^sibly all things
during his age, be it either because of the continual alteration and changing
of things that are here in this world, or because of ye long distance of places
and countries, God has given the mean to represent them not only by writing,
but also by picture by the industry and labor of those that have seen them. I
have seen set out by figure, many ancient, as those of Jason, of Acteon,
Eneas, Hercules, and many other things ye which we may daily see in their
proper form, without figure, as are many kynds of wild beasts. For this cause
I mind to set forth and rehearse unto you, ye great and large city of
Thimistitan, as nere as is possible, Themistitan.
being sure and certain yt few among you have seen it, neither can ye well go
and see it because of the long and dangerous navigations that it behooves ye to
make. Themistitan is a city edified in new Spain, the which takes his
beginning at the straight of Ariana, and ends on the north side at the river
of Canuca. In times past it was named Anauak, and since because it was
discovered and inhabited of Spaniardes, it has received the name of new
Spain. Among the which lands, the first inhabited was Iucathan, the which
has a point of land lying out into ye sea like unto the land of Florida,
notwithstanding that those which make the Cards Marius, have forgotten to make
the best, the which sets out their show or description. Now this Noua
Espania, on the East, West, and South side, is compassed with the west sea, and
on the North side to the new world, the which being inhabited, is seen beyond
in the same North, an other land not known of the Modernes, for the which I
will not stand therein. Themistitan, which is a strong City, great and very
rich in the country before named, is founded on a great Lake, the way that
goes to this City is not broader than the length of two spears, being so
named of him that laid the foundation, named Tenuth, son to the King
Iztacmixcoatz. This city has only two gates, the one to enter in, the other
for to come out at. And not far from the City is a bridge of wood, a ten
foot broad, the which was made for the increasing and diminishing of the
waters: for that Lake rises and falls like unto the Sea. And for the defense
of the city there is yet many others like in manner to Venice, edified in the
sea. That country is compassed with very high mountains, and the plain
country has in circuit.150. leagues, in the which is found.ij. lakes that
occupy a great part thereof, for because yt these.ij. lakes have of circuit.50.
leagues, of the which the one is fresh water, The opinion of two Laake.
in the which is many good small fish, and the other is salt water, the which
beside his bitterness is venomous, and therefore it can nourish no fish, the
which is against the opinion of those that thinck it to be but one Laake. The
plain is separated from the said Laakes by certain mountains, and at their
farthest part they are joined with a straight or narow land, by the which men
are conducted with barks and boats even into the City, the which is standing
on the salt water, and from thence to the main land on the causy side, it is
four leagues. And I cannot compare the greatness thereof better than to
Venise. A comparison of Themistitan.
For to enter into the said City there is four ways made of stones
artificially, whereas there are two cundits or fountains of ye greatness of
two paces, and of a man's height, from one of the which is conducted fresh water
into the City, ye which is of the height of five foot, and the water runs
a long even to the midst of the City, of the which they drink, and use it
in their nedeful business. The other Chanel they keep empty for this reason:
when yt they will ^lense that same wherein the fresh water is, they bring all
the filth of the City with the other to ye land, and because that the channels
pass by the bridges, and by the places whereas the salt water enters and
goes out, they conduct the said water by sweet and clean chanells the
height of a pace. Upon this Laake yt compasses the City, the Spaniards have
made many fair houses and places of pleasure, some upon little Rocks and
others upon pyles of wood. Moreover Themistitan, stands a.xx. degrees of
elevation above the line Equinoctial, and has.272. degrees of longitude.
Ferdinand of Cortes.
It was taken by strength, by Ferdinand of Cortes, being captain general for
the Emperor in those parts of the year of grace.1521. containing than.70000.
houses little and great. Mutuezuma.
The kings palaice which was named Mutuezuma, with those of the lords of ye
town, was fair, great and large. The Indians that then did inhabit this
City, had a custom to keep every five days the market in places thereto
appointed, their trade was feathers of byrds, How they use to trade.
with the which they made diverse and sundry things, as gounes fashioned after
their manner, Tapistry work, and other things. And to these sciences were the
oldest sort occupied. When they would go worship their great Idol, the which
was erected in the myddest of the City, like unto a theater, who when they had
taken any of their enemies in the war, did sacrifice them to their Idols, and
then eat them, holding this for a kind of religion. Furthermore, their trade
was beasts skynnes, of the which they made gounes, hose, and a kind of hoodes
for to keep them as well from the cold, as from stynging flies. The inhabitans
at this day, which before were cruel and vnhumaine, by succession of time have
so well changed their manners and conditions, that in stead of barbarous and
cruel, they are civil and gracious, in such sort that they have left all
their former naughty and wicked doings, the which they were wont to use: as in
killing one another, eating humayne flesh, to have company with the first
woman yt they met, without having regard either to kindred or degree, with
other like vices and imperfections. Their houses are sumptuously builded. Among
other things there is a fair palaice where as the Armor of ye City is kept:
the streates and places of this City are so straight, that from one gate one
may see to the other without any let. To be short, this city at this present
is so fortified and compassed with strong walls and rampers, like in form and
fashion to ours in Europe, and it is one of the greatest, fairest and rychest
that is in all the provinces of ye west Indies, taking from ye straight of
Magellan, which is beyond the line.52. degrees, unto the last and furthest land
of Abrador, ye which holds.51. degrees of latitude on this side ye line on ye
North side.

Of Florida. Cap. 74.
Seeing that in writing this discourse we have made mention of this land called
Florida, although that in our return we approached not so near, considering
that our course lay not altogether so low, nevertheless, we sailed close by to
take an easterly wind. It seems to me not out of the way, to write thereof
some thing. Likewise of the land of Canada that is next to it toward ye North,
being only certain mountains between both. Therefore keeping our course of
the height of new Spain, on ye right hand to attain to Europe, not so sone
nor so right a course as we wished to have gone, we found the sea favorable
enough. But as by chance I put out my head for to behold it, I saw it as
far as I could extend my sight, all covered with herbs and flowers, the
which gave me occasion to think that we were nere to ye land, considering also
yt in other places of ye sea I had not so much seen, notwithstanding I found
my self incontinently frustrate of my opinion, The Sea like a marishe.
knowing that they proceeded of ye sea, so ye we saw the sea strawed with those
herbs for ye space of.20. days. The sea in ye part has small store of fish,
for th^se places seem rather to be marshes, than otherwise. A star with a
tail.
Shortly after appeared another sign, and forshewing of a star, with a long
tail from ye East, into the North, the which forshewings, I leave to the
judgment of Astronomers and to the experience of those that have knowledge
therein. After this which was worse, we were troubled with a contrary wind, the
term of nine days, even to the height of our Florida. The lying of Florida.
That place is a point of land entering into the full Sea, a hundredth leagues,
being.25. leagues a shelfe or shallow.25. degrees and a half on this side the
line, and a hundredth leagues from Caape de Baxa. Therefore this great land of
Florida is very dangerous for those that sail of the coast of Cataia,
Canibalu, Panuca, and Themistitan: for to sight a far of, it would be judged
an Island lying out in ye main Sea. Furthermore this place is dangerous because
of the running waters, wyndes and tempests that are in that coast commonly. As
touching the main land of Florida, it has on the east side the province of
Chicoma, and the Islands named Bahana and Lucaia. On the west side lies noua
Espania, the which divides in the land that is named Anauae, of the which we
have before showed. The best and most fruitfullest countries that are in
Florida, is Panuae, yt which bordereth Noua Espania. The people of the country
are naturally cruel and mighty men, being all Idolaters, who when that they
have need either of water or sun, for their gardens and roots, with the
which they daily live, then they will fall down before their Idols, that are
ma^^ to the similitude of men or of beasts. Besides this these people are more
and better practiced in the feats of war than the people of Perou. When they
go to the wars, they bear their king on four men's shoulders in a beasts
skin, and they that bear him, are clad and garnished with rich feathers.
And when that they come to hand strokes, they set their king in the midst of
them, clad with fine skins, and he will never depart from thence, until the
battle be ended: Also if that they feel them selves to be the weaker sort,
and that their king begins to flee, they will not fail to kill him, the
which order the Persians and other barbarous nations in the East part observe
at this day: their weapons of defense are bows and arrows made of wood
enuenomed, the which instead of Iron heads are garnished at the end with
bones of fishes or wild beasts, the which is very sharp. Some of them will
eat their enemies, as the Americanes will do, of whom we have spoken. And
although this people as we have before showed are Idolaters, nevertheless they
believe the soul to be immortal. Also that there is a place appointed for the
wicked, the which is a very cold land, and that the Gods permit that the
sins of the wicked shall be punished. Also they believe, that there is an
infinite number of people in the skies, and as many under the earth with many
other folies, the which may better be compared to the transformations of Ouide,
than to any other thing. Furthermore, they believe these things to be true, as
Turks and Arabians do that which is written in their Alcoran. This country
toward the sea is not very fruitful, the people are very rusticall more than
those of Perou, or of America, for that they are traded with strangers. This
land was named Florida, Why Florida was so named
in the year 1512. by those that first did discover it: for because that by the
sea side it was flourishing with green trees, and with an infinite number of
^^cures of diverse and sundry colors. Between this Florida, and the river of
Palm, are to be seen diverse kinds of monstrous and strange beasts, A wild
bull.
among which there is a kind of great Bulls, having horns a foot long, and on
the back a croupe like to a Camel, the hear long all about the body, having
a dunnish color. Of these beasts there were once two, that were brought
quick into Spain, of one of the which I saw the skin, and not otherwise, and
they lived there but a short time. This beast (as it is said) is perpetual
enemy to the horse, and can not abide him to be by him. Caape of Baxe.
In Florida, toward the Caape of Baxe, there are certain little rivers, where
as the wild men gather oisters, Oisters having pearls.
that have pearls. Now seeing that we are come to the gathering of oysters, I
will not forget by what means they get out these pearls, as well in the east
Indians, as in the West. Ye must note that every chief or head householder,
having a great number of slaves, knowing not to what labor to set them about
they send them to-gather oysters, of the which they gather baskets full for
their masters, putting them into certain great vessels, which being half full
of water, is an occasion, that the oysters being conserved therein certain
days do open, and the water clensing them, leaves these stones or perles
within these vessels. And to get them out they first take the oisters out of
the vessel, and then they let the water out by a hole, under the which they
lay a linen cloth, least that with the water the stones or pearls that might
be, should run out. As touching the figure of these Oysters, they differ much
from ours, as well in color as in shell, having each of them certain little
holes, which would be thought to have been made artificially, in the which holes
are these pearls. Thus much thought I good to speak of by the way, the like
also are found at Perou, and certain other stones in good number: but the
finest are found in the River of Palm, and in the river of Panuco, the which
are distant the one from the other.32. leagues, but the christians have not
liberty to get them, because that the wild men of that country, are not yet
converted to our christian faith.

Now therefore coasting Florida on the left hand, the wind being to us
contrary, we sailed very near to Canada, and to an other country that is
called Baccalos, which was against our wills, and to our great displeasure,
because of the extreme cold that molested us the term of eightene days, The
country of Baccalos.
although that this la^d of Baccalos enters far into the full sea in form
of a point welnigh two hundredth leagues on the north side distant from the line
only forty eight degrees. The point of Baccales.

Baccales, a fish.


This point was named Baccales, because of a certain fish that is found
thereabout in the sea, which they name Baccales, between which and the Cape
Delgado, there is diverse Ila^ds peopled, very dangerous to aboard, because of
the multitude of rocks that compass the said Islands, and they are called the
Islands of Cortes. The Islands of Cortes.
Some judge them not to be Islands but main land, hangyng upon the point of
Baccalles. These places were first discovered by an Englishman named Sebastian
Babat, A voyage by Sebastian Babat, Englishman.
who informed King Henry the seventh, that by that way he would sail into the
country of Catia, toward the North, and that by this means he would find
spices and other things as well as the King of Portingal did in the east
Indies: Nevertheless his mind was to go to Perou, and America, for to people
that cuntrie with Englismen, but his purpose took no effect. True it is yt he
landed toward the coast of Ireland in ye north.300. me^ where as because of the
extreme cold the most part of his men dyed, though it were in the month of
July. And since James Quartier a Briton made thither two voyages, as he him
self showed me in the year.1530. and.1535.

Of the land of Canada, before named Baccalos, being discovered in our time,
and how the inhabitants live. Ca. 75.
FOr because that this country lying in the North was discovered in our
time, A voyage made by Sebastia^ Babat and James Quartier into Canada.
first by Sebastian Babat an Englisheman, and then by James Quartier a Briton,
being well seen in navigations, who took upon him the voyage at the
commandment of the king of France, Francisce the first, I think it good
therefore somewhat to write, the which seems to me most worthy to be noted:
although that according to the order of our voyage homewardes, it ought to go
before the next Chapter. Moreover, that which moves me so to do, is that I
have not seen any that has treated otherwise, although to my judgment the
thing does merit it, and that I have surely learned it of the said James
Quartier. How the land of Canade lies.
This land being almost under the Pole artike, is joined toward the Weast to
Florida, and to the Islands of Perou, and since is coasted by the west toward
Baccalles, of which we have spoken. The which place I think be the same, that
those which lately have discovered and named Canada, as it happens many times
that some will give name to that which is out of others knowledge, the which
toward the east extends to the sea called Hyperbores, Caape de Loraine, or
the land of Brito^s
and on the other side to a main land called Campestra de Berga, to the
Southeast joining to this country. There is a Caape called Loraine, otherwise
by them that discovered it, the land of Britons, being nere to new found
land, having not in distance above.x. or.xij leagues between them. This new
found land bordreth this hie la^d, the which we have named Caape Loraine, and
toward the northeast between both lies an Island, The lying of Caape de
Loraine.
which has in compass about four leagues. The said la^d begins even at
the said Caape toward the Southe, and extends east northeast, and west
Southwest, the most part thereof extending to the land of Florida, lying like
an half circle, drawing toward Themistitan. Now to return to Caape Loraine,
of the which we have spoken, it lies to the land toward the north, which is
ranged with the sea Meditarium, as Italy between the sea Adriatike, and the
sea Ligustike. And from the said Caape going toward the West, and west
southwest, the shore is to be seen about two hundredth leagues, and all sandy
and silte, without any port or haven. This region is inhabited with many people
of an indifferent great stature, very malicious, having most commonly their
faces disfigured and covered with vizards of red and blew, which colors they
have of certain fruits: This land was discovered by James Quartier a Bryton,
borne at S. Maloes, in the year.1535. At that time besides the number of
ships that he had, for the performaunce of his voyage, with certain barks,
some with.60. and 80. men a piece, he fought out this unknown country, until
he came to a great and broad river, to the which they gave a name, in the
which is found very good fish, chiefly Salmons, and that great plenty: then
they traded into so many places adiace^t with knives, hatchets, hooks and
lines to fish with, and such like, for Hearts skins and skins of other
wild beasts, whereof there is great store. The wild men of the country gave
them good entertainment, showing them selves well affectioned toward them,
and glad of their coming, knowledge and amity, and with their practice in
bargainyng with them. After this, they passing further, found other people,
contrary to the first, as well in their language, as in their manner of living,
Chelogua, a river.
the which people said that they came from the great river Chelogua, for to
make war against their neighbors, which afterward was known of a truth by
James Quartier, who took one of their skiffes with seven men, whereof he
reserved twain, which he brought into France, and at his second voyage did
carry them back again, and also they returned again, and were made
Christians, and ended their lives in France. Moreover the said Quartier
could not learn the manner of living of the first Barbariens, neither what
commodity is in their country and region, because that it was not before
frequented nor traded.

Of an other country of Canada. Cap. 76.
AS touching the other part of this Region of Canada, An other region of Canada
found out by Quartier.

The amiable manners of these Canadiens.


where as remain and inhabit the last wild men: It has been since discovered
beyond the said river. of Chelogua, being more tha^ three or four hundredth
leagues by the said Quartier, whereas he found the country well peopled, as
well in his second as first Navigations: the people of that country is as
obediente, and as amiable as is possible, and as familiar as though that
always they had been brought up together without any sign of ill will, or
any other rigor. And there the said Quartier made a certain hold or castle
for to winter him and his, likewise for to defend them against the cold
weather, the which there is very rigorous. He was very well entertained,
considering the time and seson: for the inhabitants brought them daily boats
full of fish, as Eeles, Lampreys and others: like wise flesh and venison,
whereof there is great plenty. Also they are great hunters, be it either summer
or winter with snares and otherwise: they use a kind of rackets set
together, with cords of two foot and a half of length, and one foot broad,
they were them on their feet in the frost and in the snow, A kind of rackets.
chiefly when they go to hunt wild beasts, to ye end that in following of their
chase their feet sink not into the snow. These people ar clad with ye skins of
these wild beasts, being corried and trimmed according to their manner. The use
of these rackets.
Now to take these beasts they will assemble.x. or.xij. together, being weponed
with iauelins or boar spears yt are xv. or.xvj. foot long, and garnished at
the end with the horn of some heart, or tooth of some other wild beast, the
head whereof is at least a foot long, the which they use in stead of iron, and
Bows and Arrows, garnished with the same. Then they follow the footing of the
Dear, and other wild beasts in the Snow, How these Canadians do chase the
dear and other wild beasts.
the which is common all the year long: and after that they have found out
their train or footyng, they will plant their branches of Cedre which is
green there all the year long, the which they plant in manner of nets, and
there they will hide them being weaponed as before is showed, so that the dear
seeing the green boughs, draw thytherwarde, and then they come forth, and
cause the dear to quit and forsake that way, and enter into the deep snowes
even unto the belly, where as they can not easily run nor go: and so by this
means they are taken and killed, and opened in the fields, and so being wrapped
in his skin, they draw him to their houses. And after this sort they brought
them to the castle or hold that James Quartier did keep both flesh and skin,
selling them for no other reco^pe^se than knives hatchets, and other iron
tools. Also I will not let pass one thing very singular, that is, when that
these people are sick either of an ague, or any other inward disease, they
take the leaves of a certain tree, which is like to a Cedre, with the which
they make a water that they drink, so that there is no disease, be it never so
festred in a man's body, but that this drink will heal within.xxiiij. hours,
which also Christians have tried, and have brought the plants thereof into this
country.

What religion these Canadians use with their living, and how they resist the
cold. Ca. 77.
THese people in their living and governing do not far differ from the law
of Nature, How these Canadians marry.
their matrimony is, that a man may have two or three wives without any other
solemnity, as the Americans, of which we have already spoken. Of their
Religion, they keep no mean, nor ceremony in worshyppyng or praying to God,
saving that they contemplate, the new Moon, Osannaha.
called in their language Osannaha, saying that Andouagny does so call it, and
then causes it to spread by little and little. Moreover, they do believe, that
there is a Creator more greater than the Sun or the Moon, and that has all
under his power, and it is he whom they call Andouagny, and yet they neither
know what way to invoke nor call upon, to pray to him, nor to worship him,
although that in some parts of Canada, they worship Idols, Andouagny, a God of
the Canadians.
and will have them sometimes in their lodgings above forty or fifty, the
which was showed me of a truth by a Portingall pylote, the which did on a time
visit two or three villages or hamlettes with the lodgyngs of the inhabitants.
They believe that the soul is immortal, The opinion of the Canadia^s as
touching the immortality of the soul.
and that if a man do evil, when he is dead, a byrd bears away his soul:
Contrariwise, if that they do well, the soul goes into a place condecorate
with goodly fair trees and flowers, where as there are birds singing
melodiously: of the which the lord of the country of Canada did inform us,
Donacoua Aguanna, king of the Canadians.
being named Donacoua Aguanna, who dyed in France a good Christian, and spoke
good french, for he had been kept there four years. And for because that I
will not be tedious in this history of these Canadians, ye shall note that
these people universally are afflicted with continual cold, The extreme cold
of the countr^y of Canada.
because of the absence of the Sun, as ye may well understand, they inhabit
in certain villages and hamlettes, made like to half a circle, in greatness
twenty or thirty paces, and ten of breadth, covered with barks of trees, and
some with reeds. And God knows whether that the cold does grieve them, The
Canadians lodgings.
having such ill lodgings, ill covered, and worse holden up, so that many
times the pillars with that which vpholdeth the house, Why the people toward
the north pole are more courageous and hardy than those toward the south
for the weight of the snow that most commonly lies upon the house falls
down: yet notwithstanding this extreme cold, they are mighty strong and
unreasonable great trauailers. Also all the people that dwell North are the
like some more and some less, even as those that dwell toward the
Equinoctial and south pole, are contrary, because yt the vehement heat of the
air draws out the natural heat, fo that they are only hot without and cold
within: the others have their natural heat enclosed, and provoked to keep
in, because of ye outward cold, A sea that is frosen.
which makes them strong, stout and valiant: for the force and faculty of
all the parts of the body, depends of this natural heat. The sea that is
about this country is frosen, because that it is so far from the Sun, which
from the east to the west, passes through the midst of the world: And the
greater that the natural heat is, the better is a ma^s appetite, and the
better does he brook and digest meats: so that these people toward the north
eat more and have a better stomach than those in other parts: Oftentimes
there is famine in Canada and why.
for the which cause oftentimes there is in Canada Famine: also for that their
fruits, roots, and other things, wherewith they sustain them, is frosen the
most part of the year, likewise their rivers. We have showed how that they
cover their houses with barks of trees: also they make boats to fish in, both
for the salt water and the fresh. Those of the land of Labrador their
neighbors, The country of Labrador found out by the Spaniards.
the which land was discovered by the Spanyardes, thinking that by this coast
they might find a way more nearer to sail to Moluques, whereas spices are in
like manner subject to these coldes, and they cover their lodgyngs with the
skynnes of fishes and of wild beasts, as also do other Canadians. Furthermore
the said Canadians live together in common as do the Americanes, How they
labor the earth
and they labor and work each one that which he can do. Some make pots of
earth, others platters, dyshes, spoones, and other things of wood, others
bows and arrows, baskets, panniers and other apparel of the skins that
they do use to wear to cover them from the cold. The women they labor the
earth, and turn it with certain instruments of stones made long: and they
sow grain, specially Myll as great as peason, Myll.
and of diverse colors, the which they plant as we do Melons and gourdes, the
stalk grows like to Sugar Canes, bearing three or four ears, of which
there is always one more great than the other, in manner like to our
Artichokes. They plant also flat Beans, White beans.
as white as snow the which are very good, there are of that kind both in
America, and in Perou. Cucumbers and how they use them.,
They have also good plenty of Cucumbers, the which the eat roasted in the
imbers as we do Pears and Wardens. Furthermore there is a little sede very
small like to Marioram seed, which brings forth an herb somewhat great. This
herb is maruellously esteemed: also they dry it in the Sun, A kind of
herb.
after that they have gathered a great quantity, and customably they ha^g it
about their neck, being wrapped in leather with a kind of thorn, having a
hole in one end, where as they put an end of this herb, The use of this herb
in parfume.
being this dried, which after that they have rubbed it a little between their
hands, they put it to the fire, and so receive the smoke by the other end of ye
horn into their mouths and they take thereof in such quantity, that it comes
forth both at the nose, and at the eyes. And after that sort they parfume them
all hours in the day: The people of America, do parfume them after an other
manner, as we have before showed.

Of these Canadians apparel, how they wear their hair, and how their treat
their children. Cap. 78.
THese Canadians having much more civility tha^ ye inhabitants of America, The
Canadians clothing.
know the mean how to cover and cloth themselves in beasts skins with their
hair being trimmed after their manner, whereof we have here before spoken,
peradventure being constrained because of the extreme cold, and not otherwise,
which occasion being not showed to others that inhabit America, causes them
to remain naked without any shame one of an other. And yet the men of Canada,
are not altogether clad, but only wrapped in these rough and heary skins like
to an apron for to cover the shamfast parts of nature, brynging it betwixt
their legs, and buttoned with buttons, on both the thighs, and the^ they gird
them with a broad girdle, which covers all their body, and they have their
arms and legs bare, saving that upon this they wear a long cloak with furred
skins, sowed so well together, as if some master furrier or skinner of our
country had thereto set his hand. Their clokes are made of Badgers skins
Bears skins, Marterns, Panthers, Foxes, Hares, Ratts, and Coneys, and other
skins corryed after their manner with hair and al: which to my judgment has
caused this argument, that some think yt the wild men ar all hearie. The
ancient Galls in the time of Hercules were like to wild people.
Some writers have set out that Hercules of Lybia, coming into France, found
the people living almost like to the wild men that are as well in the east
Indies, as in America, without any civility, and the me^ went almost al naked.
Others were clad with beasts skins of diverse colors. Such was the state and
condition of the first human kind, being at the first rude and altogether
out of frame, until yt by succession of time necessity has constrained me^
to inue^t many things for ye preservation and maintenance of their life. Well
now the poor wild men wonder at our apparel, of what and how it is made,
demaundyng what trees hear such things? as was demanded of me in America,
thinking that wool did grow on trees, as does their cotton: The use whereof
was long time unknown: And as some writers do affirm, The use of wool, and
by whom it was invented.
the first use thereof came from the Athenians, and by them it was first put
in ure: others have attributed it to Pallas, for because that wool was used
before that Athens was builded. For this cause the Athenians have greatly
honored and worshipped the goddess Pallas, for that they have received of her
this great benefit. And by this may be known that the said Athenians and
other people of Grecia, do clothe them selves with skins like to these
Canadians, and to the similitude of our first parents Adam and Eve, as
witnesses Saint Hierom, leaving an example to all his posterity for to use
the like, and not to go naked. For the which thing we can not give sufficient
praise and thanks to God, the which of his providence far above all other
parts of the world, has showed favor to our Europe. Now there rests to
show how they wear their hair, the which is otherwise than the Americanes
use. How these Canadiens wear their hair.
These people as well men as women have their hair black and very long: and
they have this difference, that the men have their hair trussed on their
heads like a horse tail, with certain pinnes of woodde, that keeps it
trussed, having besides to cover their heads a Tygres skin, or of a Bear, or
some other wild beast: so that to see them attired after this sort, ye would
judge them to be some stage players: for that they lohe more like to the
picture of Hercules, that the ancient Romans were wont to make for their
recreation and pleasure, and as he is set out now a days, than like any other
thing: Others there are that cover their heads, and girde their bodies with
marten sables, being so named by the name of the religion that is used in those
parts, where as this beast frequenteth, the which Furs we esteem very
precious and rich, because they are rare and scant, and therefore these skins
with us are for princes and great lords to wear, for they are very scant. The
Canadians have no beards no more than those of Bresseill, for they shave it of
as soon as it buddeth. The clothyng that the wives of Canada use to wear.
As touching the women, they are clad with Bucke skins, being trimmed with
the hair after their manner: and being therewith wrapped or covered they girde
or bind them selves with a girdell, that goes three or four times about,
having always one arm and one pap or breast out of the skin at liberty the
which skin covers one of their shoulders, coming cross their bodies like a
pilgrims scrippe. Moreover these women of Canada, wear hose of tawed lether,
being well made after their manner, and painted or colored with certain herbs
or fruits after their manner, their shoes are after the same sort. They
observe matrimony faithfully, How the Canadians marry
eschuing adultery, and hating it above all things. True it is, that these men
have.iij. or.iiij. wives, as we have before showed: the King of that country
may have as many wives as he will, they name him Agahanna: Agahanna.
the maide^s of that cuntry are not hated because they have showed pleasure to
young men before that they have been married (as they do in America, and therefore
they have certain houses in their villages, where as the men and women mete,
being separated from the young men and maidens. Women that are widows do never
marie again, after the death of their husbands, but live in sorrow the rest of
their life, and have their face all blacked with the dust of coals mingled
with train oil, with their hair hanging al about their face, and not trussed
up behind, as ye others use: and after this sort they go even to their death.
How they use their children.
As touching the usage of their young children, they wrap them in.iiij. or.v.
marterne skins being sowed together, and then they have a certain holow thing
of wood which comes between their legs without hurting the^ in which the
child makes water, and fileth, so that he never fileth nor touches his body,
nor yet the skins that he is wrapped in. And this thing or gutter that is
between their legs, is made of some tender and thin bark of a tree. If this
people were nearer Turkey, I would think they had learned this of the Turks, A
superstition used by the Turks.
or else that they had taught it them. I will neither say nor judge, that
these wild men think it to be sin, that their children should weat them with
their urine, as the superstitious nation of the Turks do, but rather for a
civility that they have above others. And by this may be known how much these
poor brutish people do excel others in honesty. They plant or set a planke
of wood for the child because of the inferior extremity pointed into the
earth, and the child shall stand or lie upright to sleep with his head
hanging down.

How these people make war. Cap. 79.
AS these people seem almost to have like manners and usage, as other barbarous
people have: The Canadia^s are warlike people.

Toutaniens enemies to the Canadians.


also there is no nation more prompt and ready to make war one with a another
tha^ they are, and that use their feats of war most likest unto them, only
certain things excepted. The Toutaniens, the Guadelphes, and Chicorins, make
war commonly against the Canadians, Of Ochelagua and Seguana.
and other strange people that descend from the great river of Ochelagua and
Saguena, which Rivers are very fair and great, bearing very good fish, and
that great plenty. Also by these rivers ye may enter above three hundredth
leagues into the country, and also into the land of their enemies with small
boats, because of the rocks. And the old people of the country say, How
they prepare them to make war.
that they which were minded to follow these two rivers, they should in a few
moons (for so they do reckon) find diverse kinds of people, and abundance of
gold and silver: besides this, these two Rivers being separated the one from
the other, they mete and join together in one place, and being thus together
they enter far into new Spain, for they border one another as France does
and Italy. And therefore when that they have war in Canada, their great
Agahanna, which is as much to say, their King or Lord does command all other
Lords under his authority, for every village has his superior, that they make
them ready to come before him in their best array, with men, victuals and
munitions of war, as their custom and manner is to do: and then every one
will make them selves ready to obey their lords commandment: and so they
will come together on the water with their little barks and skiffes, made of
the barks of trees, as they do in America, These Canadiens use feats and
policy in their war.
and in other places. Then the assembly being made, they go to seek their
ennimies: and when they know that they shall mete them, they put them selves in
array to give the onset, in as good order as is possible, with many feats and
policies, according to their custom. If that they tarry at home for their
enemies, they fortify their lodgings with certain pieces of wood, fagots and
branches, being daubed or smeared with the grease of a Seawoulf, or with some
other poison, to the end that they may poison their enemies, if that they come
near, the which they set on fire, from the which proceeds such a thick
black and dangerous smoke to smell on, because of the extreme stincke, that it
kills those that smell it, and besides this it so blinds their enemies,
that they cannot see one another. And they use such a policy with this smoke,
Another policy
that what wind so ever blows, they will cause it to fly toward their
enemies. Likewise they use to make fishes of the leaves of certain trees and
of herbs, the which being dried in the Sun, they mingle amongste these
fagots and branches, then they set fire thereon, when that they see their
enemies coming a far of. After this sorts they did defend themselves
against the first Christians that discovered their land, doing their good
wills with certain of the foresaid grease to set fire on their ships: but
they were informed of this enterprise, and therefore they gave such order that
the Canadians were prevented. Nevertheless as I was informed, these poor
wild men had not conspired this enterprise, but justly and in a good quarrel,
considering the wrong, that they had first received of others. For our men
being descended a land some young men among them for their pleasure, most
wicked and foolish, using themselves more lyker Tyrants than Christians, did
cut of both Arms and Legs of some of these poor people, because that they
would prove whether their swords would cut well or no: And yet the poor
people received them gently. And for this occasion they have not permitted
since any Christian there to aborde nor set foot on land, neither yet to
trade or traffic as by experience has been known. Now to our purpose: these
Canadians set forward in the war four and four, How these Canadians march
in the war.
and when they are ready to join battle, they make a great noise with
exclamations and other fantasies, even like to the Amazones, of which we have
spoken, for to give fear and dread to their enemies, they carry many
standards made of branches, being decked with Penons and Swans feathers. A
kind of Drums that they use.
Their drums are of certain skins being borne of two men, and one comes
behind and lays on with two sticks, as hard as he can, their flutes are
made of the shanke bones of a bucke, or some other wild beast. And after this
sort the Canadians fight, How they use to fight.
with Bows and Arrows, round Clubs of woodde, four square Staves, Lances,
Morispikes, and others, the which are headed with bones instead of Iro^ and
steel. They use also targets, and some of them use to have and wear a coyfe
made of a thick Bears skin for the defense of their heads, How our elders
in times past used to fight.
ye shall note that the elders in times past used as the wild men do to fight
with their fistes, spurn with their fete, to bite with their teeth and to pull
one another by the hair with such like. And since they used stones in their
fight, the which they threw one at another, Heroditus.
as it appears in the holy Bible. Furthermore Heroditus, in his first book
speaking of certain people, Virgins used to fight one with another at the
feasts of the Goddess Minerua.

Diodorus. The Ancient custom of the men of Thebes and Lacedaemonians in
fighting.


that fought with Staves and Clubs, says that the Virgins of that country had
a custom to fight every year with stones and Staves one against the other, in
honor of the Goddess Minerua, on that day that was celebrated to her. Also
Diodorus in his first book says, that clubs and Lyo^s skins were good for
Hercules to fight with, for before that time other Armors was not used. Who so
ever will read Plutarchus, Justinius and other Authors, shall find that the
Ancient Romans did fight naked: the men of Thebes and the Lacedaemonians, did
revenge themselves of their enemies with Staves and clubs of wood. And ye
shall note that the people were then as hardy as they are at this day, and yet
they were naked, having no more clothing tha^ the Canadians have of their
skins, and they are also destitute and know not the feats and policies of
war, with the which these Canadians can shifte and help themselves. Well
these people of Canada, How these Canadians treat their enemies.
do not with their enemies as the Americans do, the which eat them (but that
which is much more tolerable) but if that they take any of their enemies or
otherwise remayn victors, they pull the skin quite over their ears and then
dry it, and so they carry it into their country, showing it with great
glory to their wives, friends and old people, which for age cannot go to the
wars in sign of victory. To conclude, they are not so prone to make war,
as those people of Perou and Bressill, peradventure because of the difficulty
that the frost and snow causes, with inconveniences that they have in those
parts.

Of Mines, precious Stones, and other secrets that are found in Canada. Cap.
80.
THe land and country of Canada, The goodness of the country of Canada.
is fair and under a good clymate, and very good of it self, excepting the
vntemperatnesse of the air, the which does hurt it as ye may easily
conjecture, it bears many trees and fruits, the which we know not with us.
Among the which there is one tree of the greatness and like to one of our
great nut trees that we have, the which has remained a great time
unprofitable and not known, until such time that one by chance cut him,
and then there ran forth a Juice, the which was found to have so good taste
and as pleasant, as the best wine in France: The juice of a tree having a
taste like good wine.
also it was so judged by our men that then tasted thereof, even the Captain
with certain Gentlemen of his company, and at that time they gathered of the
said Juice above five or six pots full. Therefore judge you if that the
Canadians since that time have not made great store thereof, seeing that it is
so good and excellent to drink. This tree in their language is called Cotton.
Cotton a tree. Natural vine roots in Canada.
Also there is another almost incredible to those that have not seen it. There
is found in Canada, many places and countries that bear very good vynes, even
of their own nature, growing out of the earth, without man's labor, bearing
great quantity of Grapes, fair great and good for to eat, but yet I know not
whether that the wine be good or no. It is not to be doubted, but that those
that first did discover this land, found these things very strange. In this
country is goodly hills and valeys, Stones like in color to a mine of gold.
and in these hye hills and mountains be found certain stones, being in
weight and color like a gold mine, but when it was tried, it was found good,
for it brake and turned into ashes. It is not impossible, but that in those
places may be found mines, as good and as perfect, as those of Perou, if that
the ground were undermined. As touching mines of Iron and Brass, Mines of
Iron, and mines of Brass.
there are store. Moreover there are stones made and fashioned like to a
Diamond, whereof there are some in the valleys, and others in the hills. They
which first found them, thought to have been made rich for ever, thinking
that they were perfect Diamonds, whereof they brought home a great number.
Diamonds of Canada. A Proverb.
And from thence came this proverb or common word, (it is a Dyamond of
Canada) it is like to the Diamonds of Calicut, and of the East Indies. Some
say that these Diamonds are a kind of fine Cristall, of the which I can give no
other conclusion, Opinions on the creation of Crystal.
but to say as Pliny says, that Cristall proceeds of Snow and water, that
is excedingly frosen, therefore in those places that are subject to frost and
snow, it may be made that some part thereof by process of time conuerteth,
and turns like to Cristall. Solon, Solon.
thinks this opinion to be false, that Cristall should not engender of
snow, for if it were so, it should be found only in cold places as in
Canada, and in other cold countries, but the experience shows the contrary
as appears in the Island of Cypris, Rhodes, and in many places of Egypt, and of
Graecia, as I my self have seen when I was there, that there was found, and is
found at this present great plenty of Cristall, by the which argument we may
judge, that Crystal comes not of frosen water, considering that in those
countries of which we speak, the heat is more vehement (yea without
comparison) than in Canada, which country as afflicted with continual cold.
Diodorus says, Diodorus Crystal of Canada.
that Crystal is engendered of pure water, and not frosen together by cold,
but rather dried by vehement heat. Notwithstanding the Cristall of Canada, is
more resplendent and more finer than that of Cypris and other places. In times
past the Emperors of Rome did greatly esteem fine Crystal, How greatly
Cristall was esteemed in times past of the Ancient Emperors of Rome, and to
what use it was put.
and therewith caused their vessels to be made wherein they did eat. Others
made therewith similitudes the which they kept closed in their closets and
treasuries. Likewise the Kings of Egypt, in those dares when the great City
of Thebes flourished, did beautify their sepulters with fine Crystal, the
which was brought from Armenia the great, and from the coaste of Siria, and of
Crystal was the pictures and images of Kings made to their likeness, for to
remain as they thought and to be in perpetual memory. By this ye may see how
much Cristall has been esteemed, and to what use it was employed. And now a
days it is bestowed to make cups and vessels, a thing greatly esteemed, if that
it were not so weak. To conclude, Jasper stones and Cassidonies.
in Canada is found great store of Jasper stone and Cassidonies.

Of Earthquakes and hayles to the which this country of Canada is very
subject. Cap. 81.
THis Region of Canada is greatly subject to earthquakes and to hayles, The
country of Canada is subject to earthquakes, and why.
and therefore these poor people being ignorant of natural things, yea much
more of heavenly things, are greatly afraid, although that these things are
common, they think that these things proceed from their Gods, for that they
have offended them. Notwithstanding, earthquakes comes not but of winds that
are shut in in certain crasses of the earth, the which by great power causes
it to shake, as in like manner it causes many times great trees to shake, yea
and blows them up by the roots, of the which Aristotle does show. As
touching hayle, Hayle rife in Canada.
it is not to be marvel though it be rife because of the vntemperatnesse and
inconstancy of the air, being very cold in this Region, because of the
distance of the Sun, the which comes no nearer than when it comes to our
Tropicke. And therefore the water that falls from the Firmament is always
frosen, because that the air is always cold, and therefore it is always
hail or snow. Now these Canadians when that they feel such incommodities, for
the affliction that they receive, they keep themselves in their houses with
certain domestical beasts that they nourish. And there they make their moan to
their Idols; whose form and likeness is not much unlike to the fabulouse
picture of Melusin of Lusignam, being half a Serpent and half a Woman: for
the head of their Idol with her hair represents according to their brutish
manner a woman. And the rest of their body is like to a Serpent. The which may
cause Poets to feign that Melusin was their Goddess. The earthquakes be
dangerous, although the case be evident. Earthquakes are dangerous. The opinion
of some Philosophers as touching earthquakes.
Seeing that we are come to speak of earthquakes, we will show thereof one
word, according to the opinion of natural Philosophers, with the
inconveniences that follow. Thales Milesius, one of the seven wise men of
Grecia, said that water was the beginning of al things, and that the earth
floting in ye midst of this water was in a continual quaking, sometimes
more, and sometimes less. Of this same opinion was Democrites, and fayde
furthermore, that the water under the earth being burst out by rain, could
not because of his excess quantity, be contained in the veins and compass
of the earth, but caused these earthquakes, and of this proceeds the Springs
and Fountaynes that we have. Anaxagoras said, it was fire the which coveting
(as it is his nature) to rise hye and to join with the fire Elementarie,
causes not only this quaking, but certain openings, goulfes, and such like
in the earth, as we may see in certa yne places, and confirmed his opinion in
that the earth burns in certain places. Anaximines does affirm the earth
it self to be the cause of this quaking, the which being opened because of
the excessive heat of the Sun, the air enters in great quantity, and
with vyolence, the which after that the earth is closed again, has no issue:
And by this means the belly of the earth begins to move, and this causes
the earthquake. What the wind ^^.
The which seems more to agree with reason and truth than the others,
according as we have following Aristotle, also that the wind is no other thing
than an air that rises rangingly. But leaving these opinions of natural
causes and of earthquakes the which may come by other reasons only by the
permission of the most highest unknown to us. The inconveniences that follow
earthquakes.
The inconueniens and mishaps, that come thereby, is ouerwhelming of Towns and
Cities as happened in Asia, of seven Cities in the time of Tiberius Caesar, and
of the Metropolitan City of Bithinie, during the reign of Co^stantinus. Many
also have been swallowed up by the earth, and others drowned with waters, as was
Elicea and Aura at the ports of Corinth. And for to be short, this earthquake
comes sometimes with such vehemence that beside the inconveniences before
showed, it makes Islands of main land, as it has done Sicily, with certain
places in Siria and others, it joins sometimes Islands to main land, as
Pliny says, to be happened of those of Doromscia Parua, in millites. In
Africa many playnes and valleys are at this day turned to lakes and rivers.
Seneca.
Also Seneca shows that a flock above five hundredth Sheep and other beasts
and fowls were on a time swallowed up and lost by an earthquake. And for this
reason the most part keep them by the Rivers sides for to eschew this
earthquake, being taught by experience and not by reason, that marish ground
and wet places, are not so subject to earthquakes, as the main and the
hyelande, and therefore this reason is very easy to those that understand the
occasion of the earthquakes before alleged. And for this cause the rich and
renomed temple of Diana in Ephesus, the which continued more than two hundredth
years, being so strongly edified that it meriteth to be in the number of one
of the spectacles of the world, Why the Temple of Diana was edified on a marish
ground.
was set on piles of wood in a marishe place, for because that it should not
be subject to Earthquakes, until such time as one Heluidius, or as some term
him Eratosthenes, being foolishly minded, for because that he would be known,
and that his memorial might be showed, did set it on fire, and consumed it to
ashes. Also for this cause the Romans had edified a Temple to Hercules, by the
river of Tyber, and there they did pray and offer sacrifices. Earthquakes in
Canada very violent.
Now this earthquake is so vehement and contagious in Canada, that within.v.
or.vj. leagues of their houses within the Country, there shall be found more
than two thousand trees overthrown to the earth, as well on hills as on valeys,
rocks overthrown one upon an other, the ground to sink and to be swalowed
up, and all this happens not, but of moving and stirring of the earth. The like
may happen to other Countries that are subject to earthquakes. Thus much
thought I good to speak of earthquakes, without straying far from our matter.

Of the Country called New found land. Cap. 82.
AFter that we were departed from the height of the gulf of Canada, it behooved
us to pass further, keeping our course right North, leaving the land of
Labrador, and the Islands called the Islands of Devils, The Islands of Devils.

Cape de Marco New found la^d a very cold country.


and the Cape of Marco distant from the line.56. degrees, we coasted on the
left hand the Country that is named New found land, the which is very
cold, and therefore those that did first find it out, made there no long
abiding, nor those neither that go thither oftentimes for fish. This new
found land is a region, that is one of the farthest parts of Canada, and in
the same land there is found a river, the which because of his breadth and
length seems to be almost a Sea, and it is named the river of the three
brethren, being distant from the Islands of Essores four hundredth leagues, and
from France nine hundredth: it separateth the Province of Canada from this New
found land. Some judge it to be a narow Sea, like that of Magellan, by the
which ye may enter from the West sea, to the South sea. Gemafrigius, although
he was expert in Mathematike, has herein failed and erred, for he makes us
believe, that this River of which we speak is a straight, the which is named
Septentrionall, and so has he set it out in his Mappa Mundi. If that which
he has written be true, in vain then have the Portingals been, and Spaniards
to seek a new straight distant from this, above.3000. leagues, for to enter
into the South sea, to go to the Islands of Moluques, where as the spices are.
This Country of New found land is inhabited with barbarous men, being clothed
in wild beasts skins, as are those of Canada: this people is very froward
and intractable, as our men can well testify that go thither every year a
fishing. They that dwell by the Sea, live with little kind of other meat than
fish, which they take in the sea, whereof they take a great multitude, Oil of
the fat of fish.
and chiefly sea Wolves, of which they eat the flesh, which is very good. With
the fat of this fish, they make a certain Oil, that after it is come to his
perfection, has a red color, which they drink at their tables as we do wine
or beer. Of the skin of this fish which is strong and thick, as if it were of
some wild beasts, they make clokes and garments according to their manner, which
is a meruellous thing, that in a element so moist as that is, which is moist of
it self, ca^ be norished a beast or fish, that has the skin hard and dry, as
beasts of the earth have. Likewise they have other fishes that have hard skins,
as ye Grampas and the Dog fish and others with strong shells, as Torterels,
Oysters, Muscles, and such like. Besides this, they have great plenty of other
good fish both small and great, of which they live daily. I marvel that the
Jews, Turks, The superstition of diverse nations in Leuant.
Greeks, and many other nations in the East eat no Dolphins nor of many other
kind of fishes, that are without shell, as well in the sea as in fresh waters,
which makes me to judge that these people are more wiser and better advised to
find the taste in meats more delicate, than whereas are Turks, Arabians, and
other superstitious people. In those parts there is also found Whales, (I mean
in ye hie sea, for such fish never comes toward the shore) to live with such
little fish. Notwithstanding, With what fish the Whale lives.
the fish that the Whale does most commonly eat, is no greater than a Carpe, a
thing almost incredible considering her greatness, the reason thereof as some
say, is for because yt the whale has but a little throat in comparison of ye
greatness of his body, and therefore he cannot devour a greater fish. The which
is a wonderful secret, and unknown as well to our elders as to us, although
that they have treated of fishes, the female has but one yo^g one at a time,
which she brings forth as a beast of ye earth without egg, and that which is
more wonderful, she gives suck to her yo^g one after yt she has brought it
forth. And therefore she has.ij. rothers under her belly under ye nauel, which
no other fish has, neither in the sea nor in fresh water, but only ye sea
Wolf, as witnesses Pliny. Pliny shows that a Whale is dangerous on the
sea to mete.
This whale is dangerous to meet on the sea, as the Bayones ca^ well tell by
experience, for they use to take them. To the purpose, ye shall note when that
we were in America, some Marchantes ship yt passed from one la^d to another for
marcha^dise was ouerthrown, and all yt was within her lost by a whale yt
touched her with her tail. In the same place whereas the Whale frequenteth, A
fish that is perpetual enemy to the Whale.
there is found most commonly a fish that is his mortal enemy, so that if
she meet the Whale, she will prick the whale under the belly, which is the
softest and tenderest place, with her tongue that cutteth like a Barbars raser,
so that he being thus hurt, cannot save himself, but that he dies as the
inhabitants of New found land do show, and the common fisher men. In this Sea
of New found land, there is a kind of fish that the people of the country
call Hehec, Hehec a fish.
having a bil like a Popengay, and other fishes with shell. There is found in
the same place great store of Dolphins, that show themselves many times above
water, leaping and floting; the which some judge to be foreshewings of tempests
and foul weather, from the part or coast that they come from, Foreshewings of
tempests. Isidorus.
as Pliny shows, and Isidorus in his Etymologies, which I have also known
by experience, the which is more surer than the witnessing either of Pliny or
of any other. Some have written that there is fine kinds of signs and forth
wings of te^pests and storms on the Sea, as Polybius being with Scipio
Aemilian in Africa. Furthermore, there are great plenty of great muscles: and
as for beasts of the earth, there are a great number very wild and
dangerous, Strange beasts.
as great Bears, the which are almost all white, and bisides beasts, there
are fowls of the air, of which the feathers are all white, the which I think
happens because of the extreme coldness of the Country: but these Bears
which I spoke of, are day and night about the houses of this people, for to
devour their Oil and Fish. As touching these Bears, although that we have
treated thereof at large in our Cosmographie of Leuant, yet notwithstanding we
will speak somewhat thereof by the way, how the inhabitants of the Country
take them, being afflicted with ye importunity that they make them. Therefore
they make certain pittes in the ground very deep, near to trees and rocks,
and then they cover them finely with leaves and branches, and this they use
where as are hiues or multitude of Honey Bees, which these Bears seek and
follow with all diligence, and thereof they are very desirous, not only so much
for to fill them therewith, but for to heal their eyes, the which they have
naturally blemished and all their brain: also that being stinged with these
Honey Bees, there falls from them a blood, specially from the head, whereby
their pain is eased, so that they are comforted thereby. There is also seen a
kind of great beasts like to Buffles, having horns very great, their skin is
grayishe, of which they make garments, and of many other beasts, whose skins
are very rich. This Country is full of hills and mountains, and very
barraine, as well for because of the vntemperatenesse of the air, as of the
condition of ye land smally inhabited, and ill tilled. As for birds, there are
not found such quantity as in America, or at Perou, nor yet so fair. There
are two kind of Egles, of which the one kind keeps the waters, and lives
only with fish, Two kinds of Egles.
chiefly with shell fish, the which she takes up, and flies into the air,
and so lets it fall, and breaks it, for to get the fish out: this Egle
makes her nest in great hie trees by the sea side. Also in this Country there
is many fair rivers, and a multitude of good fish. This people prepares for
nothing, but that which is needful to sustain nature, so that they are not
curious in meats, for they go not to seek any thing in far Countries, and
yet their nourishment is healthsome, and therefore they know not what sickness
means, but they live in peace and in continual health, so that they have no
occasion to conceive envy one against an other, because of their goods and
patrimony: for they are in a manner all equal in goods and riches, being in
one mutual contentation and equalness in poverty. Also they have no place
ordained for to minister justice, for because that among them, they do nothing
worthy of reprehension. They have no laws no more than the worthy Americanes
and other people, but only the law of nature. The people that dwell toward the
sea as I have showed live with fish, and others that are far from the sea,
are content with fruits of the earth that comes forth, the most part without
labor of man's hands: and after this sort lived the people in the first age
as Pliny witnesses: In his.xvj. book of his natural history.

Virgill Forestof Dodona.


also we see in our days how the earth brings forth fruit without labor.
Virgill shows that the Forest Dodana began to die because of his age, or else
for because that it could not satisfy the multitude of people that then did
multiply, and therefore they began to labor and till the earth, for to receive
the fruits thereof for the sustainme^t of their lives, so that they began
husba^dry. How the men of New found land do war.
Moreover these people make not war unless that their enemies come to seek
them, and then they put them al to defense like to the Canadians, their
instruments that give men courage to fight, are beasts skins spread in manner
of a circle, which serves them in stead of drums, with fluites of bones of
Dear like to the Canadians, if that they perceive their enemies a far of,
they will prepare to fight with their armors and weapons which are bows and
arrows. And before yt they enter into battle, their principal guide the
which they honor as a King, shall go the first, being armed with fair skins
and feathers, sitting on the shoulders of two mighty men, to the end that every
one should see him, and know him also to be ready to obey him, what so ever he
shall command. And when they obtain victory, he shall lack no honor, and so
they return joyful to their houses with their banners displayed, Strange
ba^ners.
which are branches of trees garnished with feathers of swannes wavering in the
air, and bearing the skin of the face of their enemies spread in little circles
in token of victory.

Of the Islands of Essores. Cap. 83.
THere rests now nothing of all our voyage, The Islands of Essores why it is
so named and feared of the Nauigantes.
but to speak of certain Islands that they call Essores, which we coasted on
the right hand, not without great danger of shipwreck. For.iij. or.iiij.
degrees beyond, and on this side there blows always a wind so cold and
contagious, that for this respect it is feared of the Pilots and Nauigants, as
the most dangerous place that is in the voyage, be it to go either to the
Indies or to America: by this ye may know yt the Sea in those parts are never
calm, but always rough and grown, as we see many times the wind to blow up
the dust into the air, the which we call a tempest or foul weather, which is
as well upon ye land as on the sea, for in the one and the other, it rises
like a point of fire that raises the water of a heigthe when it plaweth or
boileth, as I have many times seen. And therefore it seems that the wind has
a moving upward like a whirle wind of which I have spoken in an other place.
For this cause these Islands were so named, because of the great Essor that
causes this wind in the said Islands, Essores.
for Essores is as much to say, to dry or to wipe clean. These Islands are
distant from France, about.x. degrees and a half, and they are.ix. in number,
of which the best of them are inhabited with Christians Portingalles, The
fruitfulness of the Ila^ds of Essores.
whether as they did send many slaves for to labor the ground, the which by
their great pain and diligence they have made fruitful with all good fruits
necessary for man's sustenaunce, chiefly with wheat, the which grows there
so plentifully, that therewith all the land of Portingall is furnished. The
which they transport in their ships, with many good fruits, as well naturally
of the Country, as other where: but there is one amongst others, named Hyrcy,
Hyrcy.
the plant whereof was brought from the Indies, for there was none thereof found
before, even as in the Canaries. Likewise in our Europe, before they began to
labor the earth, to plant and to sow diverse kinds of fruits men were contented
only with that the earth brought forth of his nature, having then to drink
nothing but clear water, and for their clothing the barks and leaves of trees
with certain skins of beasts, as we have already showed. In the which we may
clearly see a wonderful providence of our God, the which has placed in the
sea great quantity of Islands both little and great, which does abide and
sustain the brunt of the waves of the sea, that goes not beyond their
compass or limits, neither hurts the inhabitaunts: for the Lord as the
Prophet says, has appointed his limits, the which he does not ouerpasse. Of
these Islands, some are inhabited that before were desert, and many are
forsaken, that in times past were inhabited and peopled, as we see has happened
to many Cities and Towns of the Empire of Greece, Trapezande and Egypt, such
is the ordinance of God, that things here in earth shall not be perdurable,
but subject to changing. The which being considered of our Cosmographers in
our days, they have added to the Tables of Ptolomeus new matters of our time,
for since ye time and knowledge that he has written, there has happened many
new things. Now these Islands of Essores; were desert, before that the
Portingalls knew them. Nevertheless they were full of woods of all sorts,
among the which is found a kind of Ceder named in their speech Orcantine,
Orcantine a kind of Ceder.
with the which they make fine karued works, as tables, cofers and many vessels
for the Sea. This wood has a very good smell, and will not rot neither be worm
eaten, be it dry or wette as other wood will. Of the which also Pliny speaks,
Plynie.
that in his time was found at Rome, in an old Sepulcher certain books of
Philosophy between two stones within a little chest made of Ceader wood, the
which had been under the ground above five hundredth years. A chest of Ceder.
Furthermore, I remember that I have read in times past, that Alexander the
great, passing into the Island of Tabroban, found a ship of Ceder wood on the
borders or coast of the sea, A ship of Ceder.
whereas it had remained above two hundredth years without rotting. And thereof
this proverb in Lattin came (Digna Cedro.) A Proverb.
These Ceders are not so hye neither of such a savor as those that are in the
straight of Magellan, although it be of the same highness as are these Islands
of Essores. Likewise there is found many other trees small and great, bearing
fair fruit, chiefly in the best and most notable Island, the which they have
named the Island of S. Michael, The Island of S. Michel.
and it is the best peopled. In this Island there is a very fair town lately
builded with a castle, where as the ships as well of Spain as Portingal, at
their return from the Indies do harbor, before that they sail home into
their countries. In one of these Islands there is a hill or mountain almost as
high as that of Teneryf, of which we have spoken, where as grows great plenty
of Pastel* of Sugar, and some wine, there is no ravening beasts to be found,
but there is certain wild Goats and many fowls in the woods. From the height
of these trees it behooved us to sail forward, until we came to the Caape
Finistra, Cape Fynistra.
on the coast of Spain, where as we landed very late for to recover victuals,
whereof we had great need for to sustain us, until that we arrived into
Britayn, which is a country under the power and obedience of France.

The Authors conclusion.
Here have I loving readers, showed the discourse of this may far and long
voyage to the Ponent, the which I have set forth as well as God has given me
grace, for that I would not be found unprofitable, neither that this my
enterprise should be in vain, peradventure not so eloquently, as your delicate
ears and ripe judgment does require. Therefore seeing that it has not been
the pleasure of God, that I should bestow my youth in learning, nor to obtain
so much perfection as others, but rather in navigations, I most heartily
beseech you to excuse me. In the mean time if that it please you to take in
good part this present work, the which I have gathered together being in the
tempests and other discommodities of the sea, you shall encourage me, after
that I have rested my self, and reconciled my spirits, which are as
scattered here and there, to set forth more fully and at large the lyeng and
distance of places, the which I have observed by eye as well in Leuant, The
Authors Cards, containing the lyeng and distances of places.
as in the Ponent, and in the South, the which I hope to show you by eye, and
represent by lively figures besides the Card Marins, the which to speak the
truth, without offense or hurt of any man, do err and fail in many things,
whether it be the fault of those that prick them or set them out, I leave you
to judge. Furthermore, as it is uneasy so is it also impossible for any one
justly to represent the most notable places their lyengs, and distances,
without having seen them, the which is the surest knowledge of all, as all
men may well judge and understand.

By this ye may see how long time we have been ignorant of many countries, as
well Islands as maine lands, beleeuyng only that, which our Elders had set
forth, until that since of late years men have ieoparded them selves in the
Navigations: So that now all our Hemispherie is discovered and found
inhabited: of the which Ptolomeus, and others knew not the half.

FINIS.
The Table of the Chapters of this present Book.
How the Author took shipping. cap. 1 Of the straight auncienly named Calpe,
and now Gebaltary. cap. 2 Of Africa generally. cap. 3 Of Africa particularly.
ca. 4 Of the fortunate Islands, now called the Canaries. ca. 5 Of the hie
mountain of Pyke properly called Pike hill. ca. 6 Of the isle of Iron. cap. 7 Of
the Islands of Madera. ca. 8 Of the wine of Madera. ca. 9 Of the Promentary
Verd, and of his Islands. cap. 10 Of the wine of Palm trees. cap. 11 Of the
Rivers of Senega. ca. 12 Of the Ila^ds Hisperides otherwise named Caape Verd.
cap. 13 Of Torterells and of an herb that they call Orseilla. ca. 14 Of the
Island of Fire. cap. 15 Of Ethiopa. cap. 16 Of Gynney. cap. 17 Of the
Equinoctial line, and of the Islands of S. Homer. cap. 18 That not only all
that is unto the line is inhabited, but also all the world is inhabited,
contrary to the opinion of our Elders. cap. 19 Of the multitude and diverse
kinds of fishes being under this line Equinoctial. ca. 20 Of an Island named
the Assention. cap. 21 Of the Promentary of good hope and of many secrets
observed in the same, lykevvise our aryual to the Indians of America, or France
Antartike. cap. 22 Of the Island of Madagascar otherwise named S. Laure^ce. cap.
23 Of our aryuall to France Antartike otherwise named America, to the place
named Caape de Fria. cap. 24 Of the River of Ganabara, otherwise named Ianaria
and how the land where we aryued was named France Antartike. cap. 25 Of the
fish that is in this great River before named. ca. 26 Of America generally.
cap. 27 Of the Religion of these Americans. cap. 28 The manner and custom of
living of these Americans, asvvell men as women. cap. 29 Of their eating and
drynking cap. 30 Against the opinion of those that thynck the wild men to be
heary. cap. 31 Of a tree named Genipat in the American tongue, with the which
they make colors. cap. 32 Of a tree named Paquouer. cap. 33 How these
Americans or wyld men do difforme themselves, esteming it a great glory. cap.
34 Of visions, dreams and dellusions that these Americans have, and of the
persecution that they receive of vvycked spirits. cap. 35 Of false Prophets and
Magitians that are in this country of America, the which invoke and call
upon wicked spirits, and of a tree named Ahouai. cap. 36 How these Americans
believe the soul to be immortal. cap. 37 How these wild make war one
against a another, specially against those whom they name Margageas
Thabaiares. Also of a tree which they name Hairy, of the which they make their
weapons for war. cap. 38 Their manner of fighting as well on the land as on the
water. cap. 39 How these barbarous and wild men put their ennimies to death
that they have taken in the wars, and how they eat them. cap. 40 How these
wild men covet greatly to revenge their harms and injuries. cap. 41 How these
wild men of America are married. cap. 42 Of the ceremonies, burial, and
funerals that they use to the deceased. cap. 43 Of Mortugabes, and of the
charity that they use toward strangers. cap. 44 The description of a
sickness named Pians, to the which are subject those people of America, as
well in the Ilan^des as the main land. cap. 45 Of the Diseases most ryfe in
America, and the mean that they observe to cure them. cap. 46 The manner how
to trade among these people: of a byrd named Toucan, and of the Spicery of that
country. cap. 47 Of birds most common in America. ca. 48 Of Venison and wyld
beasts that these wild men take. cap. 49 Of a tree named Hauorahe. cap. 50 Of
a tree named Vhebehafou and of the honey Bees that frequent it. cap. 51 Of a
strange beast named Haute. cap. 52 How these Americans kyndle fire, of their
opinion of the world, and of their Iron works. cap. 53 Of the river of Vases,
likewise of certain beasts that are found there about. And of the land named
Morpio^. 54 Of the River of Platte, and of the country ad^acent. ca. 55 Of the
straight of Magellan, and of Daryen. ca. 56 How that those that inhabit from
the River of Platte unto the straight of Magellan are our Antipodes. cap. 57
How these wild men excercyse husbandry, and make gardens of a root named
Manihot, and of a tree that they name Penoabsou. ca. 58 How and after what
sort the land of America was dyscouered, and Brassyll wood found out, with
many other trees not seen else where, but in that country. cap. 59 Of our
departing from France Antartik or America. ca. 60 Of the Caniballs, as well of
the maine land as of the Islands, and of a tree named Acaiou. cap. 61 Of the
River of Amazones, otherwise named Aurelana, by the which ye may fail into the
country of Amazones and into France Antertike. cap. 62 How certain Spaniards
aryued into a country where they found Amazons. ca. 63 How these Spaniards
continued their voyadge to Morpion, and of the River of Platte. cap. 64 How the
lands of the kings of Spain and of Portingall are separated. cap. 65 The
division of the West Indies in three parts cap. 66 Of the Island of Rats. cap.
67 How we continued our course w^^h a declaration of Astrolabia of the Sea.
cap. 68 Of the departing of our Equator or Equinoctial. cap. 69 Of Perou and
of the principal places contained in the same. cap. 70 Of the Islands of Perou,
and chiefly of the Spanish Island cap. 71 Of the Islands of Cuba, and of Lucaia.
cap. 72 A description of Noua Espania, and of the great city of Themestitan,
edified in the west Indies. cap. 73 Of Florida. cap. 74 Of the Island of
Canada before named Baccalos, being discovered in our time, and how the
inhabitans live. cap. 75 Of a another country of Canade. cap. 76 What Religion
these Canadians use, with their living and how they resist the Cold. cap. 77
Of these Canadians apparel, how they wear their hair, and how they treat
their children. cap. 78 How these people make war. cap. 79 Of Mines, precious
stones and other secrets that are found in Canada. cap. 80 Of Earthequakes and
hayles, to the which the country of Canada is very subject. ca. 81 Of the
country called New found land. cap. 82 Of the Islands of Essores. ca. 83
Imprinted at London, in Knightrider street, by Henry Bynneman, for Thomas
Hacket. 1568.


