THE REASONABLENESS OF WISE AND holy truth: and the absurdity of foolish and
wicked Error.

ECCL. 7. 27. I have compassed about, both I and mine heart, to know and to
enquire, and to search wisdom and reason, and to know the wickedness of
folly, and the foolishness of madness. MATTHEW. 11. 19. But wisdom is
justified of all her children. AC: OX



AT OXFORD Printed by John Lichfield, and William Wrench Printers to the famous
University. 161^

TO THE RIGHT REVErend Father in God, ARTHVR, Lord Bishop of BATH and WELLS,
Vice chancellor of the University of Oxford, and Warden of New College, JOHN
TERRY wishes all increase of that Glory and Virtue, whereunto you are called
by our most glorious and holy Lord. 2. Pet. 1. 2.
MY duty binds me (right Reverend and my very Good Lord) to offer up to God
for you the sacrifices of thanksgiving and prayer. Some of the Heathen offered
sacrifice to the sun rising for benefits to come: and other to the Sun
setting for such as were already received. Wherefore it being a great shame
for a Christian to be out gone in any good duty by an Heathen, I cannot but
offer up to our most blessed Savior Christ the true Son of righteousness,
the sacrifice of thanksgiving: first, for causing such a bright star as your
Lordship is to appear above our Horizon in the west: and secondly for causing
you to set with leaving much good to that College, whereof my self was once a
member. And how can I also but offer up prayer to God; first, that the fresh
memory of your renowned learning and religious life may instill such a sweet
influence of celestial grace into the hearts of all the members of that
society, that they may be effectually stirred up to walk in your ways, and
to devote themselves by your example to the public good: as secondly I am to
beseech him that walks in the midst of the seven golden Candlesticks, and
holds the stars in his right hand, that he would hold and uphold you long
to his own glory, and to the edification and comfort of his people, among whom
he has now placed you to hold out the word of life. And thus commending you
to God the Father of light, and to the word of his grace the most worthy
instrument thereof, with all humble thanks unto your Lordship for your loving
acceptance of this small paper present, I rest

Your Lordships in all Christian love and duty, JOHN TERRY.

JOHN. 17. 17. Sanctify them with thy truth: thy word is truth.
THis Chapter contains a most divine and heavenly prayer of our most blessed
Savior Christ wherein he requesteth of his Father, that he would by the
gracious word of his Gospel, make more and more manifest the glorious work of
man's redemption. For that hereby he and his father should be most glorified,
and all such as his father had given him, should be made partakers of life
everlasting. For this is everlasting life (says he) to know thee the only true
God, and whom thou have sent (videlicet, to accomplish the work of the
redemption of all the elect) Jesus Christ. For the clear doctrine of the
Gospel, laying open the glorious work of man's redemption, does make manifest
the light of Gods countenance shining in Christ, and does give unto all that
are truly lightened therewith, the holy eye of saving faith, whereby they
assuredly apprehending, and most certainly believing the unspeakable love of
God toward them that do cleave unto Christ, and are made one with him, and by
him have communion and fellowship with God; and so are made partakers of life
everlasting. And verily the true saving faith wrought by the Gospel, is
nothing else but such a sure and certain knowledge of Gods unspeakable love in
Christ, as is accompanied with all manner of holy and heavenly graces. And
therefore as v. 8. our Savior testifies that he had given his Fathers words
to them, which he had given unto him, and they had received them, and had
surely known that he came from the Father, and had believed that the Father
had sent him: so in this verse he prays to his Father that the would
sanctify them with the truth that was contained in the same word. In the which
petition of our Savior Christ, we are to observe these two points first, the
thing that our Savior requesteth at his Fathers hands; that he would bestow
upon all those that he had given him, which is, Sanctification: Secondly, the
means whereby it is wrought, which is the truth of his own word. Sanctify
them with thy truth: thy word is truth. Now the sanctification that our Savior
here prays for, is not maimed, wanting any essential part, but total and
whole; even such a sanctification, as does sanctify the mind with saving
knowledge, and faith, the will, and the affections, with all other graces, and
gifts of the holy Ghost, and so does sanctify the whole man. Neither is this
whole and total sanctification bestowed only upon some principal persons in
the Church of Christ, but even upon the meanest also. As the Apostle testifies
2. Cor. 3. 18. We all (says he) behold as in a mirror the glory of God with
open face, there is the subjection, action, object, and clerenesse of faith)
and are changed into the same image from glory to glory, as by the spirit of
the Lord (there is the inseparable effect of saving and sanctifying faith, one
and the same in substance, though not in circumstance in all the faithful.)
And verily, how can it otherwise be, but that all such as by faith are
engraffed into Christ, Romans 11. 17. should immediately be made good trees, and
so consequently be enabled to bear good fruit. Mat. 7.17. How can it otherwise
be, but that all such as by the linely word of God, Heb. 4. 12. are quickened to
a living faith. Gal. 2. 20 should show themselves to be alive to God Romans 6.
11. by the exercise of al holy and godly works. For nature is never idle, much
less grace. Gal. 5. 6. and therefore, as the body without the (operative)
spirit is dead: so faith without works is dead also, Iac. 3 26. And therefore
the same Apostle in the same chapter wills Natura est nunquam otiosa.
all such as lay claim to a true faith, to make proof thereof by their good
works, after the example of Abraham the father of the faithful. For after
that he had showed himself ready at the commandment of God, to offer up in
sacrifice his most dear son Isaac, then he made it manifest that he so
firmly apprehended by an assured faith, the incomprehensible love of God in
Christ, Ephesians. 3. 19. toward himself, that he preserred it before his most
entire love toward his own most dear son: and then was the Scripture
fulfilled: Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for righteousness.
Wherefore it was not without cause that S. Peter writing to such as had
obtained like precious faith with himself, wills them to join to their
faith virtue, to virtue, knowledge; to knowledge, temperance; to te^pera^ce,
patience; to patience, godliness; to godliness, brotherly kindness, and to
brotherly kindness, love, 2. Pet. 1. 5. For (says he) if faith want
knowledge, it is a blind credulity, and not a clear eye wherewith we see God,
and heavens happiness, albeit it be a far off. v. 9. And if it be not
accompanied with all these divine graces, it is an idle and fruitless fancy,
verse. 8. and not a true working and fruitful faith. Gal. 5. 6. But if it be
accompanied with these divine graces, then it proves it sufficiently, to be
the faith of Gods elect. Tit. 1. 1. and assures al such as are endued
therewith, that they are effectually called to the estate of grace, and are
elected to everlasting life. verse. 10. And verily, even by the light of nature
it is recorded that the Graces go hand in hand, and will in no wise part
company: and by the light of Prophecy it is further justified, that they are
as a most precious and golden chain, Ez. 16. 11. the linkes whereof cannot be
severed. How then can a true faith being one of the principal virtues that are
by Christ infuled into the hearts of all true Christians, Ephesians. 6. 16. Ioh. 6.
19. be severed from the society of the residue of the divine graces of the
spirit of God? Does not the Apostle plainly avouch, that we are all the sons
of God by faith in Christ. Gal. 3. 26. Ioh. 1. 12. and therefore renewed into
his image in righteousness and true holiness? Are we not by faith united
unto Christ, Ephesians. 3. 17. and at one with God? Romans 5. 1. How then can it be a
near companion with blindness and ignorance, or with unrighteousness and
sin? For what communion can there be between light and darkness? what
concord between righteousness and unrighteousness? 2. Cor. 6. 14. But there
is so great an agreement between faith and love and the residue of the divine
graces of the spirit of God that S. Austin does place them in the definition of
faith, as if they were the very essence thereof. For, what is it (says he) to
believe in God, but to love God, and to love God? that is, to love God with a
double love. Aug. in Ioh. tr. 29. So. in Ps. 77. To believe in God, is to
cleave to God, and to work that which is good together with him that works
good in us. Wherefore let all such as make profession, that by faith they
joyfully embrace the covenant of mercy in Christ, and yet are careless in the
performance of all holy duties, nay, which turn the grace of God into
wantonness, Iac. 4. and upon a presumptuous opinion of the infinity of the
mercy of God, and merits of Christ, do loose the raines to all manner of
wicked and corrupt affections. Let them all know that howsoever in word they
make profession of the faith of Christ, yet in their deeds they deny the same.
Tit. 1. 16. For how does he say that he believes in Christ, who does not that
which he commands him to do? Cyp, de simpl. praelat. How then can he that
does contrary to that which God commands, say that he believes in Christ,
and is partaker of the covenant of grace? For unto the ungodly, says God,
What have thou to do to declare mine ordinances, and to take my covenant in
thy mouth? Ps. 50. 16. So Ier. 7. 9. Will ye steal, murder, commit adultery,
and swear falsely, etc. and come and stand before me in this house whereon my
name is called, as if ye were my servants, whereas ye cloth your selves with
the Devils livery, and do such works as belong to his service? Will ye say
that ye are delivered from the slavery of sin, and yet pollute your selves
with all manner of abominations? How shall we (says the Apostle) that are dead
to sin live any longer therein? Romans 6. 2. Surely if Christ's death does
deliver us from the guilt of our sins, it will first deliver us from the
dominion of our sins: and if Christ's resurrection shall raise us up to be
partakers of eternal life, it will first raise us up to newness of life. 1.
Cor. 25. 34. Apoc. 20. 6. For undoubtedly a wise and an holy faith, whereby we
live to God, Gal. 2. 20. must go before our glorification, and justification
also. For whom God electeth in Christ before all worlds, to those by an inward
and effectual calling, he gives a wise and an holy faith, whereby they are
made the sons of God, Gal. 3. 26 and are renewed unto his image in
righteousness, and true holiness, that so resembling their heavenly father, he
may take them for his own dear children. Now whom he thus calls, them he
iustefieth (for by faith we must be first engraffed into Christ, before we can
have interest in his righteousness, whereby we are justified) and then, them
whom he justifies, he also glorifieth. Romans 8. 30. A sanctifying faith is then
the first of all the proper and peculiar gifts that God bestows upon all
those to whom he vouchsafes to give an honorable place in his house and
family. 1. Cor. 6. 11. Tit. 3. 5. 6. 7 and a greater also then justification it
self. For it is a greater blessing to be delivered from the being and bondage
of sin, then from the guilt and punishment thereof: for that the one is a
far greater evil then the other. The making of an impious a just man (as
Thomas A quinas teaches) is the greatest of all the works of God. So S.
Austin writing upon these words of our Savior Christ ( greater works then
these shall they do) says that it is a greater work of an impious man to
make a just man, then to create heaven and earth. Aug in Ioh. tract. 72. For in
the creating of all things of nothing, as there was nothing to further, so
there was nothing to hinder the work: seeing nothing has no activitie, but in
the recreation or regeneration of man, there is not only no furtherance in the
natural Non ent is nullae sunt qualitates.
man, but a great hinderance and resistance. Wherefore it is not without cause
that the faithful, recording in what danger they were by reason of their
sins before their regeneration and sanctification, do greatly rejoice and
say: The right hand of the Lord has showed forth his mighty power; the right
hand of the Lord has advanced me. Aug. confess. l. 4. c. 3. Wherefore seeing an
holy faith, which is accompanied with all the residue of the graces of
sanctification is the greatest of all the peculiar gifts of God, even such an
one, as whereby we have not only an entrance into the estate of grace, Romans 5.
2. but are preserved there by to eternal salvation. 1. Pet. 1. 5. we ought to
employ our first and our chiefest care for the obtaining and preserving of the
same. And that so much the more, for that not only God is principally served,
and glorified, and our selves beautefied thereby. Ioh. 6. 29. but also that so
we may stop the mouths of our adversaries. For among all the most slanderous
imputations that they lay to our charge, this is not the least, that they
avouch that we teach a bare and naked faith, without the fruit of all good
works, in that we affirm that faith is alone in the work of our
justification. The which is as true, as if they should say, that we hold that
the eye is alone in the body without the residue of the other senses, seeing
that we avouch that the eye is alone in the apprehension of all such things as
are subject unto sight. And yet for this cause we must be called Sol^fidians as
if we rejected all other fruits of the spirit with the practice and exercise
of all good works. Nay, let us make no less use hereof, then Philip did of
those slanders, the which the Athenians had raised up against him: I am much
(said he) beholding to the Athenians, for that by their slanderous reports I am
made the more careful to look to my ways, that I may hold a right course, that
so I may confute them, both by my words and works. So likewise, whereas our
doctrine is, that the true Christian says is accompanied with all manner of
divine and heavenly graces, and is fruitful in all good works, let us give
all diligence to confirm the same by an holy life and conversation, that so we
may confute them by our deeds also. And so we may be bold to retort upon them
justly and truly, that which they untruly charge us withal. For in that they
avouch that the true Christian faith, may not only be in the reprobate, but
even in the very devils themselves, thereby they teach that it may be alone
without the company of any virtue, and without the practice of any good work.
And therefore they may be truly termed not only Solifidians, but
Implijfidians, and 'Diabolifidians also. Undoubtedly hereby they make it
manifest to the whole world, that they hold not the true Catholic faith,
seeing thereby in the judgment of S. Austine, the just are discerned from the
unjust. Aug. ad Bomf. l. 3. c. 5. Whereas by that faith which themselves hold
to be Catholic, they cannot be discerned from the very Devils themselves. Now
if they be not severed from the Devils in their faith, neither can they be
severed from them in their works, seeing faith is the root, and works are the
fruits; and such a root, such a fruit: Now if they be severed from the Devil
neither in their faith nor works, how can they be severed from him in their
punishments? Wherefore let them disgrace this gracious gift of faith which have
no part nor portion in the reward thereof, But as for us which acknowledge it
to be a principal part of true sanctity and holiness: let us most carefully
observe the means whereby it is coliated, by God set down in these words of
our text: Sanctify them with thy truth: thy word is truth. Wherein we are to
observe these two points: First, that God does sanctify his by the truth:
secondly that this truth is contained in Gods word, even in that word of God
which is delivered unto us by the Prophets and Apostles. Concerning the first,
which is, that truth is the true means whereby we attain to an holy faith,
and to all the residue of the graces of sanctification, it is manifest in this,
that truth does rectify our understanding, will, and affections: in the
uprightness of the which, our whole and total sanctification does consist.
And therefore by S. Austine, truth is termed, The virginity of the soul, and
the chastity of the mind, As falsehood, and untruth is the adulterous
pollution of them all: insomuch that all such as in Gods service embrace lies
either taken by tradition from their ancestors, or sucken out of their own
heads, are justly charged by the spirit of God to go a whoring after humane
inventions. Number. 15. 39. Here of it is that men of al professions lay claim to
the truth, and for proof thereof make a show to derive the pedigree of their
doctrine from God the author of truth, and from his word the authentical, and
undeniable evidences thereof. As it may appear by Celsus. (...).
Who as Origin reports, entitled his books, The word of truth, which yet
he wrote against the truth. Wherefore as the Apostle exhorts, we are not to
believe every spirit, but to try the spirits whether they are of God or no:
and wisely to examine the grounds of all doctrines, before that we make them
Articles of our Creed: that so we may embrace the knowledge of the truth,
whereby we may be saved, and reject the strong delusion of Satan's lies, which
are the venom and poison of our souls. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10. Now the word of God
which our blessed Savior, the wisdom of God Prove. 8. revealed by his spirit
to the Prophets and Apostles, is this word of sanctifying and saving truth. For
if we continue in the same, We shall know the truth, and the truth shall make
us free. Ioh. 8. 32. And how does truth make us free, but by sanctifying us
with all divlne and heavenly virtues? For a true virtuous man is the only free
man.

Let us then come to the second point, and take a true view of such proofs as
may be produced, to make manifest, that the word of Christ revealed by his
spirit to the Prophets and Apostles, is only the rich treasury of that precious
truth, whereby all the elect of God are brought to a sanctifying and saving
faith. The which thing that we may effect, let us first search and enquire
where and what truth is, that so truth may speak and manifest it self. Truth
is either in things or words. Truth in things, is the fit and apt agreement of
the causes with their effects, and the effects with their causes, of the
accidents with their subjects, and subjects with their accidents: and so of all
other arguments and reasons, with the things whereof they are arguments and
reasons. Vera est propositio qua^do praedicatum convenit subiecto. Tum
praedicatu^ co^venit subiecto cum est genus. etc.
So truth in words, is when true reasons which agree with the things whereof
they are reasons, are accordingly set down in the words, which are delivered
to express the same. Hence then we thus conclude that if all true reasons
whereby the true God and true Godliness may be known and embraced, are
rightly set down in the doctrine revealed by Christ to the Tum veritas est in
verbis quando ita est in rebus quemadmodum verb^ significant.
Prophets and Apostles, and by them registered, and enrolled in the Canonical
Scriptures of the old and new Testament: then this word is the word of God, and
the word of truth. But in these books are set down all manner of most
forcible and effectual arguments, and reasons for the rooting up of all errors
and untruths, and for the opening and confirming of all doctrines of faith, and
godliness, and for the edifying of the spiritual Scriptura est ^ons
rationalis.
temple of God. Let us (says S. Hierome) ascend into the reasonable mount, and
seeking of the testimonies of Scripture choice and fit timber for every
several point of doctrine: let us cut it down, and there with build the house
of wisdom. Hier. in Hagg. Neither does this word of God minister choice timber
only for the building up of the Lords Temple, but all manner of wholesome food
also for the sustenance of all such as are of the Lords household. For in it
there is both milk for children, and strong meat for such as are men. Heb. 5
12. The principles of this word, are the childrens milk: which is by S. Peter
called a doctrine, standing (...).
upon so sure and sound reason, that he that rightly apprehends the same
cannot be deceived. 1. Pet. 2. 2. whereby he does distinguish it from the
principles of (...). 2. Pet. 1. 16.
all other religions, which being not Logical but Sophistical, as happily
having in them a show, but not the substance of sound reason, cannot but
deceive and destroy all such as drink down the venomous poison thereof. Now
if the first rudiments of the word of God stand upon such sound reason that
they cannot deceive, then the stronger meat thereof, which is all such reasons
and arguments which are set down for the further lightning and strengthening of
these principles, must needs be of greater light and strength. And so no doubt
they are: seeing they are of power to make the me^ of God which are long
exercised therein able so thoroughly to discern between good and evil, error
and truth, that they can both purely and zealously perform unto the Lord that
reasonable service (...).
which is acceptable unto him, Rom, 12. 1. The which reasonable service, what
is it else but the purity of a true says, and of all oather divine virtues,
with all holy works that issue from them all? Ioh. 6. 29. 1. Tim. 6. 11. Now
faith (as the Apostle defines it, Heb. 11. 1.) is the ground of things hoped
for, and the demonstration of things not seen: which principally are the
unspeakable love, and goodness of God demonstrated, not only in the work of
the creation. Romans 1. 20. but especially in the work of the redemption. 2.
Cor. 3. 12. For this is such a demonstration of Gods unspeakable goodness and
love, that (as Austine says) it does convince the judgment, (...).
and after a sort force the mind to yield her assent thereto. Aug. in Ioh.
hom. 79. and 95. So God loved the world (says out blessed Savior) that he
gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not
perish, but have life everlasting. Ioh. 3. 16. So Saint John. In this appeared
the love of God toward us, in that God sent his only begotten son into the
world that we might live through him. Ioh. 4. 9. And again, Herein is love,
not that we loved God, but that God loved us, and gave his Son to be an
atonement for our sins. And again, in the very next verse, If God so loved
us, etc. As if he would have us thoroughly to understand, that such a person
given for such persons to work such a work, is such a demonstration of Gods
love, that the like is no where to be found, no not in all the Books of
Aristotle's Demonstrations. When I was here a scholar, I heard a most reverend
Father, namely Mr. Fox, preaching on these words of the Apostle: If one be
dead for all, then we were all dead. 2. Cor. 5. 14. say here is such an ergo,
that all the Schools cannot show the like. And yet this ergo and demonstration
whereof we now speak is a more forceable ergo, and a more compelling
demonstration, as the same Apostle teaches in the former part of the same
verse. For verily if we could attain to all riches of the full assurance of
understanding, to know the mystery of God even the Father, and of Christ. Col.
2. 2. Then we should attain to the full assurance of faith, Heb. 10. 22. even
to the full assurance of Gods love. If we were able to comprehend with all
Saints, what is the breadth, length, depth, and height of the love of Christ
that passes knowledge, then should we be filled with all fullness of God.
Ephesians. 3. 18. In the mean season, all such as have attained to some measure of
this faith, which is grounded upon so strong demonstration, are called by S.
Chrysostom. hom 9. in Epist. ad Coll. sheep endued with reason, for that they
are, or should be able to give (...).
answer to every one that asks them a reason of the hope that is in them. 1.
Pet. 3. 15, And verily all such Christians as rightly understand the grounds of
their faith are esteemed by the Apostle to be worthy of the name of
reasonable men: whereas all that do not, are by him branded with the note of
men wicked and unreasonable. Furthermore (says he) brethren pray for us, that
the word of the Lord may have a full current, and be glorified, as it is with
you, and that we may be delivered from unreasonable and evil men: for all men
have not faith. 2. Th. 3. 1. Neither is this first and principal part of Gods
service only grounded upon most sure and sound reason, but also the other part
thereof consisting in the exercise of all holy works, proceeding from all the
divine graces and gifts of the holy spirit of God. For if they be not done
after that manner, and by the inducement of such reasons, as God in his word
requires Deus non exigebat quae siebant sed propter quod fiebant. Tert. 1, 3
cont. Marc.
them to be performed, they are not allowed, and approved of Christ. Mat. 6. 1.
1. Cor. 13. 1. For that may be said of all good works which Tertullian
avoucheth of the Jews sacrifices: Viz: that God did not in them require the
thing done, but the reasons for the which they were to be done: so God does not
require our bare works, but will have them done upon such reasons and motives
as they ought to be done. So then the very rudiments and principles of this
word of Christ are reasonable milk: and the service therein prescribed, is a
reasonable service: and the faith therein commanded is grounded upon a most
strong demonstration: and the works therein required are squared by the squier
of exact reason: and the persons that embrace this faith, are only and alone
esteemed to be endued with right reason: therefore we rightly conclude that
this word of Christ set down in the holy Scriptures of the Prophets and
Apostles is the only unerring word of truth. And verily, unless the holy
Scriptures were furnished with all variety of arguments and reasons to
convince all errors, and to confirm all truths, how could the professors of
the Christian faith be enabled thereby, to convert or confound all heathenish
persons, and all heretics and schismatikes, and to instruct and strengthen
the faithful themselves? For if we will deal with Ethnikes, we must not
produce the bare testimonies of the Prophets and Apostles as of witnesses
immediately instructed and sent into the world by God, to give an undeniable
evidence to truth: (for that were to beg that as granted, which is by them
not only questioned, but also peremptorily denied) but they must be dealt
withal by arguments and reasons, as being a plea allowed by all as are, or
think themselves to be endued with right reason. And among the great variety
of arguments and reasons, where by all questions are handled, and discoursed
of, we must not at the least principally use such of them as most prevail
with the affections and will; but rather such as do instruct the understanding
and the mind. For (as Tertullian says) Truth persuades by teaching: that
veritas d^c^nd^ suadet.
is, it teaches the understanding, and so prevails with Falsitas suadendo
docet.
the affections and will. Whereas, Falsehood does teach by persuading: that is,
persuades the affection and will, and so moves the mind to assent unto error.
The truth of both which positions is verified by the experience of all ages.
For what prevails most with the affections but the ensamples of our Ancients,
custom, a good intent, and an outward peace and plenty of all temporal
blessings? And have not these been used as principal arguments by
Schismarikes, Heretics, Idolaters, and Ethnikes? Our Fathers (said the
schismatical Samaritans) worshipped in this mount. Ioh. 4. 20. I have so
received from my Progenitors (was the plea of that infamous heretic Eutiches)
In this faith was I borne and consecrated to God, and in this I desire to die.
Council. Chalced. act. 1. So Dioscorus in the same place, I do find the
doctrine of the ancient Fathers not cursorily delivered, but handled of set
purpose in their books: I am rejected with them. So the Idolatrous Jews said
that they would do whatsoever went out of their own mouths; as to burn
incense to the Queen of heaven, and to power out drink offerings to her: as
they had done both they and their fathers, their Kings and Princes in the
cities of Judah, and in the streets of lerusalem: for then (said they) they had
plenty of victuals, and were well, and felt no evil. Ier. 44. 17. So the
heretical and idolatrous Papists cry out both generally for the Fathers, the
Fathers, the Church, the Church, Antiquity, Unity, Universality; and
particularly unto his Majesty, your holy progenitors, your dear mother were
professors of our Roman religion. Lastly, so the old Idolatrous Ethnikes:
That which is more ancient cannot be false. Aug. de Civ. Dei. l. 39. But how
did the ancient Fathers themselves reply hereunto? What will thou do (quoth
Lactantius writing in defense of the Christian faith) against the Idolatrous
Ethnikes? will thou follow thine Ancestors, or reason rather? Lact. de vero Dei
simulachro. cap. 20. So Cyprian ep, 7. cent: Quint, We are not to prescribe by
custom, but to co^vince with reason. So Tertullian: We are not to esteem of
faith by the persons, but of the persons by the faith. Yea this kind of
reasoning, reason it self has taught, even the natural wise men. I am thus
resolved (said Plato in Nullius addictus iurare in verba magistri.
Critone) not now but always, that I am not to enthral my judgment unto any
of my friends, but to reason: yea to that reason which by discord appears to
be best. Whose opinion was seconded by the chiefest of all his scholars.
Plato is my friend, but truth is more my friend. Arist. Mor. l. 1. c. 3. For
the efficacy of reason is better then all authorities. Zalm. in c. 5. ep. ad.
Otherwise why do all learned men of all professions call for a general
disputation, that they may justify all their positions by logical
syllogismes. Yea why does God himself call the Idolatrous Ethnikes, standing
in defense of their heathenish Gods, to this manner and kind of trial? as Isa.
41. 21. 22. 23. Stand to your cause, says the Lord, bring forth your strong
reasons, says the God of Jacob. Let them bring them forth, and let them tell
us what shall come: let them show the former things what they be, that we may
consider them, and know the latter end of them: either declare us things to
come. Show the things that are to come hereafter, that we may know that ye
are Gods.. Yea, do good, or do evil, that we may declare and behold it
together. In which words are set down two reasons, whereby the true God may
be discerned: whereof the one is the doing good or evil. The other, the
declaring of things past, and of things to come. And verily the true God is
goodness it self, and has declared himself to be so by the creation of the
world, and by communicating some portion of his own goodness to every
creature therein. And therefore, as Pythagoras said, if any besides one God
say, I am God: let them show a world like to this, and say thereof, this is
mine. For the creation of this one world is so sure an evidence to prove that
there is but one God, that this one God wills his people to say to the
Ethnikes that shall stand in defense of their Idol Gods: The Gods that made
not the heavens and the earth shall perish from the earth, and from under the
heavens, Ier. 10. 11. And verily the Gods of the heathen are but Idols: for it
is the Lord that made the heavens. Psalm. 96. 5. Now if the heathenish Gods
shall assume to themselves the glory of this great work of the creation, then
says the Lord in the place before alleged, Let them show it to be so, either
by revealing things passed from the beginning of the world, or things that are
to come to pass even to the end. For undoubtedly, known unto God are all his
own works from the beginning of the world. Act. 15. 18. and as certainly he
knows what shall become of them to the end, yea what shall come to pass for
ever and ever. As it is undoubtedly true, that the heathenish Gods cannot tell
what shall come to pass in time to come concerning such things as are to be
effected by such causes as are set on work by their own wills: and therefore
are no true Gods. For if it be replied that the Priests and Prophets of their
heathenish Gods have declared such things before hand: as namely their
Prophetesses called Sybillae, have set down some as distinct particulars
concerning our Savior Christ, and the works of redemption wrought by him, as
were foretold by Moses and the Prophets: we answer that as Plato did Moizare,
that is, deliver many doctrines set down by Moses for that he had taken them
out of him: So these Sybille did Prophetizare, because they had received these
prophesies either out of their books, or by tradition from the old Patriarks.
For as Sampson said unto his guests that were at his wedding, when they gave
him the right sense of his riddle which lie had proposed unto them: If ye had
not plowed with my heifer, ye could not have found out my riddle. Iud. 14. 18.
So may we as truly say, that if the heathenish Prophets and Prophetesses had
not consulted with our Prophets, they could not have delivered these Oracles.
The which is evident by this, that when they were consulted by their greatest
friends concerning events that were presently to come to pass, they delivered
their Oracles in doubtful sentences, which might be expounded diverse ways,
for that they were not able to deliver any certainty thereof. As; Aio te
Aeacides Romanos vincere posse. And Craesus halim penetrans magnam pervertet
opum vim. Whereas our Prophets not only delivered the certainty of the events
of diverse battles when they were ready to be undertaken. as Iud. 4. 9. and 7.
9. 1. Sam. 30. 8. 1. Reg. 20 13. But also many other events many hundred years
before they fell out. As namely the deliverance of the Jews out of the
captivity of Babylon, and the particular king by whom it should be
accomplished, even Cyrus king of the Medes and Persians. Isa. 44. and 45. The
which prophecy, as Josephus reports, Antiq. Iudaic. l. 11. c. 1. Cyrus
reading and perceauing himself to be named therein some 200 years before he
was borne, and appointed to such a work, gave liberty to the Jews to return
to their-owne country, and to build their temple, and he gave them back the
vessels thereof, which had been carried away by the king of Babylon. For he
understood that the God of the Jews was the true God, because he had foretold
such an event a long time before it was to come to pass. As it may appear by
his own words, Ez. 1. 2. Thus says Cyrus King of Persia, the Lord God of
heaven has given me all the kingdoms of the earth, and has commanded me to
build him an house in Jerusalem which is in Judah. Who is among you of all his
people with whom his God is? Let him go up to Jerusalem which is in Judah, and
build the house of the Lord God of Israel: he is the God which is in
Jerusalem. Here then we may perceive by evident reason set down in the
Scriptures, that the heathen have and therefore still may be convinced to
acknowledge him to be the true God, who has revealed himself in those books
of the Prophets and Apostles, and that those books are the authentical word
of the true, all seeing and well working God. And verily even the most
profoundest mysteries of those books may be justified by evident reason to
the heathen themselves to be the doctrines of truth proceeding from the true
God: as it may appear by the books of these notable lights in the Church of
Christ. 'D. de Plessis de veritate Christianae religionis. Zeged. in locis com.
Keckerm. in Syntagm. Theolog. Neither must the doctrines of our Christian
religion be by reason evicted against the Gentiles, but also against all
Schismatiks, and Heretics. For albeit all these, or at the least the most of
them acknowledge the holy Scriptures to proceed from God, yet seeing this word
of God consists not in the letters but in the sense, not in the reading, but
in the understanding, not in the leaves of the speech wherein it is delivered,
but in the root of the reason whereon it is grounded: and seeing all
Schismatikes and Heretics, be the words that are produced against them never
so plain and pregnant, yet pervert and corrupt the right sense and meaning of
them, how can the right sense be justified against all such persons, but by
clear and evident reasons? For if one testimony be produced to clear
another, they will pervert the sense of the one as well as of the other. And if
the testimonies of the ancient Fathers, yea of general Councels be alleged
against them, either they will pervert the meaning of them as well as they did
the meaning of the Scriptures, or else they will flatly refuse to subscribe to
their authority. The truth hereof was fully known unto S. Austin, who for his
learned confuting of many heretics, was called the Hammer wherewith heretics
were knocked Malleus haere^^corum.
in the head. For he writing against Maximinus the Arrian. l. 3. 1. 14. says;
I will not allege the Council of Nice to prejudice thee, neither shall thou
produce the Council of Ariminum to prejudice me: I will not be bound to yield
to the authority of the one, nor thou to the authority of the other: but by the
authority of the Scriptures, as by most indifferent witnesses, not proper to
either of us, but common to both. Let matter with matter, cause with cause,
reason with reason, be compared together, and let that prevail which is the
stronger, and weigh most wherein there is the most weight. And verily there is
no other means to clear the meaning of all testimonies, humane, and divine,
then by the light of clear arguments, and reasons. Wherefore seeing that the
power of the word of God consists in the right sense and meaning thereof,
which cannot be cleared without the light of reason, and without the sure
apprehension thereof, the people of God themselves cannot be edified; therefore
clear arguments and reasons must be produced for the clearing of all
doctrines of faith, and an holy life by all such teachers as seek after the
edification of the people of God. The truth whereof is plainly confirmed by
the usual practice of all preachers of the word of God. Among who^ it is most
ordinary, after the doctrines deduced out of their texts, to clear the same
with variety of reasons, and then to draw out the uses there of, which are
nothing else but particular doctrines by evidence of reason collected and
gathered out of the general. And verily the true Christian faith is not an
ignorant credulity, but an understanding assent grounded upon a sure
knowledge: even such a faith as was in the Apostles themselves, and the which
they were to preach through out the whole world. Luke 1. 77. For of this their
faith, our Savior himself testifies in this very chapter, saying: I have
given them the words which thou gave me, and they have received them, and
have known surely that I came out from thee, and have believed that thou have
sent me. v. 8. The truth where of is plainly confirmed by (...).
the words of S. Peter. Ioh. 6. 69. Thou have the words of eternal life: and
we believe and know that thou art the very Christ the son of the living God.
Neither is this understanding faith proper and peculiar to the teachers of the
truth, but to all the godly professors of the same. For none come to salvation
but by the knowledge of the truth. 2. Th. 2. 10. 11. In which place knowledge
and faith are joined together as inseparable companions: as Ignorance is set
down as a separatist from faith and salvation in the former chapter of the
same Epistle. Now to know a thing is to know the reasons thereof. Scire est
per cau sas scire.
Wherefore the true Christian faith grounded upon knowledge, does no otherwise
work in the faithful a right assent to the several doctrines of faith then
by grounds thereof. This truth is manifestly proved throughout the whole body
of the sacred Scripture, which teaches that the true Christian faith is a
wise, and holy, not foolish and wicked, a seeing and not a blind; a clear and
not a dark; a manly and not a childish; a reasonable and not a brutish
persuasion. Faith is a wise assent grounded upon the wise doctrines of the word
of God, which are able to make us wise to salvation by faith in Christ. 2. Tim.
3. 15. And what is wisdom but a right apprehensio^ of truth and the reasons
thereof by the testimonies of divine and humane autors? I have (says Solomon
the wise) compassed about both I and mine heart to know and inquire and to
search wisdom, and reason Eccl. 7. 27. by the which manner of annexing the one
to the other, he gives us to understand that the one arises out of the
other. So Aristole, the wisest of all Philosophers. Prudence is an habit joined
with right reason. So Tully one of the wisest of all Orators: He that does
best apprehend truth in every thing, and the reasons and grounds thereof is
worthily to be esteemed the most prudent and wise of all other. Wherefore our
Christian faith being a wise apprehension, and assent unto truth, must needs
apprehend the reasons whereon it is grounded. The wisdom of the prudent (says
Solomon) is to understand his way: but the foolishness of fools is deceit.
Prove. 14. 8. That is; wisdom lightning the understanding by means of true
reason, does sanctify it with truth: as folly darkning it with ignorance,
leads it into error both in matters of faith, and of life, and conversation.
For the foolishness of a man perverteth his way, Prove. 19. 3. for folly is
the mother of wickedness, Eccl. 7. 27. Wherefore, such as be foolish shall
not stand in Gods sight: for he hates all such as work wickedness. Ps. 5. 5.
But the wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament. Dan. 12. 3. The
foolish Virgins could not enter into the marriage because their lamps were gone
out. Mat. 25. 10. That is, they made profession of the word of God, which is a
lantern to our feet, and a light to our paths without the understanding
thereof. For what is the word not understood, but a lamp without oil, or a
candle without light? But the wise that had oil in their lamps, that is
rightly understood, the doctrines of Gods word were admitted into the marriage.
For they that truly know God, shall be Visio iustificans Visio glorificans
known of him: and they that now see him with the eye that justifies, shall
hereafter see him with the eye that glorifieth. But they that know not God,
shall not be known of God, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8. Hos. 4. 6. Prove. 1 22. And all such
as see him not with the eye of faith, shall never see him with the eye of
glory. Prove. 29. Fools and mad men may be Saints with foolish and mad Mahomet:
but the children of wisdom Mat. 11. 19 are the chil dren of the most wise God:
and such as have their minds and affections sanctified by wisdom, are his
Saints, in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. Coll. 2. 3.
Now if faith be a wise assent, then it is not blind and dark, but eyefull and
clear. I saw (says Solomon the wise) that there is more profit in wisdom
the^ in folly, as the light is more excellent then darkness. Eccl. 2. 13. for
a wise man's eyes are in his head, but a fool walks in darkness. Wisdom and
faith are the sight of the eye of the mind: and truth rightly apprehended and
assented unto, is the light that leads in the' right way Morio (...) quasi
(...)
unto God. Ps 43. 3. But a fool and unbeliever is a blind and a dark man. 2.
Pet. 1. 9. For infidelity and folly is the blindness of the mind: and where
these lead the will and affections, there is a wandering from God (seeing he
that walks in darkness, woteth not whether he goes. Ioh. 12. 35.) and
there is a falling into the pit of all errors and sins: seeing where the
blind lead the blind both fall into the ditch. Wherefore, blessed are their
eyes who seeing see, and do perceive, and hearing hear, and do understand,
and so are converted, and so are saved. Mat. 13. 16. And blessed are all (not
some but all) believers, because they all behold as in a myrror the glory of
God with open face, and are changed into the same image from glory to glory, as
by the spirit of God. 2. Cor. 3 18. Neither does our wise Christian faith bring
only sight and light to all that believe, but also a behavior fit for men,
endued with sound and right reason, and de liuereth them from childishness,
and brutishness also. It is the property of a child to do childishly. When I
was a child (says the Apostle) I spoke as a child, I understood as a child:
but when I was a man, I put away childishness. Non qu^ eundu^ sed quo itur.
1. Cor. 13. 11. So it is a property of a brute beast to go not whether they
should go, but whether others go. But the faithful should not be children in
understanding, but of a ripe age. 1. Cor. 14. 20. Neither should they be like
the horse and mule, in whom there is no understanding, Ps. 32. 9. For children
are childish, and are led with such motives as most prevail with the
affections: and brute beasts are brutish, and follow sense: but the wise
Christian believer will take especially notice of such inducements as soundly
inform the understanding, and are powerful to rule and direct the affections
and senses in a right course. Now by all these properties and effects of a true
Christian faith, it is evident, that whosoever desires to attain thereunto,
must labor to understand the several reasons, whereon the several doctrines
of faith are grounded, that so he may be enabled thereby to stand upon the
just defense of his own faith. Thus much is Bellarmine himself forced to
confess, in that he makes sanctity of doctrine, which is the wisdom and
reasonableness thereof, to be a note of the true Church, and of the right
faith professed therein: and upon that ground takes exception against our
doctrine, and charge it to be unreasonable and absurd, and so unholy, and
therefore not the doctrine of the true Church, and of the right faith professed
therein. For the proof whereof he gives instance in five points. And first he
begins with justification by faith: and against the truth thereof, makes
this weak and childish Sophisme. If faith (says he) justifies and assures
the faithful of his justification, then either it finds him just before he
believes, or makes him just after he believes. But this division is
insufficient, and should be made in this manner. If faith justifies either it
is before, or when, or after it is given. But faith justifies both when, and
after it is given, and does never find any man just before he has obtained a
right faith. And so the Apostle teaches. Romans 8. 30. Whom he predestined
(says the Apostle) them be called (viz. effectually by giving to them a true
faith) and whom he called them he justified. (viz. at that present instant of
time) For says does presently ingraff the believer into Christ, and so gives
him present interest in his sufferings and righteousness, and there by does
presently justify him. Wherefore in this first instance, reason fails in
this sophistical confuter, and not in the doctrine which he would confute. His
second instance is this: If faith gives assurance of the pardon of sin, then
it suffers him not to say that petition of the Lords Prayer, forgive us our
sins: seeing it is an absurd thing to pray for that whereof he has good
assurance, that he has it already. But God gives forgiveness of sins, but
to such as in their daily prayers make confession of them unto him, and
faithfully pray for the forgiveness of them. I said (says David Ps. 32. 6.) I
will confess against my self my wickedness unto the Lord, and thou forgauest
the iniquity of my sin. Therefore shall every one that is godly make his
prayer un to thee in the time when thou may be found. That is; seeing God is
sound of all them that seek him in truth, and grants mercy and pardon of
sin to all that humbly and faithfully seek for pardon in Christ: Therefore
every one that is godly, will in his daily prayers sue and seek for the
forgiveness of his sins in Christ, that so he may obtain the assurance
thereof. What? Had not that man assurance of the pardon of his sins, to who^
Christ said, man thy sins are forgiven thee Luke 5. 20. And did this man
absurdly, if he said the Lords prayer? Had not the Apostles themselves
assurance of the pardon of their own sins, which were to preach and to
proclaim the pardon of all sins to all believers? And did they cease to
pray, yea to pray after that manner as Christ commanded them to pray, forgive
us our sins? Matt. 9. 9. What does the holy father the Pope, who in his
plenary pardons, and indulgences, or all his Friars and Priests, who in the
sacrament of penance, give assurance of the pardon of all sins to such as
confess the^, and are contrite and sorrowful for them, do they I say forbid
the saying of the Lords prayer, and the asking therein of the pardon of their
sins? Surely the holy Father himself, and all the principal persons of his
Church, are absurd men or else it is no absurdity to assure the faithful of
the full forgiveness of all their sins, and yet to will them to pray daily for
the same. The Cardinals third instance is: the Anabaptists hold faith to be an
assurance of Gods love, who yet can have no assurance thereof: therefore says
is not the assurance of Gods love. As if heretics and reprobates might not
hold some right opinions in matters of faith. But the Anabaptists say that they
themselves have an assurance of Gods love, and are accepted of him. And what of
that? Did not the Laodiceans say that they were rich and increased with goods,
and wanted nothing? Ap. 3. 17. And yet it was nothing so. So some mad men will
say that they are Lords of such and such Mannours, vea Sovereigns of such and
such kingdoms: and yet they may be struck beggars. Now the Anabaptists, as all
other heretics are after a sort mad men, and baue lost a sound mind: and
therefore they may think that they have faith and the assurance of Gods love,
when they have it not indeed. The evidences wherein diverse men do seek for
the assurance of Gods love are diverse. The Pharisees had such an high conceit
of their own works, that they did think themselves just thereby, and
accepted with God, as being such in their own proud opinions as did demerit no
less at Gods hand. So many that have intended the v^^er overthrowe of Prince
and people, having received absolution from their Priests, and a pardon from
the Pope, have judged themselves to have had all their sins pardoned, and
themselves greatly beloved of God. So the Anabaptists deeming and dreaming
their own fancies to be the immediate revelations of the spirit of God may
happily presume hereof, that they are right dear unto God, and such as may be
fully persuaded of his love. But the faithful to whom God by his word and
sacraments, does so reveal his covenant of mercy in Christ Jesus, that thereby
they are effectually called and brought unto God, to trust in this his
unspeakable goodness, and to place their chief happiness therein and to love
God for the same above all things whatsoever; here by are rightly assured that
they are in Gods love, and are effectually called to the estate of grace, and
to obtain salvation in Christ Jesus. Wherefore albeit the assurance of the
Anabaptists, and of all other of the like rank may be false and vain, for
that it is built upon a sandy false ground: yet the assurance of the faithful
is most firm and certain, for that it is founded upon a rock. Fourthly,
Bellarmine charge Luther with an absurd position for that he avoucheth, that
children being baptized may have faith. Why, does not our Savior himself
testify, that some at the first hour of the day of their life are called to
work in the Lords vineyard? Mat. 20. 1. and therefore endued with a sanctified
faith, which works by love. And does not the Scripture also in plain words,
and not in parables, teach that some are sanctified from their mothers womb,
and therefore not only endued with an holy faith, but also with all other
graces of sanctification? Ier. 1. 5. Why does not Bellarmine himself think
that infants descending from faithful parents being baptized, and dying before
they come to years of discreation, are Gods children and heirs of his
kingdom? Now how are they Gods children, unless they are reformed to his
image in righteousness and true holiness, and there fore endued with a true
faith which is a principal part of true holiness, and the very root whereout
all other graces sprout and grow? Wherefore it is no absurdity to think that
children may be endued with a sanctifying faith, albeit they cannot produce the
actions thereof, no more then it is an absurdity to say that they are endued
with a reasonable soul, albeit the effects there of appear not in them. But
Bellarmine himself happily doubting of the absurdity of these former
doctrines, in the last instance will be sure to produce an absurd position
indeed: which is, that God is the author of sin: which yet as he affirms is
taught by Calvin. But this is an impudent and a shameless slander refused and
refuted also by that worthy servant of God himself. Wherefore Bellarmine
hereby manifestly declares that the doctrine of the Romish church whereof he
is so stiff a maintainer, is absurd, false, and untrue: and therefore not
taken out of the word of truth, seeing it is not, neither indeed cannot be
defended but by false slanders and lies. For the law of God shall be fulfilled
without lies: seeing wisdom is sufficient to a faithful mouth, Eccl. 34. 8.
And verily that all the particular doctrines of the Church of Rome are
unreasonable and absurd, and therefore untrue by Bellarmines own rule, untrue
it may be justified in them all: but at this time I will give instance only in
some of their particular doctrines which concern the word of God, the
Sacraments, Prayer, and Faith. And first concerning the word of God, the Church
of Rome absurdly teaches that it is delivered unto us partly in the
Scriptures, and partly by tradition. For if it be an absurd thing for a wise
and provident Father to deliver his last will and testament partly in writing
and partly without: it is much more absurd to ascribe any such action unto the
most wise and provident God. Secondly, if it be an absurd thing for a father to
interdict any of his children to get a coppie of his last will and testament,
wherein some great legacy is given unto him, and some special duties are
required at his hands: then it is more absurd to avouch that God does interdict
all his children of the Laity, the having of the books of the old and new
Testament in the which so great legacies are bequeathed unto them, and so many
special duties are required at their hands. Thirdly, if it be an absurd thing
that a wise and loving father should make his last will and testament in a
language unknown to his children, seeing he makes it to this end, even to make
known to all and every of them what portion and legacy he bestows upon
them, and what duty he requires at their hands; then much more absurd is it
to avouch that our heavenly father, making his will and testament to the same
end, would have the understanding thereof kept close from any of his children
under the lock and key of a strange language. Fourthly, seeing every wise
father has a special care to set down his mind in his will and testament in
plain and clear words, that so he may take away all just occasion of discord
and dissension among his children: it is absurd to imagine that the God of
peace and love would set down his mind in the books of the old and new
Testament in dark and obscure terms, and in phrases of such a doubtful and
ambiguous signification that like a nose of wax they may be bowed as well this
way as that way, and so minister occasion of discord and strife which he
therein so straightly and severely interdicteth? And verily as it is an absurd
thing to avouch that the light of the sun is dark, because sore eyes cannot
well behold it, and blind cannot apprehend it at al: so is it more absurd to
avouch that the holy Scripture being a light that proceeds from Christ the
son of righteousness Ap. 12. 1. is dark and obscure, because the sore eyes of
some men's sick minds are offended with it, and the blind minds of other that
are stark dead in their sins cannot apprehend it at all. Fifthly, seeing it is
an absurd thing to think that any person in a manuary craft can become a good
Artisan, unless he understand the particular rules thereof, and the reasons of
such works that are to be wrought thereby: it is no less absurd to determine
with the Church of Rome, that a blind and a colliar-like faith can make a true
faithful man, and a good intent can make a good work, when the party
understands not the particular doctrines of faith, nor the several reasons
whereby a good work may be done rightly and acceptably unto God. For is it
not absurd (as Chrysostom says) that a Physician, a Tanner, a Cloth-worker,
and all other craftsinen shall be able to stand in defense of their arts: and a
Christian shall not be able to give a reason of his faith? Whereas these arts
neglected bring loss only to our temporalties: and the contempt of the other
brings damage to our souls. Yet (says he) such is our madness that we
employ all our thoughts upon the former, and little regard the necessary and
most strong fortifications of our salvation: albeit we be commanded to be
ready to give an answer to every one that should ask us a reason of our faith,
and also to have the word of God dwelling in us most plentifully. Chryf. hom.
16. in Ioh. Sixthly, if we think it absurd to trust another man's telling in the
receipt of money, or another man's eye in the feeding of our horse, or another
man's taste in the food of our own bodies: It is more absurd to receive from our
teachers the heavenly coin of faith, hope, and love, upon their bare word, or
to trust his eyes and taste in the food of our souls by receiving and approving
all doctrines delivered by them unto us without all examination and trial. So
S. Chrysostom. It is an absurd thing in the receipt of money, not to trust
another, but to tell it our selves: and in matters of far greater moment to
content our selves with another man's bare word: especially whereas we have a
most exact balance, squire, and rule, even the determination of the divine
laws. Chryf. hom. 13. in 2. ep. ad Cor. Lastly, is it not most absurd that a
translation made by some which were not inspired and guided therein by the
spirit of God, should be commanded to be received by all, as only authentical,
and to be preferred before the text it self set down in the books of the
Canonical Scripture, penned in the Hebrew and Greek tongues by the Prophets
and Apostles, which were immediately inspired and guided in that very action by
the special motion of the unerring spirit of God? 2. Pet. 1. 20. 21. Is it
not, I say, absurd that all truth most purely set down by such notaries as
were immediately thereto designed by God, should not be so well preserved in
their register books from all errors and corruptions by divine providence, as
in the writings of any other which were not immediately by God designed
thereunto? For is water more clear in the stream where it may gather mud,
then in the Dulcius ex ipso fente bibuntur aqu^.
most pure fountain it self? Hence spring errors (says S. Cyprian) while men
repair not to the original verity nor the head is sought after, nor the
doctrine of our heavenly master is observed. Cyp. de simpl. praelat. Sccondly
to come to the doctrines of the Church of Rome, concerning the Sacraments: Is
it not absurd that the bare pronouncing of a few words should consecrate a
Sacrament, and that a Sacrament should give grace by the work wrought; albeit
the words themselves be not understood, nor the uses and ends, for the which
Sacraments were ordained? Tell me (says S. Chrysostom) O thou foolish, or
absurd Priest, does the virtue of the word of God consist in the form of the
letters, or in the understanding of the sense? Chrysostom. hom. 43. in Mat. Verily
the Apostle teaches, that the word of God profits not unless it be mingled
with faith in them that hear it. Heb. 4. 2. that is, unless it be so
delivered that the hearers minds may be instructed and edified thereby, and so
faith may be either begotten, or at least strengthened in them. And so does S.
Austine teach, both concerning the word and the Sacraments also. From whence
comes this power (says he) that water does touch the body and cleanse the
soul, but by means of the word, and that not because it is uttered, but
because it is believed. For in the word the vanishing sound is one thing, and
the remaining power another. This is the word of faith which we preach. Aug. in
Ioh. hom. 80. And again, The faith of the Sacraments do justify, not Fides
Sacra^^torum iustisicat non sacraments.
the Sacraments themselves. And therefore (says he) in the Sacraments we
must not regard what they are, but what they signify. Aug. cont. Max. l. 3.
cap. 22. For as in the Jewish sacrifices, so in these our Christians
Sacraments, God does not require the work wrought, but the reasons and ends
for the which it is wrought. Tertull. l. 3. cont. Marc. Secondly, it is not
absurd that a Sacrament which of the very work wrought (as they say) gives
grace, should hinder grace given in another sacrament, as they affirm of
marriage, and of their holy orders? As if one grace could disgrace another: or
one instrument Subordinata (...) pugnant.
ordained to give grace could resist the efficacy, and power of another.
Thirdly, was not their ancient order of baptising of Bells, an absurd disorder?
As if Christ had shed his blood for the purging of the sins of Bells, and had
ordained baptism to give to them his heavenly grace: But to leave baptism,
and to come to the Lords supper. what a Chaos of absurdities do they bring in
about the same? First, whereas the Scripture in plain words avoucheth that our
blessed Savior at the first institution thereof, took bread and wine in their
essence and substance to make them the mystical signs of his body and blood,
they say that he transubstantiated them into the very substance of his body and
blood, and left their accidences only to be the outward signs in the
sacrament. Whereas, Sacraments if they had not acertaine resemblance with the
things whereof they are Sacraments, they could not be sacraments at all, and
bear the name of the things themselves which Exijsdem nutrimu^ and sumu^.
Arist. ex ijsdem nascimur and pascimur. Bern. Accidens non transit a s^biecto
in subiectum. Accidentis esse est inesse.
they resemble, Aug. ad Bonif. ep. 23. Now what resemblance can there be
between the accidents of bread and wine, and the true and real body and blood
of Christ? Can these accidents nourish our bodies, that they may resemble the
nourishment of our souls by the body and blood of Christ? And is it not absurd
that these accidents being separated from their subjects must not only retain
their being, but also subsist by themselves? Surely it were fit that these men's
bodies were fed with accidents, which feed men's souls with such absurd
fancies. Now concerning Christ's body and blood which is the inward grace in
this sacrament, how many absurdities also do they avouch? First they will have
the very same body and blood daily to be made of the substance of bread and
wine through the pronunciation of five words by the mouth of a Priest, which
was but once made of the substance of the Virgin Mary by the operation of the
holy Ghost. Secondly, they will have it still here in earth which is ascended
up into heaven. Yea they will have it here to be daily eaten with our bodily
mouths, which is not only an absurd and an inhumane impiety in the judgment
of S. Austine de doct. christ. l. 3. c. 10. but has been an occasion to
Insidels to condemn Christians for the wickedst monsters that were in all the
whole world, for that they were not ashamed to say that they daily devoured
their Lord and God. Thirdly, they teach that the body of Christ which is a true
natural body, is in their mass uncircumcised without any dimensions, and
the same in heaven circumscribed and having dimensions. Lastly, they teach that
Christ's body here is not limited in space or place, but that it is so in
heaven: and therefore is in heaven a true body, but not here in earth. For (as
Austine says) take away from a body space or place, and it shall be no where,
or in no place, and if it be no where it is not at all. But all these
absurdities they think they may cure with this salve; for that all these
things are and may be still done by the miraculous hand and power of God. But
Austine refuses this plaster as not fit for this sore. For (as he teaches)
Sacraments may have honor as being religious: but they do not work
astonishment as being miraculous. For they are such means as God has
appointed to confirm the faith of such as already believe; and not to convert
unbelievers, for the which end miracles are ordained. 1. Cor. 14 22. And verily
if these works were miraculous, they should be such as might be first
apprehended by sense, that from thence they might enter into the conscience.
But these which they call miraculous works, are not apprehended by sense, as
sense it self does testify sufficiently. Thirdly, concerning prayer: First,
is it not absurd that public prayers unto which a public assent should be
given by the people, should be made in a tongue not understood of the people.
For (For (as the Apostle says) When thou blessest with the spirit, (viz. in a
tongue unknown) how shall he that occupies the room of the unlearned say
amen at thy giving of thanks, seeing he knows not what thou say 1. Cor.
14. 16. Secondly, is it not absurd that private prayers should be commanded to
be made in a tongue unknown to him that makes them, and therefore cannot
understand for what he himself prays? For should any one present a
supplication to a Prince, and not understand what is contained in his
supplication? much less should he do it to the king of kings, unless he
look to be re^ected as a foolish and an absurd companion, yea as a frantike
and mad man. Thirdly, is it not absurd to pray to Saints for such blessings as
cannot be given but by God alone? seeing it is all one, as if one should seek
for that of a subject, which is only in the hands of a king to give. Fourthly,
were it not absurd, when thou have the kings eldest and dearest son to be thy
mediator to his father, to request some mean persons of the court to be thy
mediators also, as if the mediation of such a person were not sufficient? So is
it far more absurd to join the Saints to the Son of God in the wor^e of
mediation, whereas his intercession with the father is 10000000000 times more
respected of God, then is the intercession of all Angels and Saints. Lastly,
is it not absurd to make the Saints mediators to Christ, when be himself
calls thee, and promises to hear and help thee also, whenever thou by
thy self shall come unto him in faithful and humble prayer? Mat. 11. 28. For
he loves his faithful servants better then any creature can love him: and
therefore they ought to come rather to him then to any other. I come with more
comfort (said an ancient author) to my Jesus then to any of the Saints. For this
cannot be the saying of S. Austine, because he renounceth Dulcius ad meum Iesum
accedo quam ad que^vis sanctorum.
all other mediators but Christ: and says more over that, if S. John himself
should take upon him to be our Mediator, he should show himself thereby to be
a very Antechrist. Aug. cont. ep. Parm. l. 2. c. 8. Last of all, concerning
faith they teach most absurdly of all other. For where as our common Creed
containing the sum of our Christian faith, teaches us to believe in God, that
is, to be fully persuaded that God is our God and loving father in Christ, and
has taken us for his adopted children even all and every one of us, unto whom
he has given a true faith: how can this faith taught in our common Creed stand
with that of the church of Rome, which commands us still to stand in doubt of
Gods love? Why? is not Gods love toward his faithful and obedient children,
greater then is the love of any earthly father to his? And would not an earthly
Father who has declared his great love toward his loving child in giving him
the best education that he can, and the greatest portion and the largest
inheritance take it very unkindly at his child's hand, if for all this he should
make but the least doubt of his so entire and tender affection and love? Now
our heavenly father gives to all that are adopted sons by faith in Christ a
far better education, greater portion and larger inheritance then all earthly
parents can give, and that to this end to testify unto them the unsearchable
riches of his goodness toward them, and to give them full assurance of his
unspeakable love. And yet shall they be commanded still to make doubt thereof?
yea whereas all professions in the whole world be they heathenish, Jewish,
Haereticall or schismatic do make solemn protestation that they will give
assurance, albeit upon most false and deceauable grounds, to their Disciples
and followers, that if they will rightly embrace their rules and put in
practice their commandments, they shall thereby be brought near unto God, and
have assurance of his favor and love? And shall our christian profession,
which only delivers the true grounds of our reconciliation and peace with
God, and of his good will and love toward the faithful, even by the
testimonies of a multitude of heavenly Angels, Luke 2. 14. yet be counter
commanded herein, and that by that Church which vaunteth her self to be the
only pillar and rock of faith? Undoubtedly as that person is no chaste wife,
nor true mother, that wills the children still to stand in doubt of the
kindness of their careful and loving father: so the church of Rome hereby
show eth her self neither to be the chaste spouse of Christ, nor the natural
mother of the faithful, but the whore of Babylon, and the mother of all
abominations, in that she commands the faithful which are the children of
God still to stand in doubt of the love of God their heavenly father. Wherefore
to conclude, as on the one side we are to pray unto God our heavenly father
that he would still deliver us from the wicked doctrines of evil and
unreasonable Papists, because they be not the doctrines of faith and truth: so
we are on the other side still to pray unto him, that he would cause the
doctrine of the Gospel to be published more and more, that he would give it a
full current, and cause it to be glorified throughout the whole earth. And let
us also pray that the Lord our God by the ministry of one Haggei or other
would lay open the ends and uses of such gentle corrections, which of late
years our land has bin visited withal again and again, and stir up the
spirits of our Zorobabels and Ioshuahs to have a care, first to build the
temple of the Lord before the care of building of their own houses. And that
our wise Solomon would not only have a care, first to build the temple of God
before the building of his own palace, but also have a greater care for the
one then for the other: that so of him it might be truly said: Behold a
greater then Solomon is here. Yea that God would more and more settle in the
heart of our David King James this serious meditation, which so thoroughly
possessed the soul of king David: Behold, I dwell in an house of Cedar trees,
and the ark of the Lord in diverse places of my kingdom dwells under
curtains by the want of skillful builders to build it a Temple: that so not
only our Nathans may say unto our King: Go and do all that is in thine heart:
for God is with thee: but also his God may say unto him: have thou such a care
to build an house unto me? Behold, in lue there of, thine house shall be
established and thy kingdom before thee for ever, even thy throne shall be
established for ever, 2. Sam 7. 16. even so oh faithful, Amen; say Amen, and
confirm this thine own decree, that it may be as the decrees of the Medes and
Persians that cannot be altered. And say again and again of our King James,
and his kingdoms, as thou did once of David and his Sion. I have chosen
great Britain, and loved to dwell in it, saying: This is my rest for ever,
here will I dwell, for I have a delight therein. I will bless her victuals
with increase, and satisfy her poor with bread. I will cloth her Priests with
health, and her Saints shall rejoice and sing. Here will I make the horn of
James to flourish: I have ordained a lantern for mine anointed. And as for
his enemies I will cloth them with shame: but upon his head shall the crown
flourish. Ps. 132. And let every faithful Britain cry out to his companion
in faith and country saying. O pray for the peace of London, they shall prosper
that love thee. Peace be within thy walls, and plenty within thy palaces. For
my brethren and companions sake I will wish thee now prosperity: yea because
of the house of the Lord our God I will seek to do thee good. Ps. 122.
Lastly, to conclude, let every faithful soul wheresoever after this or the
like manner commend his own soul and salvation into the hands of his redeemer.
Into thy hands Lord I commend my spirit which is thy due: for why thou have
redeemed it O Lord my God most true. Send out thy light, that is, thy truth,
and lead me with thy grace: which may conduct me to thine hill and to thy
dwelling place. One thing of thee I do require that thou will not deny: for
which I pray and will desire till thou to me apply. That I within his holy
place my life throughout may dwell: to see the beauty of thy face, and view thy
Temple well. The greater sort crave worldly goods, and riches do embrace: but
Lord grant me thy countenance thy favor and thy grace. For thou thereby shall
make mine heart more joyful and more glad, then they that of their corn and
wine full great increase have had. In peace therefore lie down will I, taking
my rest and sleep: for thou only wilt me O Lord alone in safety keep.

The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship of
the holy Ghost be with us all. Amen. Yea thou that art God to be blessed for
ever so in grace vouchsafe to be with us that thou bless the continual
ministry of thine holy word and heavenly Angels to our continual
sanctification and preservation in this life, and to our full and final
glorification in the life to come.

Amen.
FINIS.

