A TREATISE OF THE PESTILENCE: Wherein is showed all the causes thereof, with
most assured preservatives against all infection: and lastly is taught the true
and perfect cure of the pestilence, by most excellent and approved medicines.

Composed by THOMAS THAYRE Chirurgian, for the benefit of his country, but
chiefly for the honorable city of London.

Altissimus creauit medicinam super terram, vir prudens non contemnit illam.

Imprinted at London by E. SHORT, dwelling at the sign of the star on
bredstreete hill. 1603.

TO THE RIGHT HONORAble Sir ROBERT LEE Knight, Lord Mayor of the renowned City
of London, and to the right Worshipful the Sheriffs, and also to all the right
Worshipful the Aldermen their brethren, THOMAS THAYRE wishes all spiritual
and temporal blessings from the Lord in this life, and in the life to come
eternal salvation, through Christ Jesu our Savior.
COnsidering with my self, Right Honorable, and right Worshipful, that
nothing is more necessary, nor more desired in the time of dangerous sickness
and peril of death, then to present unto the person so standing, the means to
preserve him from the violence of the same, and to restore the sick from
imminent peril of death, unto his former estate of health; and perceiving,
right Honorable, that no man had as yet written any treatise, wherein was
contained such special and excellent medicines, that might be able to resist,
and also cure this dangerous and contagious sickness; and likewise to give
sufficient instruction and direction unto the inhabitants of this City, for
their preservation in this infectious time: I was moved in conscience (my
Lord) for the duty I owe, and for the love I bear unto this honorable city,
to communicate unto them such preservatives, as are, through Gods grace, given
unto them able to resist and defend from infection of this sickness all such
as use the^. And also I have set down most excellent and approved medicines,
such as I have practiced and approved unto the great utility of many, being
able, through Gods mercy, speedily to cure the most and greatest part of al
such as shall be infected with this sickness, being used in time, before the
sickness has utterly overcome nature. And although my insufficic^cy to write
any public matter, persuaded me to relinquish my intended purpose in
publishing this treatise, I being the meanest of so many in this land, and
unable to write any plausible style: yet the truth and plainnes of the matter,
the excellency of the medicines, and the vtility that many should find thereby,
being used, overcame that doubt of mind, and animated me to proceed in my
intended purpose; not doubting, but assuredly trusting in the Lord, from whom
comes all health, that this being used, many shall be preserved, and cured
thereby, to Gods glory and our comfort: he it is on whom we must depend. The
Lord has created medicine ne open diuina ^il valemus.
of the earth, and given great virtue unto trees, herbs, gums, stones, and
minerals, and all for the help of his people in the time of their sickness. God
make us thankful unto him for them, and give us grace to be warned by others
punishment, and to use thankfully and diligently, the good means for our
health: and then I trust assuredly that the Lord will bless our endeavors,
unto his glory, and our health' and comfort. And for as much as I have written
this treatise chiefelie in respect of the city, I have presumed to dedicate
the same unto your Honor, and unto the right Worshipful the Sheriffs and
Aldermen your brethren, as a pledge of my love and humble duty toward you:
which if it shall please you to accept in good part, and vouchsafe to patronize
mine endeavors, I doubt not but that many shall find the benefit thereof to
Gods glory and their great comfort: and I shall be encouraged some other time,
as occasion shall be offered, to perform a work no less needful: Thus
beseeching the Almighty to bless your Honor, and the right Worshipful your
brethren, with all happiness your hearts can desire, I humbly take my leave.

Your Honors and Worships to command, THOMAS THAYRE.

To the loving Reader grace and health from the Lord.
CAlling unto mind (courteous reader) the saying of TVLLY, Non nobis solum nati
sumus, etc. we are not born unto our selves alone, but we owe a duty and
service unto our country, our parents, and our friends, and considering with
my self unto my grief, the sickness, the which it has pleased God to visit
us withal, is greatly increased, dispersing it self into many places of this
city to the grief of many: I having duly considered thereof, thought it my
duty to use the small talent that the Lord has lent me unto his glory, and
the good of my brethren: which moved me to write this Treatise showing the
causes of the pestilence: the means to preserve us from the infection of this
contagious sickness: and the way and method to cure such as shall be infected
therewith, using the remedy in time, I mean in the beginning of the
sickness, before nature be overcome, observing the order of this book. And
for as much as this is Gods visitation for our iniquity, we must therefore
first fly unto him with contrite hearts, fixing our whole trust in his mercy:
And then we must with all diligence and thankfulness of heart, use the good
means that the Lord has ordained for our health. For to neglect the means,
is to contemn Gods gifts; and we make our selves guilty of our own death,
and before God we are no better then murderers, because we have despised the
means of our help that he has ordained for us. But I trust there are none so
wilful and obstinate in this city. This Treatise (gentle Reader) I have
penned, and present unto thee, plain and simple, barren of eloquence and filed
phrase to delight thee: yet herein is contained most excellent and approved
remedies, and as effectual for the curing of this sickness, as are, or have
been known. Use them in Gods name, and do not trust unto light and trifling
medicines, considering the strength and danger of this sickness: These have
power and virtue, through Gods grace, to expulse and speedily to cure this
infectious sickness: and for preserving a person from infection I have set
down many preservatives. And for curing the sickness I have set down four
principal medicines, and three others of less strength, to be used when the
aforenamed cannot be had. All which you may have ready or speedily made at
every good Apothecaries. Use them I counsel thee in the beginning of this
sickness, for delay breeds danger: and death commonly follows, and
medicine comes too late when nature is overcome by the sickness. And for as
much as I have written this Treatise for the benefit of all men in general,
that think good to use it, and have done it in love and good will, so I hope
the well disposed will censure it. And no godly and virtuous minded Physician
will be herewith offended, or envy my endeavors, considering it is for the
benefit and help of many in this or such like dangerous time, wherein many
perish for want of counsel and help in their sickness, at the beginning
thereof. And where any oversight or defect has passed in my book, as I doubt
not but that there are some, having so short time, and so little opportunity to
ouerlooke it, I desire the learned Reader to correct and amend the same: and in
so doing I shall be unto him beholding. And so now taking my leave, I beseech
God of his great mercy to bless the means that we shall use for our health,
unto the honor, glory and praise of his holy name, and unto our health and
comfort. Farewell luly the ninth.

Non quaero quod mihi vtile est, sed multis.

Thine in all friendly love and good will, Thomas Thayre.

A Treatise of the Pestilence: wherein is showed all the causes thereof, with
most assured preservatives against all infection.
THis contagious sickness which is generally called the Plague or Pestilence, is
no other thing then a corrupt and venomous air, deadly enemy unto the vital
spirits: most commonly What the Plague is. Aerem vitiati ac putridum.
bringing death and dissolution unto the body, except with speed good remedy
be used. I mean not that the air of it self is a very poison, for then
consequently all persons (for the most part) that live within the air so
corrupted, should be infected, and few or none escape the danger thereof: but
my meaning is, that the air has in it self a venomous quality, by reason
whereof those bodies wherein there is Cacochymia, corrupt and superfluous
humors abounding, are apt and lightly infected, those humors being of
themselves inclined and disposed unto putrefaction. Now I will proceed to show
the causes of this dangerous sickness, and also the cure thereof.

Now having briefly defined what the Pestilence is, I will (God assisting me)
prosecute mine intended purpose. First, in showing all the causes thereof, and
the cure, and remedy for every cause.

Entering into due consideration of the causes of the Pestilence that now
reigns, Christian Reader, I find there are three causes thereof.

The first and chiefest is sin. ^^metimes the ^ is corrup^^ by natural ^ses,
and som^^^es by evil ^its com^ded by God


The second is the corruption of the air.

The third and last cause, is the evil disposition of the body, bred by evil
diet, and the abuse of things called Res non naturales, things not natural: not
so called, for that they are against nature, but because through the abuse of
them nature is debilitated, corrupted, and oftentimes utterly destroyed.

The first cause, I say, is sin. The holy Scriptures sufficiently proves the
same, and gives many examples ^^e first cause.
how the Lord oftentimes punishes his people for their sin and impiety of
life with the Pestilence. Read the 14. chapter of the book of Numbers, and
the 11. and 12. verses: where the Lord speaking unto Moses, saying: How ^^mb.
14. 11.
long will this people provoke me? and how long will it be ere they believe me,
for all the signs I have showed among them? I will smite them with the
pestilence, and will destroy them, and will make thee a greater and mightier
nation then they.

Why does the Lord here threaten the children of Israel his chosen, to strike
them with the Pestilence? the reason is showed in the same chapter: because
(says he) they have murmured against me, and have rebelled, not keeping nor
observing my laws. And as the Lord spoke unto the children of Israel by Moses,
so speaks he unto us daily by his ministers and preachers of his word.

Also read Deuteronomy the 28. chap. the 1. 2. 3. and 4. verses, and there you
shall see the blessings that the Lord promises unto them, that walk in his
ways and ^ut. 28. 1. 2. ^.
keep his commandments: And it follows in the same chapter: But if thou will not obey the voice of the Lord thy God, and keep and do his
commandments: The Lord shall make the pestilence to cleave unto thee. And many
more curses he pronounces against them that continue in their sin and
iniquity of life. And further, The Lord shall smite thee with a consumption,
and with a fever, and with a burning ague, and so forth. This spoke the Lord
unto the children of Israel his people, and this speaks the Lord daily unto
us: but we are slow to repentance and amendment of life.

Read Leuiticus the 26. chap. and the 21. verse. And if you walk stubbornly
against me (says the Lord) and Leuit, 26. 2^
will not obey my word, I will bring seven times more plagues upon you,
according unto your sins. And in the third verse following he says: I will
send the pestilence among you, and you shall be delivered into the Verse. 3.
hands of your enemies. This spoke the Lord unto the inhabitants of Jerusalem,
and this speaks he unto us oftentimes by his Ministers, whom we ought with
all reverence to hear, and with all diligence to follow. Many more places
could I cite and infer out of the sacred Scriptures, to prove sin to be a
cause of the Pestilence, and sometime the only cause thereof: example in
David: example in Pharao, and diverse other, which for prolixitie I omit, hoping
this may suffice to prove sin to be a cause of the Pestilence, which is
indeed as a messenger or executioner sometimes of Gods iustire. Many and
great plagues has this our land tasted of in times past, and it is not yet
ten years since this City of London was visited and afflicted with this
sickness, dispersing it self into diverse and many places of this land, cutting
off and taking away a great multitude of people: and I doubt not but sin was a
great cause thereof. O that man would therefore remember the inconstancy and
srailtie of this life! And consider the end of his creation was to serve and
glorify God: but we daily dishonor him by committing of sin, and not giving
unto him that honor and service that is due unto the Lord: But placing all our
affections upon the vain delights and inconstant pleasures of this alluring
and deceitful world, which do as it were bewitch us, and withdraw us from
that Christian care that we ought to have of our salvation, abusing Gods mercy
and long sufferance with our delays and procrastination to turn unto him,
being misebly deluded by satan, and intised by the glittering shows of this
world, to the love thereof; and God knows how soon we must leave it. I pray
God infuse his grace and holy Spirit into our hearts, that sin may be
mortified in us, and that it may work in us a reformation and amendment of
life: and that we may henceforth walk in this our short pilgrimage, as
Christians and servants of the Lord, serving him in all holiness and piety of
life, contemning the vain pleasures of this fraudulent world, which are but
snares to entrap our souls, and the baits of Satan to draw us unto
destruction: then shall we not need to fear death, but say with Saint Paul,
Mors mihi lucrum, Death unto me is gain, says he: so is it indeed unto all
the godly: but unto the wicked it is an entrance into a continual and eternal
punishment: from the which Christ that has died for us, deliver us. Amen.

Now having showed sin to be one cause of the Pestilence, and sometimes the
only cause, when it pleases God to punish the impiety of his people, using
it as the executioner of his wrath: it follows that I show the other causes,
whereof the Pestilence may arise. The second cause, is the corruption of the
air.

Galen the most excellent and famous Physician in his book de Differentijs
Febrium, says, there be two causes ^en. de diff ^rium cap 8. ^ocrat. de ^hus.

2. cause is corruption he air. third he is the e^disposition ^e body.


of the Pestilence: Vnam, aerem vitiatum ac putridum: altera^, humores corporis
vitio so victu collectos, and ad putreso endum paratos; The one cause is (says
he) an infected, corrupted, and putrified air: the other cause is, evil and
superfluous humors gathered in the body through haughty and corrupt diet,
which humors be apt and ready to putrefaction. And this is most true, and not
only the opinion of Galen and Hippocrates, the Fathers and princes of
Physic, but of all the learned and judicial Physicians of latter time, and
at this day. Now let us consider how, and by what means the air may be
corrupted and altered from his wholesome quality unto a venomous disposition.
Entering into due consideration thereof, I find many causes that may corrupt the
air, all which I will compose or include in these two.

The first cause whereby the air may be corrupted, is through the unwholesome
influence of yt planets; who by their malicious disposition, quality, and
operations, distemper, alter and corrupt the air, making it unwholesome unto
humane nature.

When the temperature of the air is changed from his natural estate, to
immoderate heat and moisture, Note.
then it corrupts and putrifieth, and ingendreth the Pestilence. I emit to
write what I have read concerning the Gal. de diff. febrium lib. 1. cap. 5.
alterations and mutations, that are sometimes caused by the superior bodies or
planets here below upon the earth: for unto the learned it were superfluous,
and unto the vulgar or common sort, it would rather breed admiration then
credit: but this every man is to understand, Deus regit Astra, GOD rules the
stars: and yet I doubt not, but through the Eclipses, Exaltation,
Conjunctions, and aspectes of the Planets, the air may be corrupted, and made
unwholesome sometimes, in so much that diverse griefs are bred thereby.

The second cause, whereby the air may be corrupted, The second cause of the
pestilence.

Rotten exhaltions may corupt the air.

The air tha^ comes from such stinking places corru^^ the blood.

The third cau^^ of the pestile^d is the evil diposition of the body.


is a venomous euaporation arising from the earth, as from fennes, moors,
standing muddie waters, and stinking ditches and priuies, or from dead bodies
unburied, stinking channels and mixsones, and multitudes of people living in
small and little room, and vncleanlie kept: all these are causes and means
whereby the air may be corrupted.

The third cause of the pestilence, is the evil disposition of the body, which
is bred by evil diet: the body being repleat with corrupt and superfluous
humors, which humors bereadie to putrify and rot upon any light occasion: And
when such a person does but receive into his body by inspiration, the
corrupted and infections air, he is therewith by and by infected, his body
being disposed thereunto through superfluous and corrupt humors abounding:
whereas contrary wise, a body of a good disposition, I mean a body free from
gross, corrupt, and superfluous humors, is not castlie or lightly infected,
because there is not that matter for the infectious air to work upon. And
again, nature is more strong to repel the infectious or corrupted air, if
it be received: and perfected ^n an^.
this is the cause why one person is rather infected then another; namely the
disposition of the body.

Now having showed all the causes of the pestilence; I will (GOD assisting me)
set down the cure and remedy for every cause, which causes being taken away,
the effect which is the sickness, must needs cease.

The first cause, I say, is sin: and this ought first to be taken away, and
then I dare undertake (by Gods assistance) ^ritudi^^m est.
my corporal medicines shall soon stay this furious sickness. Sin is a
sickness of the soul; the cure thereof does consist in these two points. The
first, is true, hearty, and faithful repentance, with all contrition of heart
confessing thy sins unto the Lord, with faithful prayer unto Christ Jesus,
that it will please him to be an advocate and mediator unto the Lord for the
forgiveness of thy sins. Do this, and thou shall find GOD merciful, he is
readier to forgive then we to ask forgiveness of him. He would not the death
of a sinner, but with all mercy, patience, and long suffering wayteth and
expects our conversion unto him.

The second point, is newness of life: for what shall it avail us to have
forgiveness of our sins, if we fall into the same again, and walk in our
former euilnesse of life? This will but increase Gods wrath and indignation
against us, and exasperate him to punish our impiety of life with all
severity. Therefore, I counsel thee, as thou tendrest the salvation of thy
soul, fly from evil, and do the thing that is right; walk vprightlie before
him in newness and holiness of life: for the Lord sees all thy ways, and
knows the thoughts of thy heart long before. Remember thy time here is but
short, and death will sommon thee (thou know not how soon) to give an
account how thou have spent thy time, and used the talent that the Remember
this whilst the live here.
Lord has lent thee here on earth. Then shall thou stand before the tribunal
seat of the Almighty and just Judge, where all thy whole life shall be laid
open, and all thy actions, and thoughts of thy heart made manifest and known.
Then happy and ten times happy are they, unto whom the Lord shall say: Come
ye blessed of my Father, receive ye the Kingdom prepared for you before the
beginning of the world. But how unhappy, and in what miserable estate are
they, unto whom the Lord shall say: Go you cursed into eternal darkness, a
place of punishment appointed for you: where there is horror, weeping and
gnashing of teeth. This is the place appointed for the ungodly worldlings that
wallow and continue in their sin, neglecting the service of the Lord: for
which end they were created. Consider this (good Christian Reader) and defer no
time to turn unto the Lord: for this life of ours is frail, unconstant, and
very uncertain. We have examples daily before our eyes of the uncertainty
thereof, to day a man, to morrow none. Homo natus Muliere paucorum dierum est,
and repletur inquietudine, says Job: Man that is borne of a woman his days
are few, and is full of misery.

For thy further instruction, I refer thee unto the godly and learned Divines,
hear them: for they are the messengers and ministers of the Lord, appointed
to teach his people, and in me it might be noted for presumption, to take upon
me the office of another man, having in this point more need to be taught my
self, then able to instruct others. The cure of the soul belongs unto them,
and the^ cure of the body unto me. I will now hasten unto the second cause,
which is the corruption of the air.

I have showed before all the causes that may corrupt the air: it follows
now that I teach the correction, purging and altring of the air corrupted,
which is the second cause of the pestilence.

And first I would counsel you, that al ye streets, lanes, and allies be kept
clean and sweet, as possible may be, ^uations.
not suffering the filth and sweepings to lie on heaps, as it does,
especially in the suburbs, but to be carried away more speedily: for the
unclean keeping of the streets, yielding as it does noisome and unsavory
smelles, is a means to increase the corruption of the air, and gives great
strength unto the pestilence.

Also, that all the pondes, pooles, and ditches about the City, if they yield
any stinking and noisome smells, that they be scoured and cleansed: for there
arises from them an evil and unwholesome air, which furthereth the corruption
of the air, and worse will do in hotter weather.

Also, that you suffer no mixsons to be made so near unto the City as they
are, but to be carried far off: neither any dead carrion to lie unburied, as I
have seen, but to be ^e good ^ers were in the of all ^ishes in^^ and good
carried forth and buried deep.

Also, that every Evening you make small and light fires with Oken wood, in
those streets where the infection is, either two, or three fires, according
unto the length of the street or place infected; the wood being consumed, cast
in some sticks of Juniper; and therewithal, two, three or four rowles of
perfume that I have here set down in my book, which I would wish were used
through the whole City in your chambers and houses, cast in upon some coals in
a chafingdish or fuming pot, in the Morning and Evening. This fumigation has a
most excellent and singular property, to purge and alter a corrupt and
unwholesome air.

But peradventure some men for want of Judgment, will think this my direction
over curious and of small validity: but I do and will affirm, that the use
thereof is very requisite, and of great force and vtility, and the best means
for the purging and altering the evil quality of the air, that is known
unto man.

This fumigatio^ is to be used where the infection is, in the evening, and also
in the morning; and is of great force for the purging of the air, and altering
the evil quality thereof: which I wish were daily used through the City, in
their houses and chambers, for the excellent virtue thereof.

R. Storax, Calamint, Labdanum, Cypresse-wood, Myrrh, Benjamin, Yellow
Sanders, Ireos, red Roseleaues, Flowers of Nenuphar, of each one ounce; liquid
Storax one ounce, Cloves one ounce, Turpentine one ounce, Withy cole five
ounces, Rose Water as much as will be sufficient to make them up in trochis, and
let them be two drams in weight.

The wood being consumed, cast in some sticks of Juniper, and after it cast
in two or three of these trochis, which will yield a comfortable smell and
purge the air.

Another more sweet and delectable for the better sort, to use in their houses
and chambers daily.

R. Storax, Calamint, Labdanum, Cypresse-wood, Franke^cense, Benjamin, of each
of the^ half an ounce; red Roseleaues dried, yellow Sanders, of each two drams;
Cinnamon, Cloves, wood of Aloes, of each of them one dram; flowers of Nenuphar
one dram; liquid Storax half an ounce, gum Dragagant two drams, and musk six
grains, Withy cole three ounces, Rose Water as much as will suffice to make it
up in Trochis.

This I would counsel Gentlemen, and Citizens to use daily in their houses and
chambers, for the excellent operation it has.

Also it is good for want of these, to burn in your houses and chambers
Juniper, Frankincense, Storax, Baylaues, Marierom, Rose marie, Lauender, and
such like.

Now having showed the remedies for the two first causes; it follows, that I
teach the cure of the third and last cause, which is the evil disposition of
the body, through superfluous, corrupt, and evil humors abounding. Here is the
cause, and these corrupt and superfluous humors must be taken away before the
body can be in any good estate of health. And this is the reason that diverse
persons living together in one air, that one is infected and not another,
namely, the disposition of the body: for those naughty, corrupt, and
superfluous humors, are of themselves apt and disposed unto putrefaction, and
if it so chance that they do putrefie of themselves, then there arise dangerous
fevers, according unto the nature of the humor that corrupts. As for example,
If choler do putrify within the vessels, it ingendreth febris ardens or
febris causon, a hot and a dangerous fever, working his malice in the
concauitie of the liver and lunges and about the heart, and except remedy be
administered the person dies. And so when any of the other humors do putrefie,
there spring fevers, according unto their nature, as the learned know. Now
such bodies (I say) wherein there is such superfluous humors abounding, in the
time of any infection, receiving into their bodies the corrupt persons ^t to be
^ed.
and venomous air, are thereby infected: And these humors turned not only into
putrefaction, but into a venomous quality, by the operation of the infectious
air Whereas in bodies void and free from such superfluous humors, there the
infectious air has not such matter to work upon: and again, nature is more
strong and forcible to resist and expel a corrupt and infectious air although
received.

Here the reason is apparent why one person is infected and not another. And
very niedfull it is especially in this time of sickness, that this evil
disposition of the body be taken away and amended, by purging and euacuating of
the perccant humors. For which purpose I will set down a very excellent and
approved potion, which purges the blood and disburdeneth the body of
superfluous humors both choler, phlegm, and melancholy, opening attracting and
euacuating the corrupt and vicious humors of the body, to the great comfort,
help and ease of those that use it with discretion, as I shall direct Yet it
were good to take counsel of some Doctor.
them: the making or composition whereof I have here set down.

But first taking this sirrup three morninges before you purge, two spoonefuls
every morning, fasting after it two or three hours, and use your accustomed
diet as before.

R. Oximell two ounces, sir. de quinque radicibus two ounces, misce. To prepare
the body.


R. Good Rubarbe two drammes, spicknarde six grains, Seen half an ounce,
Fenill seed, and annisseede The potion purging.
of each half a dram, flowers of Borage and buglosse, of each half a little
handful; Water of Endive and fumitarie of each of them five ounces, and so
make your infusion.

Let this infusion be made in some earthen stupot close covered and paasted
that no breath or vapor go forth, and let it stand seven or eight hours upon
some imbers, or small coals, and but warm: after which time strain it forth
and put thereunto of Diacatholicon one ounce, Diaphenicon half an ounce,
Electuarium Succo rosarum half an ounce, mix these with the infusion above
written, and this will be a sufficient quantity for three days, taking the
third part the first day, and on the second day the half of that which was
left, and the other part the third day: take it early in the morning, and
sleep not after the taking of it, neither eat, nor drink until it has
wrought his effect, and then take some broth made with a chicken or a capon,
and for want thereof with veale or young mutton, as you can be provided, with
What is to be observed in the ^aking of this ^otion.
resins of the sun stoned, two or three dates, a little parsely put
thereunto, and thickened with some crummes of bread. When your potio^ has done
working you may take of this broth, and also a little of your meat sparingly,
and in the evening make a light supper with a chicken, or a rabbet, or such
like meat that is light and easy of digestion, yielding good nutriment: The
next day early, take another part of your drink, and use your self as the day
before. And likewise the third day, take that part of your potion that
remained, and use your self as before taught. This being done, rest a Gods
name, and use a good and a moderate diet, and beware of excess and
superfluity; for he that uses it shall fall into the hands of the Physician,
but he that dieteth him self prolongeth his life.

Now if it so happen that your potion do not work within two hours after the
receiving thereof, which is very seldom seen in any body, then take a little
of your broth, or if it be not ready a little thin alebrue, either of which
will cause it to work forthwith. Or if you fear through weakness of your
stomach, you shall vomit after the taking thereof, then as soon as you have
received your potion, let there be made ready a brown tossed, which being dipped
and sokened in good vinegar, hold it unto your nose, and smell thereunto
sometime. You ought to keep your chamber during the three days, that you take
your potion.

And it is very requisite also, that you keep your house the day after your
purging: because the pores of the body will be opened thereby. This potion is
of great virtue, and not only delivers the body from a disposition to be
infected with this sickness; but also from many other griefs and diseases
springing and arising by repletion, and corruption of humors, and very gently
and easily purges both choler and phlegm from the stomach without molestation
And draws from all parts superfluous humors.
of the body, or weakening of nature. And this is especially good for such as
want appetite unto their meat, and such as feel an vnweildinesse, and
slothfulness in themselves, having no delight in exercise, dullness of the
wit and senses, more sleepie then accustomed to be, shiuering of the body,
mixed with These are the signs of repletion.
heat, as if they should have an Ague.

And if any think this a tedious course, and therefore loath, or unwilling to
use it, let them consider that health is not obtained without some means be
used, and let them not think much to take a little pains for the gaining of
so precious a Jewel, without the which although abounding in worldly wealth,
yet we can take delight, pleasure, or contentation in nothing: As for healthy
bodies, such as are free from corrupt and superfluous humors, using a good
diet and exercise of body, such (I say) are not lightly infected as others
are, in whom there is repletion: it shall be sufficient for them without
purging to use any of the preservatives I have set down in this book. And
let them be assured by the use thereof, and by Gods assistance, from all
infection, although the sickness were more strong and powerful then it is:
And although I assuredly know, that this potion being used may suffice to take
away the evil disposition of the body, yet because I know many would be loath
to be inioined to keep their chamber four days as they ought to do, that
use this potion or any other purging potion, I have for their benefit set
down a most excellent pill that purges all corrupt, and superfluous humors,
and is with all a very good preservative, defending the body from all infection.

The Composition of the pill.
R. Good Rubarbe one dram and a half, Saffron two scruples, Trochis of
Agarick one dram; of chosen Myrrh one dram, Aloes the best two drams, syrrup
of Roses solutiue as much as will suffice to make them in pills.

Take a dram of these pills early every morning, for five or six days together,
taking two or three hours after them a little thin broth, and use a sparing
diet for these five or six days, and let your meat be light and easy of
digestion: you shall have two or three stooels daily or four in some bodies.
Notwithstanding you may safely go abroad about your business, without any
inconvenience at all.

And having now showed how the evil disposition of the body may be amended,
and taken away by gentle purging and euacuating of the peccant humors, bred by
evil diet, and the abuse of the six things called, Res non naturales, whereof
I will briefly speak, teaching what ought to be avoided, as hurtful and
prejudicial unto your health.

In receiving of the air.
The air is one of the Elements whereof our bodies are composed; and without
the inspiration, and respiration thereof we cannot live: and therefore it
stands much with our health, that the air which we receive into our bodies,
be sweet, wholesome and vncorrupt. And I counsel al men that they avoid all
places of infection, all stinking and noisome smells; and when they are disposed
to walk, that they walk in gardens, or sweet and pleasant fields: but
neither early nor late at night. I have set down the making of a good
pomander, the which I would wish to be worn not only of Gentlemen, but of
others also for the good property it has both in resisting a corrupt, noysom,
and stinking air, and in comforting the senses. I do not intend in this place
to write of the nature of aires and the election thereof; it would be over
tedious, who so desires it, let him read Hippocrates de flatibus: also
Auicen, and Rasis have written copiouslie thereof. And you ought to observe
air as meat, cold sicknesses require warm air, dry sicknesses moist air:
and so in the contraries, to them that be long sick, change of air is very
commodious; and to Both in fevers dropsies, rhumes falling sickness.
such as be in health, a temperate air is most holesom. And where the air is
infected and corrupted, I have set down most excellent perfumes, for the
correcting and purging thereof both for the streets, houses and chambers, and
by the use thereof the evil quality of the air shall be taken away.

In eating and drinking.
In eating and drinking, we ought to consider that the meats that we eat and
receive for the nourishment of our bodies be sweet and wholesome, yielding Galen
de humoribus.
good juice: for such as the meat is, such humors it breeds in the body: if
it be hard of digestion it does debilitate and weaken nature, and ouercharge
the alteratiue virtue of the stomach: if sweet, it breeds oppilations,
whereof dangerous fevers arise; sower cools nature and hasteneth age: moist
does putrify and hasten age, dry sucketh up natural moisture, salt does
fret, bitter does not nourish, so that in diversity of meats is great
diversity of quality. A man that is in health ought to use Quality.
a temperate diet, and feeding sparingly upon one, two or three dishes at the
most, and if we mean to live in any health of body all superfluity, and
repletion of meats is to be abhorred. Consider with thy self, thou art a man
endued with reason, and therefore in thy diet and all other thy actions let
reason and temperance Quantity.
govern thine appetite and affections: through surfeiting many one has
perished, but he that dieteth Eccl. 7.
himself, prolongeth his life. The variety of meats at one meal brings
pain unto the stomach, offends nature, and does engender and beget many
diseases, as Galen witnesses, reason teaches, Galen iuuent. ne^brorum lib. 1.
cap. 4.
and experience approves. Therefore whosoever is in health, and desires to
continue therein, let him observe this rule. Let his meat that he uses be
wholesome and nourishing, such as best agrees with his nature and complexion:
for unto some men beese is more wholesome and better then chickens, or such like
fine meats: the reason is, digestion is strong through heat, as in cholerike
persons, in whom light and fine meats are rather burnt then digested:
therefore grosser meats are for them more wholesome and better. And let him
also note what meats do offend, or disagree with him, and let him refuse it
as hurtful: and in so doing he shall be a Physician unto himself. Note also
that thou may eat more meat Heat is the cause, of digestion.
in winter then in summer, because digestion is more strong, by reason that
natural heat is enclosed in the stomach, but in summer universally spread
abroad into the whole body: so the stomach wanting this natural heat,
digestion is thereby more weak. Cholerike persons and children may eat oftener
then any other, by reason of their heat and quick digestion. Time and place
will not permit me to write what I would concerning diet, the observation
whereof is a very special means for the preservation of health: and many
times sicknesses are cured by the benefit of diet. In hot sickness use a cold
diet: in a moist sickness use a drying diet, Contraria contrariis curantur:
all distemperatures are cured by Auicen. Hippocrat. in Aphoris.
their contraries. I will here end of diet: wishing thee to remember this
saying of Hippocrates, Studium sanitatis est non satiari cibis, the means or
study to preserve health, is to eschew fullness or superfluity of meats and
drinks. So is it indeed, and especially in a time of sickness, as this is. And
it is now exceeding good with all your meats to use sharp sauces made with
vinegar, or rose vinegar, Orenges, Limons, Pomegranates, and a little Cinnamon
and Maces. But forbear and refuse all hot spices, and strong wines, Onions,
Garlic, Leekes, Cabage, Radish, Rocket, and such like: the use of them is
very Except one draught for a cold and weak stomach.
hurtful and dangerous. But these are good and wholesome: Borage, buglosse,
sorrel, endive, cichorie, violets, spinach, betonie, egrimonie, they are good
both in salades, sauces, and broth: and your diet ought in this time of
infection to be cooling and drying.

Of sleeping and waking.
God has created the day for man to labor in his Arist. de some. Somnus
causatur ex vapore cibi, qui vadit ad cerebrum.
vocation and calling, and the night to rest and sleep, which is so natural
and needful, that without it we cannot live. In sleep our senses have their
rest, the powers animal are therewith comforted and strengthened, the mind
quieted, digestion furthered, and finally the strength of the body maintained:
and without sleep wise men should be soon changed Moderate sleep is good,
and greatly comforts nature.
into idiote fools. And sleep is no less needful for the preservation of our
lives then food. These are of themselves good, but we, through the abuse of
them, change their natures, and make them hurtful unto us. Immoderate sleep,
and sleeping in the day is very evil: it dulleth the wit, it repleats and fills
the body with evil humors, it ingendreth rheum, and makes the body apt unto
palsies, apoplexies, falling sickness, impostumes; and finally, slow and unapt
unto any honest exercise.

Note also that we ought not to sleep immediately after meat before it be
descended from the mouth of the stomach, for thereby digestion is corrupted,
and pains, and noise in the belly engendered: Also our sleep is made unquiet
and troubled by evil vapors ascending: therefore I counsel all men that are
in health, and desire the continuance thereof, that they avoid sleeping in the
day time, especially ^eepe in the ^y makes the ^dy apt to in^ction in this ^^e
of sickness.
lying upon a bed: and if they must needs sleep, being accustomed so to do,
let them take a nap sitting in a chair. And in many sicknesses sleep is
dangerous: so is it after the receiving of any poison, or unto a person
infected with the pestilence: the reason is, sleep draws the blood and
spirits inward, and therewithal attracteth the venom unto the nutrimentall or
vital parts: therefore if a person doubt that he is infected, let him
refrain from sleep, and let him take without delay some good medicine set
down against the sickness, and sweat therewithal.

And as I have showed the inconvenience of too much, or immoderate sleep: so I
say overmuch watching is no less hurtful unto nature. It does debilitate the
powers animal: it weakeneth the natural ^ne nimium ^^turae inimicu^.
strength of the body, brings consumptions, breeds melancholy, and
oftentimes the frenzy. Therefore both in this and all other things, we must
use temperance, sobriety and moderation.

Of exercise and rest.
Galen counsels us, if we desire to preserve health, that we use exercise of
body: it makes digestion Galen. in regim. sanitat.
strong, and more quick alteration, and also better nourishing: it
strengthens the body, it increases heat, dries rheumes, it opens the
pores of the body, whereby humors offending nature are expulsed: it is
indeed the preserver and maintainer of health, as Galen, Auicen, and Corn.
Celsus teach, and experience approves.

Idleness and rest is a contrary unto exercise: it is the mother of
ignorance, the nurse of diseases, it corrupts the mind, it dulleth the body,
filling and repleating it with superfluous and evil humors, which breed
many sicknesses. And as exercise and labor is a preserver of health, so
idleness is the shortner of life, enemy unto the soul and body, and very
unprofitable in a Commonwealth, and also hurtful in a private house. And
remember this, that vehement exercise be not used presently after meat, for it
will conueigh crude and undigested juice unto each part, which is very evil and
hurtful. But exercise is good before meat, and two or three hours after
meat, being moderately used. Exercise is best and most convenient, when the
first and second digestion is complete, as well in the stomach, as in the
veins. But in such a time of infection as this is, I cannot commend exercise,
because it will too much open the pores, and the pores being opened, the body
is apt to receive the infectious air. Much more would I say of the benefit of
exercise, and the inconvenience of idleness, but that I should be ouer-tedious
in this place.

Of fullness and emptiness.
All fullness and superfluity of meats are to be eschued, for as much as they
make repletion: And all bodies in whom there is repletion, are apt to be
infected. And such bodies must endeavor to keep themselves soluble: All
euacuations are good for them, as purging and bleeding, except some special
cause does forbid it: And let them use a sparing and frugall diet. And they may
safely, and with great profit use the pill I have set down before in my book.
And as I have said, repletion is an enemy unto health, bringing and begetting
sickness, and sometime sudden death: so is too much fasting and emptiness,
no less hurtful: it weakeneth the brain, and dries the whole body,
consuming the radical moisture in man, and shorteneth life.

And as repletion is to be abhorred and avoided, so also increa^h wind, ^oler,
and me^choly.
is too much emptiness to be eschewed: and as I have said, we must use a
mediocritie in all things.

Of affections of the mind.
Affections of the mind are called by M. Cicero, Perturbations. Galen calls
them Pathemata vel affectus anims, and nothing is more hurtful in this time of
sickness, nor greater enemy unto life, then fear, sorrow, anger, heaviness
and grief of mind. Anger is a dangerous passion: it chafeth the blood, and
disquieteth the heart: it inflameth the spirits: which ascending up into the
head, annoieth the animal powers ^hese passions the mind are ^angerous.
or faculties. This passion choleric persons, tyrants and fools are much
troubled withal, and oftentimes in their wrath perform wicked and unlawful
actions, Fear, sorrow, and grief of mind are no less hurtful unto the body:
for they waste the natural heat and moisture, wherein life consists; making
the body lean and dry, whereupon consumption followesh: it dulleth the wit
and understanding, and draws the spirits and blood inward to the heart: and
withal attracteth the venomous and infectious air, if we live within the
compass thereof. If I should here stand to write of all the perturbations for
the mind, defining and distinguishing them one from another, showing the
wonderful effects of them, and the inconvenience thereof, I should be over
tedious in this short Treatise, and it might seem impertinent in this work:
only this I wish thee to remember, Sub te erit appetitus tuus, and
tudominaberis illi: Under thee shall be thine appetite, and thou shall bear
rule over it, says the Lord. We must therefore master our affections: for if
they be not ouer-ruled and governed by wisdom, they will exceed, and prove
dangerous enemies both unto soul and body. And in this time of sickness we
ought specially to avoid these perturbations of the mind, and to use all
virtuous and commendable mirth, sweet music, good company, and all laudable
recreation that may delight you, and use the perfumes in your chambers, and in
other rooms of your houses that I have set down, being cast into a fuming pot
or chafing dish upon a few coals. Do this evening and morning: the charge
thereof is small, but the utility is great. It purges the air, and takes
away the evil quality thereof.

Now having showed what ought to be avoided, it follows, that I set down
preservatives that may resist all infection: which God assisting me, I will do.

First of all, I counsel all men in whom blood does abound, the which they may
easily know themselves, by the heat of their bodies, color, largeness and
fullness of their veins, that they be let blood in the liver vain in the
right arm: and let the quantity be according unto the strength of the person.

Also that all men in general avoid all bathes and hote-houses, and all
vehement exercise, that may ouerheate the body, and inflame the blood.

Also the company of women this hot and contagious time is very hurtful,
and therefore ought to be used with great moderation.

Also walking very early in a morning, and very late in the evening, is
hurtful and dangerous. Also avoid all prease and throng of people where a
multitude are assembled, and al noisome and unsavory places.

Now having showed all the causes of the pestilence, and set down the cure and
remedy for every cause: I will by Gods assistance, for the care I have of the
preservation of the inhabitants of this honorable city, and for the love I
bear unto them and my country, communicate unto them most excellent and
approved preservatives and of singular virtue: which whose uses them, shall
not need to fear the infection of this contagious sickness. First, with an
humble and contrite heart desire mercy of the Lord: and then commend thy self
unto his protection: which being done, use the good means he has ordained for
thy health.

Pills of especial virtue in preserving all that use them.
R. Good Aloes half an ounce washed in rosewater: of good myrrh, of saffron,
of each two drams: bolearmoniac. praep. one scruple: seed pearl one scruple:
sir. of limons as much as will suffice to make them in pills, or in a mass.

Take half a dram hereof made in pills every second or third day in the
morning; fast after it three or four hours: but it shall be good for you to
take a little thin broth, or a little alebrue, or six or eight spoonefuls of
wine within an hour after, and use your accustomed diet, as before.

Another pill that does more move the body, and gives two stools, or three
in some bodies, and this is good for such as are costiue, and in whom humors
abound.
R. Good Rubarbe, chosen myrrh, of each one dram; chosen aloes two drams:
zedoarie root one scruple: saffron one scruple: sirrup of Roses solutiue as
much as will suffice to make the mass.

This pill purges gently, and preserves the body from all infection.

Such bodies in whom humors do abound, and are most commonly costiue, may use
these pills, taking half a dram every morning, for three, four, five, or
six days together, as they please. Take after it either a little thin broth,
or of an alebrue, or a draught of wine, if it be not too hot for your
complexion, and use your ordinary diet as accustomed, if it be good.

Another very good Preservative, and worthy of much commendations.
R. Of good Mithridatum half an ounce, Angelica root in powder two drams, of
Theriaca andro, half Take a little o^ this every morning.
an ounce, Bolearmoniac. praep. two drams, conserues of Roses and Borage half
an ounce, seed of Citrons two scruples, sirup of Limons one ounce, mix them,
make half this receite.

Or this which is very good.
R. Good Mithridatum half an ounce, Conserues of Roses half an ounce,
Bolearmoniack praep. two drams, mix them.

Take as much of this every morning as a nut, and fast after it two or three
hours.

A good pill and an assured preservative.
R. Aloes optima four drams, lota in aqua Rosarum; ^^ld wish to use dai^me one
of ^ preserua^ and when ^ake no ^se some o^ preserua^
Myrrh elect. two drams, Croci two drams, rad. Zedoariae one scruple, Boli
armeni one scruple, sir. limonum Q. S. fiat massa.

Take half a dram of these pills in the morning, you may mix it if you will
with a little white wine this summer, and drink it, and be free from
infection. ^^t commons with ^e and ^ water.


Another of most excellent virtue, and an assured preservative.
R. Boli armeni praep. half an ounce, Dictamni albi two drams, Cinamoni three
drams, Rosarum one dram, rad. Angelicae two drams, rad Turmentillae, ^ncely
pre^tiue.
rad. Gentianae of each two drams, sem. Limonum one dram, Santalorum omnium ana
one dram, Cornu cerui rasurae, flo. Buglossae. fol. scabi, rad. turmentillae,
rad. Zedoariae ana one dram, oxyaloes, nucis muscatae, Granatum Iuniperi, ossis
de cord. ^he Apo^rie make for you.
cerui ana half a dram, Saphiri, hyacinthi, smaragdi, rubini, Granati praep.
ana one scruple, Margaritarum two scruples, foliorum Auri one scruple,
puluerizantar and cum sir. exacetosa Q. S. fiatelectuarium.

This is to be taken every morning, a scruple or two scruples daily, and is a
most excellent and an assured preservative against al infection.

Another that defends all men that use it, from the infection of this
contagious sickness.
R. Theriaca Andromachi, mithridatum optimum ana two drams, conser Rosarum
three dra^s, Boli armeni A good preservative.
praep. two scruples, sem. vel rad. Angelicae two scruples, sem. citri half a
dram, sir. Limonum half an ounce, misce.

Take of this every morning, the quantity of a hasel nut, or any other time of
the day if you go among any throng of people, or where the sickness is, but
you ought to fast after it a while.

The common pills against the pestilence, that defend al them that use them from
infection.
R. Good Aloes half an ounce, Myrrh, saffron of either of them two drams, let
them be beaten in a mortar, and put to them a little white Wine or sweet wine,
and incorporate it together, make them Rufi cont. pest. Auicen in lib. 4. Take
these pills every second day.
in pills, and so take them if you will, half a dram in the morning, and drink
after them an hour a draught of white wine: these although plain, are very
good: and I would they were more used for their virtue. But women great with
child may not take of these pills, neither of the other pills set down before:
let them content themselves to eat in a morning, some conserues of sorrel,
roses, or borrage, wherewith they may mix some sirrup of Limons, and let them
be merry and use a good diet, and good company to pass the time away, and this
is the best medicine I can advise them.

The use of Orenges, Limons, and Pomgranats, is very good; so is Vinegar,
cloves, maces, saffron, sorel with your meat, or that is, O^^^ges, Limo^s,
^^mgranats.
either of them in a morning with sugar is good. Let all your meats be dressed
and saused with vinegar, Orenges, and Limons, maces and saffron, and a little
cinnamon, and avoid al strong wines, and hot spices.

Now having set down most excellent preservatives for the Gentilite, Citizens
and better sort, it follows, that I likewise teach the commons how they may
preserve themselves in this time of infectio^: but first of the Pomanders,
which are apreseruatiue against this infection for the Gentlewomen and Citizens
of this place.

A very good Pomander to be worn of all the better sort against this
infection, and stinking and noisome smells when they go abroad.
R. Labdanum, of the rinds of Citrons ana one dram; of the three kinds of
Sanders ana half a dram; wood of Aloes, flowers of Buglosse, and Nenuphar, Rose
leaves ana two scruples, alipta muscatae half a ^ good Po^ander.
scruple; Cloves, Mariero^ ana one scruple; Zedoary root one scruple, Benjamin
one dram, Storax Calamita one dram and a half, Campher half a dram; Musk,
Amber greece ana four grains; make your simples in fine powder and mix them
with Rose water, wherein gum dragagant has bin dissolved as much as will
suffice to make your pomander.

This is a singular good pomander, sweet and comfortable, to be worn in this
time of sickness against corrupt aires, stinking and noisome smells.

An other good Pomander, though not all thing so costly, to be worn against
the infection of the air.
R. Of the rinds of Citrons one dram; Storax, Calamint two drams, Labdanum one
dram, of all three kinds of Sanders, ana two scruples; flowers of Roses,
Violets, and Nenuphar ana half a dram; liquid Storax, Benjamin, ana one dram;
Campher one scruple, Musk and Ambergreece ana three grains, with Rose water,
and gum Dragagant a little quantity make your Pomander.

But here I had almost forgotten one preservative which many men commend, and
is good indeed, but especially for fearful persons, such I mean as live in
fear of this sickness, and although I have placed it last, yet not the least
to be regarded: Cito, long and tarde, we must fly away speedily, and we must
go far off, and return again slowly, it is good for those that can
conveniently so do. Let us put our whole trust in the Lord, from whom comes
all help, and with contrite hearts for our iniquity use the good means that
the Lord has ordained and created for us, and cast away all fear, and I doubt
not, but by Gods assistance this sickness shall be taken away.

To eat every morning as much as the kernel of A preservative.
a nut of Electuarium de ouo, is a good preservative.

So is treacle of Andromachus description, which you shall have at the
Apothecaries, mix with it as much Conserues of Roses.

Three or four grains of Bezoar stone taken in the morning in a spoonefull of
scabious, or sorrel water, is a good preservative.

So is a little Diascordium taken in the morning the quantity of two white
peason.

Also to use the root of Angelica, stieped in vinegar to chew in your mouth as
you go in the street is good, and to eat a little thereof.

Gentian, Zedoarie, Turmentill, chewed and kept in your mouth are good.

Sorrel eaten in the morning with a little good Vinegar like a sallet, is very
good: the use of Orenges and Limons is very good, Pomegranates and Vinegar.

It is good every morning betime, to take some good preservative, and before
you go abroad, it shall not be amiss to eat something to your breakfast
that is wholesome, as bred, and sweet-butter, a potcht egg with vinegar, or
some other thing as you are provided, and use always in going into any infected
place a root of Angelica to chew upon in your mouth, a little sponge dipped in
Rose-vinegar to smell unto often times is good, put into a pomander box of
iuorie.

Also to wear a Pomander about your neck and smell to it oftentimes, is very
good.

Let your chamber be dressed with sweet flowers as these, sweet mints, time,
penerial, carnatio^s, roseleaues: and let your chamber be strued with green
rushes, Vine leaves, Oken leaves, and Willow leaves and Mintes.

If you have any windows toward the North or northeast keep them open in
clear days; your chamber ought also to be persumed oftentimes, with the
perfumes taught in this book; you may use Juniper Benjamin, Storax and wood of
Aloes.

For your diet.
Young Mutton, Veale, Kid, Capors, Hens, Chickens, Rabbets, Partridge, Fesant,
Quail, Plouers, small birds of the fields, Pigeons, sweet butter, potched
eggs with vinegar, but not in hot complexions.

Water-fowles are not good, neither is Porke, or old powdered Beef.

But Fishes from fresh rivers is very good eaten with vinegar, and good sauce,
they cool the blood well.

Let your drink be small beer, and well brued, and sometimes a cup of white
wine mixed with water for hot complexions, with Borrage, and Buglosse, but
eschew all hot and sweet wines.

Herbs that be good to be used, Sorrel, Endive, Succorie, Borage, Buglosse,
Parsely, Marigoldes, Time, Marierom, Betonie, Scabious, Isope, Mints, Purslane,
Pimpernell, Rue, Angelica, Cardus Benedictus, Lettuce.

Make your sauce with Cytrin, Limons, Oreng, Sorrel, Vinegar, Maces, Saffron,
Barberies, and such like.

Raw, and young fruit is hurtful, so is Garlic, Onions, Leekes, Radish, Rocket,
Mustarde, Pepper, and hot spices, and al hot wines, and all these are hurtful,
and so are al sweet meats: let your diet be cooling and drying.

Preservatives for the Commons and Contrymen, who have not an Apothecarie at
hand.
Take of Rue or Herb grace two ounces, of the young buds of Angelica, two
ounces; or for want thereof, of the root or seed one ounce, Bolearmoniacke
prepared one ounce, of Juniper berries one ounce, of walnuts clean picked from
their skins two ounces, Good figs in number six or seven, of Saffron six
peniworth, of good wine vinegar that is sharp four ounces. Let these be well
beaten together in a mortar the space of one hour, and then put in your
vinegar, and incorporate them together. Which being done, put it into some
sweet gallie pot or glass, and cover it close: and take thereof daily in the
morning the quantity of a nutineg. Or you may eat thereof at any time going
near, or in any infectious place.

Another good preservative of no less virtue in resisting all infection.
R. Of holy Thistle, or for want thereof, our Ladies Thistle so called,
Betonie, Angelica, Scabious, Sorrel, Pimpernell, Turmentill, of either of
these a handful, Gentian roots also, if they may be had.

Bruise all these in a stone mortar a little, and put thereto a pint of good
vinegar, and half a pint of white wine, and put them into a still, and draw
forth the water, and take two or three spoonfuls thereof every morning
fasting, and be free from all infection.

The root of Angelica laid or stieped in good vinegar all night, and a little
thereof taken in the morning is a good preservative. The seeds are of the like
virtue.

Another good preservative that defends all from infection.
Take of the kernels of walnuts three ounces, rue one ^he com^^s.
ounce and a half, fine bole armoniack one ounce, root of Angelica and
Turmentill of either an ounce, good figs three ounces, Myrrh three drams,
Saffron four peniworth.

Let these be beaten a good space in a mortar, then put thereto two or three
spoonefuls of good vnegar, and as much Rosewater, and incorporate them well
together, eat hereof as much as a hazell nut in the morning, and at any other
time of the day going where the infection is, and be free from all infection.

Now such as desire to live in safety, and yet would bestow no cost for their
preservation, let them use this.

R. Figs seven or eight in number Rue one handful, For the Commons.
the kernels of ten or twelve walnuts clean picked from their skins, four
or six spoonfuls of good vinegar, beat these together in a mortar, and keep
it close in a box, and eat thereof every morning, and it is good to defend
thee from the infection.

Galen commends Garlic, calling it the poor man's treacle, but undoubtedly
it is too hot to be eaten of choleric persons, or sanguine, or in a hot
season, and therefore I cannot commend it, except in cold, moist and
rheumaticke bodies, for whom it may be good.

I have set down, courteous Reader, diverse and sundry preservatives that you
may take your choice: use them in the name of God. And this I dare boldly
affirm, there are in my book as good as are known and sufficient for thy
preservation by Gods grace.

Now it follows, that I write of confections, electuaries, and potions,
required in the cure of the pestilence.

An Electuarie of great and singular virtue in curing of the pestilence, being
taken in time before it be settled at the heart, and nature utterly over come.
R. Bolearmoniack prepared two ounces, terra sigillata one ounce, Myrrh six
drams, roots of Gentian, Zedoary, Angelica and Dictamni, of each three drams
red corrall, red saunders of each a dram and a half, saffron one dram and a
half, yellow saunders one dram, turme^til, scabious, leaves of Cardus
benedictus or holy thistle of each a dram and a half, flowers of marigolds one
dram, the bones of a Hearts heart half a dram or two scruples, Basil seed
half a dram, good seed pearl two scruples, unicorns horn two scruples,
leaf gold two scruples, hearts horn one dram. Let all these be made in fine
powder every one by itself. The^ take sirrup of Limons and sorrel, as much as
will be sufficient to make it in an electuarie. Add hereunto good Mithridatum
one ounce.

He that is infected with the pestilence, let him take one dram or one dram and
a half of this medicine, according to his strength with water of Scabious,
Angelica, or Cardus benedictus the quantity of nine or ten spoonefuls, it must
be taken warm, and procure the patient to sweat after two, three or four
hours: which if he cannot easily do, then use the means, as I have taught in
this book, by putting in ^or want of ^ese waters ^^ke posset ^ink made white
wine.
of bottles filled with hot water, and if it should so chance the patient should
vomit, then give him as much more; and if he vomit again, let him wash his
mouth with Rose water and vinegar, and receive his medicine again, the
quantity before taught, and undoubtedly by this means the venomous infection
shall be expulsed, the heart comforted, and the life preserved through Gods
mercy and goodness.

Another Electuary curing the pestilence, being taken within twelve, sixteen
or eighteen hours, after the person is infected.
Electuarium de ouo.

R. Ouum gallinae recens, and educto per apicem albumine, id quod vacuum est,
croco orientali imple, A medicine of singular virtue in curing this sickness.
vitellum non auferendo: postea cum alio putamine iterum occlude, ne quid
transpiret, and lento igne tamdiu assa in ollula, donec tota oui testa ad
nigredinem deueniat, exempta e testa materia exsiccetur vt in mortario
exquitissime contundi and in puluerem redigi queat, addendo pulueris sinapis
albi quantum praedicta omnia ponderant, postea,

R. Fol. Dictamni albi, rad. turmentillae, Zedoariae ana ij. rad. gentianae,
angelicae, granatorum iuniperi ana iij. fol. Card. benedict. rad. doronici. ana
j. Cardamomi, cornu cerui rasurae ana ss. myrrhae ij. ossis de cord cerui
scrup. ij. Margaritarum i. camphurae ij. santalorum omnium ana i. puluerize^tur
omnia sing. per se, misc. omnia simul in mortario, and tandem appone Theriaca
Andromachi ad pondus omnium, and iterum pistillo fortiter contunde and commisce
per tres quasi integras horas, agitando fiat electuarium.

When any person is infected, let him take a dram A dram and a scruple is
sufficient for a any man.
or somewhat more, according unto his strength, mix and dissolve it in water
of Scabious, Roses, or Endive, as you can have, or in them altogether the
quantity or measure of eight spoonefuls, and make it warm, and drink it in
Gods name, sweat well thereupon, and thou shall be delivered from danger of
the sickness, and is a most approved medicine and speedy remedy, if it be
taken in time: for herein censisteth the danger, namely delay, in which time
the venom pierces unto the heart, and there setleth, and vanquisheth the
vital spirits. For this is most certain, as I have often seen and approved,
that those that take and use in the very beginning of their sickness, some
good means, scarce two in ten die, but very speedily recover their former
health.

And truly I cannot but lament the folly of many people, who feeling themselves
sick, drive forth and delay the time, some trusting to their strength and
^elay in this ^knes is very ^angerous, and ^mmonly ^ngeth death
youth: other some take some light and trifling medicine to no purpose, and
many other blinded with a foolish opinion, that physic can do them no good:
and this is the cause why so many die of this sickness, as they now do.

Note this, that if a person do vomit up his medicine, that then you cause
him to wash his mouth with rosewater and vinegar, and give him as much more, if
he cast it up again, do as before until he keep it.

A singular confection for the cure of the Pestilence.
R. Rad. Angelicae, rad. Gentianae, rad. Zedoariae, rad. Turmentillae, rad.
Dictamni, rad. Valerianae, rad. 3 good confe^on for cu^^^g the pesti^^^ce.
morsus diaboli, rad. Aristo. rotundae, rad. asari, rad. serpentariae, herb.
scordit, card. benedicti, rut^, galang^, flor. calendulae, sem. citri, sem.
acetosae, baccarum lauri, ossis de cord cerui, cornu cerui praeparati, ana ij.
Croci, thuris, santalorum omniu^, ana ^j. Cinamomi, myrrhae, boli armeni
praeparati, terrae sigillatae, camphurae, ana iiij. spec. diagem. call. and
frig. spec. diamarg. call. and frig. spec. diambrae ana j. succi scordii, succi
calendulae ana vnc. 1. Commiscea^tur omnia cum syrupo acctositatis citri q. s.
incorporentur ad formam opitatae, add mithridatum Andromachi vnc. iii. and
theriacae opti. vnc. i. and semis. aqua angelicae vnc. ii. misc.

Take one dram and a half, or two drammes of this confection, or two drammes
and a half, according to the age and strength of the patient, with water of
Scabious, Cardus benedictus, or Angelica nine or ten spoonefuls, made warm and
mixed well together, let him drink it and sweat well thereupon.

Another that cures the Pestilence, and expulseth al venomous infection.
R. Bolearmoniack prepared half an ounce, Cinnamon two drams, root of gentian,
angelica, Zedoarie, 4 Electuarium contra pestem cum gemmis.
turmentil ana two drams; seed of citrons, red rose leaves, hearts horn rased,
of the three kinds of Saunders of each one dram; juniper berries, half a dram;
nutmegge, the bone of the deares heart, ii. scrup. seed pearl and orient one
dram; saffron one dram, red coral two scruples, rinds of citrons two
scruples, fragments or pieces of the five precious stones, Saphiri, Hyacinthi,
Smaragdi, Rubini, granati praep. ana one scruple, leaf gold one scruple,
bezoar stone one scruple.

Make these into most fine powder severally, which being done, put thereto as
much sirrup of limons as will make it in form of an electuarie, making it
something thick, and putting thereto of good Mithridatum three ounces, mix
them. This being taken ye weight of one dram or a dram and a half, or two
drams for a strong person in water of Scabious, Angelica, or Cardus benedictus,
sweating therwithal, cures ye person speedily of ye pestilence, expulsing it
by sweat and urine.

Another for the commons and countrymen, where these aforesaid set down cannot
be had.
R. Good Mithridatum Andromachus a dram and a half, good Treacle, I mean not
the common treacle sold at the Mercers, but at the Apothecaries, called
theriaca Andromach. one dram. Mix these together, and take it in a little
posset drink made with white wine, and sweat well therewith, and this cures
the pestilence. If any sore do arise, then use the means, as I have taught in
this book, to ripen or suppurate the sore: which being done, let it be opened
and drawn forth.

Another medicine or remedy for the Commons and Contriemen, very good and
effectual.
Take a great white Onion, cut off the top, and with your knife pike forth the
core, and make a wide hollownesse in the middle, which you must fill up with
good treacle, from the Apothecaries called Theriaca Andromachi, or Andromachs
treacle, let it be in weight one dram and a half: this being put into the
Onion, cover it with that you cut off before, and paaste it over and roast it in
the imbers, and being soft stamp it in a mortar, and strain it through a
cloth, and with two or three spoonfuls of posset drink mixed with it, take it
and sweat thereupon as long as you can, and this will expulse it from the heart.

Or this which is very good.
R. Mithridatum two drams, Venice treacle one dram, mix them with water of
Angelica, Cardus Benedictus, or Scabious, or for want thereof posset drink made
with white wine, and sweat well.

These three last medicines I have set down for them that cannot have speedily
the other aforesaid; and although they seem mean, yet are they of great
virtue in this sickness, and cure them that take it in time in the beginning
of their sickness, observing the order of this book therewithal.

The signs that signify and declare a person to be infected with the
pestilence.
The first is, a great pain and heaviness in the head. 1.


The second is, he feels great heat within his body, and the outward parts
cold and ready to 2.
shake, and is thirsty and dry therewithal.

The third sign is, he cannot draw his breath easily, 3.
but with some pain and difficulty.

The fourth sign is, he has a great desire to sleep, 4.
and can very hardly refrain from sleeping, but beware he sleep not. And
sometimes watching does vex and trouble him as much and cannot sleep.

The fifth sign is, swelling in the stomach with 5.
much pain, breaking forth with stinking sweat.

The sixth sign is, diverse and heavy looks of the eyes, 6.
seeing all things of one color, as green or yellow, and the eyes are changed
in their color.

The seventh sign is, loss of appetite, unsavory taste, bitterness of the
mouth sour and stinking. 7.


The eight sign is, wambling of the stomach, and a desire to vomit, and
sometime vomiting humors 8.
bitter and of diverse colors.

The ninth sign is, the pulse beats swift and deep.

The tenth sign is, a heaviness, and dullness in 9.
all the body, and a faintnes and a weakness of the 10.
limbs.

The eleventh sign is, the urine most commonly is 11.
troubled, thick and like beasts water, and stinking, but ^se are ma^est
signs ^ the heart ^ drawn ^venim unto ^y attraction ^he air by inspiration
^he arteries the heart.
smell to it not if you love your health: but oftentimes the water does not
show at all, especially in the beginning of the sickness, therefore trust not
unto the water, but look unto the other signs here above set down.

The twelfth and last sign, and surest of all other, is, there arises in the
neck, under the arm, or in the flank, a tumor or swelling, or in some other
part of the 12.
body there appears any red, greenish, or blackish colored sore, these are
most apparent signs to the eye, that this person is infected with the
pestilence.

But take heed, be not deceived: for oftentimes a person is strongly infected
with the Pestilence, and has neither Apostume, Carbuncle, nor botch appearing,
in two or three days, by which time he is near his death: therefore when a
botch does not appear speedily, it is always an evil sign and dangerous.
The reason hereof is, nature is weak, and the infection and poison is strong
and furious: and nature being weak as in children, and in aged persons, and in
others also, through the evil disposition of the body, is not able to make
resistance against so furious, and puissant an enemy, and to expulse the
infection or poison. And this is the very reason and cause, why ^e reason ^y
no sore ap^reth in som^sons.
in some persons there appears no botch, or sore, but other certain marks,
or spots, as I may call them.

Now contrariwise, when the infection or poison is more mild and weak, and
nature strong, then she gathering her power and force together strineth and
resists the infection, and expulseth the poison from the heart, and other the
principal members unto some emunctorie or clensing place, where it may be best
purged and avoided. Now this is a good sign, that ^e reason of appearing sore
or ^^ch.
nature is strong, and has prevailed against the infectious poison; so is it
indeed, if the sore arise not near about the heart, or throat, or some such
dangerous place. And again nature must now forth with be The heart ought with
all speed to be comforted.
aided; least the venom gathering strength, by the putrefaction of the humors
within the body, return again unto the heart. Therefore I say the heart must
be strengthened with cordialles, and also speedily comforted: and the other
principal members likewise. For we commonly see notwithstanding the botch be
thrust forth by nature, yet the person often and most commonly dies, whereof
the greatest and most part might live, if help in due time were administered.
And sometimes the infection is so strong, and No help in some persons but
death follows.
the Body so weak through corrupt and vicious humors, that nature is suddenly
overcome, and the spirits of life expulsed. And this infection naturally
flies with all possible speed to the heart, as the principal member of life,
to surprise it, and pierces sooner unto Venena Principes parts petunt. Gal.

What bodies soonest infected I showed your before.


the heart of choleric persons then any other complexion; although the
sanguine be more apt to be infected by reason of their heat and moisture, and
phlegmatic are also apt through humiditie, that is in them: the melancholy
are not apt to be infected, but hardly cured being infected

Now forasmuch as this sickness is swift, fierce, and dangerous, and speedily
expulseth life, if it be not prevented in time by good medicine: Let us I say
leave our folly, in delaying to use the means for our help, remembering this
good counsel

Principijs obsta, sero medicina paratur etc.
We must stop the beginninges, medecines come too late, nature being overcome
through the long suffering of the evil. And what is the reason that so many die
ofthis sickness as they do, I think you will answer me it is Gods hand and
visitation, and contra mortem non est remedium: I grant indeed it is Gods
visitation, and so is all other sicknesses. And this is the difference, this
sickness is strong, swift, and dangerous, and kills many through his
violence, and venomous quality: some other more mild, yet kills also in some
short time, if it be not prevented: and some other so mild and weak, that
nature being strong does hot fevers
overcome her self with good diet without the benefit of medicines. The very
causes indeed that so many die of this sickness are two. The first is the
strength, power, and venomous quality of this sickness, speedily surprising the
vital spirits.

The second cause is, our delay to use medicine in time, and not using good and
effectual medicines, such as have virtue by Gods grace given unto them ^he
cause so ^any die of ^s sickness.
for the curing and withstanding of this violent sickness. We must rely upon
God, fixing our whole trust in him, and thankfully and diligently use the good
means that he has ordained and created, for our health and help in time of
sickness.

And against this contagious sickness, I have set down good preservatives,
which being used, will by Gods grace prevent the danger. And also most
excellent and approved remedies for this sickness, that whosoever uses them in
time, shall undoubtedly by Gods grace and mercy be speedily cured. Now it
follows, that I teach the use of them, and the true and perfect cure of the
pestilence, and what is to be observed in the cure thereof.

And first, I will teach the cure of the pestilence when no botch or sore
appears, and how to prevent the rising of any botch or sore most commonly in
all persons.

The cure of the Pestilence, when no botch, or sore appears, and how to
prevent the rising of any botch or sores most commonly in all persons.
In the cure of this sickness there are three intentions especially required.
The first is to aid and help nature, to expel the infection and venomous
poison. 3. Intentions required in the cure of this sickness.
The second is to comfort the heart, and other the principal members of the
body. The third is a good observation in diet, afterward to be used. And at the
first when any person feels himself sick, let him well consider, whether
any of the signs before set down, that signify a person infected, be in him
or no: and if he find any of them at al in himself, then let him be assured it
is the sickness. But here he must not defer the time, doubting, and making
farther trial, whether it be or no: For in this time when the pestilence
Beware you sleep not until you have taken your medicine, and eight hours
after.
reigns, there are few other sicknesses. The nature of this venomous and
corrupt air is to alter and convert other sicknesses into the pestilence, as
we find most true by experience. And again, the nature and quality of this
dangerous sickness, is, ever with all swiftness to approach and assail the
heart the principal member and fountain of life. Here may it appear, how
dangerous delay is in this sickness, in not using some good and approved
medicine, that has virtue through Gods gift to withstand the force thereof,
and power to expel the venomous infection Use help in the first beginning
of this contagious sickness. Now to prevent this lion of his pray, note what
is to be done.

First, when any feels himself sick or evil at ease, if the sickness begin
hot with pain in his head, Who ought to bleed.
if he be of a sanguine or choleric complexion, or has a plethoricke body,
that is, a body full of humors, large veins and full: let every such person
in any wife be let blood in the liver vain and right arm. And if there
should be felt any forenesse in any side of the body more then the other; then
let him bleed in that arm on the side grieved; which being done, let the
surgeon decently bind up his arm: and if the person be weak, then let this
be done in his bed, and with speed let him take one of the four medicines set
down before in this book for the cure of the pestilence, the quantity and
the manner is there set down. Let him receive his medicine warm, and procure
him to sweat: which if he cannot easily do, then must you fill some bottles
with hot water, and set them in the bed about him, by which means you shall
cause him to sweat speedily. Let him continue sweating three, four, or 5.
hours, or according to his strength, as he can endure it, giving him, if he be
very dry in ^e him in ^ sweating, if be very dry, ^n of the cor^ll sirrup
set ^wne in this ^oke half a ^onefull, or a ^onefull at a ^e.
his sweat, a little of one of the cordial confections set down in this
book, to be used to a person after his sweat. And the keeper must take great
heed that the sick person sleep not: For whosoever is infected with the
sickness, must carefully be kept from sleep, until they have bled, if they may
bleed, and taken their medicine, and sweat five or six hours after, and in
so doing all for the most part shall be speedily cured of this sickness. The
patient having sweat well, dry his body with warm and soft clothes, and if
the sheets be wet with sweat, then pull them away, and let him rest in Gods
name, so he sleep not. And give him to eat sometimes of one of the
confections, that comfort the heart, that gives great comfort and strength
unto the body and principal members thereof, and therefore not to be omitted.
Two hours after his sweat give him to eat some broth made with a chicken or
a capon. In which broth boil Endive, Borage, Buglosse, and a little parsley,
raisins of the sun, and two or three dates, and a little whole mace. Let his
drink be good, stale, and middle ale, wherein you must boil whole mace and
some sugar. What drink the patient ought to use. To mitigate and take away his
dryness and thirst.
And if he be very dry, as commonly in this sickness they are, then give him
a spoonefull of one of the sirrups set down in this book for that purpose,
which does both assooage thirst and dryness, and comforts the heart withal,
he may use to take a spoonefull when he is dry.

His diet must be chickens, capon, rabbet, partridge or such like: but for want
thereof young mutton or veale: and let him use with his meat limons, orenges,
pomegranats, good vinegar, grains of paradise, mace, a little saffron. Let his
chamber be perfumed with the balls or trochises set down in this book before
for the purging and amending of the air. Use them three or four times in the
day, and for want thereof take Benjamin, Storax calamita and liquid, But my
perfumes set down are far better to be used.
wood of Aloes, and burn it in some chafingdish or fuming pot for the purging
of the air in the chamber. And diverse times sprinkle his chamber with vinegar,
or water and vinegar together. Now within five or Let him sleep one or two
hours to prevent pain and lightness of the head.
six hours after his sweat, or if it be longer it is the better, let him
sleep in Gods name, and remember that you give the patient oftentimes in the
day one of the confections set down in this book, to comfort the heart, and
give him his broth and meat a little at a time, and the oftener, and give him
sometimes a cake of Manus Christito cate. And above all things, let him be of
good comfort, fixing his hope above in the Almighty, from whom comes all
help, health, and God is the author of health.
comfort: for observing what I have taught, there is no danger of death: and
for the most part all they that use this order and direction, recover and be
free from all danger within two or three days, except some very few, that
have unsound and very corrupt bodies before the infection. And this will I
undertake by Gods leave and his holy assistance to perform, and that not one
in six persons shall die that takes a good medicine, and that uses this
order and follows my direction: for by this means of taking away of blood,
euacuation by sweat and purging the body, the infection and poisoned matter
is expelled: insomuch that seldom rises any botch or sore, because the
matter whereof the botch arises is otherwise cast forth. And if any do arise,
as sometimes there does, by diligent foresight and good application it may
speedily be brought to suppuration, and drawn forth. But if no botch do arise
within two days after his sweat, then does none arise at all, doing as I
shall ^e purging is ^od, and ought be used.
show you. The third or rather the second day, if he be any thing strong, and
no botch appearing, give the patient this potion underwritten, which will purge
forth the rest or remnant of the venomous infection.

A purging potion of great virtue, that expulseth all venomous and corrupt
humors from the body.
Here I warn all men that they meddle with no purging medicine when the botch
or carbuncle appears, and grows toward ripeness: for so shall they draw
the venom in again, which nature has put forth before.

R. Leaves and flowers of holy Thistle, Scabious, Turmentill, three leaued
grass, of each a little handful, purging po^^n to be ta^^n the second ^y after
sweat no botch or ^^e appear.
Gentian, Tamarims, of each two scruples: good Rubarbe one dram: water of
Bugloffe and endive, of each an ounce and a half, Seen three drams: water of
Scabious one ounce, flowers of Borage a little handful: make your infusion,
which being done, put thereto diacatholicon half an ounce, Manna half an
ounce, sir. Ros. solutiue one ounce.

This potion has a most excellent property in purging the body from venomous
and corrupt humors, as the learned may judge at the sight thereof. If it be
not on the change or full of the Moon.
This potion must be taken of the patient the second or third day at the
furthest after his sweating, when no botch appears. And let him forbear to
eat, drink, or sleep, until it has wrought his effect, which is in giving
five, six, or seven stools. Afterward let him receive some broth, and use a
good diet, and also use his cordial confection for three, four or five days,
and rest in health in Gods name, for he shall need no further physic: if he
be disposed he may take the potion above written another day, for ye
thorow-purging of his body, and it shall be good so to do.

This is the true and perfect cure of the pestilence, being used in time, I
mean in the beginning of the sickness, within four, or six, or in some within
twelve hours: the sooner the better, for in a little time this venomous
infection gathers strength, by the evil humors which it turns into
putrefaction, and swiftly assaulteth the heart, and without speedy and good
remedy, as we see daily, death follows.

Now it follows that I teach the way or means to cure such in whom the botch
appears, which (God assisting me) I will do.

The way or means to cure such in whom the botch appears.
This sickness (the pestilence) is a fierce, swift, and dangerous disease, and
very quickly destroys nature: therefore I counsel all men again, to use at
the first some speedy help: for giving it sufferance but a little time it
resists all cure, neither is it in human power to help it, as we daily
see. Here I cannot but lament the folly of many people, who neglect Great
folly in many men, to ^suse the means of their ^ealth.
the use of good means in time: Some foolishly conceited, that physic can do
them no good: Some other using some light and trifling medicine to no purpose:
some other using none at all, standing unto the mercy of the sickness, which
is merciless, and thus many perish daily: not perish neither, therein I said
not well: Beati mortui qui in domino moriuntur, Blessed are the dead that die
in the Lord. God give unto us his grace, that we may learn to contemn this
vain world, and be ready when he does call, and while we live here, to use
thankfully his good creatures unto his glory and our comfort. Now unto the cure
of the pestilence, which is my purpose.

When any person feels himself infected, and that When the botch sore grow^h
toward benesse, bear ye neither ^rge nor ^eede, but use ^rdials, and ^utward
medi^^nes to ripe^ it.
the sore begins to arise or appear, if the sickness begin hot, and that
he feels in himself any great heat above nature, being of a sanguine or
choleric complexion, strong, and blood any thing abounding, then would I have
that person with speed let blood, if it be within twenty four hours of his
sickening, and that the sore or botch be not yet in way of ripening, but newly
risen. For you must note that blood is to be taken at the beginning of the
sickness, and before the botch be growing to suppuration, or not at all: For
at this time the botch having been forth, and growing to suppuration, you
should greatly hinder nature, and weaken the person, and endanger his life.

But in the beginning of the sickness, it is a special good thing in all
persons, in whom blood does abound. But these persons I do except, women with
child, or lately delivered; old men that grow toward Who may not ^eed.
threescore, and children, also weak and feeble persons, wherein is Cacochymia
and little blood: these persons may not bleed, but must receive some medicine
before set down for the cure of the pestilence, and sweat therewith, and take
cordials as I will show them. But such as may bleed must observe this rule in
bleeding, according unto the place where the sore or botch is placed or
appearing.

If the sore or botch appear in the throat, neck, or under the ears, then
open the head vain Cephalica Where to bleed, in what place or vain.
in the arm, on that side, whereon the sore or botch is. And if the sore or
botch arise in the armepit, then open the vain mediana, which is between the
head vain and the vain coming from the liver. If the sore or botch arise in
the flancke, then open the vain Saphena in the inner side of the foot: always
remembering this note, that you let blood on that side whereon the botch
appears: For on the contrary side it is dangerous and evil, drawing the
venom overthwart the spiritual members, to the great danger of the patient.
The quantity must be according unto the strength of The quantity.
the patient, in those that be young, strong, and full of blood, it is good to
take much away, and in others according unto their ability of body. And in
this time of necessity, when it may not be deferd, you must neither regard
time, neither sign nor aspect or conjunction of Planets, but in the name of
God do it.

Quouis tempore and hora mittere sanguinem necessitas Any time or hour in
necessity let blood.
concedit and iubet: two hours delay in bleeding may be the cause of death.
This being done, or not done, in those persons above named, who may not bleed:
let there be given unto the sick person, of one of the medicines set down for
the cure of the plague before in this book, and procure the sick to sweat
well: which if they cannot speedily do, then you may use the means before
taught with bottles, whereby a sweat shall speedily be brought forth: and let
the patient endure it as long as he is able. And remember that you keep the
sick from sleep in his sweat, and five or six hours after, if he be very
faint, give him of one of the cordial confections to eat of sometime: and if
he be so thirsty that he must needs drink, then give him of the sirrup set
down in this book for that purpose. But you ought not in any wise to give him
drink after his medicine, until he has sweat well: and that which you give
him, must be warm and comfortable. And having sweat well, dry his body with
warm and soft clothes: and so let him rest, keeping him from sleep. Within
two hours give him some good broth to eat made with a chicken, in which broth
boil a little whole mace, dates, raisins of the sun, Endive, Borage,
Buglosse, and rings or some pieces of gold. Let him have oftentimes to eat of
one of the cordial confections, set down in this book: and let his drink be
the first day Betonie water, Scabious and Borage water, of each of them half a
pint, boiled a little with sugar and whole mace. After you may give him ale,
if not strong, boiled with Mace and sugar. Let his meat be chickens, capon,
rabbet, young mutton, or veale, and let him use orenges, limons, pomegranets,
grains of paradise, The diet the ^cke ought to ^eepe.
and all thing that does comfort the heart and cool. You must perfume the
chamber oftentimes in the day with the perfumes set down in this book, which
will purge the air of the chamber; and sprinkle the floor of the chamber with
good vinegar, and give Or rosewater ^^ vinegar together.
him to smell unto oftentimes a cloth wet in rose vinegar. Now must the sore or
botch be looked unto. And to ripen and bring it to suppuration, you shall find
medicines set down in this book. If the sore do arise near the heart, I have
set down means to defend the heart, and to draw the sore or botch further
off: or if the botch appear in the throat, then likewise draw it further for
fear of suffocation, or choking the patient. If watching or rauing trouble
him, I have set down means to help it. If thirst and dryness vex him, I
have set down comfortable sirrupes to remedy it, or whatsoever he shall need
in this cure, if advisedly you follow my direction.

The patient ought to change his chamber sometimes, Change of chambers is good.
and to use often the perfumes before set down: and to keep the house all the
time of his sickness until his sore be well, changing himself in fresh
apparel well aired, and persumed before.

And those that are about him must have care of themselves, and eat daily
every morning some good preservative. And above all, let them take heed of the
air or breath of the sore when it is opened: always holding some root of
Angelica stieped in vinegar in their mouth, or some other strong and good
preservative, and let them eat sometimes a little good mithridatum, or any
one of the confections preservative set down in this book against the
pestilence: and also let the keeper take heed how to bestow the plasters
that come from the sore.

Well now remember what I have said ought to be done in this cure of the
pestilence.

First, that with all speed you use remedy without delaying the time, for
therein chiefly consists the danger.

Secondly, that you bleed, if no cause forbid it, as before is taught.

Thirdly, that you take one of the medicines before set down in this book,
and sweat therewithal, and refrain from sleep.

Fourthly, that you use the cordials to comfort the heart set down, and that
you eat of them oftentimes in the day.

Fifthly, that if the patient be faint, you must use the Epithymum, and
cpithymate the heart therewith. and apply an ^pithymum unto the heart.


Sixthly, that if the sore or botch appear, and rise near unto the heart, that
then you use upon the heart a defensitiue, and with speed draw the botch
further off.

The seventh observation is, that with speed you apply medicines to suppurate
the sore, and draw it forth.

The eight is, that the chamber be oftentimes perfumed, and it were ^ry good
that ^es were ^ade through ^ut the city, and you think the ^erfumes too ^ere,
then ^e frankin^nse, rosin, and ^urpentine. ^y sleep the ^oud and ^rits vital
are ^awne inward ^d attracteth ^th it self the ^nome unto ^e heart, and
^taineth it in.
that the air thereof may be purged, and made wholesome: and that the patient
change his chamber oftentimes.

The ninth is, that he use the diet before taught, eating a little at a time,
and the oftener. And to use the sirrups and consections to cool and comfort.

The tenth, which should have been the first, is, that the patient in any
case be kept from sleep, from his first sickening until he have taken his
medicine, and sweat, and sire or eight hours after, and then to sleep but one
hour, and the next day let him sleep three hours at times, but not above one
hour at a time: and after the third day you may give him more sleep. But in
the beginning of his sickness, it is most dangerous: for by sleep the spirits
are drawn inward, and therewithal the venom is attracted unto the heart, and
also the fever made more vehement and sharp. And this is the cause that many
die, that might live if they were kept from sleep, and therewithal take some
good medicine.

The eleventh is, that the patient keep his chamber during the time of his
sickness, and refrain all company, that he hurt not others.

The twelfth is, that being well, he give humble thanks to God, and then let
him change his apparel, being well perfumed, and in the name of God go
abroad.

And if the botch arise near unto the heart, then before you sweat, it were
good to apply this defensitiue unto the heart, being thin spread upon a fine
cloth, as broad as will cover the heart.

R. Good Mithridatum one dram, Andromachus treacle A defensitiue for the heart,
in sweating to be used.
half a dram, red saunders, terra lemna half a scruple, with water of Roses
and vinegar, as much as will suffice, make it in form of an unguent in a
mortar.

A good Cordial comforting the heart and cooling, to be used after the patient
has sweat or purged, and oftentimes in the day to take of it as much as a good
hazell nut at a time.
R. Conserues of Roses, Borage, and Buglosse, of each one ounce: Diamargariton
frigidum, Diarrhodon A very good cordial confection to be eaten oftentimes in
the day of the sick patie^t.
abbatis, of each half an ounce: seeds of Citrons two scruples or a dram:
Manus christi three drams: fol. auri number 6. bolearmoniack prepared two
scruples. Mix them, and let the sick eat hereof many times in the day.

A good potion giving five or six stools gently, which purges venomous
filthy humors from the body, to be taken the third day after sweat, if no
sore or botch appear, or when a sore or botch has run, and is growing well,
then is it good to use this.
R. Flo. and fol. Card. benedict. one handful: fol. Scabi, A purging potion to
be used the second day after sweat, if no sore appear
Betonicae one handful: root of Gentian one dram: good Rubarb one dram; water
of Buglosse, Scabious and Borage, of each an ounce: let there be made an
infusion thereof. Then add unto it Diacatholico^ half an ounce, Cassia with
Manna half an ounce: sirrupe of Roses solutiue one ounce, misce.

This ought to be taken in the morning, and neither ^t work not thin two ^ures
take a ^tle broth five ^^ six spoone^s.
eat, drink, nor sleep until it has wrought his effect, in giving five,
six, or seven stools, and use your self as is before taught in purging.

Another good Cordial greatly comforting the patient after his sweat to be
eaten oftentimes, a little at a time, and to continue the use thereof three or
four days, until he be strong, and all danger past, or in his sweat a
little, if he be weak, faint, and apt to swoune.
R. Conserues of Roses, Borage and Buglosse of each half an ounce: spe. Diagem.
call. and frig. of each one This Cordial ^onfection ^oth greatly ^omfort the
^eart.
scrup. bolearmoniack prepared two scruples: spe. diamargarit. call. and frig.
of each one scruple: diarrhodon abba. half an ounce: sirrupe of limons and
sorrel, of each half an ounce, misce.

Within two hours after the patient has sweat, give him a little good broth,
made of a chicken or capon, and let him eat a little at a time, and the
oftener, according unto his strength and stomach: and let him be of good
comfort, and eschew all fear and doubt, fixing his hope above in the
Almighty, from whom comes all help and comfort. Let his meat be chickens,
or some light and good nourishing meat, as The diet that ^^ust be used.
young pullets, capons, partridge, rabbets, or such like: but for want of
these, young mutton, or veale, and let it be given him with sauce made with an
orange, a limon, and a little good vinegre with mace and Saffron: and make unto
all his meat these cool and sharp sauces: and use no hot spices, neither
strong wines in any wise. Let his drink be middle ale, clean brewed and well
boiled with maces and sugar: also you ought to keep him from sleep the His
drink.
first day until it be toward night, and then let him rest in Gods name one
hour. And if the patient be very dry and thirsty, as most commonly they are,
then give him of this Iulep three or four spoonefuls at a time to drink.

R. Water of Roses, Endive and Buglosse of each three ounces, sorrel water
four ounces, good vinegar A Iulep to help dryness and thirst.
four ounces: juice of limons four ounces: sugar one pound, boil them a
little over a soft fire: which done, and cooled again, give him a little
thereof to drink, the quantity of two or three spoonefuls at a time.

Also a ptisan made with barley, liquorice, and cool herbs, is good to
assuage his thirst. But use this, which I do most commend for the asswaging of
thirst and dryness.

R. Sirrupe of Endive comp. sir. of sorrel of each three ounces: Water of
Roses, and Buglosse, of each one Against thirstinesse a sirrup.
ounce: sirrup of limons two ounces, mix them.

Let the patient have sometimes, or as often as he is dry, one spoonefull of
this sirrupe, which is very good: and this shall suffice, for the amending of
his heat and dryness. Give him to eat sometimes of a limon with sugar, or of
a Pomgranate, which are both very good.

Or this asswageth and takes away all thirst, and dryness in this case.
R. Water of Roses, and buglosse of each three ounces: sirrupe of Endive and
limons, of each two ounces, Iulep against ^st and dri^e.
oil of Vitrioll one scruple. Mixc them.

The taking of this one spoonefull at a time, takes away dryness and thirst.

And if the patient be very faint and weak after his sweating, or before his
sweating, then apply this quilt upon the region of the heart: and let him wear
it continually for a while.

A Quilt for comforting and strengthening the heart, when the patient is weak,
to be worn after his sweating.
R. Flowers of water lillies, borage and buglosse, of each half a dram: red
Rose leaves one dram: ^uilt com^ing the (...).
flowers of balm and rosemaric, of each two drams: maces one dram: ofred and
yellowe saunders, of each one dram: wood of aloes, cloves, of each one dram:
seeds of citrons, juniper berries, of each one dram: saffron six grains: of
the bone of the Deeres heart one scruple. Let them be made in gross powder,
and quilt it in crimson or scarlet colored taffeta, or fine cloth.

This quilt being made by the Apothecarie, use it over, or upon the heart of
the sick, in such manner as it may avide without falling away.

An Epithymum that does much comfort the heart, when a person is weak.
R. Water of Roses, borage, and buglosse of either three ounces: vinegar one
ounce: forrell water An Epithymu^ for the heart to be used to a weak and
fainting person.
two ounces: wood of aloes, red saunders, barks of citrons, of every one of
them two drams: saffron six grains: Electuarium de gemmis one dram:
Diamargariton two scruples. Mix them together, and make an Epithymum.

A little of this must be made warm in some pewter dish, and then take little
clothes of fine linen, which fold up two or three double. Then moisten one of
your clothes and wring it forth lightly, and apply it unto the heart, keeping
it there a while, until it begin to be cold: then take another, and so a
quarter of an hour together, and this you may do two or three times in the
day, applying afterward the quilt aforetaught. This is to be done when a person
is weak and faint.

A Potion purging gently all venomous and corrupt humors from the body.
R. Scabi. Card. benedict. Mors. diaboli ana pu. i. betonicae pu. i. trifolii
pu. i. rad. gentianae scrup. i. flo. boraginis, buglossae ana pu. i. sem.
citrini scru. i. rhubarb. clectae j. Seen iij. aqua scab. endiniae and
buglossae ana vnc. j. and semis. fiat infusio. Deinde add Diacatholicon vnc.
j. manna calab. vnc. semis. sir. Rosarum solutiu. vnc. i. misce and fiat potio.

Take this potion the second or third day after your sweating, so it be not on
the changing or full of the moon, and the sooner the better, no botch or sore
appearing. This will work gently in all bodies, and purge strongly and
effectually, and cleanses and purges the body of the remnant of the venomous
infection, and corrupt humors. Take the other part the second day after early
in the morning, you must ^xing it with infusion ^t was left.
neither eat, drink, nor sleep until it has wrought his effect, which is
in giving you seven or eight stools. Within an hour after the taking of it,
or thereabout it will work: Have therefore in readiness your stool with warm
water. If after the taking of it you fear casting it up, then use abrowne
toste and vinegar to your nose, and smell thereto oftentimes. Within four or
five hours you may take a little good broth made with a chicken, veale, or
mutton, with herbs as before taught. And when it has wrought his effect,
which will be within five hours, or thereabout, then may you eat some of your
meat, and take your rest ^member to often in ^ur chamber ^t perfumes down be^e.
a while after, if you have any disposition to sleep. Make a light supper, and
keep and observe a good diet, keeping your self within your chamber or house
ten or twelve days.

They that would have it less purging, may take the third part before set
down. And although it work strongly, yet is it gentle, easy and hurtlesse. It
purges choler, phlegm, and all corrupt and superfluous humors. I could set
down many for the purging of the body, but none better, or to be preferred
before it in this case: and this will suffice. At other times, we commonly give
sirrupes bnfore, opening, extenuating ^ppocrat. cum ^isque purgare.
and preparing the body, but in this case, where the matter abounds, and
requires speedy euacuation, we stand not upon it.

Oftentimes and most commonly in this contagious sickness the patient is
troubled with lightness in his head, and cannot sleep: the reason hereof is,
Note the brain is distempered by heat: Hot vapors ascending and flying up
from the stomach. And this is the reason they sleep not: and the cause of
their raging is want of sleep, and a distemperature of the brain. When a
person is so troubled, then use this underwritten.

An unguent to anoint the temples and brows of him that cannot sleep through
heat, and distemperature of the brain.
R. Vnguentum popillion vnc. semiss. vnguentum rosarum vnc. semiss. Vnguentum
alabastra vnc. An unguent to cause sleep in watching and rauing.
semiss. olcum violarum, oleum nenupharum ana ij. opium scrup. j. or scrup. ij.
in aqua rosarum dissol. misce.

With this anoint his temples, and the for part of his head sometimes, when
you would have him to sleep. And give him to eat this, which is exceeding good
to cause sleep, and stay raging.

R. Conserve of Roses half an ounce: Diascordium two drams: sirrupe of popie
half an ounce: sirrupe A confection causing sleep.
of limons two drams: mix them.

Give him the half of this to eat, which will greatly further and provoke
sleep. Or this will also greatly provoke sleep.

R. Sirrupe of violets, sirrupe of limons, sirrupe of poppie of each one ounce:
diascordium three drams: mix them.

Give the patient sometime of this in a spoone to drink, for it is good to
provoke sleep and stay raging.

A Frontall to be applied unto the fore part of the head, to cause sleep.
R. Flowers of Roses, violets, and water Lillies, of each a little handful: of
the seeds and heads of poppie, ^eause sleep ^ntlet to be ^ied unto ^rowes.
one dram: of the three kinds of Saunders, of each one dram: Flowers of
Camomill, betonie, and melilote, ana pu. ss. beat them into gross powder, and
let a frontall be made thereof.

Apply this frontall unto his head, as before taught. I have set down these
means to cause and provoke sleep, and stay the raging that is oftentimes in
this sickness. But you must note, that this is not to be used in the beginning
of his sickness: For in the beginning of the sickness the person ought in
any wise to be kept from sleep. For as through sleep the spirits are drawn
inward, and the venom therewith attracted unto the heart: so the heat is also
exceedingly increased through sleep.

Therefore this means that I have set down for causing of sleep or any
other to sleep, may not be ^ote this.
used until the Patient has sweat, and two or three days after his
sickening. And the sore forth, then may you safely use them to his great
comfort and ease.

Through the great interior heat, the patient his tongue, throat and mouth will
be sore, as I have often seen, then make this gargarisme.

A Gargarisme to heal the mouth, throat and tongue in this sickness, if it be
sore through the heat of the stomach.
R. Barley excoricated or common barley a handful, ^ gargarisme.
Plantain leaves, strawberry leaves, violet leaves, sinckfoile leaves, of
either of these a handful: bryer tops half a handful: woodbine leaves and
collumbine leaves, half a handful: shred and bruise these herbs a little,
and then boil them in a quarte of fair water, which being well boiled,
strain it forth, and put thereto Diamoron two ounces, sirrupe of Roses two
ounces, mel Rosarum or honey of Roses two ounces: mix these, and let the
patient use it often to wash and gargarize his mouth.

The use of a little white wine sometimes is good with Rose Water, and a little
vinegar to wash his moth withal.

To vomit at the beginning of the sickness is good: Note this, when vomit is
good.
for if a person fall sick at his meat, or within a while after his meat;
then ought he to provoke vomit, and when he has vomited, then to take a
medicine set down for the cure of the pestilence, and sweat therewithal, and
do as I have taught Cordials and sweat will stay vomiting.
in this book before: but if he be much troubled with vomiting in his
sickness, then let him use this that I shall teach him.

R. Aromaticum Rosarum vnc. semis. Aromaticum gariphilarum ij. sir. limonum
vnc. semis. diamargariton To stay vomiting.
frid. ij. misc.

And if his vomiting should not stay, then were it good for him to take some
gentle purging potion to expulse these corrupt humors that sucketh up that
disposition to vomit.

I doubt not but what I have written is sufficient for the interior part. Now
will I come to the external and outward application, and show what is to be
done in suppurating and opening the sore.

Having taken one of the medicines before taught, and sweat, using the cordial
appointed, apply unto the sore this underwritten, which will draw it forth,
and ripen it: and you must have special care that with speed you draw forth
the sore, apostume or carbuncle, least it return again into the body.

A plaster to suppurate, draw forth, and ripen the sore or botch, although
common, yet very good and commended of all that use it.
Take a great white Onion, and cut off the head of it, and with your knife
pick out the coare or middle part, and fill that hollow place full of good
treacle, not common treacle, but Theriaca Andromachi, which you shall have at
the Apothecaries. Put on the head of the Onion, and paast it with a little dow
or leven, and set it to roste in the imbers, and being soft roasted, take it
forth and pill it, and stamp it in a mortar, and lay it hot unto the sore
upon some double cloth, and roll it softly that it fall not off, and renew it
and lay on fresh, every six hours.

And here I must needs commend the use of a young cock to be used in this manner
unto the sore. Pull away the feathers from about the fundament of the cock,
and place the fundament upon the sore, and hold his bill sometime to keep in
his breath, he shall the better draw the venom: and if he die, then take
another, and do so again. Then lay on this Cataplasma, which I have often
used, and approved to be very good to draw forth and suppurate the sore.

R. One Lilly root, young mallows, one handful, let them be bruised in a
mortar: Lineseede two or three sponefuls beaten grossly, boil them together
in sufficient water, or as much as will cover them, boil them until they be
very soft and thick, then put thereunto Figs six or seven: half a good
handful of raisins stoned, mix these together, and put unto it oil of Camomil
two spoonefuls, and being very warm lay it to the sore, and bind it softly
that it may abide on, change it every twenhoures.

Another that ripeneth the botch and brings it speedely unto suppuration.
R. Onions and Garlic heads, of each of them in number four: roast them in
the imbers, then stamp them in a mortar, and put thereto of fenegreeck and
line seed of each a good spoonefull, snayles with their shelles four or five,
figs in number four: leaven as much as a Walnut, barrowes liquor as much as
two walnuts, mix them in a mortar, and warm it and apply it unto the sore.

An Implaister that ripeneth the sore or botch.
R. Galbanum Ammoniacum, Bedelium ana j ounce, dissolve them in vinegar at the
fire and strain them and put thereto diachilon magnum ij. ounces, mix them and
spread it upon a thick cloth, and lay it to the sore and change it every xvi.
hours.

Another plaster that draws forth the sore and ripeneth it speedily.
Take a white Lilly root, young mallows two handful, scabious one handful:
shred them and bruise them, and boil them in a sufficient quantity of ale
grounds, and put thereto of line-seede two or three spoonefuls beaten, and as
much fenegreek beaten likewise, sower leaven as much as two walenuts, mix
them, and lay it warm unto the sore, changing it every sixteen hours, two or
three times using it, ripens the botch.

By using any of these pultesses, or cataplasmes, you may speedily ripen the
botch or sore, and being break not self by means dily.
ripe, it ought to be opened by the Surgeon in the lower part thereof, that
the matter may be the better avoided. And remember this note, that whatsoever
you apply or lay unto the botch must not be cold, I mean cold in quality and
operation. For cold medicines would drive back again that venomous matter
true has expelled, to the great danger of the that napatient.

And if you fear the opening of it, which is indeeds nothing to suffer, then
let the Surgeon use a potentiall instrument, I mean a causticke, and being
done use this digestion.

R. Clear Turpentine washed one ounce, a yolke of a new laid egg, as much:
oil of Saint John's worte half a dram, of good Mithridatum half a dram.

Mix all these together and use it unto the wound until it be well digested,
which you may know by the whiteness, thickness, and great quantity of the
matter. And notwithstanding it is now running, yet shall it be good for you to
use one of the pultise before taught, it will ripen and bring forth the rest.
This is dangerous for those that are about you, therefore be careful to keep
your chamber, and also how you bestow the plasters that you use unto your sore,
that others be not infected thereby. You ought to use daily in your chamber the
perfumes before set down three or four times a day, to use a good diet, and
to eat of some of the cordials before set down, and your sore being near
well, then ought you to purge with one of the potions before set down.

What is to be done when a sore or botch lies deep and commes not forth.
You must take one of the medicines before set down for the cure of the plague,
and sweat therewithal: but Use cordials to comfort the heart.

The cause why the sore coms not forth, is weakness of nature.


if the Apostume or sorely deep, notwithstanding your sweat, then must you
fasten cupping glasses over or upon the sore, first scarifing the place, and
when you have used your cupping glasses, then use a young cock or pullet, as
before is taught, pulling the feathers from about the rumpe and tail, putting a
little salt into the fundament of the cock or pullet, set it unto your sore
houlding the bil of him sometime to retain his breath: and if he die take one
more, and do as before, and then apply the plaster of onions and treacle
setdown before: and then apply some one of the other which will bring it to
suppuration, then let it be opened as before taught.

What is to be done when the botch will not come to suppuration, but continues
hard.
If a botch come not to suppuration within three or four days, as most
commonly it does, but resists your application continuing hard, then must
you use some caustic or strong vessicatorie, or insitio^ which I like not of,
the matter being unripe or not altered into corruption: the continuance of a
botch vnsuppurated and not drawn forth is very dangerous: the reason is, the
venom gathers strength by putrefaction within the body and returns unto the
heart again. Then farewell life. This I have known, and I am persuaded may
die that might live, if this were seen unto. Therefore to prevent danger,
rather open the botch before it be full turned unto suppuration, and use
cataplasmes and pultesses to ripen the rest that remains. But being still
hard, then I say you must use the counsel of a surgeon, and open it with a
causticke, as I before said, how and wherewith I (...) with a (...).
would teach, but it would be too long in this place.

First, before it be opened, let it be well epithymated: and use some cordial
set down in this book, two or three times a day. And then use digestions and
salve to heales.

What is to be done when a botch strikes. in again.
Sometimes I have known the botch to appear, and yet suddenly to fall in
again, and this is ever a dangerous and deadly sign. But I will show you all
that may be done: and many have by this means been relieved from death.

First, with all speed give him some one of the four Electuaries set down in
this book for the cure of the plague, the quantity is there set down: and
procure him to sweat as long as he can endure it. Then dry him with warm
clothes. And give him cordials to eat of, set down in this book. Then ought
he to have a glister, the which I will set down, and the next day early give
him my purging potion set down before: the which is good in this case: and
give him often cordials to eat. And by this means (by Gods grace) the patient
shall be delivered from death.

The Clister.
R. Maluae, Althaeae ambarum cum radicibus ana m. ss. Mercurialis, Hipericonis,
Meliloti ana m. ss. Scabi m. ss. sem. lim, and fenigraeci vnc. j. fiat
decoctio, m huius libra dissolve butyri vnc. i. mellis rosarum vnc. ii. olei
violacei vnc. ii. Catholici vnc. semiss. Succhari rub. vnc. j. Misce and fiat
clister.

Take four ounces less of the decoction, for that it will be too much in
quantity. Let this glister be given to the patient: And then the next morning
receive the potion set down before, that purges venomous matter from the
body, and observe what I have written.

When a botch arises near unto the heart, or in the throat: then must you
desire help of the Surgeon, When a botch arises in a dangerous place what
we must do.
who with cupping glasses may draw the sore or botch farther off. To set down
the manner here it were needless, every surgeon that has any judgment
and practice knows how to do it. I will here end, beseeching God to be
merciful unto us, forgive our sins, and make us thankful for his great
blessings bestowed upon us, bless our labors, and cease this sickness. Amen.

FINIS.

