The second book of Tertullian unto his wife, translated into English, wheri^
is contained most godly counsel how those that be unmarried, may chose unto them
selfs godly companyons, and so to live quyetly in this world and blessedlye in
the world to come.

Let wedlock be had in price in all points, and let the Chamber be undefiled,
for whore kepers and aduouteters god will judge.

Heb. 13. To the christian Reader, John Hoper wysheth grace and knowledge in
the Lord.
THe more of importance and weyghte the matter is, a man takethe in hand: with
the more circumspectyon and advised counsel he should begin the same: lest the
thing lightly and unadvisedly begone, might either constrayne the autour with
shame to leave, and forsake utterly his fact, either with anxite and troble
of mind to persevere and contynewe in the same. Therefore it was wyselye
counceled by wise men when they said: before thou begin any thing ask
counsel, and then put the thing councelled upon in fact. With this makes also
that elegant and wise proverb, Dimidium facti qui been cepit, habet.

That is to say, he hat half e^ded his purpose, yt begi^neth well. But in the
life of man what is more weighty, grave, excellent, or wa^teth more
circumspection, good counsel, ernest prayer unto god the^ Matrimonye? What and
thou should begin it vnwyslye, and ungodly: how many inconuenie^ce and
troubles should there follow? I leave ye nombre of testymonies, and examples,
and commend the unto experyence. We see daily most petifull and lamentable
alienations, and separacions not only of the mind but likewise of the body,
by means as well of frowardnes and morosyte of conditions as of filthy
adulterye, and unlawful diuorcementes. To succor and help so great euelles in
the beginning of matrymonye required counsel, and not such as persuades and
co^pelleth the most part of persons to marye for fond, flesshely, or
auaricious affection: but holy, just, prudent and well aproued counsel that
teaches at the beginning to behold wisely the conditions of him or her that
is wyshed for in Marriage: and so in time with wisdom take, or leave, him or
her accordi^gly, with time advised upon: And then appoynte him self (if any
thing should happen after the Marriage contrary to his expectacyon and hope
that he or she had of others health, manners, or conditions, that breaks not
afterward matrimony) with patience, and tolleraunce to bear them, until,
death separat the one from the other, or God redress and amend the faults
and manners to be redressed and amended. But before man or woman marie, this is
requisite to be done that every one and of every sex and kind examine him
self whether he can with a good conscience live sole and unmarried or not. If
he can, it is the mind of the holy ghost and of sayncte Paul that he so
remain in purite, and cleanes of life in body and soul to ye glory of God.i.
Cor. vii and the commodyties of this true and unfeigned chastity be infinite
and wonderful, but not given to all men. And great head must be taken here,
lest under the pretext, and name of chaste and sole life lie hyd most damnable
hordome and adulteri. In case thou be gyltie and fyndest in thy self the
danger of adustion, and burning of concupysence it is the commandment of
God thou mary i. Cor. vii. With this commandment no man can dyspence, nor no
vow or what esti^acie, (...), or estimacio^ so ever it be: for obedience unto
the commandment is better then all the vows, or sacrifice of the law.

And when thou have thus advisedly appointed thy self to marriage see thou first
chose thy make or companion, before thou lone, lest thou happen to be deceived
with blind love which suddenly entered, and suddenly perishes again.

Measure not thy chose, from riches, beauty, age, parentaige, or from such
like: but from vertwe, godliness, wit, discreacion, and tractablenesse of
conditions. The first condycyons be not to be refused in case they be well
placed in a man or woman that has them with ye fear of God, where that
lacks: they be better refused, then taken. And because we may be deceived
under the show of virtue and happen upon a woman of froward co^dicions and
troublous, when we think our selves best bestowed: and also the woman many
times hoping to have matched with an honest man, where as she afterward finds
her self utterly deceived: farther both manne and woman many times are
charged and in danger to love the rich, the fair, and so prefer them before
ye good and virtuous. The first election and beginning of Matrymony ought to be
from prayer, in the which such as would marie should ask of God, a godly
companyon from whom only it is given Prouer. After diligente prayer should be
like inquisition of what faith the party is that is desired in Matrymonye: for
as dyuersytye of religyon between one man and his wife is dangerous, so is it
forbidden by God Deuteronomy. vii. Ios. xxiii. Therefore Abraham the father of the
faythfulles bound his servant by an oath that he should not take any of the
daughters of Canaan for his son Isaac. And Isaac commands Jacob his son
to beware of ye same Gene. xxviii. The contempt and violacion of this
commandment brought the children of Israel into great danger Iudic. iii.
And Salomo^ the king into Idolatrye.iii. Reg. xi. Therefore saynct Paul says
i. Cor. vii. That it is lawful to marye whom we will, so it be in the Lord, as
it never can be where as the person to be Married abhorrithe (as saint Ambrose
says) the autoure of Matrimonye. It is not enough for the man or ye woman,
that will mary, to chose such a one as bears ye name of Christ, but he or she
must diligently search what the practyse and obedyence of his conversation is to
the name of Christianite. And when such a one is found, then chose and love
honestlye, seek with the counsel of thy wise friends, and neglecte not the
suffragies, nor consent of the parents and friends of the person thou
sekest: and commend then, all the success to God, and desire his will to be
done. This is the only way to begin Matrimony if it shall ever prosper well
But out alas how far be men now adays from this manner of way toward
marriage. This is now accounted folyshnes and supersticion. And in ye place of
these virtues is entered many unlawful and ungodly means, some bye and and
sell their children: yea from ye cradell and makes marriages between those,
that has not the use of reason to judge what marriage is. Another sort seeks
how with flattery, collusion, defraude, and gile: yea by the means of bands
and dishonest persons alure the son and daughter to a contracte with out the
knowledge, advise, and consent of the parents, and thinks it good enough so
they agree within them selves. Another sort where as they se, the mairage they
covet to be above their reach they solicitate their friends letters and
boroweth, many an honest co^me^dacion in their masters or fre^des letters
which they never pay after, to the person that honest co^mendacions
pertayneth. I do not condemn nor disalowe ye report and lawde of an honest
man or woman, nor think it not against the word to make mention trewly of the
persons virtue and faculties that is wished for in matrymony, as Abraham's
servant did, so it be done trewly and without fraud. But in case the
commendacions and good will of the suter can not prevail, I would not that the
commandment of any friend that s^weth for an other, should forse or
compel the free parson against his or her will. Nether where as this means
can avail, with tortoure or compulsion of perswatio^ to constrayne or induse
the unarmed, and euel fe^ced mind, of him, or her that of it self for virtue
could no way admit such a conjunction and matrimony. If it be well begone
the lord will prosper it in grace and goodness. If the contrary, he will sure at
length punish it, as it is to be seen how the whole world for violating of
matrimony was drouned, Sodom burnte. Among other faults and crimes that
brought the children of Israel into Captivity the least was not the breaking
of Marriage: But it is not ynoungne to begin Matrimony iustlye, it must so
contynewe, and end, if it be of God. This shall be done, incase boothe, fear
the Lord, and each know his duty to the other. And to the end it may the
better and sooner be put in experience, it shall not be a lost labor al
together for the christian reader to see the godly writings of this old and
grave writer Tertulliane that here lived for. 1340. since. This second book
to his wife, before four years past, I translated at the desire of a godly
friend of mine, being both then, in a strange country. And when I had done
in the translation, I commended unto him the judgment thereof: so that with his
labors and mine he send it into London to a godly, and virtuous widow his
mother by the law, who thankefullye took it for the time of her life. And
since her departure the godly man has given the same godly council to
others that be unmarried. And now wishyng good to al, through this realm that
he cannot speak withal, thought it good to commit the same (for a farther use
thereof) to the prynte.

Prayinge god, that it may do as much good to all unmarried, and married
persons, as both he, and I most heartily pray for, in the Lord. Amen.

A leter directed, unto a certain godly and virtuous wyddowe of London,
written by the husband of a daughter of hers.
Right wourshypful, and intierly beloved mother, with most erneste, and
hearty desire, I beseech our heuenlye father, almighty God, for to increase
the knowledge of his dear son, our savior Jesus Christ, in you. And
through his holy spyryt the true comforter, for to assyst and comfort you, in
this your present heaviness, for the departi^g of my good father your husband,
and to council you what is best for you to do, in the estate that ye be now
in. etc. For, as for my comfort, or counsel specyallye, which ye desired to
have, is over slender, for to do you any great good, in so waightye a matter.

Never thelesse good mother, out of the love that I do bear unto your soul
health specially, and considering how much I am bound unto you. First for
giuynge of your consent, that I might mary your daughter, my beloved wife.
Then for the great kyndenesse (to your great cost, and charge) that ye have
showed us two, in the keeping, and ouerseinge of our son, in our absence, and
for manyfolde other benefytes, and pleasure done unto us, by our good father
your husband, and you, at diverse, times besides: I have caused a good friend
of mine here, master John Hoper, for to traunslate and write out in to
English, a little treatise compiled in lattin by that very christen and godly
doctor, Tertulian (a Martyr also of Jesus Christ, as some do write) now
about.xiii. hundred and lxxxx. years agonne. And so much the sooner, have I
sent you the said treatise, rather then annye other thing, gathered after
mine own mind, out of the holy scriptures: because that no man should drive
you, from the following of the same, as from a new found doctrine, devised but
yesterday, out of some fond fellows brain. For yt is one, of the
cauylacyons, where with the dyuell goes about, for to let the going
forward, of the verytie many times: even for to mou emen to believe, that the
old truth, is the new learning, yea new fangled heresy, and I wot near what.

The occasyon why I have now sent you, this aforesaid treatise, called the
second book of Tertulian, unto his wife: And not rather translated his first
book, in which he instructs his wife, how she should behave herself, and
order her living after his death: Is that in his said first book or treatise,
he exhorts her, for to contynewe, still a widdowe in any wise: yea and that
requires he, of her so earnestely, and so straightely, that he (but in yt no
doubt he erryed greatly) seems plainly to affirm, and to go about, to make
her believe, that if she married again with any man, she should commyt sin.
But here in this other treatise, he seems after my mind, rather by declarynge
unto her, what manner of husband, yt she should chose to her (to say none
other, Husbands, christen virgens or widows might i^ no wise take, wtoute
the great offense and co^tempte of almighty god: teach and i^struct her what
manner of etc.
but a very Christen and godly person) if that after she were once free, from
the yoke of matrymony, she had not the gift of god, to follow S. Paul's
counsel, which is: to abide still unmarried, and not to seek another husband,
if she were once losyde from one, and not in danger of fornicacion, through the
burning incontinencye of the corruptyble flesh.

But now I doubt not, but that if some man, should hear this said treatise
read unto you: he would say by and by: what mad fool sent this book unto
you, as a thing that ye should follow? etc. This exhortacion served, for the
christen women of Tertulyans time, when they inhabyted the whole world over,
here and there, amongst the infideles and heathen, and for such as do dwell
amongst the Turckes and Jews, now in our days: And not for any Uirgins or
widows, in our kings grace his realm, where as be none other to take, but
only christen, if a woman will mary, any man at all. That is truth in deed, if
all men were true christen, that bear the holy name of Christ. But our
savior him self says Math.vii. Enter in at the strayte gate for wide is
the gate, and broad is the way that leads to distruccyon, and many therbe
which go in thereat. But straight is the gate, and narrow is the way which
leads unto life: and few therebe that find it. Ite^: not every one that
says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven: but he that
does the will of my father, which is in heaven. And saint Paul, speaking of
the false christen, I mean such, as be but christen in name only. Unto
Titus.i. Says: they profess that they know God (with their mouth, and by
their outward use, of the sacraments and ceremonies, the Apostle means no
doubt) but with their deeds they deny him: In as much as they be abominable
lyuers, and not obedient unto gods word, but reprobate persons, as touching
any good works. It is good to think then, that the man of God, Tertulia^,
took such for no better, the^ the heathen: Specially seyuge that his master,
and Lord Jesus Christ, says further, that at the last day, he will say unto
such, christen disciples of his: de part from me, an ye that work Iniquity:
I know you not. etc. Mat.vii. And who I pray you, should better know, who
be the true christen, and christ's disciples in deed, then our savior Jesus
himself? which says Ioh.viii. If ye shall abide in my word, then shall ye be
my disciples in deed. Item. Ioh.xv. He that abides in me, and I i^ him,
brings fourth much fruit. etc. Then they that bring forth, no fruits of
righteousness at al: but lie still like swyne, wallowing in their voluptuousnes,
or else like cruel dogs, do bark at, and persecute the true doctrine of
Christ, which they know not, be none of christ's discyples, and therefore,
no true christian: but heathen, and worse then infidels, in the sight of
almighty god. Yea, and so be all such to, as do contynuallye sryll from day
to day, walk or lie, in their foruicacion, adultery, drunk nnesse, glotonye,
extorcion, intolerable usury, inordinat covetousness, blind supersticion,
and wiked Idolatrye, with such like vices, as S. Paul says.i. Cor. vi. and
Ephe.v. For why should they else, be cast out of the company, or communion, of
al christen men. In token that they have no part i^ the gospel, nor of the
kingdom of Christ, except they amend? Saynet Paul, when he went so
earnestly about, to drive the christen people amongst the Corynthiaus, from
the vsyng of the Idolatry, and other vices of the gentyles there: what meant he
when he said.i. Cor. x. I would not have you ygnoraunte brethren that our
fathers were al of them under the cloud, and as passed through the sea, and al
of the^ were baptisid into Moses, in the cloud, and in the sea, and al did eat
one, and the same spiritual meat, and al did drink one spiritual drink.
etc. What should the Apostle mean, by all these words I say? but that such of
those fathers, as were afterward noughty fell from God, unto lust, and sin,
and tempted and provoked god, unto wrath and vengeance in the wilderness,
were never the better in the sight of him, for yt they had before seen and
felt, so many of his great miracles, or wonderful deeds, nor for that they
had been partakers, of so many, of his holy signs and sacraments. Now that
this was S. Paul's meaning, aperyth plainly, by that he says by and by after
the before aleaged words: out in many of them, God had no pleasure. And that
same the Apostle proves, by that the Lord did after ward, punish and plage
the^ so grievously and often, in the wilderness. For they were overthrown in
the wilderness, says S. Paul.i. Cor. x. And then he goes fourth there, to
his purpose and says: but these are examples unto us: that we should not lust
after euel things, as they lusted: nor be worshippers of Images, as some of
the^ (he means the forefathers of the Jews, that provoked God in the
wilderness) were: And so fourth, as ye may read there, at your leisure. And
at the the last, Saint Paul concludes thus: al these things happened unto
them, for figures (or examples, as he might say) and were written for our
warning, upon whom the ends of the world are come upon. Even as though he
would say. It shall nothing avail you, O ye christen amongst the
Corinthians, that ye once received the spirit of God, at your baptysme, that
ye come often to pray together, and sing psalms in the commen asse^bles, nor
that ye do often receive the sacrament of Christ's body and blood etc. As
other good christen do: Except that ye do follow your profession in deed,
continue in the spiryt and fear of the lord, avoiding all deadly sin, and
the wicked wourshypping of Images, that is used, amongst your neighbors and
familiers the gentyles there, at Corrinth. etc. And by this good mother is it
easy, to apply this aforesaid saying of sainet Paul: unto our corrupt ryme
(of which no doubt, the holy ghost showed before hand.ii. Timo. iii.) And to
esteem those persons, no true chrystians, which do persevere without all
repentance and amendment, in all manner of vice, and abominacions, of ye
world. For Saint James says that the pure and undefiled religion, before god,
and the father, is, to vysit the fatherless and wyddowes, in their afflyccion
(by these two good works of mercy, he understands the walki^g, in all other
good deeds, ye may be sure) and to keep him self, unspotted of the world.
That is: to beware, that he defile not his soul, nor body another, with the
covetousness, extorsio^, adultery, fornicacion, Idolatrye, or such like
abomynacions, which the world commonly vsyth or co^mytteth.

But to return somewhat again, unto my purpose: please it you to understand
good mother, that whereas ye shall hereafter find, certain annotacio^s in the
mergent, of this treatise, the same I made my self, with out master Hopers
knowledge: (but ye faithful, may sone judge, whyther they be true or no) if
they will confer the same, with the right touch stone, the holy scryptures.
This I wright for none other intent, but that, if the same annotacions do not
like you, ye should not put ye blame in master Hoper, who knows not yet of
them. And as for the notes that I have made here and there concerning the
Sacrament, I amsure that ye would nor be offended with them, if ye had read
the same doctors mind, in other places of his works: Because yt by ye same,
he does manyfestlye declare, that he was of the right opinion in the said
Sacrament. For in his first book against the herityke Marcion, who did say
that all the things of this world were vncleaue (but other more dampnable
heresies then that did he stiffely defend) he says these words folowi^g:
Tertuliaus mi^de of ye holy sacrament of Christ's body and bludde
Christ did not reprove bread, by which he did represent his body. And in
his fourth book where he confuteth the said abominable herityke, for saying
yt our savior Jesus, had but a pha^tastical body: he is yet more plain, and
says thus: Chrsyte took bread, distributed ye same unto his discyples, and
made it his body, saying: this is my body. That is to say, a figure of my
body. But that had been no figure thereof, except that he had had a very
body. For a vain thing, which is but a pha^tasy, can receive no figure. Or
else if he did therefore make bread his body, because that he lacked a true
body: Then should he have delivered bread, for us. And that had made for the
vanytye of Marcyon, that bread had be^ crucyfied. Hither to are Tertulians
words: by the which ye may plainly perceive, that he believed not (as ye
Papystes do) that the bread of the Sacrament, was the very body of Christ
Really, no, but figuratively, or i^ a mystery. And for the better understanding
of the whole treatise following (because that master John Hoper did it not) I
have translated the prologe into the same, here my self symplye, and as well as
I can. But now I make an end, to trouble you good mother, with this my rude
writing: because ye should the sooner read here now, wholly Tertulians own
mind, of the foresaid matter. etc. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, be
ever more with you. AMEN.

The Prologe and Argument, of this book, made in Latin by master beatus
Rhenamus, a learned man of Schleckstadt, nygh unto Strasburge in Germany. Anno
Domi. 1521. and prynted in Englysh. An. 1550.
Certain christen women (and specially such, as were rich or wealthy) when
their husbands were dead, through ambition and vain glory, did marye with
the gentyls afterward, because they were ashamed of christen men, as
persons of a low degree, and of small substannce. For in those days, the
heathen had at ye wealth, and high power in their hands. They did reign,
bare rule, and had all the dominion alone. The poor christen lived then with
out all manner of office, or authorytye, in the commune wealth: lived, yea
rather lay hyd, and were al only known, by their modestyousnesse, and sobre
living. Therefore when Tertulyan saw this unseemly example, of the wyddowes,
which so did mary again, he in this latter book, going about for to warn
his own wife of that inconvenience, entreats of those women, that took unto
their husbands, gentiles: declarynge also plainly, yt in so doing, they did
wickedlye, and al against S. Paul's sentence, with yt which they defended their
deed. By and by after he does rehe rse, the impedymentes and inconueniency,
that came of such wedlock, sei^g that they might not frelye attend, unto the
obseruacions of the christen faith. In the which place he receyteth the
chief studies and offices, of our religyon, which were used in those days.
That is to say, of standing, of fasting, of processyon (which represented the
people of the Jews, that went fourth of Jerusalem, for to mete Christ: And
also the Apostles, going out, unto the Mount, when christ ascended into
heaven) Of the vysyting of the brethren (that was of the christen, when they
were syche, and diseased) of the watchinge in the night at Easter: which
Saint Jerome thought therefore to be celebrat and done, because it is the
tradition of the Jews, that Christ shall come at mydnyghte, like as it was, in
the time of the Egiptians before. Wherefore I think (says he) yt the Apostles
tradicion did then still remain, that on Easter even, the people might not goo
away, till half the night were paste, but should tarry waightyng for the
coming of Christ, that then, when that time was passed, they might al of
them, with the more security, and with out fear, keep that feast holy.
Tertulian makyth also mention, of the lords feast, or supper, of the vysyting
of men in prison, of the kyssing of brethren, that is christen men, of the
washyng of feet, of the impartynge or dealing of meat and drink, and
lodginge, of the sign or token of the cross, of ye prayers made In the
night: of the sacrament, of the lords body and blood (which was then
taken, before they did eat any meat) and of the holy synginge, of the
christen people then. Last of all, he extolleth, that matrymonye, by the
which a christen manne, is coupled unto a christen woman, because that then,
one may keep their chrystianity, when as (that I may use Tertulyans own
words) the sick is freely visyted, the neby sustained, when alms is done
without torment, or fear: the comunion used and frequented, without all
scrupulosyte and doubt (that is to say, when the husband himself, being also
present at the same, is not afraid of his wife) daily dylygence without any
impedyment, no markynge of one, with the sign of the cross, by stealthe. (For
a christen woman then, durst not, that her husband might see, cross her
self: but did it secreatly) no tremblyng or fearful gretyng (for the wife in
saluting of a christen man, did cause her unbelieving husband, for to suspecte
her of adulterye) nor yet no domme praysynge of god. For in the presence of an
heathen man, his wife durst not openly, or alowde give thanks unto christ.
Which thing he him self does so expound, when he says, afterward. psalms
and holy himnes, are song between them two, and the one strives with the
other, who can sing best unto their God.

FINIS.
The second book, of the blessed martyr Tertulyan unto his wife.
OF late, my dear beloved wife and companion in the lord, as well as I could,
I aduertysed you, what life best besemed: and was most decente for a godly
woman, that was losed by any occasion, from Matrimony. Now having regard
unto the infirmites of man, being moved thereunto by the example of certain
persons, the which by reason of diuorsement or death of their housbande, had
occasion given them to live chaste, they not wtstandynge, have not only,
forsaken (...) of so great a perfection, but also in maryinge again, for got
the disciplyne, and commandment of the law, which gives the wydowes
liberty to marie again, unto whom they will, only that it be done, in ye
lord. Therefore I am in great perplexity and troubled, lest that I which of
late exhorted you, to perceauer and continewe in the state of wydowheed, as a
woman contented with one husband. Now making mention of marriage, should give
you occasion to fall from the higher perfeccion: But in case ye will consider
your health, ye will live in that state of life, yt shall be most commodiouse,
though ye do it with pain and force. If the thing be hard and dyfficile,
the more it requires the (...) of God. I would not have written, unto you of
this matter, but that I find mine own conscience, and judgment, careful of
your health. Incase the chastity of the body, that preserves ye state of
wyddowhed, be so great a gift, yt it may not be suffered or kept, it may be
had excused, Wed owes cannot mari again, except it be to such as be of the
household of faith.
things that be hard and uneasy to be borne, sone opteineth pardonne. The
more favorable the law of god is to permit matrimony to such as cannot
abstain, the more it condemns him, that may abstain, and will not.

This approves ye apostle, when he speaks of wyddowes: I would says he
they should continue, in the same estate. I would they should follow mine
example. And when he licenceth them to marye in the lord, when he says only
in the Lord, he does not give council, so to do, but earnestlye commands
them. Therefore as concerning marriage again, if we follow not the
commandment, we fall in danger of damnacion. For he that passes not of
wholesome council, will likewise neglecte, the commandment, the one is a
council, and put to the choice of man, but to offend in the other, is
contempt, and injuries to ye law. Therefore seeing, that a certain woman,
forsook to mary with one, of the household of faith, and joined herself, to a
gentyl as I have seen the like done, before by other. I wounder they could not
aproue their so doing, to be lawful by the scripture, to excuse their
wantonness, and pride, and the tra^sgression of such holy cou^selles. Do they
thick they can excuse their fault, 1. Cor. vii
by the place of Paul: If any brother, have an unbelieving wife, and she is
contented to dwell with him, let him not put her away. Likewise if a woman,
have a unbelieving husband, and he is contented to dwell with her, let her not
put him away, for the vnbeleui^g housbaude, is sanctified, by the beleuynge
wife, and the unbelieving wife is sanctified by the beleuinge housbande, or else
were your children unclean. Paraduenture such as be unmarried will
understand this sentence of Paul sympely and plainly. They that so
interpretate it do think it lawful, for one of the faith, to mary an
infydele. But god forbyde that a man wyllynglye should thus deceive him self.
For truly it is plain that the scripture speaks of them, that were married
before any of them were called to the faith, as ye words plainlye declare: If
any beleuynge brother have an vnbeleui^g wife: he does not say: If any brother
be to be married to an unbelieving wife, he means that the husband of an
unbelieving woman, now being in matrymonie, and converted, may and ought to
conty^^e, with his wife, that is to say, for because the housbande, that is
converted to the faith, shall not think it lawful to depart any manner of
ways from her, as from a woman of a strange faith, in so much that his
reason is thus: God has called us in peace, and it may be, that the
unbelieving woman may be converted of the faithefull housbande by the
conversation of matrymonye. This little sentence and proposition declarythe it
so to be understand. By calling. S. Paul meneth here no doubt, ye state or
condition of liui^g, which God by his providence has ordened every man and
woman to walk in, after his word or commandment. etc
For every man says Paul, as he is called, of the lord, in the same let
him, abide, I suppose, such as be called be vnbeleued and not faithful. For if
he had meant of such, as were in the faith of Christ before matrimonye, he
would absolutelye have permitted, one of the household of faith to have married
with the heathen, and if he had permytted yt, he would never have added so
diverse and contrary a sentence to his own permissio^. Saing: the housband
being dead, the wife is at liberty, to marye to who^ she will, only in the
lord. There is nothing here to be entreated upon again: For, as much as was
expedye^t to be spoken of, Christ has declared it, lest any man should mysse
take this sentence she may mary to whom she will, he added, only in the lord,
that is to say in the name of the lord, which is no doubt to a man of the
household of faith. Christ our holy savior therefore, which would have
widows to live chastely in their wydowhed, who does exhort us to his
example, has prescribed none other license to marye again, saving only to
such as be of the congregation of faith, to this rule and precepte, he has
Bound al yt will mary again: only says he in ye lord he has. etc.
added the great weight of his awe: by the which ways and means, thou may
declare this saying, and it is of great waighte. For now he charge, then he
speaks fair, now he gives commandment, then he exhorts, now he
prays, another time he threatens.

This sentence is often times repeted and approved, brefe and short, not
withstanding very plentuouse and copiouse. This is the condition of the
scripture: Continually observe it my godly wife: In these marriages, that the
apostle forbyddeth men to enter and join the^ selfs, who can perceive how
many perils, and ieoperdies of faith there be. The first is to beweare, lest
the flesh of a christen woman, be defiled by the comyxtion of ge^tilite. Some
man would move this question: Then what dyuersite, is there between him yt is
called by the lord in matrymonye being a gentyl, and him that is one of the
household of faith before his marriage, that both they should not a like a
boyde, the defylynge of their steshe. The one being an infydele, is constrained
to leave his matrimonye with the christen, the other is souffered to continue
in matrimony. If then we be defiled, by mariyng, one that is not of the
household of faith, may not the one be separated, as well as the other is not
suffered, to be joined? I answer, if ye spirit of God, would so give
chastity, better it were before all other things, a man not to couple him
self in matrimony, then afterward utterly to break, and dyssolue
matrimony: For the lord forbyddeth any deuorce to be made, except it be for
fornication. As for chastity the lord always commends, the one by the law
is commanded to him with his wife, the other, has no license to marye.
Therefore according to the scripture, they that in matrymonye be called of god,
shall so continue, and yet not thereby defiled, yea ye other party, is rather
thereby sanctified: with out doubt such as be of the household of faith,
before they marie, if they couple the^ selves with such, as be not of their
religion, they cannot sanctifye that matrimony. For that appertains only to
the grace of god, to sa^ctefye that it fyndeth, then if it cannot be
sanctified, it is unclean, and that that is unclean has no part with that
that is holy, but rather with the same fylthynes to deflye and distroye it.
These be three things: faithful persons to marie with them, that be not of the
household of faith, they be to be condemned of fornication, and to be
excomunicated from the company and fellowship, of the christian congregation,
by the auctoryte of the Apostels saying. (...) (...) a person cate not, and yet
shall we bring the tables of this matrimonye, before the judgment seat of the
lord? And shall we say that this matrimony, is to be allowed, which god
co^dempneth? is it not adultery that is forbidden? is not the marriage with one
that is not of the household of faith, unclean? He does less violate ye
temple of god, and does less injuries to ye member of Christ, that accompeneth
him self with an harlot: For I know, we be not at our own liberty, but
redeemed, and that with the rau^som of Christ's bludde. Doing therefore injuries
to our flesh, we do hurt him. Then what means he that says, it is sin
in deed, to mary with a stranger, but it is but a little pretye sin. Where as
if I should set aside the injuries of the flesh, that appertains to the
Lord, every transgression that is voluntarye, is great in the syghte of the
lord. The more power was given to overcome, the more is the defaulte worthy to
be condemned of contumary, and pride. Let us rehearse the other perilles and
dangers of the faith, which the apostle saw before, which are not only
troubelous to ye body, but also to the spirit, The inco^ueuiency that
comes, of an unfaithful or vnmet marriage
who doothe doubt, but that faith is daily put out of remembrance, by
keeping of familiarite with infydeles. Euel co^municacion, corrupts good
manners, how much more continual fellowship, and daily familiaryte. Every
faithful woman ought to be the servant of god: And how can she serve two
masters, her lord God, and her housbande, deynge none of the household of
faith. She that will please her housebande being a gentyle, must fashion her
self, after the manner of the gentilles, renderi^g unto him unchristian
reverence and service, in beauty, trick apparel, worldly nysenes, deshonest
intiseme^ts: yea i^ such estate, ye very secreates of matrimony be dishonest,
and the use or benevolence of the said persons, is not practiced, as it is
amongst godly persons, reuerentlye, soberlye, and modestlye, as ye
necessites of nature requires and as persons always present before the syghte
of God. But let the woman marcke or look, how the husband doothe his deutye
to god: Truly she her self cannot live in a virtuous trade of living, that
marieth with him that is not of the houshoulde of faith, being the servant
of the dyuell his lord, to let the godly mind and study of the faithful.
So that if the Christian congregation, should assemble together, her husband
would appoynte to bathe. If she should go out of her door to do any busynes
for the christen, she should that day have most busynes of her hand: if she
would fast, the same day, would her housbande prepare a feste. For what
unfaithful would suffer his wife, for the love of ye poor, to visit streate
by streate the cotayges of her poor neighbors? what unfaithful would suffer
his wife to rise from him to go unto the convent used in the night? And what
infidele without ialousye would suffer his wife to use the lords feast
(which he speaks euel of) without suspycion? who would suffere his wife to
creape in^o ye preson, To watch all night i^ yt sole^n feast (...) Easter?
what infidel would (...) fre his wife. ^
to the martyrs of Christ and there to kiss their featters, and now and then,
to receive a brother, with the kiss of peace, and to prepare, and bring them
water for their fete. To be careful and solycytouse what they shall eat. And
if any brother come from a strange country, what harbor shall he find, in
the house of an unfaithful man? If she would give any thing, to the poor,
ye garner and store house is locked up. But there be some yt suffers, and
bears with our religion, and does not cry out upon us. That is not
withstanding a fault, yt ye gentiles, know our secrets, and that we be at
their commandment, and yt the alms that we give, is of their goods. Now
the ge^til that suffers his wife so to do, is not ignoraunte, that his wife
does it. Other else if she keeps it close, because she knows he can not away
there withal, it is to be feared lest he should know it. Now forasmuch as
the scripture commands, both: that we should work in the lord, without
the obedience of the infidel, and likewise without our own ieoperdie and
peril: there is no difference, in which of these two thou offe^dest, either in
that thou have suomitted thy self under his powere, if he be contented to
suffer thy doings: or else in that thou have brought thy self, in such
trouble. Cast not says Christ your precious stones before swyne, lest they
tread upon the^, with their feet, and so turn back, and overcome you. Your
preciouse stones, are your badgis of your daily exercise, in godly lyuinge.
The more you go about, to keep your religion close, the more you cause, it to
be little paste of, and cause the curiouse gentile to be the more ware of it.
anne ye hyde your godly going to rest, when ye sing and marcke, both your
bed, and your body, with the sign of the cross? and when thou doste but
spyt at some unclean thing, that he does, or when ye shall rise in the night
to pray? Your husband will think rather these things, to be sorcery and
witch craft: Your husband may not know, what thing that is, that ye eat
secreatly in the morning, fasting, and if he know it to be bread, he will not
believe it to be as it is, To be it is: this the scrame^^ of christ's bo^^ and
blou^^
and he that knows not that mystery: can he be satisfied or quyer with him
self, without the suspection of bread Of bread that is of common bread: as
though, be would say thus will he not think, yt it is but bare bread, and not
an holy sacrament etc.
or poison?

There be some that bearethe with their wyfes in deed, but they do it of
craft, to deceive them, and to begile them, whose secreates they hyde, until
such time as they may detect and dysclose it, to their wyfes danger and
peril, whose substance, and dowerie shall recompense well enough, their
husbands silence, and preserve, the reproach of their defamacion, or else at
their pleasure, they might accuse the^, to ye higher powers. The which
experyence some have felt in deed, by losing of their goods, that they had,
or be deniynge of their faith: The hand maid of God, dwells, where false
gods be wurshypped, is trobled and vexed, with supersticious reverence of
ydolles, at such solemn feasts, as be appointed in the beginning of the
year, and of the monethe, to the honor of princes, or kings, with the flames
and odowre of franckinsence: And departs out of her house, decked with laure
leaves, and ca^dellis, as it were out of a new brodel house, or commen place of
horedome, she keeps company with her housbande in such fellowshyppes, and
many times, in commen tauernes: And many times she shall mynister to the
wicked, which before, was wo^t to mynister unto saynctes, and yet not hereby so
gracyous to know the danger of her damnacion: She shall wait upon them, of
whom she should have been judge, at whose hand she must take bread, and of
whose cup she must drink: what godly song may her husband sing to her,
or she to her husband? Tushe, let him hear a tale, of a good supper, of the
tavern, and of the dyuel, or of hell. What communicatio^ is there of god? What
invocation of Christ? there is no nourishment of faith, but rather mention,
how to destroy the scripture. Where is the consolacion of the spryte? Where
is the holy praisynge of god? All things be turned of a another sort, all
things odiouse, contrary and all things damned and reproved, laid in bayte
to bring persons, from their souls health. These things though they
happen to such to, as were called to the faith, in the state of heathen, or
gentyle matrimony, yet they are excused, as persons called to the faith, in
the state of gentyle matrimonye, and therefore be they commanded, to continue,
and the one is sanctyfyed by the other, and likewise there is hope of winning
the other party. If then such a matrimonye, be allowed of god: Why has it no
better success? Why is it not defended from affliction, from oppression,
trouble, By defiling, paraduenture he meaueth here, the danger that married
people, more then unmarried, be in: to fall from godly exercyses, through the
cares of this world, from which ye christen should keep the^ selves un
defiled Iam.i,
and defilynge of them selfs, having some proteccyon by the grace of God. For
a man that happens to marye a woman, which has after their marriage,
received the heavenly vertewe, so that it seems, that god has vouchsaued to
call her to such a state, of such a man: I say, the gentyles are aferde to
speak so sone yuel of, as of other, in so much, that she is less looked upon,
and has her meditacions in the mysteries of God, and at length seythe some
way to win her husband. She knows or perceaueth that her housbande waxes
better, and begins to fear God, so that such men be the sooner won,
which by the grace of God do happen upon such a make. For a conclusion, it is
an other matter, to fall in to things forbidden (which displease god)
willingly, and of purpose, sithe that even as they offe^de god, so bring they
them selves, into much inconuenyence. This is once as manifest as the sun,
ye none but wowers, does feign, as though they fauered the christian faith.
Yea, and god shall find out those weme^ well enough, which do not abhor
such wowers, and all because they might be in the more estimacion, so that
they take them to their housba^des, and thereby seclude the^ selves, from the
christian faith. Here have I rehearsed wherefore such matrimonye can take no
good success: Because it began of yuel, and is condemned, of the lord. But
yet let us se further, whether this matrymonye be lawful, that declares us
berelye to be despisers of gods word. Has not all prudente, and wise lords
or masters, always forbidden their servants, to mary with strangers, lest
they should fall in to wantonness, omyt their duties, and give away their
masters goods, to strangers. More over there was a law amongst the
gentiles, that if any fre man, had kept an other man's servant, after that he
was admonyshed, he should thereby have lost his liberty, and become a
servant. And shall worldelye ordinances be preferred before the heuenlye
decrees, and laws of god? so that the gentyles should lose their liberty,
for marying with a stranger, and our women should go, and join the^ selfs,
with servants of the devil, and shall never the less be accounted of the
household of faith? But now some will deny, that ever god taught the^ any
such ways by his apostle: what have I more to say, to open and utter the
madness of this cause, but even that our faith is weak and ready to fall into
the concupyscence of worldly lusts or desires, of which thing we have
experience and find it specially true in rytche and wealthye persons: For
the rytcher and greater fame that the wyddowe is of, so much the sonet she
desires a large house or place, to say her By burdens, he under stands the
riches and think, which hi^dereth ye cammels of this world, to go through the
straighte door unto life.
burde^s in: fildes of pleasure, where as her ambicious pride may solace or
delight it self. The congregacyons of the faithful do stynke in the eyes of
such a woman, it is hard to find a rich man in the church of god, and also
such a one as As liuith chaste: after they have been once losed from matrimony I
think he meuethe etc.
lives chaste. What then shall wyddowes desire, marriage of the dyuel? shall
they bestow their gooddes, to be carried in a chartet (or on a goodlye chair
or sladde) or to bye strange mules to carrye their bagage with all? A christen
man, ye being tytche, would not paraduenture, maintain these things. I
beseech the to call to thy remembrance, the women, that amongst the heathen,
such as be of noble progenye and rytche withal, do marye them selves to ^erye
slaves, and vile persons, of small or no estimacion: either because, they will
satysfye their carnal pleasure, or else because they may live, at their own
liberty: Also many of them will marye with their own servants, and such as
be set at liberty, yea with such as be paste lest of, amongst al men, so
that they may have such a one, as will not break them, of their will.
Should then a christen woman being rytche, despice to marie a christian
brother that is not as rytche as she? Nay, she shall be the rytcher for
maryinge of this poor man, For if ye Ki^gdome of heaven belong unto the pore,
and not to ye rich: the rich woman shall find in poor man etc.
a rytcher ioynter, then the rich man is able to make her. Well, if they be of
one condition and like rytche, concerning worldly substance, paraduenture
there is dyfference between them in ye kingdom of God. Should a christian
woman doubt, inquire and delyberate, whether that man be poor, to whom god
has given, the talent of his gospel? Now can I sufficiently praise, and
magnifye the felicite of that matrimonye, which the church does join to
gether, confirmed by offringe, ye Aungelles declare it to be sealed, and so
sygned, God the father does allow it: And here in the world the children
cannot lawfullye, and of right, marye without the consent, and good wylles of
their parents. O lord how godly is the matrimonye of thy faithful, that be
of one hope, of one desire, Aposcrophe A co^uersio^ of his tale to god,
praising ye state of godli maa trimony.
and of one learning, of one teligyon: both of them brothers and systers,
both of them servants of god, both of the^ one, in flesh and spirit, no
dyuersite nor dyfference. They pray together: They be many times myndeful of
god, they fast both together, the one leadynge the other the way: the one
exhorts the other. In the temple of god they be together, the marriage that
they have taken, they observe in wealth and woe, the one hydeth nothing from
the other, the one keeps nothing close from the other, the one eschewith not
the others company, the one is not unkind to the other, the sick is frelye
visyted, and the poor sustained. Their alms, is wyliyngly done, their
sacrifyces without scrupulosyte: Their daily affairs is done without let,
they need not to cross them selves by stealthe, nor to be half afraid when
they do salute a christian person, nor yet secretlye to praise god: psalms and
holy himnes, or often times long between them two, the one contendeth with ye
other, who may best sing to their god. Christ seeing and hearing these
things reioysethe, unto the^ he se^deth his peace. Wether such two be, there
is he, and where as he is, the devil cannot be These be ye things that we may
gather out of the sayings of ye apostle, where he gives leave to marie
again. Put thy self in remembrance of these things if need be, and follow
not the example of other. It is not lawful otherwise, for ye faithful to
marye. Though it were lawful yet is it not expedyente.

FINIS.
Imprynted at London, by Richard Judge, dwelling in Paul's church yard at
the sign of the Bible. M. D. I.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum Solum.


