THE MIRROR of Divine Providence.

Containing a collection of Theoret his arguments: declaring the Providence of
God to appear notably both in the heavens and in the earth, and in all things
therein contained: Taken out of his works De Prouidentia.

Printed at London by T.C. for John Smithick, and are to be sold at his shop in
S. Dunstons Churchyard in Fleetstreet. 1602.

To the Reader.
THe copy of this collection having long since lain by me, I have now thought
good to publish, as a work well worthy to be read and perused of all sorts of
people, at this time, wherein Atheism like an ill weed, is grown to such
height, as it seems to ouershadow the plants of true Religion, while men
attributing to Nature, what belongs properly to the Creator of Nature, do both
deprive God of his glory, and also discover their impiety, to the danger of
their own souls, and the hurt of others. The matter was originally handled by
Theodoret, an ancient and learned Father of the Church, in ten Sermons,
treating of Providence, the substance whereof has been extracted, and digested
into Method by a learned Divine, now deceased, who made this Collection
following. Read it with advise; and if thou do believe the Divine
Providence, as thou ought, the meditation thereof may be sweet and
comfortable unto thee: if otherwise thou doubt, or deny it, the consideration
thereof may strike thee with shame and terror, and happily reclaim thee from so
absurd and impious an opinion: which effect I do heartily wish, that it may
work in thee.

I. C.

THE MIRROR of Divine Providence.
Causes why he defends the Providence of God against the blasphemous mouths,
that deny the same.
THe children defend their Parents. Reasons why.


Servant their Masters.

Citizens their Cities.

The guard their Prince.

Much more ought Christians to defend Gods cause.

For God is nearer unto us then our Fathers, Reasons of the Conclusion.
by whose benefit they be made parents.

He is better then our masters, (whose rule is by nature, not by the calamity
of the servants).

He is stronger then any wall of brass, as he, whom no time can wear away,
nor force impair.

He is more princely then any king, whose rule is perpetual, and over all.

The Providence of God is proved in the Heavens.
FIrst, Nature.
in that the heavens being of a passible and corruptible nature,
notwithstanding continue until this day whole and perfect, in an uniform order,
Order. Motion.
or motion, without interruption, by the only word of the Creator.

Secondly, they being so near the Sun, Moon and Stars, (which by nature
be fiery), for all that are neither melted, dried, nor set on fire after so
many thousand years.

It is proved also in the Sun.
THe Sun contrary to nature (for that all fire is carried upward) does cast
down his beams and heat toward the earth. Likewise the water, being by
nature fluxible and heavy, is carried upward, and hangs in the air, without
any stay.

Secondly, the Sun is ordained to give light to all creatures.

Thirdly, The use of the Sun.
it serves for the distinction of time: for the Sun by rising and setting,
does distinguish the day from the night, which is the measure of all time.

The Night is as necessary as the day.
FIrst, by the night the light being interrupted, the day is made more
pleasant in his second coming.

Secondly, the bodies being wearied with the day labor, and by sleep, bed,
and rest, well refreshed, are made apt again to the next days labor.

Thirdly, it gives to the wild beasts a free and safe opportunity to seek
their pray.

Fourthly, and last of all, the days thereby being measured, it is
consequently the true measure of all time: The proof of the conclusion.
for by the night, days are measured: by days, the weeks: by weeks, the
months: by months, the years. And so it is the measure of all time.

Again, the Providence is proved by the four parts of the year.
IN that God has not joined the Winter and Summer together (which are
extremes) but has placed between them, the Spring and Autumn, as means to
qualify their extremities, to the comfort and preservation of all creatures:
for in coming by little, and little, as by degrees from the extremity of cold,
to the extremity of heat, we are both in less danger, and receive the more
pleasure: for the sudden, and over great alteration from one extreme to an
other, is very hurtful unto nature.

Secondly, as these four parts of the year are prouidently disposed, so are
they all necessary. The Winter to sow, the Spring to grow, the Summer to
ripen, the Autumn to reap, and gather in.

Last of all he gathers the Providence by the Stars also.
FOr the Stars, beside their light, are ordained as guides to direct
Mariners sailing upon the seas, where there is no tracke of Horse, Moyle,
wheel, or wayfairing man.

A demonstration of the Providence by the Air, Earth, Sea, Rivers, and
Fountains.
By the Air.
FIrst, whereas it is by nature fluxible, and has need of something to
contain it, God has so placed it between heaven and earth, as between two
most strong walls, that it cannot break forth, but is kept in, to the
preservation of al living creatures, by the breathing whereof all that have
sense do live.

Secondly, being moved with the watery clouds, it does moisten the Earth.

Thirdly, it is as it were a chariot to bring the light of the Sun unto our
eyes.

Fourthly, being placed between the Sun, and the Earth, it does with his
natural moisture and coldness, so temper the dryness and heat of the Sun,
that we receive his light, without grief, or hurt unto us.

And least we should imagine the Air to be the chief cause of this so great
benefit, God has appointed the Sun likewise to temper the extremity
thereof; for were it not that the Sun with his beams did warm the Air, we
were not able to abide the extremity of his cold, as we may perceive by the
winter, when the Sun goes further from us.

Fifthly, hereby is the Providence declared, for that the Air and Sun,
being in their own natures hurtful (the one through the extremity of his
cold, the other by reason of his extreme heat) are by the only providence of
God so aptly disposed, that they turn to our great commodity and pleasure.

Sixthly, neither in the Sun, Air, nor any one of the Elements severally, nor
yet in them all jointly, does the life of creatures, or the increase of the
Earth consist. For when the Air is most temperate, and the Earth watered with
seasonable showers, the Sun likewise uses a moderation, and the winds do
blow most mildely; yea, although the Husbandman plow never so skilfully, and
sow in good measure, and time, yet does not the Earth always yield her (looked
for) fruit liberally: neither is mankind always free from sickness and
diseases. Whereby God shows all things to be ruled by his Providence, and
not by Nature.

Last of all, by the Providence of God, the Air is so preserved, that although
all living creatures have breathed it so many thousand years: yet is it not
consumed, or less then it was at the beginning.

In the Earth.
Whose diverse form (for God has not made it altogether plain, neither
steep, nor rough altogether, but has divided it into hills, plain fields,
and thick woods) makes it pleasant to behold, and does delight through her
variety.

Secondly, the commodity is great, whilst the hills being drained by the
valleis, do minister safer passage in Winter, and yield relief unto cattle.
Again, the plain fields in Summer, are more pleasant to both purposes.

Thirdly, as the hills and mountains do yield matter for Carpenters, and
other Artificers to work upon: So the plain fields do minister plenty of
Corn, whereof they stand in need: wherein the Providence of God is declared to
the mutual help, and releeuing one of another.

Lastly, as God by his Providence has enriched the Earth: so does he preserve
and increase the same, that notwithstanding men have reaped thereout, great and
infinite treasures: yet is not the store consumed in so many thousand years.

In Rivers.
WHich by the only Providence of God, do ebb, and flow.

In Fountains, and Springs.
WHich by the same Providence do oftentimes break out in the top of very high
mountains, whereas naturally they are carried downward, and by sinking of
deep pits, we are compelled to draw up the water to our use.

Secondly, he does not only by his Providence carry the waters contrary to
their nature, up to the top of mountains, but causes the^ also to hang in the
midst of the Air, without any stay.

Thirdly, whereas naturally water is cold, he does warm it in the bowels of
the Earth, without fire, to the great profit and commodity of all men, as may
be seen in the hot Springs.

Of the which hot Springs, or Bathes, there are of diverse kinds, and
operations. viz. Some are good to loosen, and mollify the sinowes, which are
stiff through cold. Othersome do bind again those which are loose, and make
them strong. Again, other are good to cut away fleame. Some do purge
melancholy. Othersome do dry up sores and biles, etc.

All which diversities, declare the Providence of God, to the comfort and
relief of us unthankful creatures.

The absurdity and impiety of their opinion whith deny the Providence of God.
IF God has no care of those things he has created, it is either because he
is not able, or for that he will not.

To say say God is not able (who by his only word has created the whole
world, and all that therein is, in an order, and beauty so wonderful, and
unspeakable) beside the impiety, it is an over great absurdity, considering
that it is (infinitely) more easy to preserve them being made, then to create
them when they were not, and to make them of nothing.

Again, to think that God does hate his work, through envy or disdain,
those things which he has in such an unspeakable excellency created (as that
in the written verity with a great liking he said (They were all good) it is
an absurd and blasphemous impiety; for no such wickedness can come near unto
God, who is altogether good, and goodness it self.

Again, for what cause should God envy the world, whether for the greatness
thereof, or for the beauty? God being uncreated, and infinite, who never had
beginning, and shall have no end, comprehending all things, is limited, and
comprehended himself of nothing; in whose hand are all the ends of the
world, who measures the heavens with his spanne, and the whole earth with his
fist, how can he envy the greatness of the world, which being compared to him
is not an handful?

As for the beauty thereof, seeing it has both that and his whole being of
God, there is no cause of envy, but rather great cause for God to glory in
the excellency of his creatures. For if the most envious man, does not hate
the house, and building which he has made, because it does excel in beauty,
but rather does greatly boast, and is proud of the same: Much less ought we
to think that God, in whom there is no envy, or wickedness, can envy the
excellency of his creation.

The Providence of God in the Seas.
FIrst, in that God created therein, and does preserve for the use of man,
infinite store of diverse kinds of fishes.

Secondly, by his only Providence, it is kept within his bounds, and dare not
pass his prescribed limits; as may appear by the waves of the Sea, which
being carried with violence against the sand on the shore, do retire again, as
it were repenting their fact in presuming so boldly, and are afraid of their
prefixed bounds.

Thirdly, the Sea is as it were a mediator to knit together in friendship,
Countries that are far distant one from an other: for God has not given to
any one country all things necessary, but has as it were divided his
benefits, to the intent that one Country standing in need of an other, they
should all live together in mutual amity and friendship. Wherefore the Sea
serves to the easier transporting of that which we can spare, and to bring in
such commodities as we do want, which by cart, and horses, cannot be done so
speedily, and with so great ease: for the burden of one Ship will scarce be
carried upon a thousand horses or Camels backs.

Fourthly, least men should be ouertoyled with long and tedious travel, God
has placed diverse Islands in the midst of the Sea, to be as it were Innes, to
rest their wearied bodies, and Markets to provide such necessaries as they
shall need.

A brief collection of his arguments, declaring the Providence of God through
all the parts of the earth.
FIrst the great benefits which we receive by the Sea, the Earth, the Air,
and Sun, do plainly declare the fatherly Providence of God toward mankind.

Secondly, it does appear in that wonderful construction of the heavens,
which hang over our heads.

Thirdly in the tribute, that the Earth and other parts of the world do pay
yearly and daily to man: for God has made them as it were servants to man. The
Sun to give light, to warm, and to ripen the fruits of the Earth. The Moon
to shine in the night season. The Stars to guide us in the dark, to declare
the course of times, and to direct those which sail on the sea. The Air being
drawn in of men, does refresh the natural heat within. The Rain does
nourish, and make the fruit to grow. The Frost, first does stay the plants
and other fruits of the Earth, that they do not spring forth before their
time, and does drive the natural heat unto the root. Secondly it kills
worms, which are hurtful to the fruits. And lastly, it does yield unto us
great store of foul.

A demonstration of the Providence in the framing of the Body of man.
WHere (first of all) God having given a mouth unto man, to set forth the
glory of God, and to give thanks for the great benefits received at his hand:
it is an extreme wickedness to abuse and pollute that noble instrument in
breathing out blasphemous speeches against the Providence of God.

The Mouth and other instruments of speech.
THe Mouth (which alone does sufficiently declare both the wisdom and great
goodness of God toward man) may well be likened to the musical Instrument,
which being made of brazen pipes, blown up with bellows, or the breath of
man, and moved with the fingers of him that plays thereon, does give a sweet
and pleasant sound: so in man, the lungs are as it were the bellows, which
being drawn together, and opened again by the means of certain muscles,
does se^d forth the breath through the windpipe, whereby the cover of the
throat being opened, it is carried into the Mouth, where Reason (which is a
special gift of God in man) by the help of the tongue, as with his hand,
does carry that breath unto the teeth, (which are as it were brazen pipes)
that it may run up and down, and learn to slide easily without combrance,
and least the tongue through his continual motion, should wax dry (whereby
the facility in his moving should be hindered) God has annexed unto it a
certain kernel, running (as it were a fountain) with continual moisture.

Thus Reason (which is in man) carrying his purpose, and by help of the tongue,
beating it against the teeth, through the drawing together of the lips, and an
apt beating of the Air with the breath, that is sent out of the mouth, this
articular voice is framed and made.

Again (whereas the Heart being the fountain of natural heat, from whence
all the parts of the body draw their warmth, has need of some cooling and
refreshing) the Lungs drawing impure and fresh air, and sending it unto the
heart, do receive and take away the other, which was ouer-boyled by reason of
the heat of the Heart, and expel it as superfluous and hurtful; and so that
breath and air which is cast out as a thing superfluous, and to no use, is by
the Providence of God turned to this notable use, to be the author and worker
of our speech.

The Heart.
THe Heart (being the most excellent part of man's body, having as it were the
government of the whole committed unto him) by the Providence of God is so
enclosed, and defended with the breast, as with a most strong bulwark, that no
outward force can lightly hurt it.

Secondly, the Heart being in continual motion (for it is the fountain of
the Arteries) the nether part (under which the Lungs are placed) is soft,
spungie, full of Pores and Arteries, but the upper tip thereof, God has made
more stiff, and has covered it with a strong and tough coat of skin.

Thirdly, for that the Heart is nourished, not only with the vital spirits,
but also with blood, God has placed a great hollow vein going through the
whole body, whereby it does draw his nutriment from the Liver, as through a
conduit pipe.

The means and Instruments whereby the body is nourished.
The Belly.
THe Belly with the help of the stomach, does draw the meat down unto it,
where first keeping it, and drawing out the moisture, altering and changing it;
afterward, when it is well sod and digested, he does sever and distribute it,
sending the purer part thereof unto the Liver to be better strained; and the
rest being good for nothing, he does cast out through the expulsive parts.

The Liver.
THen the Liver (when he has thus received the best and purest part of the
meat, not being contented with the former purging and cleansing) does begin a
fresh, strayning it through more narrow passages, and so being better purged
and severed, the dross and slimie part thereof, the Spleen does draw unto him
for his nutriment, and that which through overmuch boiling, is turned into a
chollericke nature, is sent unto the gall or bladder, wherein choler is
contained and kept; an other part thereof, which being ouer-thin, will serve
for no nutriment, the bladder appointed for urine, does receive it, and cast it
out as superfluous; the rest being thus thoroughly purified, is made like unto
blood.

The great hollow vain called Vena caua.
WHen the Liver has thus turned it into blood, it is conveyed into a great
hollow vein, from whence being carried by other small veins unto every part
of the body, it serves for the nourishing of the whole body.

The Veins.
THe Veins (wherein the blood is carried to the nourishing of every part of the
body) are made of a very fine and thin ryne of skin, the Pores whereof are
covered as it were with a spungie matter: for as blood being gross must have
the greater Pores to pass forth: so again least it should run out altogether
at once, and that it might feed and moysten the parts adjoining by little and
little, as necessity requires, God has covered the^ with this spungie
substance.

The Arteries.
THe Arteries (for that the vital spirit which is carried in them, is so
thin, that it will pass away through very small holes, and can hardly be
kept in) are not made of one, but of two skins, and those are very fast and
thick, that it cannot break forth.

Again, God has compassed the Veins with Arteries, that the blood being
stirred with the moving of the warm spirit might run the more easily,
whereas otherwise by standing still it would congeale and wax stiff.

And therefore in certain places they are joined and knit together with very
fine Pores, that the blood there-through may receive a little of the spirit, the
better to further his motion; and the spirit on the other side (being somewhat
moystned with the humor of the blood) is preserved from being dried up.

The stature of man.
MAn only among all creatures is made to go straight upright, and upon two
feet only, whereas all other go groueling.

The Legs.
THe Legs consist of the parts knit together with joints, whereof one part is
joined to the hippe, an other to the knee, and the third part to the ankle,
with very strong sinews and muscles, for the ready moving of them. Again,
those sinews and bands, are neither too loose, nor too straight, for being
ouer-straight, as the parts could hardly, or not at all be moved: So if they
were over loose, they would not tarry, but fall out of joint. And thus through
the great benefit of Gods Providence, man is able to go, run, stand, and sit,
when he lift.

The Buttockes.
FOr that it would be hard to sit upon that hard bone, and naked joint, God
has given man Buttockes, as it were a pillowe, or quishion to sit upon, by the
means whereof he is able to sit on the bare ground, yea upon an hard stone
without any grief.

The Back bone.
THe Back bone taking his beginning at Os sacrum, does run up into the
neck, and is as it were a strong pillar, sustaining and holding up the belly,
shoulders, hands, neck, and the head.

Again, this bone being hard and full of knobs, is not placed in the forepart
of the body (least it should hinder or hurt the necessary extension of the
belly, stomach, and lunges, when they receive in meat, or breath) but in the
hinder part as it were a prop or stay.

Thirdly, it is not one whole bone, but consists of many joints, that with the
more ease a man might turn and wind his body every way.

Lastly, it is by the Providence of God fed with certain marrow, coming
from the brain.

The neck may well be likened to the cesterne in a Conduit, in the sides
whereof many holes are stricken, whereby the water (that was brought thither in
a great pipe) is sent forth to diverse places.

Likewise the neck reaching down to the mouth of the stomach, does send the
meat and drink into the belly. It has besides the windpipe, which reaches
from the lunges to the top of the throat; there are veins also, and arteries
in it, which carry blood and spirit up to feed the brain.

The brain also does send down the marrow through the neck into the back
bone, thorough certain bones adjoining unto it, wih which marrowe the bones
are nourished, and whereof the sinews spring, which bind the joints together,
and the muscles take their motive power.

The head and brain.
THe head is placed upon the height of the body, as it were a Castle upon the
top of a great hill, wherein the brain (man's especial treasure) is kept, as
in a very strong hold. The skull is as it were an helmet, compassing the
brain, and defending it from outward force, which otherwise would soon
receive great hurt.

Again, least the brain which is soft and tender, should be hurt with the
hard and stiff bones, God has enclosed with two coats of skin; whereof one,
which is next the brain and does enclose it, is very thin and soft, the
other is a more stiff and tough skin (being placed betwixt the brain and the
skull) neither ouer-hard for hurting the brain, nor yet ouer-thin least the
skull through his hardness should hurt or fret it.

The Eyes.
THe Eyes are placed in the Head, as watchmen in the top of a Tower; and to the
intent they should watch on both sides, God has set there not one alone, but
two eyes; one toward the right hand, the other to the left.

Again, for that they watching for the safeguard of the whole body, had need
of some bulwark to defend them, God has placed the brows (hanging over them)
that both they serve for a defense, and are a means to make us se^e the
further off.

Thirdly, (the brows serving for a pendant house to cast off the wet) God has
set fine hairs in the utter part thereof, which enclining toward the
temples, do receive the swette falling from the forhead, and carry it from the
Eyes (as hurtful unto the^) down by the utter side of the face.

Fourthly, for that these watchmen had need of harnis and weapons, God has
also armed them with their lids, and certain hairs in them, as it were spears
to keep out little gnats, moates, dust, and such like, which would otherwise
fly into the eyes, and hurt them.

Fifthly, these hairs be not crooked (as the other upon the brows) least they
should run into the eyes, and hurt them: neither do they run straight
downward, for so would one ruffle and wear another, through the often closing
and twinkling of the eyelids: but they are set somewhat a slope, and run
outward, so that they neither hinder one an other in the shutting, and serve
for the better defense of the Eyes.

Lastly, all things in the eye are wonderful, and ^et out the great Providence
of God. viz. The smalnesse of the sight, the garland about it much like the
Rainbow, of diverse colors, the circle like unto horn: the crystal sphere
and glassie humor about it: his ^ouble coat, one colored like (...) grapes,
the other in form like a^^shers net: his seat full of kernells: his nutriment
which is bought from the brain in a very thin vessel: and the cleansing of
it in expelling the superfluous humors at the corners of the Eye.

The Blood.
THe meat being received into the Belly, this Juice is first assi miled to the
Belly, and made white, then being sent up to the liver, it is there turned into
blood; afterward, part of it being sent up to the brain, it is made white
again, and is turned some into bones, and othersome into tough and hard
sinews.

The sense of Smelling, and his instrument.
THe sense of Smelling done discern betwixt savors, d^lighting in that which
is pleasa^^, and repelling that which is unsavory, as a thing hurtful to nature.

Likewise through that instume^t is the head purged of certain excrements. For
the head being placed in the highest part of the body, all the vapors do
ascend up thither, which being hurtful to the brain, are expelled through
certain spungie holes and pipes. And that these moist and clammie excrements
may with more ease and speed be carried away, God has appointed 2. ways to
purge them, that is through the roof of the mouth, and the nostrils.

The sense of Hearing.
THis sense does discern between sounds, delighting in a pleasant harmony,
and loathing the contrary. By the means whereof also we attain to the
knowledge of the liberal Sciences, and of the will of God.

The Hands and Arms.
THey are neither longer nor shotter then is needful, but are of a just
length, and framed to the performing of those works whereunto they were
ordained. The Arm is divided into three parts, whereof one part is joined to
the shoulder, another to the elbow, and the third to the wrest.

The Fingers.
THe Fingers consist of three joints, or pieces, the extremities whereof are
some hollow, denting inward, other some are round like unto a sphere, the
which round ends being as it were grafted in the hollow ends: they are bound
together with strong sinowes, and by the help of certain muscles they are
moved, where also, least their hardness should hinder the closing of the
Fingers, God has covered them with a thin and soft skin or coat.

The Nails.
THe nails serving for to keep the ends of the fingers from hurt, are made
thin and light for hurting the soft flesh that is under them: broad, that they
might the better help and sustain the fingers, being pressed with any
burden. Thirdly, they are as it were round, which force is strongest for
defense, and shall least hurt with pressing the flesh under it.

The Feet.
THe Feet are not made round like an hoof, nor hard, but soft, and stretched
out in length; whereby, and through the flexible composition of the toes, man is
able to stand the more sure, and move with the more ease.

The great use of the Hands.
MAn only has Hands, wherewith he does plough, sow, plant, reap, thresh,
gather in, etc. with infinite works more, serving both to pleasure and
necessity.

The Ship.
THe Ship (being made with the hands of man) is as it were the Sea waine, or
chariot, where the mast serves in stead of the beam, or draught tree, whereon
the yokes hang: the sails are the yokes: and the wind as it were the horses,
and mules to draw it, which by certain cords are directed, as it were with
bow yokes to draw even together. Again the stern is, as it were the bit or
rains, which the Pilot taking in his hand does guide the ship, sitting in the
hinder part, as it were in the circumference of a waine, or chariot. And with
this stern he does guide the ship, not only when the weather is calm, but is
able therewith to break the force also of the boistrous storms, and as it were
with a bit, to bridle and hold in those rough and untamed horses, which all is
wrought and much greater things, our hands being the means and instruments.

How Arts are as it were allied to the mutual help one of an other.
THe Carpenter receives his tools of the Smyth, the Smyth again has of the
Carpenter his house. The husbandman does minister food to them both, but yet
he is compelled to borrow of them both, his house, and other instruments
necessary to till his ground, etc. All which are made with the hands of man.

The Providence of God in teaching man the necessary use of Mettalls.
FOr man himself could never have found out this treasure so deeply laid up,
and hid in the bowels of the earth, or having found it, who else could teach
him to know the veins of silver and gold? who taught him to know the nature of
the glass? and so skilfully to discern the same, as to know which sand should
be tried by fire, and after what sort, and how long it should lie there?

To be short, God alone has opened these unto man, as also how (by the help of
fire and breath, or wind) to make thereof such diverse kinds of vessels to all
purposes, wherein also the notable and necessary use of the hands may easily
be seen.

Of the Silke-worme.
LEast man should be puffed up (by reason of his great skill, and cunning in so
many Arts) and wax over proud in himself, God has showed by this little
Worm (which draws a finer thread then man is able) that it is the only gift
and goodness of GOD; which Woorme (as it serves to beat down the pride of
man) does declare also the great Providence and goodness of GOD toward us,
whilst both she, and her whole labors are at the commandment of man.

Of Physic.
WHereas man being mortal, is subject to diverse diseases, God has given him
this knowledge, both to preserve health, and to remove sicknesses: In so much
that Art has invented medicines for every disease. The earth also does bring
forth diverse kinds of herbs, whereof some are food for man, other some for
cattle, and another sort for medicines. So that oftentimes of those herbs,
which if they should be eaten would kill a man, is made a medicine to remove
sicknesses, and to cure the body.

Of Grammers.
THrough the help of this science (which teaches both to speak and write)
many books are written very necessary for the use of man, both concerning the
mysteries of Christian Religion, and diverse other needful Sciences, by the
means whereof man is able to talk also with them that be absent: For although
the tongue (which is the instrument of speech) be silent, the right hand taking
the pen, does commit to writing whatsoever we have to do, or would communicate
with our friend, although he be never so far from us, And thus the hand (not
only the mouth and tongue) is made the chariot to carry our speech.

The apt placing of the Fingers.
THe hand being divided into five Fingers, the thombe is opposed, and set
against the four, bending the contrary way, and as it were clasping the rest:
whereby man is apt to take any thing the more readily, and to hold it the
faster, and more surely.

A demonstration of the Providence, in that God has given to man the rule and
dominion over all brute beasts.
Of the Be.
THe Bees of all creatures do live the most orderly, and keep laws most duly.

First they take their flight out of the hiues orderly, and by course, and
lighting upon herbs, trees, and flowers, do gather out of them that which is
for their use; wherewith being laden, their former feet serving in steed of
hands to lay it on their necks, they return again into their hiues.

Secondly, they build their combs (without the help of any rule to direct
them) in so good a proportion and order, with the corners so even and coequall
one to another, that he, which is most cunning in the Mathematical sciences,
is not able to do the like, or come nearer unto it.

Thirdly, they live a most pollitike life, where nothing is private, or proper
to one, but the treasure is common to all, whereby there is no strife, or
injury amongst them.

And to conclude, they have the best kind of government, whilst they have
but one, as it were a king to rule them, unto whom also they yield a willing
and dutiful obedience.

What man has to learn of the Be.
FIrst man ought to learn of the Be to abhor idleness, and idle persons.

Secondly, with a ready and cheerful mind to labor in his calling.

Thirdly, to gather his goods with painfulnesse, not iniuring any man, for the
flowers are not the worse by the Be, to any use or purpose.

Fourthly, not to seek ambitiously after honor, and principality.

Fifthly, if he be called to any office, to rule with right and equity.

Sixthly and last of all, not unnaturally to hourd up their riches, but
charitably to impart to such as stand in need.

The Spider.
THe Spider in drawing so fine a thread, and weauing his web so artificially,
has taught man to make Nets, and so consequently the skill of hunting, fowling,
and fishing.

Of the Ox, the Horse, and the Elephant.
HErein is the Providence of God toward man notably declared, in that he has
subdued these beasts (which in strength do far excel Man) and caused them to
submit their necks and backs, and to employ their whole strength to the use
and service of man; wherein as man has to acknowledge with thankfulness the
great goodness of God; so must he learn thereby to obey God, by whose means they
are subdued unto him. Not only these, but all other beasts whatsoever are
subject unto man, whilst they serve either to feed or cloth him, or else to
carry burdens, or for some other necessary use.

The cause wherefore wild beasts and Serpents were created.
Whereas some beasts do rebel against man (others being easily subdued) it
does manifestly appear, that they are not naturally subject, but by the
commandment of God, which only does keep in the rest, that they do not
likewise break out and rebel.

Again, God has created some altogether enemies unto man, to suppress, and
bridle as it were his insolency, and to train him up in Virtue, that the
terror of those beasts might teach him to know how needful the help of God
is, and so to exercise himself in prayer, and dutifully to obey GOD, by whose
only help he is defended.

So that this fear, is as it were a guide to bring man unto God. And least man
being continually in fear of them, should live a troublesome and unpleasant
life, GOD has stricken those venomous beasts with a natural fear of man, that
they hide them selves in Caves and holes under the ground, and has so
brideled their fury, that they hurt but seldom times, and that in their own
defense, when they are by men hurt, or provoked thereunto.

As for the wild beasts, he has sent them into the woods, craggie Rocks and
Dens in the Wilderness, to dwell far from the company of man, and has
set them their appointed time, (the night when man is at rest, and safe) to
seek their pray.

So that the wild beasts and venomous serpents, are as it were whips and rods
for children, and such as are not thoroughly instructed in the fear and love of
God; but as for men, and such as are strong in faith, they are without any
fear of them, as did appear by Noah, Daniel, Paul, and many more.

Riches and Poverty, are both necessary for man.
WHereas the enemies here take occasion to blaspheme God, and say that there is
no Providence in him, nor care of man, because they see the wicked abound in
wealth, and live in all kind of pleasures, the godly man contrariwise through
the oppression of the rich, to live in great poverty, and very miserably: they
ought rather to conclude, and that more truly (bridling this rash judgment, and
learning to reform their common error) that riches cannot therefore be the
true felicity and happiness (as they dream) whereby virtue is thus by their own
testimony suppressed, neither that Poverty is misery, seeing that godly men,
and such as excel in virtue, do oftentimes live in want and necessity.

Again, seeing they acknowledge virtue to be the most precious Jewel, and
such as do most fervently embrace and follow her, to live a most happy life,
there is no cause why they should extol riches, as to think them the only
note of true happiness, which they see commonly with their eyes, to be the
greatest enemy unto virtue.

Of Virtues, what they are, and first of Prudence.
Prudence is as it were the watchfulnes and care of the mind, or reason,
wherewith man is endued; As foolishness and lack of foresight (which is
contrary to Prudence) is a drunkenness, which rising of affections, does
darken and blind the reason and understanding of man, not suffering him to
foresee that which is profitable and convenient for him; The cure whereof, and
health of the mind, is called Prudence.

Temperance.
TEmperance is a right constitution of the mind, when the rude and disordered
desires thereof, are brideled, and ruled by reason.

Fortitude.
FOrtitude is that whereby a man is stirred up unto a lawful anger, and just
revenge.

Justice.
Justice is a lawful and right government of the mind, whereby the affections
subject unto her, are ruled and directed.

The affections of Lust and Anger, submitting themselves unto reason, and being
ruled thereby through a mutual qualifying one of another, do absolve, and make
this notable virtue of Justice.

Riches and great abundance, is an enemy unto virtue.
THe great troubles, and continual cares, which follow the getting and
possessing of riches, the infinite tossing and turmoyling of those me^ which
have them, (whilst they are never at rest), cannot accord with the quiet and
peaceable state of virtue, but are enemies that hurt and hinder the good course
thereof.

Secondly, he that is given altogether to serve the belly, in eating and
drinking, desiring dainty fare, and delighting in great diversity of meats
and drinks (which faults and many more, accompany such as abound in wealth) how
is it possible that he should live a temperate and contented life?

Thirdly, he that does thus quench the watchfulness of reason, and set on
fire the affections, brings reason into servitude, and make her a servant
unto the belly, who^ God has set as lady and mistress over all the body: he
that delivers the prince as a prisoner unto his subjects, and casts the
governor of the chariot to be torn in pieces of his horses: He (I say) that
will not suffer the Pilot to hold the stern any longer, and to guide the ship,
but will let it be carried headlong with the storms of these tempestuous
affections, and so to be drowned in waves: He is not only utterly void of wit
and wisdom, but has abandoned and given himself over to all kind of
Intemperancie and filthy pleasures.

Lastly, in great abundance there is small hope of justice, for he that is
greedily bent to heap up great riches, does make no difference between right
and wrong. So that riches is an enemy to every kind of virtue.

Poverty is a great helper, and furtherer unto virtue.
FIrst the want of things necessary does compel the affections to be subject
to reason, and will not suffer them to swell up, or to strive against their
lady and gouernesse, as it falls out oftentimes in such as are wantonly
brought up, and delight in belly cheer.

Secondly, the mind thereby being delivered from superfluous troubles, and void
of outward cares, does enjoy great rest and quietness: So that looking into
her self, she does behold her own dignity, and taking the rule into her
hands, does prescribe unto her subjects, laws of moderation and order, and
suppressing or punishing the rebellious affections of Lust and Anger (the one
by the other), does bring them into order.

Thirdly, the great labor and travel (whereunto Poverty drives man) does
much profit to bridle and keep under the outrageous lusts, for it does consume
and spend that matter wherewith they are fed, so as they are not able to break
forth.

Last of all, the examples of godly and virtuous men in all ages from the
beginning does manifestly declare, that poverty does further more to the
obteining of virtue and riches. In so much that many (as Socrates, Diogenes,
Anaxarchus and others, for the love they bare to virtue, and that they might
the better attain unto it, did give and cast away their riches, and all that
they had, choosing rather, and delighting to live in voluntary Poverty.

Riches are not ill of themselves, but through the abuse of men.
RIches, for that they come from God are not il in themselves, but are given as
necessary instruments to make and polish the beautiful Image of virtue: which
if man shall contrariwise abuse to the making of an Image of wickedness, the
Instrument is not to be blamed, which was to be well used, but the man which
has wickedly abused the same. As Iron and Wine although they be diverse times
abused to murder, and drunkenness, are not to be cast away, and condemned as
superfluous, but are kept notwithstanding as very necessary, and commended as
great blessings of God: Even so riches are not therefore to be blamed, because
wicked men abuse them, but to be acknowledged as the gifts of God, necessary
for many good purposes.

Why God has not given riches to every man.
AS God has not given to every member of the body the like operation, but to
every one a peculiar function, as the eye to discern colors, the ear to
judge the difference of soundes, and so forth in all the rest, that through the
variety of their operations, and the mutual help that they have one of
another, the body should want nothing necessary, and that among the members
there should be no grudge, or envy, whilst no one part can justly say unto
another (I have no need of thee): Even so has not God made all rich alike, but
some poor, that one standing in need of another, through their mutual help;
this his Commonwealth might be preserved; which otherwise would be quite
overthrown: whilst every man abou^ding in wealth, there would be found none
to sow, plow, or to do any such inferior and necessary works. Whereby one of
these two inconveniences would follow of necessity, that every man must
learn all Arts, and do all works himself, (which thing is impossible) or
else that all me^ should perish together for want of things necessary (which
were absurd and lamentable). So that in this diversity also the Providence of
God does notably appear.

The state and condition of the Rich and Poor, is naturally alike, and all one.

1 First, all men, both rich and poor, have one and the self same earth for
their house, nurse, mother, and grave, alike common to every one.

2 The Sun, Moon, and Stars, give their light indifferently to all,
neither is the Air peculiar unto the rich, but all breathe of it alike.

3 The bodies likewise both of rich and poor are alike, but that the poor man
has (for the most part) the stronger, and more healthful body. For (as a
wise Physician said) Scarcity and Lack is the mother of good health, to the
preservation whereof, Exercise also, and Labor, is of great force, and helps
much.

4 The souls in them, are both of like nature.

5 They have one beginning of generation, or conceptio^, and are brought forth
with pain alike. But that the poor women (commonly) are delivered with more
ease: For through continual labor, her childbirth is the less painful.

Again, coming into the world, nature has not clothed the rich man's child
better then the poor man's, but they are brought forth both alike naked, and fed
with milk alike.

7 And as they had one entrance into the world, so do they depart alike: for
death is common unto both, and has no respect of persons, but strikes in
differently.

8 After death also they do both of the in putrify and rot, the like matter
and corruption issues out of them, and together they become worms meat. So
that in all or the greatest respects, the condition of the rich and poor are
both alike.

How Riches and Poverty are common unto all men.
GOD has so ordained Poverty, with all kind of Arts, that the Rich and
wealthy are compelled to bring their money unto the poor man, and to buy of
him all thing, whereof they stand in need, without whose help they are not
able to live, notwithstanding their great wealth. Wherein we are to acknowledge
the great wisdom and Providence of God, who has given riches unto some, and
to other knowledge in arts and sciences, that through this necessity (where
they stand in so great need one of another) they might be knit together in
mutual concord and friendship. For as the Rich men do stand in need of Poor
Artificers, to supply their necessary wants: so again the poor men are set on
work with the rich men's money. So that both of them standing in need (the one
of wares, the other of money) do show how Riches and Poverty are common unto
all men, and both very necessary.

God has not given Riches to good men only.
GOD has not bestowed Riches only upon good men, least the enemy should
accuse God not to deal with indifferency, or slander the godly, that they
should love God only in respect of these blessings, and for fear of loosing
the same. Wherefore he has distributed riches and poverty indifferently unto
both, and has ordained them, as certain instruments, or matter to work
withal, which the godly using to the attaining of Virtue, and the ungodly
abusing unto vice, there is no excuse left, or hope of pardon for such as spend
their lives in wickedness, whether they be rich or poor. For they which get
their riches well, and honestly, and do not increase them with other men's hurt
and misery, but use them to the relief of such as stand in need, do justly
accuse and condemn the covetous and ungodly rich me^: As the poor man, which
tempereth his poverty with the study of wisdom, and sustaineth the rage
thereof with a stout and valiant mind, does condemn the wicked life of such
as being poor, do spend their days altogether in ungodliness.

The poor are commonly more healthful then the rich.
Wherein the care and Providence of God does notably appear, in that
foreseeing the diverse helps and remedies that such as be wealthy are able to
provide, which the poor man by reason of his necessity cannot do, he has as
it were, allotted unto the poor man a more strong and healthful body; so that
health does recompense the want of wealth: and oftentimes it falls out, that
the rich man wishes the poor man's health, when the poor man will not change
his state for all the rich man's wealth.

Again, in sicknesses you shall see the poor man who lies on the bare ground
without bed or matte, to take his grief more quietly, and have less pain
then the rich, which lie in beds of Down, and have all kinds of Physic to
mittigate their pain. So gracious is God in providing for these, which through
want are not able to provide for themselves.

How the difference in the estates of men (whereof some obey, and other
command) is very necessary.
GOd in the beginning made but one man of the earth (for the woman was made of
a bone taken out of Adam) least through the diversities of earth she should be
thought to be of an other nature. Of which couple sproong all mankind. So that
in the beginning there was no such difference of Lords and Servants. Neither
in the time of Noah, (when he, and his wife, his three sons, and their
wives, entered into the Arc) do we read that any Servant went in, or find
this name of Servant: for as then was not this distinction of degrees
instituted, or thought necessary. But afterward when it was perceived that
much mischief did rise through overmuch liberty, whilst there was no
magistrate to bridle the outrageous multitude, Laws were devised, which being
found to be very necessary; it was also as necessary that there should be
Lawmakers, and magistrates to execute and put the same in practice: which
could not possibly be, (this equality among all men remaining still. And
therefore it was needful that there should be this difference of magistrates
and subjects: for God seeing that by sin there was brought in a wonderful
disorder and confusion of all things, did prescribe an order in setting down
Laws to suppress and bridle the rage thereof, the raines whereof he has
delivered into the hands of the magistrate, to put the same in practice:
whereupon arises this necessary distinction of masters and servants;
Magistrates to command, and inferior subjects to obey.

Servitude is very profitable and necessary.
AS in a ship, the good order is the preservation of such as sail therein,
whilst some do row, othersome do make fit the Cables, others are busied
about other things necessary, which they are commanded to intend: and the
guide in the fore end of the ship, does discrie the Rocks, quicksands, and
shelues, giving warning to the master, who holding the stern does direct the
ship, and has the rule and authority over all the rest, whose commandment
they do readily obey, whereby they are preserved, and sail without fear, or
danger, which could not be, if every man should be occupied about one, and the
self same thing, or without order do every man what he thought best: So
likewise in a house where diverse works are to be done, which require the help
of many men, if there should be no one man to rule and command the rest, but
that every man might do what he list, it were impossible for any family to
consist or stand. So that it is very necessary, that there be both Masters
and Servants.

The Servant has a more pleasant life then the Master of the house.
WHereas some think it a sore and grievous thing to serve, and being wearied
with continual labor, to take his portion measured out as his Master shall
think good; if they will diligently consider all things, and look thoroughly
into both their estates, they shall find the Servant to live the more
pleasant life. For although he be in bondage of body, yet is his mind free,
and void of many cares wherewith the Master is greatly ouer-charged.

Dearth and scarcity does never break his sleep, he never takes care how to
sell his commodities, or is grieved when they lie upon his hands and wax
cheap, neither stands he in any fear of his Creditors, or takes thought
how to discharge outpayments, and to maintain his family. He dare meet a
Sergiant in the teeth, and is not afraid of the frowning countenance of the
Judge, but without all care of mind, cateth his meat with a good stomach,
sleeps soundlye, and is in good health; whereas the master with these, and
many more cares is so vexed and tormented continually, that he can neither eat
his meat quietly in the day time, nor take any rest in the night, but passes
his time in great care, and small pleasure.

Again, seeing the Master does oftentimes labor as painfully, as any
Servant, but the Servants are troubled with no care like unto the master,
there is no cause why they should be thought miserable in respect of their
labors (which is common to their masters with them) but great cause, why they
may be said to live more pleasantly, as that they are void of all care of
mind, wherewith the master is oftentimes spent and consumed.

Ill Magistrates and Masters.
THese men have not their authority from God, but the wickedness of such as be
subject has drawn the same upon them. For when they would reap no profit by
such as ruled well and honestly, but through their lewd behavior
contumeliously did cast off their discipline, they bereaved themselves of the
Providence of God, through want of whose counsel and direction they have
received these wicked Princes and Magistrates, that (...) of the ill
govern(...) might remember the other, and learn how necessary it is to have,
and obey, honest and godly governors.

The servants which have a sound and goodminde, are not hurt by serving of ill
masters.
MAny servants have been found to be great lovers of Virtue, which served
with a ready and good mind, doing that which was their duty, not compelled,
but from their heart, and have had a great care of their masters: whereby they
have not only obtained liberty from their bondage, but have gotten great
wealth and credit, as rewards for their good and faithful service.

So that service is no hinderance to the attaining of virtue or wealth. As may
appear by Abraham's servant, and Joseph, with many more. Whereof the one
(being sent by Abraham his Master to choose a wife for Isaac his son) is
set forth as a pattern of a faithful Servant, and one that feared God. And
Joseph by servitude attained to greater wealth and honor then his brethren,
who never served, but were always at freedom.

The wickedness of the Master, cannot hurt a godly Servant.
AS may appear in Joseph, whose godly and chaste mind (notwithstanding the
wanto^ allurements, fair promises, and great danger in repelling his
Mistress unlawful lusts) was not corrupted or defiled, but continued sound
and constant in virtue. Likewise Abdias, Servant unto wicked Achab, and cursed
Iezabel, who sought the utter destruction of all the servant and Prophets of
God) did preserve from death, and nourish an hundredth Prophets, whom he hid an
two Caves, notwithstanding the brutish cruelty of his Lord; Neither did the
great famine and dearth of victuals (which was exceeding sore at that time, by
reason that it rained not in three years, and six months) any whit slack his
care in providing all things necessary for them.

Again, in the time of Zedechias, the last king of the Jews, who would not
give ear unto the words of the Lord, but cast the Prophet Jeremy into a deep
and stinking dungeon, Abdimelech one of the kings servant, an Ethiopian, and
an Eunuch, not regarding the wickedness which reigned in the Court, and the
great hatred which was conceived against the Prophet, nor once calling to
remembrance his own servile condition and state, went boldly unto the King,
and reproved his unjust sentence and cruelty against the Prophet of God,
moving him with godly persuasions to take Jeremy out of the Dungeon, which
being obtained, this Eunuch was advanced, and did minister all things
necessary during the whole time of the siege, when the Jews were led captives
into Babylon, by Nabuchodonozor the king.

Daniel, Ananias, Azarias, and Mizael, though they were led captives into
Babylon, and lived in bondage under a most wicked king, yet could they not be
brought to transgress the laws of the living God in any point, either for
desire of life, or fear of death, or any torments whatsoever.

Wherefore let no man condemn servitude as evil, or think that the
wickedness of the master can overthrow the virtue of a good and godly
servant, if he have a mind well disposed, but in all things let him confess,
and acknowledge the Providence of God. For by these examples it does appear
plainly, that a servant may be virtuous and godly, though his master be never
so vicious and ungodly.

Why does God suffer the godly to be led into captivity?
GOd has a care even over those that do offend, and of great love does punish
them; wherefore when he suffers the wicked for their sins to be led
captive, he sends with them also good men, as schoole-maisters, and
teachers, by whose good counsel and example they may be directed in the true
and right path.

Again, these godly men being in captivity, have not only bin a means of
salvation unto their fellow prisoners, but through their good life and
doctrine, have brought also many Infidels to the light and knowledge of the
true God. So that in all his doings God shows himself to have a special
care of man.

The study of Righteousness is not without fruit, although in this life it
does not appear. And of the Resurrection.
ALthough the godly in this life are commonly oppressed with poverty and
servitude, and live not in like pleasure and prosperity as the wicked do: yet
notwithstanding they have pleasures, and great pleasures. For the godly do not
think the praise and rewards of mortal men to be a sufficient recompense for
their travails; and therefore co^temning them, they do look for the promises
of GOD, and attend the coming of their Guide and Captain, to receive those
crowns of unspeakable glory, (rewards from heaven). They wayt for the
Resurrection of their bodies, that being taken up into heaven, they may joy
with the holy Angels, and have the continual and endless fruition of him,
for whose sake they have suffered so many troubles, which is a most excellent
reward, and the only true happiness.

Again, seeing the possession of virtue is a most precious Jewel, and is not
gotten; nor kept without great trouble and pains: it were a great absurdity,
that all other inferior arts and exercises should have their rewards, and
Virtue only be without all recompense.

There is an Eternal life, where Virtue is rewarded.
WHereas God suffers some virtuous and godly men in this world, to live and
die without honor, and in great contempt; Other some again to live in great
honor: It is an evident argument (for that God is just in all his doings)
that there is another life prepared, wherein they which have done well, shall
be rewarded accordingly. So that in giving honor unto some here, he does
manifest and declare that virtue has her crown and reward; And in suffering
other, some to live without all honor or reward, he does show plainly that
there is another life, and does thereby notably confirm the hope of those
things which are looked for.

Again, if there were no life after this, they which are punished here might
seem to have great injury, seeing other committing the like or greater
faults, to receive no punishment at all. And the virtuous men likewise which
are not rewarded, as other godly men are, should have too great cause to
complain, and accuse the justice of God: So that of necessity (except we will
deny God to be just) there must be another judgment, where such as have
escaped punishment here, may suffer according to their deserts; and they which
have received here no reward for their well doing, may be fully rewarded, and
recompensed for their great labors.

The Resurrection of the body is necessary.
FOr it were great absurdity and want of justice, if the soul alone, (and not
the body) should be glorified or tormented, seeing the body has bin a great
furtherer and setter forward, as well of the godly as the wicked operations of
the mind, and an instrument to perform the same. Wherefore in justice it is
requisite, and very necessary (seeing the body has been a copartner here
with the soul, both of her godly labors, and wicked pleasures) that it should
be raised again, and together with the soul receive due punishment, as they
have deserved, or like glory, as rewards for their virtuous and godly labors
sustained together in this life.

It is not impossible for God to raise again the dead bodies.
ALl things are possible unto God, and easy to be done, (seem they unto man
never so hard, or impossible) for he that made all things with his word, can
easily gather together the parts of man (although they be devoured of beasts,
and consumed into dust and ashes) and raise him again: As it is much more
easy to restore a thing being decayed, then with his only word to make all
things of nothing, as he did.

How God in times past had a care, not only of the Jews, but of all men; And
of the Incarnation of Christ our Savior.
NEither the heavens, nor the earth, the sea, the Moon, or Stars, neither
this whole visible, and invisible creation, do so notably declare, and set out
the exceeding greatness of the goodness and love of God, as this, that the
only begotten son of God, of like substance to the Father, took the shape
of a servant upon him, and was conversant here among men on earth, in the
similitude and figure of man, that taking upon him our infirmities, and bearing
our diseases: he might so be our Physician, and Savior, through whom we have
obtained this notable benefit (by adoption) to be made the sons of God.

For God, when he saw our reuolting from him, being our Creator, unto a most
cruel tyranny, and how we had wilfully thrown our selves into the dungeon of
all mischife, treading the laws of nature under feet; and that these visible
creatures could not persuade and bring us to the obedience of our Creator, it
pleased him of great mercy to work our salvation another way, in great
wisdom and justice.

For in the restoring of man, God did not use his only power, whereby he was
able to do what he would, neither yet mercy alone, least the enemy of mankind
should have cause to accuse his dealing, as injurious, but did devise and take
a course, wherein he declared both great love and justice, for uniting unto
himself the captive nature of man, he brought it into the field to revenge his
former foil, and did so furnish it with all things necessary, that the enemy
which in times past had prevailed against man, was now by man utterly
overthrown; So that his tyranny being dissolved, man was by justice delivered
from most miserable servitude, and restored to his former liberty, which was
the cause that Christ was borne of a woman, and took flesh of the virgin.

The cause wherefore Christ fasted forty days.
CHrist by his fasting, and hunger, did as it were provoke the enemy to a
conflict, who perceiving his hunger, was in great hope of victory, and came
with a good confidence as it had been to deal with Adam (whom that way he did
overthrow, but (finding under Adams nature) his Creator) he departed, as
confounded.

Again, in fasting he would not pass the number of 40. days (which fast
both Moses and Elias did perform in times past, least men should doubt of the
verity of his humanity, and hungring, he showed himself to be a man in
truth, and not only in outward show and appearance.

The death of Christ.
HE was nailed on the Cross, and suffered, not for his sins, but for our
rede^ptio^. For when man (through transgressio^) had cast himself in debt, and
was not able of himself to pay the same: Christ taking the nature of man (as
it were money to pay the ransom) did rule, and guide it with so great wisdom
and Justice, that he satisfied the law, and paying the debt did set man again
at liberty.

For this cause he suffered death upon the Cross, (which was by the law
accursed, as also the nature of man, because it had transgressed the law) that
by taking upon him the curse, which was common to all, and suffering that most
shameful death undeserved, he might deliver all men from their deserved
condemnation: for though he was not subject unto the curse (as being free from
all sins) yet was he content to suffer death, which was the punishment due
unto sin.

The Resurrection of Christ.
WHen Christ had thus broken the bonds of Death, and wrought the salvation of
man, he returned again into heaven, and by the raising and carrying of his
own body, did give as it were an earnest or assurance unto all the godly of
their resurrection and ascension.

This mystery of Christ's Nativity and death, was purposed from everlasting.
WHereas some curiously do seek to know the unsearchable wisdom of God, and
demand wherefore God did not work this from the beginning, but has let it
ouerslip so many thousand years, they are to learn, first that it is over
great presumption and arrogancy in them, too curiously to search out those
things which God has hid, and reserved unto himself.

Secondly (for the thing) it was determined long since, even from the
beginning, but deferred until this time, as most fit and convenient to set out
his great wisdom and love toward man.

How God had a care of all men, even from the beginning.
IT does manifestly appear by the whole story of the old Testament, that God
in his Providence had always a care of all men, not only of those which came
of Abraham, but of all the of spring of Adam. For by this one people of Israel
he brought all Nations from their Idolatry to the knowledge of the true God;
for in blessing their good life with prosperity and great victories, he did
declare his goodness; and as it were allure all men to embrace their doctrine;
and again in punishing their wickedness, and suffering them to be led captives
into strange and far countries, he did both show his justice, and used
them as means to preach and set out the glory of God, and the truth of their
doctrine unto all nations, which if they had remained still in their own
country, could not have been done so plentifully, and effectually.

The preaching of the Gospel unto the Gentiles.
When that great mystery of our redemption was fulfilled, and the time was
come that the incarnation of Christ ought to be published through the whole
world, then did God dispearse and scatter abroad the remnant of his people
(which of his great mercy he had chosen from among all nations, even from the
beginning) into all the coasts of the earth, that all they which were deceived
with the multitude of Gods, might learn that there was but one God, the
Creator of heaven and earth: as also that the Gospel (which was to be preached
by the holy Apostles) might have the easier passage.

But how can the Jews be said to further the Gospel, which they did by all
means withstand and hinder?
THeir incredulity and stubburnesse did so little hinder the truth of the
Gospel, that it was an occasion of great confirmation thereof, whilst those
things which they denied, were so substantially proved by so many testimonies
out of the law and Prophets, that both their errors were utterly confuted, and
the Gentiles were notably confirmed in the truth of Christ, whom they saw by
so many Prophets and so long ago to be foretold. So that God may well be said
in all ages, to have had a great care and Providence, not only of the Jews,
but of all mankind even from the beginning.

Deo gloria.

FINIS.

