THE FOLLOVVING OF CHRIST.

Divided into four Books.

Written in Latin by the Learned and Devout man THOMAS a KEMPIS Chanon-Regular
of the Order of S. Augustine. AND Translated into English by B. F.

Christogram I H S



Permissu Superiorum. M.DC.XIII.

TO THE HONORABLE AND VIRTUOUS ELIZABETH VAVX Mother to the LORD Harrodowne.
HONORABLE AND RIGHT WORTHY,

THE public demonstration which you have lately given of your true desire to
follow the footsteps of our Lord, undergoing so heavy a Cross for his sake,
with so ready and resolved a mind, has moved me to dedicate this little Book
of the Imitation of Christ unto You: assuring my self that it will be no less
grateful to You to see it appear in light, purged from many mistaken
sentences which were in the former Translation, then the reading and practice
thereof will be profitable to others; it being so divine and excellent a work,
as in the opinion of such as can best judge of this matter, of all the Books
which are written, that treat of spirit and Christian Perfection, the holy
Scripture excepted, it is inferior to none, if it excels not all.

No 'booke has been more approved by general consent, none more often printed
and translated into diverse languages, none more esteemed, commended, yea
commanded also by the chief Masters of Spirit of some Religious Orders, to
be often read by every one in private, and once a week publicly to all. So
full of sweet sense is this divine Flower, that the most spiritual bees may
daily draw from thence great plenty of celestial honey. It is a dish of so
divine meat, that it never satiates the devout mind: but as the Wisdom of God
does promise to all such as fit at that heavenly banquet; so shall they find in
this spiritual food, The more they eat it, Eccl. 4.
the more they shall hunger after it.

And the reason heerof is, for that it contains so great depth of spirit, and
so great store and variety of heavenly documents, that it seems ever new to
the Reader, and like another Manna affoardeth to every one that delightful
taste which best agrees with the palate of his soul: and none can loath it,
but they whose lusts do carry them to Egyptian slavery. A true Israelite may
feed upon it forty years together, and ever find such pleasing taste and
increasing strength by use thereof, as will sustain him in the desert of this
world, and enable him to go on without fainting, till he arrive at his
promised inheritance of eternal rest.

The practice of that which this Book does teach, covers the soul with the
rich garment of grace, and adorneth it with the splendent pearls of
Evangelical Perfection, which makes us more pleasing in the sight of God,
then can the deckings of all earthly jewels make the fairest Lady in the
Kingdom where you are, appear beautiful to the eyes of men. It returns
abundant Gain for sustained Losses, and enlarges the Liberty which is now
restrained. It raises up to cheerful confidence the debased head, and
places in a Throno of endless Honor those who in this world do seem
imprisoned in the black cloud of disgrace.

To You therefore who have so willingly endured the loss of your earthly
substance, I have thought good to present this Evangelical Pearl, and
incomparable Treasure contained in a little room. Here you shall find the
most perfect manner of conforming our selves to Christ our heavenly Pattern,
and see the virtues set forth in their colors which did most shine in the life
of our Lord himself; and read in plain and vulgar phrase those Lessons of
high Perfection, which are commended unto us by the highest Wisdom, and which
have made as many Saints, as they have had diligent and obseruant followers.

ACCEPT therefore I beseech you this little Present, presented by him who
wishes you much more temporal happiness then your present state affoardeth;
and that endless glory, whereof your present suffering is no uncertain pledge.
This first of November. 1612.

Yours in all duty B. F.

A TABLE Of the Chapters of this ensuing Book.
THE FIRST BOOK.
OF the imitation of Christ, and contempt of all the vanities of the world.
CHAP. 1. page 1. p. 4. page 7. page 11. page 13. page 14. page 15. page 17.
page 18. page 20. page 22. page 25. page 26. page 31 page 33. page 34. page 36.
page 38. page 42. page 46. page 52. page 56. page 60. page 66. page 71.
THE SECOND BOOK.
OF spiritual conversation. page 80. page 86. page 87. page 90. page 92. page
94. page 97. page 99. page 102. page 107. page 111. page 114.
THE THIRD BOOK.
OF the in ward speech of Christ unto a faithful soul. page 129. page 127.
page 129. page 133. page 136. page 141. page 145. page 149. page 151. page 153.
page 156. page 158. page 162. page 164. page 166. page 169. page 171. page 173.
page 175. page 178. page 181. page 186. page 190. page 193. page 194. page 197.
page 199. page 202. page 203. page 205. page 209. page 212. page 215. page 216.
page 219. page 221. page 223. page 226. page 228. page 229. page 232. page 233.
page 235. page 238. page 239. page 243. page 247. page 249. page 254. page 259.
page 265. page 266. page 269. page 272. page 278. page 282. page 285. page 288.
page 295.
THE FOVRTH BOOK.
page 300. page 308. page 313. page 317. page 321. page 325. and purpose of
amendment. page 326. page 329. page 331. page 335. page 340. page 346. page
349. page 352. page 354. page 357. page 359. page 363.
OF THE FOLLOVVING OF CHRIST.
THE FIRST BOOK.
CHAP. I. Of the imitation of Christ, and contempt of all the vanities of the
world.
HE that follows me, Joan. 8.
walks not in darkness, says our Lord. These are the words of Christ, by
which we are admonished, that we ought to imitate his life, and manners, if we
will be partakers of his divine light, and be delivered from all blindness of
heart. Let therefore our chiefest care be to meditate upon the life of Jesus
Christ.

2. The doctrine of Christ exceeds all the doctrine of the Saints: and he
that had the light of spirit, would discover therein a secret and hidden Manna.
But it falls out that many, who often hear the Gospel of Christ, do yet
feel in themselves but slender motion of any holy desire, because they are
void of the spirit of Christ. But whosoever will fully and feelingly understand
the words of Christ, must endeavor to conform his life wholly to the life of
Christ.

3. What will it avail thee to dispute profoundly of the Trinity, if thou be
void of humility, and thereby displeasing to the Trinity? High words surely,
make a man neither holy nor just; but a virtuous life makes him dear to God.
I had rather feel compunction, then understand the definition thereof. 1. Cor.
13.
If thou did know the whole Bible by heart, and the sayings of all the
Philosophers, what would all that profit thee, without charity, and the grace
of God? Vanity of vanities, and all is vanity, but only to love God, Eccles. 1.
and wholly to serve him. This is the highest wisdom, by contempt of the world,
to tend toward the Kingdom of heaven.

4. It is therefore vanity to seek after fading riches, and to repose trust in
them. It is also vanity to gape after honors, and to climb to high degrees.
It is vanity to follow the appetites of the flesh, and to labor for that, for
which thou must afterward suffer more grievous punishment. Vanity it is to
wish to live long, and to be careless to live well. It is vanity to mind only
this present life, and not to foresee those things which are to come. It is
vanity to set thy love on that which speedily passes away, and not to hasten
thither, where everlasting joy is permanent.

5. Call often to mind this proverb: That the eye is never satisfied with
seeing, Eccles. 1.
nor the ear filled with hearing. Endeavor therefore to withdraw thy heart from
the affection of visible things, and to turn thy self to the invisible. For
they that follow their sensuality, do stain their own consciences, and loose
the grace of God.

CHAP. II. Of the humble conceit of our selves.
ALL men by nature desire to know: Eccl. 1. and Arist. l. 1. metaph. cap. 1.
but what avails knowledge without the fear of God? Surely, an humble
husbandman that fears God, is better then a proud Philosopher that neglecting
himself, labors to understand the course of the heavens. Who so knows
himself well, grows daily more contemptible in his own conceit, and
delights not in the praises of men. If I understood all that is to be known
in the world, and were not in charity, what would that help me in the sight of
God, who will judge me according to my deeds?

2. Give not thy self to inordinate desire of knowledge: for therein is much
distraction and deceit. The learned are willing to seem so to others, 1. Cor
8.
and to be accoumpted wise. There be many things, which to know does little or
nothing profit the soul: and he is very unwise, that bestows his labor
about other things, then those that may avail him for the health of his soul.
Many words do not satisfy the desires of the heart: but a good life comfort
the mind, and a pure conscience gives great assurance in the sight of God.

3. How much the more thou know, and how much the better thou understand,
so much the more grievously shall thou therefore be judged, unless thy life be
also more holy. Be not therefore extolled in thy own mind for any art or
science which thou know; but rather let the knowledge given thee, make thee
more fearful. If thou think that thou understand and know much; know
also that there be many things more, which thou know not. Romans 12.
Think not too well of thy self, but rather confess thine ignorance Why will thou prefer thy self before others, since there be many more learned and
skillful in the Law then thou? If thou will know or learn any thing
profitable, desire not to be known, and to be little esteemed of by men.

4. The highest and most profitable reading is the true knowledge and
consideration of our selves. It is great wisdom and perfection to esteem
nothing of our selves, and to think always well, and commendably of others.
If thou should see another openly sin, or commit any heinous offense; yet
ought thou not to esteem the better of thy self, for thou know not how
long thou shall be able to remain in good estate. Genesis 8.
We are all frail, but thou ought to esteem none more frail then thy
self.

CHAP. III. Of the doctrine of Truth.
HAPPY is he whom Truth by it self does teach, Ps. 93.1.
not by figures, and voices that pass away; but as it is in it self. Our own
opinion and sense do often deceive us, and it discernes little. Eccl. 3.
What avails it to dispute and contend about dark and hidden things; whereas
for being ignorant of them we shall not so much as once be reprehended at the
day of judgment? It is a great folly to neglect the things that are profitable
and necessary, and give our minds to that which is curious and hurtful: Ps 113.
we have eyes and do not see.

2. And what have we to do with the terms and distinctions of Logitians? He to
whom the eternal Word speaks, is delivered from multitudes and diversities
of opinions. By that one Word all things do speak, and all declare the same:
and this is the beginning, and that which speaks unto us. No man without that
Word understands or judges rightly. He to whom all things are one, who
draws all things to one, and sees all things in one, may enjoy a quiet mind,
and remain peaceable in God. O God, the eternal Truth, make me one with thee
in everlasting charity. It is tedious to me often to read and hear many
things. In thee is all that I would have, and can desire. Let all Doctors hold
their peace: let all creatures be silent in thy sight: speak thou alone unto me.

3. How much the more one is retired within him self, Matt. 11. Luc. 10.
and becomes inwardly sincere, and pure; so much the more, and higher
mysteries does he understand without labor: for that he receaueth light of
understanding from above. A pure, sincere and stayed spirit is not distracted,
though he be employed in many works: for that he works all to the honor of
God, and labors for inward tra^quillity, without seking himself in any thing
he does. Who hinders and troubles thee more then the unmortified desires of
thine own heart? A good and devout man first of all disposes in himself his
outward works: neither do they draw him to the desires of an inordinate
inclination; but he orders the^ to the prescript of reason. Who has a
greater combat, then he that labors to ouercom himself? This ought to be
our endeavor, to conquer our selves daily, to wax stronger, and be more able
to subdue our passions, and always in this way to get some ground.

4. All perfection in this life has some imperfections mixed with it: and no
knowledge of ours is void of darkness, and ignorance. An humble knowledge of thy
self is a more secure way to God, then a deep search after learning: yet
learning is not to be blamed, nor the only knowledge of any thing whatsoever is
to be disliked, it being good in it self, and ordained by God: but a good
conscience, and a virtuous life is to be preferred before it. And for that many
endeavor, rather to get knowledge, then to live well: therefore they are often
deceived, and reap either none, or very slender profit of their labors.

5. O, if men bestowed as much labor in the rooting out of vices, and planting
of virtues, as they do in moving doubts and questions; neither would there so
much hurt be done, nor so great scandal be given in the world, nor so much
loosnes be practiced in places erected for virtue! Matt. 23.
Truly at the day of ludgment we shall not be examined what we have read, but
what we have done: nor how well we have spoken, but how virtuously we have
lived. Tell me now, where are all those great Doctors and Masters, with whom
thou wast well acquainted, whilst they lived and flourished in learning? Now
others possess their livings, and perhaps do scarce ever think of the^. In
their life time they seemed something, and now they are not spoken of.

6. O, how quickly does the glory of this world pass away! Eccles. 2.
Would God their life had been answerable to their learning, then had their
study and reading been to good purpose. Tit. 1.
How many perish in this world by reason of vain learning, who take little
care of the service of God? Romans 1.
And because they rather choose to be great then humble; Matt. 18. and 23.
therefore they vanish away in their own thoughts. He is truly great that is
great in charity. He is truly great, that is little in himself, and that
makes no account of the height of honor. He is truly wise, that accompteth
all earthly things as dung, that he may gain Christ. Phil. 3.
And he is truly learned, that fulfilleth the will of Christ, and forsakes his
own.

CHAP. IV. Of Prudence, and Foresight in our actions.
WE must not give ear to every suggestion or instinct, but ought warily,
1.10.4.
and leasurly to po^der things according to the will of God. But (alas) such is
our weakness that we rather often believe, and speak evil of others, then
good. Those that are perfectly virtuous, Genesis 3.
do not easily give credit to every thing that is told them, for they know that
human frailty is prone to evil, Iac. 3.
and very subject to fail in words.

2. It is great wisdom not to be rash in thy proceedings, Frou. 19.
nor to stand stiffly in thine own conceits; Prou. 17.
as also not to believe every thing which thou hear: nor presen ly to relate
again to others, what thou have heard, or do believe. Consult with him that
is wise, and of a good conscience, and seek to be instructed by a better then
thy self, rather then to follow thine own inventions. Prou. 15. and Eccl. 1.
A good life makes a man wise according to God, and gives him experience in
many things. How much the humbler one is in himself, and more subject and
resigned unto God: so much the more prudent shall he be in all his affairs,
and enjoy greater peace and quiet of heart.

CHAP. V. Of the reading of holy Scriptures.
TRVTH, not eloquence is to be sought for in holy Scriptures. Each part of them
is to be read with the same spirit it was made. Romans 15.
We should rather search after spiritual profit in Scriptures, then subtility
of speech. We ought to read devout and simple books, as willingly as high and
learned. 1. Cor. 2.
Let not the reputation of the writer offend thee, whether he be of great or
small learning: but let the pure word of truth move thee to read. Search not
who spoke this, or that, but mark what is spoken.

2. Men pass away; Ps. 110. and Luc. 21.
but the truth of our Lord remains for ever. God speaks unto us sundry
ways, without respect of persons. Romans 2. and 10. and Col. 3.
Our own curiosity often hinders us in reading of the Scriptures, when as we
will examine, and discuss that which we should rather pass over without more
ado. If thou desire to reap profit, read humbly, plainly, and faithfully:
never desire the estimation of learning. Inquire willingly, and hear with
silence the words of holy men: Prou. 1. and 18.
dislike not the Parables of Elders, for they are not recounted without cause.

CHAP. VI. Of inordinate desires, and affections.
WHENSOEVER a man desires any thing inordinatly, he is presently disquieted
in himself. The proud and covetous can never rest. The poor and humble in
spirit, live together in all peace. The man that is not wholy dead in
himself, is quickly tempted, and overcome in small and trifling things. The
weak in spirit, and that is yet in a manner subject to his appetites, and
prone to sensible things, can hardly withdraw himself altogether from earthly
desires. And therefore he is often afflicted, when he goes about to retire
himself from them: and easily falls into indignation, when any opposition is
made against him.

2. And if he has follovved therein his appetite, he is presently disquieted
with remorse of conscience: for that he yielded to his passion, which profits
him nothing to the obtaining of the peace he sought for. True quiet of mind
therefore, is gotten by resisting our passions, not by obeying them. There is no
peace in the heart of a carnal man, nor of him that is addicted to outward
things, but in the spiritual and fervent.

CHAP. VII. Of flying vain Hope, and Pride.
HE is vain that puts his trust in men, or creatures. Hier. 17.1.
Be not ashamed to serve others for the love of Jesus Christ: nor to be
esteemed poor in this world. Ps. 30.
Presume not upon thy self, but place thy hope in God. Do what lies in thy
power, and God will assist thee. Trust not in thine own knowledge, Hier. 9.
nor in the wisdom or prudence of any living creature: but rather in the grace
of God, who helps the humble, and humbles the presumptuous and proud.

2. Glory not in wealth, if thou have it; nor in the power of thy friends: but
in God, who gives all things, and above all desires to give thee himself.
Extol not thy self for the stature, and beauty of thy body, which is
dissolved, and disfigured with every little sickness. Take not pleasure in thy
natural gifts, or wit, least thereby thou displease God, to whom appertains
all the good whatsoever nature has given thee.

3. Esteem not thy self better then others, Exodus 3. and 12.
least perhaps in the sight of God, who knows what is in man, thou be
accounted worse then they. Job. 9.
Be not proud of thy good works, for the judgments of God are far different
from the judgments of men: and that of ten offends him, which pleases them.
If there be any good in thee, believe that there is much more in others, that
so thou may the better keep within thy heart the precious treasure of
humility. It is no prejudice unto thee to esteem thy self worse then all the
world: but it hurts thee very much, to prefer thy self before any one. The
humble enjoy continual peace: but in the heart of the proud, is envy and often
indignation.

CHAP. VIII. That too much familiarity is to be shunned.
LAY not thy heart open to every one: but treat of thy affairs with the wise,
and such as fear God. Eccl. 8.
Converse not much with young people, and strangers. Flatter not the rich;
neither do thou appear willingly before great personages. Keep company with
the humble, simple, devout, and virtuous; and confer with them of those things,
that may edify. Prou. 5.
Be not familiar with any woman: but in general commend all good women to God.
Desire to be familiar with God alone, and his angels, and fly the knowledge of
men.

2. We must have charity toward all, but familiarity with all is not
expedient. Sometimes it falls out, that the fame of some person that is
unknown, is much esteemed; whose presence notwithstanding is not grateful to
the eyes of the beholders. We think sometimes to please others by our company,
and we rather distaste them with our disordered manners, and the evil customs
which they discover in us.

CHAP. IX. Of Obedience, and Subjection.
IT is a great matter to live in Obedience, to be under a Superior, and not to
be at our own disposition. It is much safer to live in the state of
subjection, then of government. Many live under Obedience, rather for necessity
then for charity: and such are discontented, and do easily repine and murmr.
Neither can they attain to freedom of mind, unless they willingly and
heartily put themselves under Obedience for the love of God. Go whither thou will, thou shalt-find no rest, but in humble subjection under the government of
a Superior. The imagination and change of places have deceived many.

2. True it is, that every one willingly does that which agrees with his own
sense and liking; and is apt to affect those most, that are of his own mind:
But if God be amongst us, we must leave our own judgment, that so peace and
quietness may be the better preserved. Who is so wise, that he can fully know
all things? Trust not therefore too much to thine own conceits: but be willing
to hear the judgment of others. If that which thou think be good, and
notwithstanding do leave it for God, and followest the opinion of another, it
shall be better for thee

3. I have often heard, that it is more secure to hear and take counsel, then
to give it. It may also fall out, that each ones opinion may be good: but to
refuse to yield to others, when as reason, or cause requires it, is a token of
wilfullnes and pride.

CHAP. X. Of the avoiding superfluity of words.
FLY the unquietness of men as much as thou can: Matt. 4. and 14.
for the talk of worldly affairs hinders very much, although they be
recounted with sincere intention: for we are quickly defiled, Joan. 6.
and as it were enthralled with vanity. I could wish that I had often times
held my peace, when I have spoken: and that I had not been in company. Why do we
so willingly speak, and talk one with another, when notwithstanding we seldom
return to silence, without hurt of conscience? The cause wherefore we so
willingly talk, is, for that by discoursing one with another, we seek to
receive comfort one of another: and desire to ease our mind, ouerwearied with
sundry thoughts: Matt. 7.
and we talk willingly, and think of those things which we love best, Romans 2.
and most desire; or of those, which we feel most contrary unto us.

2. But alas, often times in vain, and to no end: for this outward comfort is
cause of no small loss of inward, and divine consolation. Therefore we must
watch and pray, least our time pass without any fruit or profit. If it be
lawful, and expedient for thee to speak; speak those things that may edify. An
evil custom, and neglect of our own good, does very much slack the raynes
to inconsiderate speech: Act. 1.
Yet devout discourses of heavenly things, do greatly further our progress in
spirit, Romans 15.
especially where persons of one mind and spirit be gathered together in God.

CHAP. XI. Of the obteyning of peace, and zeal of spiritual profit.
WE might enjoy peace, if we would not busy our selves with the words and
deeds of other men, which appertain nothing to our charge. How can he live
long in peace, that thrusts himself into the cares of others, or that little
or seldom recollecteth himself within his own breast? Blessed are the simple
and pure minds: for they shall enjoy much peace.

2. What is the reason, why some of the Saints were so perfect, and
contemplative? Because they labored to mortify themselves wholly to earthly
desires; and therefore they could with their whole heart, give themselves to
God, and freely attend to their own affairs. We are too much lead by our own
passions, and too solicitous for transitory things. We also seldom overcome
any one vice perfectly, and are not inflamed with a fervent desire to profit in
spirit: and therefore we remain cold in devotion, and full of tepidity.

3. If we were perfectly dead unto our selves, and not entangled within our
own breasts: then we might also have some taste of divine things, and feel the
sweetness of heavenly contemplation. The greatest, and indeed the whole
impediment is, for that we are not free from our passions, and disordered
inclinations: neither do we endeavor to enter into that path of perfection,
which the Saints have walked before us: and when any small adversity befalls
us, we are too quickly dejected, and turn our selves to human comforts.

4. If we endeavor like men of courage to stand continually in the battle;
surely we should feel the favorable assistance of God from heaven. For he who
gives us occasion to fight, to the end we may get the victory, is ready to
succor those that fight manfully, and do trust in his grace. If we esteem our
progress in Religious life, to consist only in these exterior observations;
our devotion will quickly be at an end. Let us set the axe to the root, that
being freed from passions, we may enjoy true peace of mind.

5. If every year we would root out one vice, we should quickly become perfect
men. But now often times we perceive it goes contrary, and that we were
better, and of a more pure conscience at the beginning of our conversion, then
after many years of our profession. Our fervor and profit should increase
daily; but now it is accounted a great matter, if one can retain but some part
of his first spirit. If we would use but a little violence in the beginning,
then should we be able to perform all things afterward with ease and joy of
heart.

6. It is a hard matter to leave that to which we are accustomed; but harder to
do against our own wills. But if thou do not overcome little and easy things;
how will thou overcome harder matters? Resist thy inclination in the first
motions, and break off evil customs, least perhaps by little and little they
draw thee to greater difficulty. O, if thou did consider how much inward
peace unto thy self, and joy to others thou should procure by demeaning thy
self well; I suppose thou would be more careful of thy spiritual profit.

CHAP. XII. Of the profit of Adversity.
IT is good that we have sometimes grief and adversities: for they often make
a man enter into himself, and remember that he is here in banishment, and
ought not to place his trust in any worldly thing. It is good that we be
sometimes contradicted; and that there be an evil or hard conceit had of us:
and this, although we do, and intend well. These things help often to the
attayning of humility, and defend us from vainglory: for then we chiefly
seek God for our inward witness; when outwardly we be contemned by men, and
whe^n there is no credit given unto us.

2. And therefore a man should settle himself so fully in God, that he needed
not to seek many comforts of men. When a good and virtuous man is afflicted,
tempted, or troubled with evil thoughts; then he understands better the
great need he has of Gods assistance, without whose help he perceaueth he can
do nothing that is good. The^ also he sorroweth, lamenteth, and prays for the
miseries he suffers. Then is he weary of living longer, and wishes that
death would come, that he might be dissolved, and be with Christ. Then also he
well perceaueth, that complete security, and perfect peace cannot be had in
this world.

CHAP. XIII. Of resisting Temptations.
SO long as we live in this world we cannot be without tribulation and
temptation: for as it is written in Job: Temptation is the life of man upon
earth. Every one therefore ought to be careful, and diligently to arm himself
with prayer against his temptations, least the Devil find time and place to
deceive him; who never sleeps, but goes about seeking whom he may devour.
No man is so perfect and holy, but has sometimes temptations: and we cannot be
altogether free from them.

2. Temptations are often profitable unto men; though they be troublesome, and
grievous; for in them man is humbled, purged, and instructed. All the Saints
have passed and profited through many tribulations and temptations; and they
that could not bear temptations, became reprobate and fell from God. There is
no order so holy, nor place so secret, where there be not temptations or
adversities.

3. There is no man that is altogether free from temptations, whilst he
lives on earth: for in our selves is the cause thereof, being born with
inclination to evil. When one temptation or tribulation goes away, another
comes: and we shall ever have something to suffer, because we have lost that
innocence with which we were created. Many seek to fly temptations, and do
fall more grievously into the^. By flight alone we cannot overcome; but by
patience and true humility, we become stronger then all our enemies.

4. He that only auoideth them outwardly, and does not pluck them up by the
root, shall profit little: yea temptation will the sooner return unto him; and
he shall feel himself in worse case then before. By little and little, and by
patience with longanimity (through Gods help) thou shall more easily overcome,
then with violence, and thine own importunity. Often take counsel in
temptations, and deal not roughly with him that is tempted; but give him
comfort, as thou would wish to be done to thy self.

5. The beginning of all evil temptations, is inconstancy of mind, and little
confidence in God: for as a ship without a stern is tossed to and fro with the
waves: so the man that is negligent, and leaves his purpose, is many ways
tempted. Fire tries iron, and temptation a just man. We know not oftentimes
what we are able to do, but temptations do show us what we are. We must be
watchful, especially in the beginning of the temptation, for the enemy is then
more easily overcome, if he be not suffered to enter the door of our hearts, but
be resisted without the gate at his first knock. Wherefore one said: Withstand
the beginnings, Ovid. l. 1. de remed amoris.
for an after-remedy comes often to late. First there comes to the mind an
evil thought, then a strong imagination thereof, afterward delight, and an
evil motion, and then consent: and so by little and little our wicked enemy
gets full entrance, whilst he is not resisted in the beginning. And how much
the longer one is negligent in resisting: so much weaker does he become daily,
and the enemy stronger against him.

6. Some suffer greatest temptations in the beginning of their conversion
others in the later end; others again are much troubled almost through the
whole time of their life. Some are but easily tempted according to the wisdom,
and equity of the divine appointment, which weigeth the state and deserts of
men; and ordains all things for the saving of his elect and chosen servants.

7. We ought not therefore to despair when we are tempted; but so much the more
fervently to pray unto God, that he will vouchsafe to help us in all
tribulation; who surely according to the saying of S. Paul, will make with
temptation such issue, that we may be able to sustain it. Let us therefore
humble our selves under the hand of God in all temptation and tribulation, for
he will save, and exalt the humble in spirit.

8. In temptations and afflictions man is proved, how much he has profited;
and his merit is thereby the greater before God, and his virtues do more openly
appear. Neither is it any great matter if a man be devout and fervent, when he
feels no heaviness: but if in time of adversity he bear himself patiently,
there is hope of great good. Some are kept from great temptations, and are
often overcome in small ones, which do daily occur; to the end that being
humbled, they may never presume on themselves in great matters, who in so small
things do see themselves so weak.

CHAP. XIV. Of avoiding rash Judgment.
TVRNE thine eyes unto thy self, Matt. 7. Romans 25. Eccls. 3.
and beware thou judge not rashly the deeds of other men. In judging of others
a man always labors in vain, often erreth, and quickly sins; but in
judging and discussing of himself, he always labors fruitfully. We often
judge of things according to our own desire; for private affection bereaues us
easily of true judgment. If God were always the pure intention of our desire,
we should not be so much troubled with the repugnance of our sensuality.

2. But often times some inward secret inclination, or outward affection
occurreth, which draws us after it. Many secretly seek themselves in their
actions, and know it not. They seem also to live in good peace of mind, when
things are don according to their will, and opinion; but if it succeed
otherwise then they desire, they are straight ways troubled, and much
afflicted. The diversities of judgments and opinions, Matt. 12.
cause often diffentions between friends and neighbors, Luc 12.
between religious and devout persons.

3. An old custom is hardly broken, and no man is willingly lead further then
himself likes. Hier. 13.
If thou do more rely upon thine own reason or industry, then upon the
virtue of obedience to Jesus Christ; it will be long before thou be illuminated
with grace, for Almighty God will have us perfectly subject unto him, and that
we transcend the narrow limits of human reason, enflamed with his love.

CHAP. XV. Of Works done of Charity.
FOR no worldly thing, nor for the love of any man, Matt. 18.
is any evil to be done: but yet for the profit of one that stands in need, a
good work is sometimes to be left off, or changed also for a better. For by
doing this, a good work is not lost, but changed into another of greater
merit. The exterior work without charity profits nothing; 1. Cor. 13.
but whatsoever is done of charity be it never so little and contemptible in
the sight of the world, it is fruitful, and of great esteem in the sight of
God. For God weighs more with how much love one works, then how much he
does. He does much, that loves much. Luc. 7.


2. He does much that does a thing well: he does well that rather serves the
common good of others, Phil. 2.
then his own will. Oftentimes it seems to be charity, and it is rather
carnality: because natural inclination, self-will, hope of reward, and desire
of our own commodity will seldom be wanting.

3. He that has true and perfect charity, seeks himself in nothing; but
only desires in all things that the glory of God should be exalted. Phil. 2.3.
and 1. Cor. 13.
He also enuieth none; because he loves no private good: Ps. 17. and 24.
neither will he rejoice in himself; but wishes above al things to enjoy God
He attributes nothing that is good to any man, but wholly refers it unto
God, from whom, as from the fountain, all things proceed: in whom finally all
Saints have perfect rest, by fruition of his glory. O, he that had one spark
of perfect charity, how easily would he discern, that all earthly things be
full of vanity!

CHAP. XVI. Of bearing with the defects of others.
THOSE things that a man cannot amend in himself or in others, he ought to
suffer patiently, until God ordain otherwise. Think that perhaps it is better
so, for thy trial and patience, without which our merits are not much to be
esteemed. Matt. 6.
Thou ought to pray notwithstanding when thou have such impedime^ts, Luc* 11.
that God would vouchsafe to help thee, and that thou may bear them
patiently.

2. If one that is once or twice warned does not amend, contend not with him;
but commit all to God, that his will may be fulfilled, Matt. 6.
and his name honored in all his servants, who knows how to turn evil into
good. Endeavor to be patient in bearing with the defects and infirmities of
others: These. 5. and Io. 1. Luc. 6.
for that thy self also have many things, which must be suffered by others. If
thou can not make thy self such an one as thou would; how can thou
expect to have another in all things to thy liking? We would willingly have
others perfect, and yet we amend not our own faults.

3. We will have others severely corrected, and will not be corrected our
selves. The large liberty of others displeases us: and yet we will not have
our desires denied us. We will have others kept under by rigorous laws; but in
no sort will we our selves be restrained. And thus it appears, how seldom we
weigh our neighbor in the same balance with our selves. If all men were
perfect, what should we have to suffer of our neighbor for God?

4. But now God has thus ordained, that we may learn to bear one another
burden: Gal. 6.
for no man is without defect, no man without burden, no man sufficient of
himself, no man endued with so much wisdom as he needs: 1. These. 5. and 1.
Cor. 12.
but we ought to bear with one another, comfort one another, help, instruct,
and admonish one another. Adversity best discovers how great virtue each one
has: for occasions make not a man frail, but do show what he is.

CHAP. XVII. Of Religious life.
THOU must learn to break thy own will in many things, if thou will have
peace, and concord with others. It is no small matter to dwell in communtiy, or
in a congregation, and to converse therein without complaint* and to persevere
there faithfully until death. Blessed is he that has there lived well, and
ended happily. If thou will persevere in grace as thou ought* and profit in
virtue, esteem thy self as a banished man, and a pilgrim upon earth. Thou
must be contented for the love of Christ to be esteemed as a fool in this
world, if thou desire to lead a virtuous, and perfect religious life.

2. The wearing of religious habit, 1. Pet. 2.
and shauing of the Crown do little profit; but chang of manners, and perfect
mortification of passions make a true religious man. He that seeks any thing
else but God, Eccls. 1. and 4.
and the health of his soul, shall find nothing but tribulation and sorrow.
Neither can he remain long in peace, that labors not to be in the meanest
place, and subject to all.

3. Thou camst to serve, not to be served Know that thou wast called to suffer
and to labor, Matt. 20.
not to be idle, or to spend thy time in talk. Here in the school of Christ
men are proved as gold in the furnace. Here no man can stand, unless he humble
himself with his whole heart, for the love of God.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the examples of the holy Fathers.
CONSIDER the lively examples of the holy Fathers, Heb. 11.
in whom true perfection and religion shined; and thou shall see how little it
is, and almost nothing, which we do now in these days. Alas, what is our life
if it be compared to them! The Saints and friends of Christ served our Lord in
hunger and thirst, in could and nakedness, in labor and wearines, in watching
and fasting, in prayer and holy meditations, in persecutions and many
reproaches.

2. O, how many and grievous tribulations suffered the Apostles, Martyrs,
Confessors, Virgins, and all the rest that endeavored to follow the steps of
Christ! They hated their lives in this world, Joan. 12.
that they might possess their souls in everlasting life. Matt. 7.
O, How strait and poor a life led the holy Fathers in the wilderness! How long
and grievous temptations suffered they! How often and how grievously were they
assaulted by their Ghostly enemy! How fervent prayers offered they daily to
God! How rigorous abstinence did they use! How fervent zeal, and care had they
of their spiritual profit! How strong, and continual a combat had they for
the ouerco^ming of vices! How pure and upright intention kept they unto God! In
the day they labored, and in the night they attended to continual prayer,
although when they labored also, they ceased not from mental prayer.

3. They spent all their time with profit: every hour seemed short for the
service of God: and for the great sweetness they had in contemplation, they
forgot the necessity of corporal refection. They renounced all riches,
dignities, honors, friends and kinsfolks; they desired to have nothing which
appertained to the world; they scarce took things necessary for the sustenance
of life; they grieved to ferue their bodies, even in necessity. They were poor
in earthly things, but rich in grace and virtues. Outwardly they wanted, but
inwardly they were replenished with grace, and spiritual comfort.

4. They were strangers in the world, but near and familiar friends to God.
They seemed to themselves as nothing, and abject to this world: but they were
precious, and beloved in the eyes of God. They were grounded in true humility,
lived in simple obedience, walked in charity and patience: and therefore they
profited daily in spirit, and obtained great grace in Gods sight. They were
given for an example and pattern of pefection in Gods Church, and their
example should more styr us up to a desire of our spiritual profit, then the
number of the lukewarm and dissolute livers draw us to the neglect thereof.

5. O, how great was the fervor of all religious persons in the beginning of
their holy institution! How great was their devotion to prayer! How diligent
emulation of virtue! How exact discipline flourished! How great reverence and
obedience, under the rule of their Superior, observed they in all things!
Their footsteps yet remaining do testify that they were indeed holy and perfect
men; who fighting so valiantly, trod the world under their feet. Now he is
greatly accounted of, that breaks not the rule, and that can with patience
endure that which he has professed.

6. O couldnes and negligence of our time, that we so quickly decline from our
first fervor, and are come to that pass, that very sloth and couldnes of
spirit makes our own lives tedious unto us! Would to God the desire to profit
in virtue did not wholly sleep in thee, who have often seen the holy examples
of devout and religious souls.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Exercise of a good, and Religious person.
THE life of a Religious person ought to shine with all virtues; Matt. 5.
that he may inwardly be such as outwardly he seems to men. And with reason
thou ought to be much more within, then is perceived without: Ps. 33. Heb.
4. Ps. 15.
for God behouldeth the heart, whom we ought most highly to reverence whersoeuer
we are, and walk in purity like Angels in his sight; and to renew daily our
purposes, and styr up our selves to fervor, as though this were the first day
of our conversion; and to say: Help me, my God, in this my good purpose, and in
thy holy service; and grant that I may now this day begin perfectly: for that
which I have done hitherto, is nothing.

2. According to our purpose, shall be the success of our profit, and much
diligence is necessary to him that will profit much. And if he that firmly
purposes, often fails; what shall he do, that seldom purposes any thing,
or with little certainty? It may fall out sundry ways that we leave off our
purpose: and if for light occasions we omit our accustomed exercises, it
seldom passes without some loss. The purpose of just men is rather grounded
upon the grace of God, then on their own wisdom, in whom also they always
have confidence, in whatsoever they take in hand. For man does purpose, Prou.
16.
but God disposes: neither is the way of man in his own hands.

3. If an accustomed exercise be sometimes omitted for some work of charity,
or of intention to profit our neighbor, it may easily afterward be recovered:
Eccles. 7.
but if it be lightly left through inconstancy or negligence, it is an offense,
and will prove hurtful. Though we endeavor what we can, yet shall we fail in
many things. But yet we must always purpose something certain, especially
against that which most hinders us We must examine well, and order both our
exterior and interior actions; for that both are expedient for our progress
in virtue.

4. If thou can not always recollect thy self, yet do it sometimes, and that
at least once every day; to to wit in the morning, or evening. In the morning
make thy good purpose; Deuteronomy. 4.
in the evening examine thy self what thou have been that day in word, deed, or
thought: for that in these oftentimes perhaps thou have offended God, and thy
neighbor. Arm thy self with courage against the malicious attempts of thine
enemy. Refrain Gluttony and thou shall more easily bridle all the disordered
inclinations of the flesh. Never be altogether idle, but either reading, or
writing, or praying, or meditating, or laboring something of profit for the
common good: but bodily exercises are to be discreetly used, and not to be
undertaken equally of all.

5. Those things that be not common, are not to be done in the sight of all:
for private things are best done in secret. But thou must beware, thou neglect
not that to which thou art bound by common rule, and be ready in performing thy
private devotions: but having fully and faithfully accomplished all thy duties,
and those things that were enjoined thee, if thou have further leisure, return
to thy self as thy devotion desires. All cannot use the same exercise, but
one is more convenient for this person, another for that. According to the
diversity of times also, diverse exercises are fitting: for some suite better
with festival days, others with days of labor. We have need of one kind in
temptations, and of others in time of peace and quiet. We desire to think of
other things when we are sorrowful, then we do when we are cheerful in our
Lord.

6. When principal feasts draw near, good exercises are to be renewed; and
the intercessions of Saints more fervently to be implored. From feast to feast,
we should make some good purpose, as though we were then to depart out of this
world, and to come to the everlasting feasts of heaven. And therefore we ought
to prepare our selves carefully at holy times, and to live more devoutly, and
to keep more exactly all things that we are to observe, as though shortly we
were to receive reward of our labor at Gods hands.

7. And if it be differred, let us think that we were not well prepared, Romans 8.
nor worthy as yet of so great glory, as shall be revealed in us at the time
appointed: and let us labor to prepare our selves better for our departure.
Blessed is that servant (says S. Luke the Evangelist) whom when his Lord
comes, Luc. 12.
he shall find watching: Matt. 24.
verily I say unto you, he shall place him over all that he possesses.

CHAP. XX. Of the love of Solitude, and Silence.
SEEK a fit time to attend to thy self, and often think of the benifits of
God. Leave curious things. Read over such matters, as may cause rather
compunction, the^ the labor of much study. If thou withdraw thy self from
superfluous talk, and idle wandering about, as also from hearing of news and
tales; thou shall find sufficient, and fit time to think of good things. The
greatest Saints avoided the company of men as much as they could, Heb. 3.
and chose to live to God in secret.

2. One said: As often as I have been amongst men, Senec. ep. 7.
I have returned less man The same we find by experience when we talk long.
It is easier to keep silence altogether, then not to exceed in words. It is
easier for a man to keep home, then to demean himself as he ought in all
things abroad. He therefore that desires to attain to internal, Matt. 4.
and spiritual graces, ought with Jesus to withdraw himself from the people.
No man goes safely abroad, but he that gladly keeps home. Eccles. 3.
No man securely governs, but he that delights to live in subjection. No
man securely commands, but he that has learned readily to obey.

3. No man securely rejoices, unless he has within him the testimony of a
good conscience. And yet the security of Saints was always full of the fear
of God. Neither were they less careful and humble in themselves, for that
they shined outwardly with grace, and great virtues. But the security of evil
men rises of pride and presumption, and in the end deceaueth them. Never
promise to thy self security in this life, although thou seem to be a good
Religious man, or devout Hermit.

4. Oftentimes those, who in the iugdment of men were of better esteem, have
been in greatest danger, by reason of their too much confidence. Wherefore it is
more profitable to many, not to be altogether free from temptations, but to be
often assaulted; least they should be too secure, and so perhaps be lifted up
in pride: least also they should too freely give themselves to outward
comforts. O, how good a conscience should he keep, that would never seek
transitory joy! would never busy him self with the things of this world! and
how great peace and quietness should he possess, that would cut off all vain
solicitude, and only think of divine things, and such as are profitable for
his soul, and place all his hope in God!

5. No man is worthy of heavenly comfort, unless he have diligently exercised
himself in holy compunction. If thou desire true contrition of heart, retire
thy self into some secret and solitary place, and exclude from thy mind the
tumultes, and unquietness of the world, as it is written: In your chambers be ye
sorry. Psalm. 4.
In thy Cell thou shall find that which abroad thou shall often loose. The
Cell, if thou continue in it, waxes sweet, and if thou love not to stay in it,
it becomes irksome If in the beginning of thy conversion thou accustom thy
self to remain in it, and keep it well, it will be afterward unto thee a
dear friend, and a most pleasant comfort.

6. In silence and quietness a devout soul perfecteth her self, and learneth
the secrets of holy Scriptures. There she finds floods of tears, Ps. 6.
with which she may every night wash and cleanse her self, and be made so much
the more familiar with her Creator, by how much the further off she lives from
al worldly disquiet. Who so therefore withdraws himself from his acquaintance
and friends; God with his holy Angels will draw near unto him. It were better
for a man to ly hidden, and have care of himself, then being careless of his
soul, to work miracles in the world. It is commendable for a Religious person
to go abroad seldom, to fly to be seen, and to be unwilling to see men.

7. Why will thou see that which is not lawful for thee to have. The world
passes away, and all his delights. The desires of our sensuality, draw us to
walk abroad, but when the hour is past, what bring thou home, but a
burdened conscience, and distracted thoughts? A joyful going abroad, brings
often a sorrowful coming home; Prou. 14.
and a merry evening makes a sad morning. So all carnal joy enters gently,
but in the end it causes remorse and destruction. What is elsewhere to be
seen, Eccles. 1.
which thou can not see here? Here thou see heaven and earth, and all the
elements, of which all other things are made.

8. What is there any where to be seen that can long continue under the sun?
Thou think perhaps to satiate thy self, and have thy fill; but thou shall
never attain it If it were possible for thee to see all things created,
Eccles. 3.
present before thine eyes, what were it all but a vain and unprofitable
sight? Lift up thine eyes to God in heaven, Ps. 122.
and ask pardon of thy sins and negligences. Leave vain things to the
vain. Attend thou to that which God commands. Matt. 6.
Shut thy door upon thee, and call upon Jesus thy beloved. Be thou with him in
thy Cell, for thou shall not find so great peace in any other place. If thou
had stayed within and not given ear to idle news, thou had kept thy
self better in good peace. But now that thou delightest sometimes to hear
novelties, it is fit thou suffer for it some trouble and disquiet of mind.

CHAP. XXI. Of Compunction of heart.
IF thou will profit any thing, keep thy self always in the fear of God,
Prou. 19.
and yield not too much scope to liberty. Contain all thy senses under the
rule of discipline, and give not thy self to foolish mirth. Give thy self to
co^punction of heart, and thou shall find devotion. Compunction discovers much
good, which with too much liberty is quickly lost. It is marvel that a man
can ever perfectly rejoice in this life, if he consider his banishment, and
weigh the many perils, wherewith his soul is environed. The leuity of our
minds, and the little care we have of our faults, makes us not to feel the
sorrows of our soul.

2. But oftentimes we vainly laugh, when we have just cause to weep. There is
neither true liberty, nor good mirth, but that which is in the fear of God,
accompanied with a good conscience. Happy is he, that can avoid all cause of
distraction, and draw himself to the union of holy compunction. Happy is he,
that can abandon all that may defile, or burden his conscience. Fight ma^fully:
one custom ouercomes another. If thou can forbear to intermeddle with that
which belongs to others; they will not hinder thee in that which thou have to
do.

3. Busy not thy self in matters which appertain to others: neither do thou
meddle at all with the affairs of thy betters. Look first of all to thy
self, and have a more especial care to admonish thy self, then whomsoever
thou love best. Gal. 1.
If thou have not the favor of men, be not therefore grieved: but let this
seem unto thee a most just cause of grief, that thou look not to thy self
with that care, which beseems the servant of God, and a devout religious
person. It is oftentimes better and more secure, that a man has not many
consolations in this life, especially such, as are agreeable to the inclination
of our corrupt nature But that we have none at all, Ps. 76.
or do seldom taste divine comforts, the fault is ours, that do not seek for
compunction of heart, nor do wholly forsake the vain comforts of this world.

4. Acknowledge thy self unworthy of divine comforts, and that thou have
deserved great tribulation. When a man has perfect contrition, Iudic. 2. and
20. 2. Reg. 13.
then is the whole world grievous and loathsome unto him. A good man finds
always sufficient cause of tears and sorrow; for whether he consider
himself, or weigh the estate of his neighbor, he knows that none lives
here without tribulation. And how much the more thoroughly he considers
himself; so much the more is his sorrow. Our sins and vices in which we are
so plunged, that we can seldom contemplate the things of heaven, do minister
unto us matter of most just sorrow and hearty contrition.

5. If thou did think more diligently of thy death, then of living long,
Eccles. 7.
thou would without doubt be more careful in the ame^dment of thy life. And
if thou would consider within thy self, the pains of hell, or of
purgatory, Matt. 25.
I am persuaded it would move thee to endure any labor or pain whatsoever in
this world, and not to sear any kind of austerity. But because these things
enter not to the heart, and we still love that which delights us, therefore we
remain could and void of spiritual vigor.

6. Oftentimes our want of spirit is the cause, that our wretched bodies do so
quickly complain. Pray therefore with all humility to our Lord, that he will
vouchsafe to give thee the spirit of contrition, and say with the Prophet: Feed
me, o Lord, Ps. 79.
with the bread of tears, and give me to drink with tears in measure.

CHAP. XXII. Of the consideration of humane misery.
MISERABLE thou art where soever thou be, and whithersoeuer thou turnest, if
thou turnest not thy self to God. Why art thou troubled when things succeed
not as thou would, and desire? Who is there that has all things as he
will? Eccls. 7.
Neither I, nor thou, nor any man upon earth. There is not any man in this
world without some tribulation or affliction, though he be a King, or a Pope.
Who think thou the^ is in best case? I ruly he that willingly suffers
something for God.

2. Many weak and feeble men say: Behold how well such a one lives, how rich,
how powerful, how beautiful, how great a man he is: Luc. 12.
but lift up thine eyes to the riches of heaven, and thou shall see that all
temporal prosperity is as nothing, full of uncertainty, and which rather
oppresses then otherwise: for it is never had without solicitude and fear.
Prou. 19. Job. 14.
The felicity of man consists not in having abundance of temporal riches: a
mean suffices. It is truly misery enough to live upon earth. How much more a
man desires to be spiritual, Eccls. 2.
so much the more distasteful is this present life unto him: for he better
perceaueth, and sees more clearly the defects of human corruption. To eat, to
drink, to watch, to sleep, to labor, to repose, and to be subject to all
other necessities of nature, is doubtless a great misery to a devout mind,
that would gladly be free and delivered from all sin.

3. The inward man is much oppressed with these corporal necessities, whilst
he is in this world. And therefore the holy Prophet prays with great devotion
to be delivered from them, saying: Deliver me, O Lord, from my necessities.
Psalm. 24.
But woe be to them that know not their misery, and much more to the^ that love
this miserable, and corruptible life. For some there be so dotingly affected
unto it, that although with labor and begging, they scarce get bread to eat,
yet if they might live here always, they would care but little for the
kingdom of heaven.

4. O senseless creatures and infidels in heart, Romans 3.
who^ly buried so deep in earth, that they have no taste nor feeling, but of
sensual things! But miserable wretches, they shall in the end feel, to their
cost, how vile, and of no esteem was that which they loved. 1. Pet. ^1. Heb.
11.
The Saints of God and the devout Servants and friends of Christ respected
little what pleased their natural inclinations, or what flourished in this
life; but with their whole hopes and intentio^s they sought after the riches of
heaven. Their whole desire was carried up to those everlasting treasures, which
are invisible; least they might have been drawn to base affections, by the love
of visible things. Romans 13.
Loose not thy hope to profit in spiritual matters: there is yet time the
hour is not yet past.

5. Why will thou defer thy good purpose? Rise up in this very instant, and
begin, and say: Now is the time to work, the time to fight: now is it a fit
time to amend my self When any tribulation, or affliction does befall thee,
then is the time to merit. Psalm. 65.
Thou must pass through fire and water before thou come to rest. Unless thou
use violence to thy self, thou shall not overcome thy evil inclinations. As
long as we carry about with us this frail body of ours, we can never be
without sin, nor live without tediousnes and grief. Romans 7. Genesis 3.
We would gladly enjoy quietness, and be delivered from al misery; but for that
we have by sin lost our innocence, we have together with it lost also our
happiness. And therefore it behooves us to have patience, 2. Cor. 5.
and to expect the mercy of God till this iniquity have an end, and that which
is mortal be swallowed up of life.

6. O, how great is the frailty of man always inclined to evil! Genesis 6.
To day thou confessest thy sins, and to morrow thou committest again the
same which thou did confess. Now thou purposest to take heed, and within an
hour thou do as if thou had made no purpose at all. We may therefore with
great reason humble our selves, 2. Match. 9.
and never admit any thought of our own esteem, being so weak as we are, and
subject to every change. Full soon (God knows) is that lost by negligence,
which with much labor was hardly gotten by grace.

7. What will become of us in the end, that do so timely begin to wax could? Woe
be unto us, if we will now give our selves to ease, as if all were already in
peace and security; when as yet there scarce appears so much as any sign of
true sanctity in our conversation. It were needful that we were taught good
manners again like Children, if so perhaps there might be some more hope of
our amendment, and profit in spirit.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the consideration of death.
THE hour of death will quickly overtake thee, and therefore look how thou
live. To day a man is living, and to morrow he does not appear; Job. 9. and
14 Luc. 12. Heb. 9.
and being once out of sight, he is also quickly out of mind. O dullness and
hardness of man's heart, who thinks only on that he sees, and foreseeth not
that which is to come! Thou should always so order thy thoughts and
actions, Matt. 25.
as if this very day thou were to depart this life. Luc. 12.
If thou had a good conscience, thou would not much fear death. It is
better to avoid sin then to fly death. Sap. 4.
If thou be not prepared to day; Matt. 24. and 25.
how will thou be prepared to morrow? To morrow-day is uncertain, and whether
thou shall see it or no, thou know not.

2. What does it avail us to live long, when we do so little amend? A long
life does not always make us better, nay rather it oftentimes heapeth upon us
a greater load of sins. O that we had spent one day well in this world! Many
do reckon the years of their conversion, but full slender oftentimes is the
fruit of amendment If it be a dreadful thing to dye, perhaps it will be more
dangerous for thee to live long. Blessed is he, that has always before his
eyes the hour of his death; Eccles. 7.
and disposes himself daily thereunto. If thou have at any time seen a man
dye, think with thy self, that thou must one day pass the same way.

3. When it is morning, think that perhaps thou shall not live until night;
Heb. 9.
and when evening comes, do not dare to promise unto thy self the next morning.
Be always ready and so order thy life, that death may never take thee
unprepared. Luc. 21.
Many dye suddenly: for the Son of man will come, when we least think of
it. Matt. 24. Luc. 12.
When that last hour shall come, thou will begin to think far otherwise of
thy life, and much lament, that thou have been so slack and negligent.

4. O, how wise and happy is he, that now labors to be such in his life, as
he wishes to be found at the hour of his death! For the perfect contempt of
the world, the fervent desire to profit in virtue, the love of discipline, the
labor of penance, the readiness of obedience, the forsaking of our selves,
and the bearing patiently of all adversity for the love of Christ, will give
great confidence of a happy end. Thou may do much good whilst thou art well;
but when thou art sick, what thou will be able to do, I know not. Few do grow
better, and amend the^ selves with sickness; as also they that wander much
abroad, seldom become holy.

5. Trust not upon thy friends or neighbors; Esa. 30. and 31. Herem. 17. and
48.
neither do thou put off to future time, the care of thy souls health: for
thou shall sooner be forgotten, then thou do imagine. It is better now to
provide in time, Matt. 6.
and do some good before thou go, then to trust in the help of others, when
thou art gone. If thou have no care of thy self now when thou have time, who
will be careful for thee herafter? The time which now thou have is very
precious. Now are the days of health. Now is the time acceptable. But alas,
that thou spendest it so little to thy profit, in which thou might gain
eternal life! The time will come, when thou will desire one day, or one hour
to amend, and I cannot assure thee, that thou shall obtain it.

6. O my dearest brother, from how great danger may thou deliver thy self!
From how great fear may thou be freed, if thou do now live fearful, and
careful of thy death! Labor to live in such sort, that at the hour of death
thou may rather rejoice then fear. Learn now to dye to the world, that thou
may then begin to live with Christ. Learn now to contemn all earth ly
things, that thou may then freely go to Christ. 1. Cor. 9.
Chastise now thy body with penance, that thou may then have assured
confidence.

7. Ah fool, why do thou think thou shall live long, being not certain of
so much as one day! Luc. 12.
How many have been deceived, and taken out of this world on a sudden, when
they least expected it? How often have thou heard, how such a one was
suddenly slain, another was drowned, another falling from some high place
brake his neck, another dyed at his meat, another when he was playing: one
came to his end by fire, another by sword, another by plague, another dyed by
the hands of thieves? So as death is the end of all, and the life of man
passes away like a shadow.

8. Who will remember thee; and who will pray for thee after thy death? Job. 14.
Do now beloved brother, do now what thou can, for thou know not how soon
thou shall dye, nor what shall befall thee after thy death. Matt. 1. Luc. 11.
Now whilst thou have time, heap together eternal riches. Think on nothing,
but on the health of thy soul. Gal. 6. Luc. 16. Heb. 11.
Have care only on that which belongs to God. Make the Saints of God thy
friends by honoring them, and imitating their virtues, that when thou
departest this life, they may receive thee into their everlasting dwellings.

9. Esteem thy self as a pilgrim, 1. Pet. 2.
and stranger upon earth, and as one to whom the affairs of this world do
nothing appertain. Keep thy heart free, Heb. 13.
and lifted up to God: for thou have not here any permanent City. Send
thither thy prayers daily with sighs, and tears; that thy soul may deserve
to pass with much happiness to our Lord after death.

CHAP. XXIV. Of Judgment, and the punishment of sin.
IN all things consider the end, and how thou willt be able to stand before
that severe Judge, from whom nothing can be hidden, and is not appeased with
gifts, Heb. 10.
nor admits excuses, but judges according to instice. O most wretched and
foolish sinner, that fear sometimes the countenance of an angry man; what
answer will thou make to God, to whom all thy wickedness is known? Job. 9.
Why prouidest thou not for thy self against that rigorous day of judgment,
Luc. 16.
in which no man can be excused, or defended by another, but every one will be
burden enough to himself? Now thy pains are profitable, 2. Cor. 6.
thy tears acceptable, thy cries are heard, thy sorrow satisfies for thy
sins, and purges thy soul.

2. The patient man has a great and healthful purgatory, Iac. 1.
who receiving injuries, grieueth more for the others malice, Luc. 23.
then for his own wrongs; prays willingly for his adversaries, Act. 7.
and from his heart forgiueth their offenses; delayeth not to ask forgiveness of
whomsoever he has offended; is sooner moved to compassion then to anger; uses
often violence to himself; and labors with his whole force to subdue the
flesh in all things to the spirit. It is better to purge our sins, and vices
now, then to reserve them for purgatory. Verily the inordinate love we bear to
our selves deceaueth us.

3. What other thing shall that fire feed on, but thy sins? How much the more
thou sparest thy self now, and followest the desires of thy corrupt nature: so
much the more grievously shall thou be punished hereafter: and so much the more
matter do thou keep for that purging fire. In the self same wherein a man
has finned, shall he be more grieuoufly punished. There shall the slothful
be pricked forwards, with burning goads. There shall the Gluttons be tormented
with insatiable hunger and thirst. There shall the lascivious and the lovers of
pleasures be covered over with burning pitch and brimston. The envious like
raging dogs, shall there howl for grief.

4. There is no vice, that shall not have his proper torment. The proud shall
be full of all shame and confusion. The covetous shall be in miserable want.
One hour of pain there shall be more sharp, then a hundred years of most
hard penance here. There is no rest there, nor comfort for the damned. Job. 40.
Here yet sometimes our labors cease, and we enjoy the comfort of our
friends. Be now solicitous and sorrowful for thy sins; that in the day of
judgment thou may be secure in the copany of the blessed souls. For then
shall the just stand in great constancy, Sap. 5.
against those that afflicted and oppressed them. Then shall he stand to judge,
who now does humbly submit himself to the judgment of men. Then shall the
poor and humble have great confidence and the proud shall be compassed about
on all sides with fear.

5. Then will it appear, that he was wise in this world, who had here learned
to be as a fool and despised for Christ. Then shall afflicti on patiently
suffered delight us, and iniquity shall stop her mouth. Then shall the devout
rejoice, and the irreligious mourn. Then shall the chasticed flesh more
flourish, Ps. 10^.
then if it had been always nourished in delights. Then shall the poor garment
shine, 2. Cor 4.
and the precious robes appear contemptible. Then shall the mean cottage be
more commended, then the sumptuous palace. Then will constant patience more
avail us, then all earthly power. Then will simple obedience be more esteemed,
(...). 25.
then all worldly wisdom.

6. Then shall a good and pure conscience yield us more comfort, then the
profound learning of Philosophy Then shall the contempt of riches weigh more
then all the worldlings treasures. Then will thou be more comforted that thou
have prayed devoutly, then that thou have fared daintily. Then will thou be
more joyful that thou have observed silence, then that thou have talked much.
Then will good works appear of much more esteem, the^ fair words. Then a
strict life and hard penance will be more pleasing, then all earthly delights.
Accustom thy self now to suffer a little, that thou may then be delivered
from more grievous pains. Prove here first what thou can endure hereafter.
If now thou can bear so little, how will thou be able to endure everlasting
torments? If now a little suffering make thee so impatient, what will hell fire
do hereafter? Assure thy self, thou can not have two Paradises. It is
impossible for thee to enjoy delights here in this world, and reign hereafter
with Christ in heaven.

7. If thou had hitherto lived always in honors and delights; Luc. 12.
what would it avail thee, if thou should presently die? All is vanity but
to love God, Eccles. 1.
and only to serve him. And he that loves God with his whole heart, needs to
fear neither death, punishment, judgment, nor hell: Romans 8.
for perfect love gives secure access to God. But he that delights always
in sin, what wonder though he always fear death, and be terrified with the
thought of Judgment. Yet it is good, that if love be not of force to withhould
thee from sin, that at least the fear of hell may restrain thee. And he
that lays aside the fear of God, can never continue long in good state, but
falls quickly into the snares of the devil.

CHAP. XXV. Of the seruent amendment of our whole life.
BE watchful and diligent in the service of God, 2. Tim. 4.
and often think with thy self wherefore thou came, and why thou did leave
the world. Was it not that thou might hue to God, and become a spiritual
man? Go on therefore with courage: Matt. 5.
thou shall shortly receive the reward of thy labors, Apoc. 21.
and there shall be no more fear nor sorrow in the confines of thy habitation.
Thou must labor here a while: Eccles. 51.
thou shall afterward have great rest; yea everlasting joy. Apoc 21. and 22.
If thou continuest faithful and diligent in serving of God, Matt. 25.
do not doubt but God will be faithful and liberal in giving thee reward.
Thou ought to have a good hope of getting the victory, Romans 5.
but thou must not make thy self assured thereof, least thou wax negligent, or
be puffed up with pride.

2. When one that was in great anxiety of mind, often wavering between fear
and hope, did once, being oppressed with grief, prostrate himself in a Church
in prayer before an Altar, and said within himself: O, if I knew that I should
yet persevere! He presently heard as it were a voice from God, which said: What
if thou did know it, what would thou do? Do now what thou would do
then, and thou shall be secure. And being herewith comforted, and strengthened
in mind, he committed himself wholly to the will of God, and that noisome
anxiety ceased, neither had he any mind to search curiously any further, to
know what should befall him; but rather labored to understand what was the
perfect, and acceptable will of God, Romans 12.
for the beginning and acco^plishing of every good work.

3. Hope in our Lord, Psalm. 36.
and do good, says the Prophet, and inhabit the land, and thou shall be fed in
the riches thereof. One thing there is that draws many back from that
spiritual good, and the diligent amendment of their lives: the horror of the
difficulty, and the labor of the combat. But they above others profit most in
virtue, that endeavor most to overcome those things, which are grievous, and
contrary unto them. For there a man profits more, and deserves greater
grace, where he more ouercometh and mortifieth himself in spirit.

4. But all men have not alike to overcome and mortify: yet he that is zealous
and diligent, though he have more passions, shall profit more in virtue, then
another that is of a more temperate disposition, if he be less fervent in the
pursuit of virtue. Two things chiefly help to our amendment, to wit, to
withdraw our selves violently from that to which nature is viciously inclined;
and to labor earnestly for that virtue, which we most want. Be careful also to
avoid with great diligence, those things in thy self, which do most displease
thee in others.

5. Gather some profit to thy soul out of every occasion, and whersoeuer thou
be: so as if thou see or hear any good, stir up thy self to the imitation
thereof. But if thou see any thing worthy of reproof, beware thou do not the
same. And if at any time thou have done it, labor quickly to amend it. As
thine eye observes others, so art thou also noted again by others. O, how
sweet and comfortable a thing it is, to see the servants of Christ fervent and
devout, endued with virtuous and decent manners! And on the contrary, how
pitiful and grievous a thing it is, to see them that live in a dissolute and
disordered sort, not applying themselves to that, for which they were called!
O, how great damage and great danger it is, to neglect the good purposes of
their vocation, and to busy themselves in that which appertains not unto
them, Eccles. 3.
nor is committed to their care!

6. Be mindful of the purpose thou have made, and have always before the eyes
of thy soul, the picture of thy Savior crucified. Thou have good cause to be
ashamed, looking upon the life of Christ, seeing thou have so slackly
endeavored to conform thy self unto him, though thou have walked a long time
in the way of the service of God. A religious person that exercises himself
seriously, and devoutly in the most holy life, and passion of our Lord, shall
there abundantly find whatsoever is necessary, and profitable for him; neither
shall he need to seek any thing elsewhere, Gal. 2. and 6.
but only in Jesus. O, if Jesus crucified would come into our hearts, how
quickly and fully should we be instructed in all truth!

7. A fervent religious person takes, and bears all well that is commanded
him: but he that is negligent and cold, has tribulation upon tribulation, and
on all sides is afflicted: for he is void of inward consolation, and is
forbidden to seck external comforts. A religious person that lives not
according to discipline, is in great danger of the ruin of his soul. He that
seeks liberty and ease, shall ever live in disquiet: for one thing or other
will always displease him.

8. How do so many other religious persons, who live under the strict rule of
Monastical discipline? They seldom go abroad, they live retiredly, they feed
meanly, they are clothed coursely, they labor much, speak little, watch long,
rise early, spend much time in prayer, read often, and keep themselves in all
kind of discipline. Consider the Carthusians, Cistercians, and the Religious
men and women of diverse Orders, how they rise every night to sing praises unto
God. And how unseemly then it is for thee to be slothful in so holy a work,
when as so great multitudes of religious persons do begin to glorify God.

9. O, that we had nothing else to do, but always with our mouth, and whole
heart to praise our Lord God! O, that thou might never have need to eat, nor
drink, nor sleep, but might always praise God, and only employ thy self
in the exercises of spirit: thou should then be much more happy, then now
thou art, when for so many necessities, thou art constrained to serve thy body.
Would God these necessities were not at all, but only the spiritual refections
of the soul, which (alas) we taste of too seldom.

10. When a man comes to that estate, that he seeks no comfort of any
creature, then does he begin to take perfect contentment and delight in God.
Then shall he be contented with whatsoever does befall him in this world. Then
shall he neither rejoice in great matters, Romans 11.
nor be sorrowful for small, but with great integrity and confidence commit
himself to God; who shall be unto him all in all: to whom nothing does perish,
nor die, but all things do live unto him, and serve him at a beck without delay.

11. Remember always the end, Eccles. 7.
and how that time lost never returns. Without care and diligence thou shall
never get virtues. If thou beginnest to wax could, Apoc. 3.
it will be evil with thee: but if thou give thy self to fervor of spirit;
thou shall find much peace, and feel less labor, through the assistance of
Gods grace, and love of virtue. The fervent and diligent man is ready, and
prepared for all things. Eccls. 19.
It is harder to resist vices and passions, then to toil in bodily labors. He
that auoideth not small faults, by little and little falls into greater. Thou will always rejoice in the evening, if thou spend the day profitably. Be
watchful over thy self, stir up thy self, warn thy self, and whatsoever
becomes of others, neglect not thy self. The greater violence thou use
against thy self, the more thou shall profit.

The end of the first Book.
OF THE FOLLOVVING OF CHRIST. THE SECOND BOOK.
CHAP. I. Of spiritual conversation.
THE kingdom of God is within you, Luc 7.
says our Lord. Joel. 2.
Turn thee with thy whole heart unto our Lord, and forsake this miserable
world, and thy soul shall find rest. Learn to despise exterior things, Romans
19.
and to give thy self to the interior; and thou shall perceive the kingdom of
God to come into thee For the king dome of God is peace, and joy in the holy
Ghost, which is not given to the wicked. Christ will come unto thee, Psalm. 44.
and show thee his divine comfort, if thou prepare for him a worthy mansion
within thee. All his glory and beauty is within, and there he pleases
himself. The inward man he often visits, and has with him sweet discourses,
pleasant comfort, much peace, wonderful familiarity.

2. O faithful soul, make ready thy heart for this bridegroom, that he may
vouchsafe to come unto thee, and dwell within thee. For he says: If any love
me, he will keep my word, and we will come unto him, Joan. 14.
and will make our abode with him Give therefore unto Christ a place in thy
heart, and deny entrance to all others. When thou have Christ, thou art rich,
and he will suffice thee He will be thy faithful and provident helper in all
things, so as thou shall not need to trust in men. For men are soon changed,
and quickly decay; but Christ remains for ever, Joan. 12.
and stands firmly unto the end.

3. There is little trust to be put in a frail and mortal man, Hier. 17.
though he be profitable and dear unto thee: neither ought thou much to be
grieved, if sometimes he cross, and contradict thee. They that to day take thy
part, to morrow may be against thee; and so on the contrary, they often turn
like unto the wind. Put all thy trust in God, and fear and love him: 1. Pet.
5. Heb. 13.
He will answer for thee, and do in all things what is best. Thou have not
here a dwelling City: and whersoeuer thou be, thou art a stranger and
pilgrim: neither shall thou ever have rest, unless thou be perfectly united
unto Christ.

4. Why do thou linger and make delays here, Phil. 3.
since this is not the place of thy rest? In heaven ought to be thy dwelling,
Sap. 5.
and all earthly things are to be regarded as it were in the way. All things
pass away, and thou together with them. Beware thou cleave not unto them,
least thou be enthralled; and so do perish. Let thy thought be on the
highest, and thy prayer directed unto Christ without ceasing. If thou can not
contemplate high and heavenly things, rest thy self in the passion of Christ,
and dwell willingly in the wounds of his sacred body. For if thou fly devoutly
unto his holy wounds, and to the precious marks of his passion, thou shall
feel great comfort in tribulation: neither will thou much care for being
despised of men, and wilt easily bear the words of slanderous tongues

5. Christ was also in the world despised, and in great necessity: Matt.
1.12.5.26. and Joan. 15.
forsaken by his acquaintance, and friends in the midst of slanders. Christ
would suffer, and be contemned, and dare thou complain? Christ had
adversaries and backbiters; and will thou have all men thy friends and
benefactours? For what shall thy patience be crowned, 2. Tim. 21.
if no adversity happen unto thee? If thou will suffer no adversity, how will thou be the friend of Christ? Suffer with Christ, and for Christ, if thou
desire to reign with Christ.

6. If thou had once perfectly entered into the heart of Jesus, and tasted a
little of his burning love: then would thou not weigh thy own commodity or
discommodity, but would rather rejoice at flaunders, when they should chance
to be cast upon thee: for the love of Jesus makes a man to despise himself. A
lover of Jesus, and of truth, and a true spiritual person, and free from
inordinate affections, can freely turn himself unto God, and lift himself
above himself in spirit, and with great joy of his soul rest in God.

7. He that judges of all things as they are, Esa. 54.
and not as they are said, and esteemed to be, is truly wise, and taught rather
by God then men. He that can live spiritually, and make small reckoning of
outward things: neither requires places, nor attends times for performing of
devout exercises. A spiritual man quickly recollecteth himself: because he
never yields over himself wholly to outward things. He is not hindered by
outward labor or business, which may be necessary for the time: but as things
fall out, so he frames himself unto them. He that has well ordered and
disposed all things within, cares little for the vain inventions, and
perverse inclinations of men. So much is a man hindered and distracted, how much
he draws matters unto himself.

8. If all went well with thee, and thou hadest thy heart well purged, all
things would fall out to thy good and profit. But many things displease, and
often trouble thee, Romans 5. and 1. Cor. 4.
because thou art not yet perfectly dead unto thy self, nor free from the
affection of earthly things. Nothing so defiles and intangleth the heart of
man, as the impure love to creatures. If thou refuse outward comfort; thou will
be able to contemplate the things of heaven, and often receive internal joy.

CHAP. II. Of humble submission.
RESPECT not much who is with thee, or who is against thee. Endeavor, and take
care, that God may be for thee in every thing thou do. Have a good
conscience, Ps. 27.
and God will defend thee. For whom God will help, no malice of man can hurt.
If thou can hold thy peace and suffer, without doubt thou shall see that our
Lord will help thee. He knows the time, and manner how to deliver thee, and
therefore thou ought to resign thy self unto him. It belongs to God to
help, and to deliver from all shame. Oftentimes it is very profitable, for the
better keeping of humility, that others know and reprehend our faults.

2. When a man humbles himself for his faults, then he easily pacifieth
others, and quickly satisfies those that are offended with him. God protecteth
and delivers the humble: he loves and comfort the humble: unto the humble
man he inclines himself: unto the humble he gives great grace; and after his
humiliation, he raises him unto glory. Matt. 11.
Unto the humble he reuealeth his secrets, and sweetly draws and inuiteth him
unto himself. The humble when he has received confusion, is in peace, for that
he rests in God, and relieth not on the world. Do not think that thou have
profited any thing, unless thou esteem thy self inferior to all.

CHAP. III. Of a good and peaceable man.
FIRST keep thy self in peace, and then may thou pacify others. A peaceable
man does more good, then he that is well learned. A passionate man turns good
into evil, and easily belieueth the worst. A good peaceable man turns all
things into good. 1. Cor. 15.
He that is well in peace, is not suspicious of any. But he that is
discontented, and troubled, is tossed with diverse suspicions: he is nether
quiet himself, nor suffers others to be quiet. He often speaks that which
he ought not to speak; and omitteth that which were more expedient for him to
do. Matt. 7.
He co^sidereth what others are bound to do: and neglects that which he is
bound to himself. First therefore have a careful zeal over thy self, Act. 1.
and then thou may justly show thy self zealous of thy neighbors good.

2. Thou know well how to excuse and color thine own deeds, and thou will
not receive the excuses of others. Gal. 6.
It were more meet, that thou did accuse thy self, and excusedst thy
brother. 1. Cor. 13.
If thou will be borne withal, bear also with another. Behold how far off
thou art as yet from true charity and humility, which knows not how to be
angry with any, or to be moved with indignation, but only against himself. It
is no great matter to converse with the good, and those that are of a gentle
disposition, (...).
for that is naturally pleasing to all, and every one willingly enjoys peace,
and loves those best that agree with him. But to be able to live peaceably
with the unquiet, and perverse minds, or with the disorderly, or such as
contradict us, is a great grace, and very commendable.

3. Some there are, that keep themselves in peace, and are in peace also with
others. And there are some, that neither are in peace themselves, nor suffer
others to be in peace: they are troublesome to others, but always more
troublesome to themselves. And others there are that keep themselves in peace,
and labor to bring others unto peace. Our whole peace in this miserable life,
consists rather in humble suffering, then in not feeling adversities. He that
can best tell how to suffer, will best keep himself in peace. He is a
conqueror of himself, a Lord of the world, friend of Christ, and heir of
heaven.

CHAP. IIII. Of a pure mind and upright intention.
WITH two wings man is lifted up from earthly vanities, that is, with
simplicity, and purity. Simplicity ought to be in our intention. Purity in our
affection. Simplicity fixes the eyes of the soul in God. Purity apprehends
and tastes his sweetness. No good action will hinder thee, if thou be inwardly
free from inordinate affection. If thou intend and seek nothing else but the
will of God, and the profit of thy neighbor, thou shall enjoy internal
liberty. If thy heart were sincere and upright, then every creature would be
unto thee a looking-glass of life, and a book of holy doctrine. There is no
creature so little and abject, that represents not the goodness of God.

2. If in thine own heart thou were good and pure, Romans 1. Prou. 3.
then thou would be able to see and understand all things without any
impediment. A pure heart penetrateth heaven, and pierces the depth of hell. Ps.
118.
Such as every one is inwardly: so he judges outwardly. If there be joy in the
world, surely a man of a pure heart possesses it. And if there be any where
tribulation and affliction, an evil conscience feels it. As iron put into the
fire leeseth his rust, and becomes bright like fire: so he that wholly turning
himself unto God, becomes fervent, and is changed into a new man.

3. When one begins to wax cold: then he is afraid of a small labor, and
willingly receaueth external comfort. But when he once begins to overcome
himself perfectly, and to walk manfully in the way of God: then he esteems
those things to be light, which before seemed grievous unto him.

CHAP. V. Of the consideration of ones self.
WE cannot trust much to our selves, for that grace oftentimes and
understanding is wanting. There is but little light in us, and that which we
have, we quickly loose by our negligence. And oftentimes we do not perceive our
own inward blindness. We often do evil, Matt. 7.
and excuse it worse. We are sometimes moved with passion, and we think it to
be zeal. We reprehend small things in others, and pass over greater matters
in our selves. We quickly feel, and weigh what we suffer at the hands of
others: but we mind not what others suffer from us. He that does well and
deeply consider his own works, will find little cause to judge hardly of
another.

2. A spiritual man prefers the care of himself, Matt. 16.
before all other cares. And he that diligently attends unto himself, does
seldom speak much of others. Thou will never be recollected and devout,
unless thou pass over other men's matters with silence, and look especially
to thy self. 1. Cor. 4.
If thou attend wholly unto God and thy self, thou will be little moved with
whatsoever thou see abroad. Gal. 1.
Where art thou, when thou art not with thy self? And when thou have run
over all, what have thou profited, if thou do neglect thy self? If thou
desire peace of mind and true union, thou must esteem little of all earthly
things, and look only to thy self.

3. Thou shall therefore profit much, if thou keep thy self free from all
temporal cares. Thou shall hinder thy self greatly, if thou esteem any thing
of this world. Let nothing be great unto thee, nothing high, nothing grateful,
nothing acceptable, but only God himself purely, or that which is for God.
Esteem all comfort vain which thou receauest from any creature. Eccles. 1.
A soul that loves God, despises all things that be inferior unto God, God
alone is everlasting, and of infinite greatness, filling all creatures: the
comfort of the soul, and the true joy of the heart.

CHAP. VI. Of the comfort of a good Conscience.
THE glory of a good man, 2. Cor. 1.
is the testimony of a good conscience. Have a good conscience, and thou shall
ever have joy. A good conscience is able to bear much, and is cheerful in
adversities. An evil conscience is always fearful and unquiet. Thou shall
rest sweetly, if thy heart does not reprehend thee. Sap. 17.
Do thou never rejoice, but when thou have done well. Sinners have never true
mirth, nor feel inward peace: because there is no peace to the impious, says
our Lord. And if they should say: We are in peace, no evil shall fall upon us,
Luc. 12. Esa. 27.
and who shall dare to hurt us? believe them not: for upon a sudden will
arise the wrath of God, and their deeds shall be turned into nothing, and their
conceits shall perish.

2. To glory in tribulation is no hard thing for him that loves. Romans 8.
For to glory so, is to glory in the Cross of our Lord. That glory is short,
Gal. 6.
which is given and received from men. Sorrow always accompanies the glory of
the world. 2. Cor. 1.
The glory of the good is in their consciences, and not in the tongues of men.
The gladness of the just is of God, and in God: and their joy is of the truth.
He that desires true and everlasting glory, cares not for that which passes
away with time. And he that seeks temporal glory, or contemns it not from
his heart, shows himself but little to esteem of the glory of heaven. He
enjoys great tranquillity and peace of mind, that cares neither for the
praises, nor dispraises of men.

3. He will easily be content and pacified, whose conscience is pure. He is not
the more holy, though thou commend him: nor the more abject though thou
dispraise him. What thou art, that thou art: neither can thou be truly said
to be greater, then what thou art in the sight of God. If thou consider what
thou art within thee, thou will not care what men say of thee. 1. Reg. 16.
Man sees in the face, but God looks into the heart. Man considers the
deeds, but God weighs the intentions. To do always well, and to esteem
little of himself, is a token of an humble mind. To refuse to be comforted by
any creature, is a sign of great purity, and inward confidence.

4. He that seeks no outward witness for himself, does show that he has
wholly committed himself unto God. For not he that commends himself, 2. Cor
10.
the same is approved (says S. Paul) but whom God commends. To walk
inwardly with God, and not to be possessed with any outward affection, is the
state of an inward and spiritual man.

CHAP. VII. Of the love of JESUS above all things.
BLESSED is he that understands what it is to love Jesus: Ps. 116.
and to despise himself for Jesus. Thou ought to leave thy beloved, Deuteronomy. 6.
for thy beloved; for that Jesus will be beloved alone above all things. Matt.
22^
The love of things created is deceiptfull and unconstant: the love of Jesus is
faithful and constant. He that cleaves unto creaturs shall fall with that
which is subject to fall. He that imbraceth Jesus shall stand firmly for ever.
Love him, and keep him for thy friend, who when all go away, will not forsake
thee, nor suffer thee to perish in the end. Thou must once be left of men
whether thou will or no.

2. Live and dye with Jesus; and commit thy self unto his trust, who when all
fail, can alone help thee. Thy beloved is of that nature, that he will none of
that which appertains to others: but will have thy heart alone, and sit like a
King in his own throne If thou could purge thy self perfectly of all
creatures, Jesus would willingly dwell with thee. Whatsoever thou put in
men, out of Jesus, is all no better then lost. Trust not, nor rely upon a reed
full of wind: for that all flesh is as hay, and all the glory thereof shall
wither away as the flower of the field. Esa. 4.


3. Thou shall quickly be deceived, if thou look only to the outward show of
men. And if in them thou seek thy comfort and profit: thou shall often feel
loss. If thou seek Jesus in all things, thou shall surely find Jesus. But
if thou seek thy self, thou shall also find thy self, but to thy own
harm. For man does more hurt himself, if he seek not Jesus, then the whole
world, and all his adversaries could annoy him.

CHAP. VIII. Of familiar conversation with JESUS.
WHEN Jesus is present, all is well, and nothing seems difficult: but when
Jesus is absent, every thing is hard. When Jesus speaks not inwardly unto us,
our comfort is nothing worth: but if Jesus speak but one word, we feel much
consolation. Joan. 11.
Did not Mary Magdalen presently rise from the place where she wept, when
Martha said unto her: Thy master is here, and calls thee. Happy is the
hour when Jesus calls from tears to spiritual joy. How dry and hard art
thou without Jesus? How foolish and vain, if thou desire any thing out of
Jesus? Matt. 16.
Is not this a greater loss, then if thou should loose the whole world?

2. What can the world profit thee without Jesus? To be without Jesus is a
grievous hell: and to be with Jesus is a sweet Paradise. If Jesus be with
thee, Romans 8.
no enemy can hurt thee. He that finds Jesus, finds a good treasure: Matt.
13.
yea a good above all goods. And he that leeseth Jesus leeseth too much, and
more then the whole world. He is most poor that lives without Jesus: Luc. 12.
and he most rich that is well with Jesus.

3. It is a great skill to know how to converse with Jesus, Prou. 8.
and a great wisdom to know how to keep Jesus. Be humble, and peaceable, and
Jesus will be with thee. Be devout and quiet, and Jesus will stay with thee.
Thou may drive away Jesus and loose his grace, if thou give thy self to
outward things. And if thou should drive him from thee, and leese him, unto
whom will thou fly, and what friend will thou then seek? Without a friend thou
can not well live: and if Jesus be not above all a friend unto thee; thou
shall be too too sorrowful and desolate. Thou do therefore foolishly, if
thou do trust or rejoice in any other. It is better for thee to have all the
world against thee, Gal. 6.
then Jesus offended with thee. Amongst all things therefore that be dear unto
thee, let Jesus alone be thy chiefest beloved.

4. Love all for Jesus, but Jesus for himself. Jesus Christ alone is
especially to be beloved; who alone is found to be good, and faithful above
all friends. For him, and in him, Matt. 5.
let as well friends as foes be dear unto thee: and all these are to be prayed
for, Luc. 6.
that all may know and love him. Never desire to be singularly commended or
beloved, for that appertains only unto God, who has none like unto himself.
Neither do thou desire that the heart of any should be set on thee; nor do thou
set thy heart on the love of any: but let Jesus be in thee, and in every
virtuous and good man.

5. Be pure and free within, and entangle not thy heart with any creature. Thou
ought to be as it were naked, and carry a pure heart to God, if thou will
consider, and prove, and see how sweet our Lord is. And truly unless thou be
prevented, and drawn by his grace, thou shall never attain to that happiness,
to forsake and cast away all, that thou alone may be united to him alone. For
when the grace of God comes unto a man, then he is strong, and nothing is
hard unto him. And when it goes away, he is poor and weak, and as it were
left unto the will of whomsoever will afflict him. In this thou ought not to
be dejected, nor despair, but to resign thy self with all indifferency unto
the will of God, and to bear all things that befall thee for the glory of
Christ: for after winter follows summer: after night comes day, and after a
tempest, fair weather.

CHAP. IX. Of the want of all comfort.
IT is no great matter to despise humane comfort, when we have divine. It is
much and very much, to be able to want both humane and divine comfort: Phil. 2.
and for the honor and glory of God, to be willing to endure desolation of
heart; and to seek himself in nothing, nor to regard his own merit. What
great matter is it, if thou be cheerful and devout at the coming of heavenly
grace? This hour is wished for of all men. He rides easily whom the grace of
God carries. And what marvel, if he feel not his burden who is borne up by
the Almighty, and led by the greatest guide?

2. We are always willing to have something for our comfort: and a man does
hardly put off, and forsake himself. The holy martyr S. Laurence overcame the
world with his Prelate: because he despised whatsoever seemed delightsome in
the world: and for the love of Christ the patiently suffered the high Priest of
God S. Syxtus to be taken from him, whom he most loved. He overcame therefore
the love of man by the love of the Creator; and he rather chose the divine
pleasure, then humane comfort. See thou also learn to forsake some necessary
thing, and a beloved friend for the love of God. Be not grieved when thou art
forsaken by a friend, knowing that we all at length must be separated one from
another.

3. A man must fight long, and with a constant mind, before he get the victory,
and be able to place his whole heart in God. When a man confideth in himself,
he easily slideth unto humane comforts. But a true lover of Christ, and a
diligent follower of virtue, gives not himself to such solace, nor seeks
sensible sweetness: but rather forcible exercises, and to sustain hard labors
for Christ.

4. When therefore spiritual comfort is given thee from God, receive it
thankefully: but know that it is the gift of God, not any desert of thine. Be
not puffed up, joy not too much, neither do thou presume vainly: but be rather
the more humble for that grace, and more wary and fearful in all thy actions:
for that hour will pass away and temptation will succeed. When consolation is
taken from thee, despair not presently; but with humility and patience attend
the heavenly visitation: for God is able again to give thee greater
consolation. This is not new nor strange unto them, that have experience in the
way of God: for in the great Saints and ancient Prophets, there was oftentimes
such kind of alteration.

5. For which cause one when he had grace, said: Psalm. 29.
I said in my plenty, I will not be moved everlastingly. But when this was gone
from him, he adds what he found in himself, saying: Thou turnedst thy face
from me, and I became troubled. Ibid.
Yet does he not despair in the midst of these changes, but more earnestly
prays unto our Lord, and says: Ibid.
Unto thee (o Lord) I will cry, and I will pray unto my God. Lastly he
receaueth the fruit of his prayer, and witnesses that he was heard, saying:
Our Lord has heard me, Ibid.
and taken pity on me: our Lord is become my helper. But wherein? Thou have
turned (says he) my sorrow into joy, Ibid.
and thou have compassed me about with gladness. If great Saints have been so
dealt withal, we that are poor and weak ought not to despair, if we be
sometimes fervent, and sometimes cold: Joan. 3.
for the spirit comes and goes, according to the good pleasure of his will
For which cause blessed Job says: Job. 7.
Thou visitest him early in the morning, and suddenly thou prouest him.

6. Whereupon therefore can I hope, or wherein ought I to trust, but in the great
mercy of God alone, and in the only hope of heavenly grace? For whether I enjoy
the presence of good men, or devout brethren, or faithful friends, or holy
books, or learned treatises, or sweet songs and hymns: all these help little,
and have little savor, when grace forsakes me, and I remain left in my own
poverty. At such a time there is no better remedy then patience, and the
resigning of my self unto the will God. Luc. 9.


7. I never found any so religious and devout, that has not had sometimes a
withdrawing of grace, or felt not a decrease of fervor. There was never Saint
so highly rapt, and illuminated, who first or last was not tempted. For he is
not worthy of the high contemplation of God, who has not been exercised with
some tribulation for Gods sake. For temptation going before, is wont to be a
sign of ensuing comfort. And unto those that are proved by temptations,
heavenly comfort is promised. He that shall overcome, Apoc. 21.
says he, I will give him to eat of the wood of life.

8. But divine comfort is given, that a man may be stronger to bear
adversities. There follows also temptation, least we should wax proud of that
good. The devil sleeps not, 1. Pet. 5.
neither is our flesh as yet dead: therefore cease not to prepare thy self to
the battle: for on thy right hand, and on thy left are enemies that never
rest.

CHAP. X. Of thankfulness for the Grace of God.
WHY seek thou rest, since thou art borne to labor? Dispose thy self to
patience, Job. 3.
rather then to comforts: and to the bearing of the Cross, rather then to
gladness. Luc. 14.
What secular person is there, that would not willingly receive spiritual joy
and comfort, if he could always have it? Spiritual comforts exced all the
delights of the world, and all the pleasures of the flesh. All worldly delights
are either vain, or unclean: but spiritual delights are only pleasant and
honest, produced by virtues, and infused by God into pure hearts. But no men can
always enjoy these divine comforts, according to his desire: for the time of
temptation it not long away.

2. False freedom of mind, and great trust of our selves, is very contrary to
heavenly visitation. God does well in giving grace: but man does evil in not
returning it again wholly unto God, with thanksgiving. And therefore the gifts
of grace cannot flow in us, Eccles. 1.
because we are ungrateful to the giver: and return them not wholly to the
headfountaine. For grace is ever due to him that is thankful: and from the
proud shall be taken that which is wont to be given to the humble.

3. I desire not that consolation that takes from me compunction: nor that
contemplation which breeds a haughty mind. For all that is high, is not holy:
nor all that is sweet, good: nor every desire, pure: nor every thing that is
dear unto us, is grateful to God. I do willingly accept of that grace, whereby
I may ever become more humble and fearful, and be made more ready and able to
forsake my self. He that is taught by the gift of grace, and by the scourge of
the withdrawing thereof; will not dare to attribute any good to himself: but
will rather acknowledge himself poor, and naked. Matt. 22.
Give unto God that which is Gods; and ascribe unto thy self that which is
thine own: that is, give thanks unto God for his grace, and acknowledge that
nothing is to be attributed to thee, but only sin, and the punishment due
thereunto.

4. Content thy self, and desire always the meanest and lowest things, and
the highest shall be given thee: for the highest stand not without the lowest.
The highest Saints before God, Luc. 14.
are the least in their own judgments. And how much the more glorious, so much
the humbler within themselves. Those that are full of truth, and heavenly
glory, are not desirous of the vain glory of this world. Those that are
firmly settled and grounded in God, can no way be proud. And they that ascribe
all unto God, what good soever they have received, Joan. 5.
seek not glory one of another: but would have that glory which is from God
alone: and desire above all things to praise God in himself, and in all the
Saints, and always tend unto the same.

5. Be therefore grateful for the least gift, and thou shall be made worthy to
receive greater. Let the least be unto thee also as the greatest: and the most
contemptible as an especial gift. If thou consider the worth of the giver, no
gift will seem little, or of mean esteem. For it is not little that is given
by the sovereign Majesty of God. Yea if he should give punishment and stripes,
it ought to be grateful, for that he does it always for our salvation,
whatsoever he permits to happen unto us. He that desires to keep the grace
of God, let him be thankful for the grace given, and patient for the taking
away thereof. Let him pray that it may return. Let him be wary and humble,
least he leese it.

CHAP. XI. How few the lovers of the Cross of Christ are.
JESUS has now many lovers of his heavenly kingdom, but few bearers of his
Cross. He has many desirous of comfort, but few of tribulation. He finds
many companions of his table, but few of his abstinence. All desire to rejoice
with him, few will suffer any thing for him, or with him. Many follow Jesus
unto the breaking of bread: but few to the drinking of the Chalice of his
passion. Many reverence his miracles, Luc. 9.22.
few follow the ignominy of his Cross. Many love Jesus, as long as adversities
happen not. Many praise and bless him, as long as they receive any comfort
from him. But if Jesus hide himself, and leave them but a while, they fall
either into complaint, or into too much deiection of mind.

2. But they that love Jesus for Jesus, and not for some comfort of their own,
bless him in all tribulation and anguish of heart, as well as in the greatest
comfort. And although he should never give them comfort, they notwithstanding
would ever praise him, and always give him thanks.

3. O how powerful is the pure love of Jesus, Phil. 2.
which is mixed with no self-love nor proper interest! Are they not all to be
called hirelings that ever seek comforts? Do they not show themselves to be
rather lovers of themselves, then of Christ, that always think of their
commodity and gain? Where may one be found that will serve God, without
looking for reward?

4. It is hard to find any one so spiritual, that is free from the love of all
earthly things. For where is any that is indeed poor in spirit, and free from
all affection of creatures? Far hence, Prou. 31.
and from the end of the world is his price. If a man should give all his
wealth, yet is it nothing. And if he should do great penance, yet is it
little. And if he should attain to all knowledge, he is yet far off. And if he
should have great virtue, and very fervent devotion, yet there is much wanting:
to wit, one thing which is most necessary for him. Matt. 16.
What is that? That leaving all, he forsake himself, and go perfectly from
himself, and retain nothing of self-love. And when he has done all that he
knows to be done, let him think that he has done nothing.

5. Let him not weigh that much which might be much esteemed, but according to
truth, let him affirm himself to be an unprofitable servant, as our Savior
has said: When you shall have done al things that are commanded you, say: We
are unprofitable servants. Luc. 17.
Then may he be truly poor in spirit and naked, and say with the Prophet:
Psalm. 24.
I am alone and poor: yet no man richer, no man more powerful, no man more
free the^ he that can leave himself and all things, and put himself in the
meanest and lowest place.

CHAP. XII. Of the high way of the holy Cross.
UNTO many seems hard this speech: Deny thy self, take up thy Cross, Matt.
16.
and follow Jesus. But it will be much harder to hear that last word: Get ye
away from me, Matt. 15.
ye cursed into everlasting fire. For they that now willingly hear and follow
the word of the Cross, shall not then fear to hear the sentence of
everlasting damnation. This sign of the Cross shall be in heaven, when our
Lord shall come to judgment. Then all the servants of the Cross, who in their
life time conformed themselves unto Christ crucified, shall draw near unto our
Lord with great confidence.

2. Why therefore fear thou to take up the Cross, which leads thee to a
kingdom? In the Cross is health, in the Cross is life, in the Cross is
protection against our enemies, in the Cross is infusion of heavenly sweetness,
in the Cross is strength of mind, in the Cross is joy of spirit, in the
Cross is the height of virtue, in the Cross is the perfection of sanctity.
There is nor health of the soul, nor hope of everlasting life but in the
Cross. Take up therefore thy Cross and follow Jesus, and thou shall go into
life everlasting. Luc. 14.
He is gone before, bearing his Cross, and is dead for thee on the Cross;
Joan. 19.
that thou may also bear thy Cross, and desire to die on the Cross, with
him. For if thou dyest with him, thou shall also live with him. And if thou be
his companion in pain, 2. Cor. 1.
thou shall be partaker with him also in glory.

3. Behold in the Cross al does consist, and all lies in ending our life
upon it: for there is no other way unto life, and unto true inward peace, but
the way of the Holy Cross, and of daily mortification. Go where thou will,
seek whatsoever thou will: thou shall not find a higher way above, nor a safer
way below, then the way of the holy Cross. Dispose and order all things
according to thy will, and judgment: yet thou shall ever find, that of
necessity thou must suffer somewhat, either willingly or against thy will, so
as thou shall never fully avoid the Cross. For either thou shall feel pain
in thy body, or in thy soul thou shall suffer tribulation of spirit.

4. Sometimes thou shall be forsaken of God, sometimes thou shall be troubled by
thy neighbors, and which is more, oftentimes thou shall be irksome to thy
self: neither can thou be delivered or eased by any remedy or comfort: but
so long as pleases God, thou ought to bear it. For God will have thee
learn to suffer tribulation without comfort; and that thou submit thy self
wholly to him, and become more humble by tribulation. No man has so lively a
feeling of the passion of Christ, as he who has chanced to suffer the like.
The Cross therefore is always ready, and every where attends thee. Thou
can not escape it, whither soever thou flyest: for whersoeuer thou go,
thou carriest thy self with thee, and shall ever find thy self both above
and below, without and within: which way soever thou do turn thee, always
thou shall find the Cross: and every where of necessity thou must have
patience, if thou will have inward peace, and deserve an everlasting Crown.

5. If thou bear the Cross willingly, it will bear thee, and lead thee to
thy desired end: to wit, where there shall be an end of suffering, though here
there shall not. If thou bear it unwillingly, thou make for thy self a new
burden, and increasest thy load, and yet notwithstanding thou must bear it.
If thou cast away one Cross, without doubt thou shall find another, and that
perhaps a more heavy.

6. Think thou to escape that which no man could ever avoid? Which of the
Saints in the world was without Crosses, and tribulations? Verily Jesus Christ
our Lord was never one hour without pain of suffering, so long as he lived.
Christ (says he) ought to suffer, Luc. 24.
and rise again from death, and so to enter into his glory: and how do thou
seek any other way, then this high way, which is the way of the holy Cross?

7. The whole life of Christ was a Cross and Martyrdom: and do thou seek
rest and joy? Thou art deceived, thou art deceived, if thou seek any other
thing, then to suffer tribulations: for this whole mortal life is full of
miseries, Job. 7.
and environed on every side with Crosses. And how much the more one has
profited in spirit; so much the heavier Crosses he oftentimes finds: for the
love he bears to God increases the grief which he endures for his
banishment.

8. But yet this man, though so many ways afflicted, is not without the remedy
of spiritual consolation, for the great good which he perceaueth to grow unto
him by the bearing of his Cross. For whilst he willingly puts himself
under it, all the burden of tribulation is turned into the confidence of
divine comfort. And how much the more the flesh is wasted by affliction, 2.
Cor. 11. and 12.
so much the more is the spirit strengthened by inward grace. And sometimes he
is so comforted with the desire of tribulation, and adversity, for the love of
conforming himself to the Cross of Christ, that he would not wish at any time
to be without sorrow and tribulation: because he belieueth, that so much the
more grateful he shall be unto God, how much the more he can suffer for him.
This is not a work of humane virtue; but it is the grace of Christ, that can,
and does so much in frail flesh: that what naturally it always abhors and
flies, that, by fervor of spirit, it takes hold on and loves.

9. It is not according to man's inclination to bear the Cross, to love the
Cross, to chastise and subdue the body, to fly honors, to suffer contumelies
with a joyful heart, to despise himself, and to wish to be despised, to bear
all adversities, and domages and to desire no prosperity in this world. 2. Cor.
3.
If thou co^siderest thy self, thou shall be able to perform no such matter
of thy self. But if thou trustest in our Lord, strengh shall be given thee
from heaven, and the world and flesh shall be made subject to thy command.
Neither shall thou fear thy enemy the Devil, if thou be armed with faith,
and signed with the Cross of Christ.

10. Resolve therefore with thy self, like a good and faithful feruant of
Christ, to bear ma^fully the Cross of thy Lord, who was crucified for thy
love. Prepare thy self to bear many adversities and diverse kinds of troubles
in this miserable life: for so it will be with thee, whersoeuer thou be: and so
surely thou will find it, whersoeuer thou hide thy selse. So it must be, and
there is no remedy, or means to avoid tribulation and sorrow, but to bear
them. Matt. 20.
Drink of the chalice of our Lord willingly, if thou will be his friend, and
desire to have part with him. Leave the desire of co^fortes to God let him
do therein as shall best please him. Joan. 23.
Set thou thy heart upon the suffering of tribulations, and account them the
greatest comfortes: Romans 8.
for that the passions of this life are not condign to future glory, although
thou alone could suffer them all.

11. When thou shall come to this estate, Gal. 6.
that tribulation shall seem sweet, and pleasant unto thee for Christ: then
thou may think it is well with thee, for thou have found a Paradise upon
earth. As long as it is grievous unto thee to suffer, and that thou desire to
fly it; so long shall thou be ill at ease: and the tribulation thou flyest will
follow thee every where.

12. If thou setlest thy self to that thou ought, to wit, to suffer, and to
die to thy self, it will quickly be better with thee, and thou shall find
peace. Although thou should have been rapt even unto the third heaven with
Paul, 1. Cor. 12.
thou art not for this assured, that thou shall suffer no contradiction. I I
(says Jesus) will show him how great things he must suffer for my name. Act.
9.
It rests therefore, that thou suffer, if thou will love Jesus, and
perpetually serve him.

13. O, would to God, thou were worthy to suffer something for Jesus! how great
glory would it be unto thee, what joy to all the Saints of God, how great
edification also to thy neighbor! For all do commend patience, though few
desire to suffer. With great reason thou ought to be willing to suffer a
little for Christ; Ps. 43.
since many suffer far greater things for the love of the world.

14. Know for certain that thou ought to lead a dying life. And how much
the more every one dies to himself, so much the more does he begin to live to
God. No man is fit to attain unto heavenly things, unless he submit himself
to the bearing of adversities for Christ. Nothing is more grateful unto God,
nothing more wholesome to thee in this world, then to suffer willingly for
Christ. And if it were in thy choice, thou should rather wish to suffer
adversities for Christ, then to enjoy the delight of many comforts: because by
these means thou should be more like unto Christ, and more conformable to
all the Saints. For our merit, and the perfection of our estate consists not
in much sweetness and comfortes: but rather in suffering great afflictions and
tribulations.

15. If there had been any better thing, and more profitable to the health of
man then suffering, surely Christ would have showed it by word, and example.
But he plainly exhorted all the disciples that followed him, Luc. 9.
and all that desire to follow him, to the bearing of the Cross, and says: If
any man will come after me, let him deny himself and take up his Cross, and
follow me. So as when we have read and searched all, Act. 14.
let this be the last conclusion: That by many tribulations we must enter into
the Kingdom of God.

The end of the second Book.
OF THE FOLLOVVING OF CHRIST. THE THIRD BOOK.
CHAP. I. Of the inward speech of Christ unto a saithfull soul.
I Will hear what our Lord God will speak in me. Psalm. 84.
Blessed is the soul that hears our Lord speaking in her: 1. Reg. 3.
and receaueth from his mouth the word of comfort. Blessed are those ears that
receive the sound of the divine voice, and listen not to the whisperings of the
world. Blessed indeed are those ears that harken not to the voice which
sou^deth outwardly, Matt. 13.
but unto truth which teaches inwardly. Blessed are the eyes that being shut
up to outward things, are attentive to those things that are internal.
Blessed are they that enter into the inward things, and indeauor to prepare
themselves more and more by daily exercises to the attayning of heavenly
secrets. Blessed be they that delight to attend to the service of God, and cast
from them all impedimentes of this world.

2. Consider these things my soul, and shut up the doors of thy sensual
desires that thou may hear what thy lord God speaks in thee. Ps. 14.
Thus says thy beloved: I am thy safety, thy peace, and thy life. Keep thy
self with me and thou shall find peace. Forsake all transitory things and
seek those that be everlasting. Ps. 34.
What are temporal things, but deaceauing snares? and what do all creatures
avail thee, if thou be forsaken by the Creator? Forsake therefore all
earthly things and labor to please thy Creator, and be faithful unto him,
that thou may attain unto true happiness.

CHAP. II. That truth speaks inwardely without noise of Words.
SPEAK Lord, The Servant.
for thy servant hears. I am thy servant, grant me understanding, that I may
know thy testimonies. 1. Reg. 3. Ps. 118.
Stir up my heart to hear the words of thy mouth. Let thy speech descend as
the dew into my soul. The children of Israel in times past said unto Moses:
Speak thou unto us, and we shall hear thee: Let not our Lord speak unto us,
least perhaps we dye. Exodus 20.
Not so Lord, not so, I beseech thee. But rather with the Prophet Samuel, 1.
Reg. 3.
I humbly and earnestly entreat: speak Lord, for thy servant hears. Let not
Moses speak unto me, nor any of the Prophets; but thou rather speak, my Lord
God, the inspirer, and enlightener of all the Prophets: for thou alone without
them can perfectly instruct me, but they without thee can profit nothing.

2. They can pronounce words, but they give not spirit. They speak marvelous
well, but if thou hold thy peace, they inflame not the heart. They deliver the
letters, but thou openest the sense. They bring forth mysteries, but thou
disclosest the understanding of sealed things. They declare thy
commaundeme^ts, but thou helpest to fulfill them. They show the way, but thou
give strength to walk it. They work only exterioutly, but thou instructest
and enlightnest the hearts. They water outwardly, but thou give fruitfulnes.
They sound forth words, but thou give understanding to the hearing.

3. Let not therefore Moses speak unto me, but thou my Lord God, the
everlasting truth; least perhaps I should dye, and become without fruit, if I
be warned outwardly only and not inflamed within: least the word heard and not
fulfilled, known and not loved, believed and not observed, should increase my
judgment. Speak therefore Lord for thy servant hears, 1. Reg. 3.
for thou have the words of everlasting life. Speak unto me to the comfort of
my soul and to the amendment of my whole life: Joan. 6.
and to thy praise and glory and everlasting honor.

CHAP. III. That the words of God are to be heard with humility, and that many
weigh them not.
SON Our Lord.
hear my words, words of great comfort, excelling all the knowledge of the
Philosophers and wise men of this world. My words are spirit and life, not to
be waighed by the understanding of man. Joan. 6.
They are not to be drawn to vain liking, but to be heard with silence, and
to be received with all humility and great affection. And I said: The Servant.
Psalm. 93.
Blessed is the man who^ thou shall instruct, O Lord, and shall teach thy law,
that thou may give him quietness from evil days, and that he be not
destroyed upon earth.

2. I (says our Our Lord. Heb. 1.
Lord) have taught the Prophets from the beginning, and cease not continually
to speak to every one: but many are deaf and give no ear to my speech. The
greater number do more willingly listen to the world, then to God: and follow
sooner the desires of their flesh, then the will of God. The world promises
temporal and small things, and is served with great diligence: I promise most
high and eternal things, and the hearts of men are nothing moved with it. Who
is he that serves and obeys me with equal care to that with which the
world, and the Lords thereof are served? Esa. 23.
Blush Sidon, says the sea. And if thou ask the cause, hear wherefore. For a
little prebend a long journey is undertaken: for everlasting life many will
scarce once lift a foot from the ground. A thing of small value is sought
after greedily: for a penny sometimes there is great contention: for a vain
thing and slight ptomise, men doubt not to toil day and night.

3. But alas for an unchangeable good, for an inestimable reward, for the
highest honor and glory without end, they are loath to take the least pains.
Blush therefore flouthfull and complaining servant, that they are found more
ready to destruction, then thou to life. They rejoice more at vanity, then thou
at truth. Romans 1. Matt. 24.
And yet they are sometimes frustrated of their hope, but my promise deceaueth
none, nor sends him away empty that trusts in me. I will give that which I
have promised. I will fulfill that which I have said, Apoc. 2
but to him that remains faithful in my love to the end. I am the reward of
all good, Matt. 5.15.
and do try my devout servants in forcible proofs.

4. Write my words in thy heart, and think diligently of them: for they will be
necessary in time of temptation. What thou understand not when thou read,
thou shall know in the day of visitation. I am wont to visit my elect two
several ways, to wit, with temptation, and comfort. And I daily read two
lessons unto them, one reprehending their vices, another exhorting them to the
increase of virtues. He that has my words and despises them, has within
himself that shall judge him at the last day.

A prayer to implore the grace of denotion.

5. Lord The Servant.
my God, thou art all that I can desire. Who am I, that dare speak unto thee? I
am thy poorest servant, Genesis 18.
and a most vile worm: much more poor and contemptible then I can or dare
express. Remember Lord, that I am nothing, have nothing, and can do nothing.
Thou alone art good, just, and holy; thou can do all things, performest all
things, leaving only a sinner void of all good. Call to mind thy mercies, and
fill my heart with thy grace, who wilt not that thy works be void.

6. How can I support my self in this miserable life: unless thy mercy and
grace comfort me? Psalm. 68.
Turn not thy face from me: delay not thy visitation; draw not away thy
comfort, least my soul become as earth without water unto thee. Lord teach me
to fulfill thy will; Ps. 142.
teach me to line worthily and humbly in thy sight; for thou art my wisdom,
thou do perfectly know me, and did know me before the world was made, and
before I was borne in the world.

CHAP. IIII. That we ought to line in truth and humility in the sight of God.
SON Our Lord.
walk in my sight in sincerity and truth; and ever seek me in playnes of
heart. Genesis 17. Sap. 1.
He that walks in my sight in truth, shall be defended from evil incursions,
and truth shall deliver him from seducers and from the detractions of the
wicked. 1. Joan 8.
If truth shall have delivered thee, thou shall be truly free, and shall not
care for vain speeches of men. Lord The Servant.
it is true. According as thou say, so I beseech thee let it be done with me,
and keep me, and bring me to a happy end. Let thy truth teach me, and let it
deliver me from all evil affection and inordinat love: and I shall walk with
thee in great freedom of heart.

2. I Our Lord.
will teach thee (says the Truth) those things that are right and pleasing in
my sight. Think of thy sins with great sorrow, and grief; and never esteem
thy self any thing for thy good works. Thou art in very deed a sinner, and
subject to many passions. Of thy self thou always tendest to nothing, and art
quickly cast down and overcome: quickly troubled, quickly dissolved. Thou have
nothing wherein thou can glory. 2. Cor. 4.
but many things for which thou ought to humble, and despise thy self: for
thou art much weaker then thou art able to comprehend.

3. And therefore let nothing seem much unto thee whatsoever thou do. Let
nothing seem great, nothing precious, and wonderful, nothing worthy of
estimation: nothing high, nothing truly commendable* and to be desired, but
that which is everlasting. Let the eternal Truth above all things please thee.
Let thy own great unworthiness always displease thee. Fear nothing, blame,
and fly nothing so much, as thy sins, and vices: which ought to displease
more then the loss of any thing whatsoever. Some walk not sincerly in my
sight, Eccles. 3. and 2. Cor. 3.
but led by a certain curiosity, and pride, will know my secrets, and
understand the high mysteries of God, neglecting themselves and their own
salvation. These often times (for that I resist them) do fall into great
temptations and sins, for their pride and curiosity.

4. Fear the judgments of God, dread the wrath of the almighty But discuss
not the works of the Highest. Search thine own iniquities, in how much thou
have offended, and how much good thou have neglected. Some carry their devotion
only in books, some in pictures, some in outward signs and figures, some have
me in their mouths, but little in their hearts, Esa. 29.
There are others that being illuminated in their understanding, and purged in
their affection, do always aspire with an earnest mind to everlasting
happiness: and are unwilling to hear of the things of this world, and do serve
the necessities of nature with grief; Ps. 24.
and these perceive what the spirit of truth speaks in them. Because it
teaches them to despise earthly, Ps. 1.
and love heavenly things to neglect the world, and day and night to desire
heaven.

CHAP. V. Of the wonderful effect of diume grace.
I praise The Servant.
thee o heavenly Father, Father of my lord Jesus Christ, for that thou have
vouchsafed to remember me a poor and wretched creature. 2. Cor. 1.
O Father of mercies and God of all comfort, thanks be unto thee, who sometimes
with thy comfort refreshest me unworthy of all comfort. I ever bless and
glorify thee with thy only begotten Son, and the holy Ghost for all worlds. O
God my lord, the holy lover of my soul, when thou shall come into my heart, all
that is within me will rejoice. Psalm. 3.
Thou art my glory and the exultation of my heart. Thou art my hope, Ps. 31.
and my refuge in the day of my tribulation.

2. But for that I am yet weak in love, and imperfect in virtue. I have need
to be comforted by thee: visit me therefore often, and instruct me with thy holy
discipline. Deliver me from evil passions, and heal my heart of all inordinate
affections: that being cured within, and well purged, I may be made fit to
love, strong to suffer, and constant to persevere.

3. Love is a great matter, Matt. 11.
in very truth a great good: which alone makes every thing that is heavy
light; and bears equally unequal burdens. For it carries a burden without
a burden, and makes every thing that is bitter sweet, and delightsome. The
noble love of Jesus enforces man to work great things, and styrreth him up to
desire allwaies the most perfect. Love will be aloft, and not kept down with
any base things. Love will be free from all worldly affection, to the end his
inward sight be not obscured, that he be not entangled with the desire of any
transitory gain, or troubled with the want thereof. Nothing is sweeter then
love, nothing stronger, nothing higher, nothing more ample, nothing more
pleasant, nothing fuller nor better in heaven or in earth: for that love has
his beginning from God, and cannot rest but in God above all creatures.

4. He that loves, flies, runs, and rejoices, he is free and not held in.
He gives all for all, and has all in all, for that he rests in one Highest
above all, from which all good flows and proceeds. He respects not the
gifts, but turns himself above all goods unto the giver. Love oftentimes
knows no measure, but inflameth above all measure Love feels no burden,
waieth no pains, desires above it strength, complains not of impossibility,
for that it thinks all things lawful, and possible. It is therefore able to
undertake all things, and performs and brings many things to effect: whereas
he that does not love, faints and can do nothing.

5. Love always watches, Romans 8.
and sleeping sleeps not: being wearied is not tired: straightened, is not
pressed: frighted, is not troubled: but like a lively flame, and burning torch,
breaks upwards, and passes through all with great security. If any one
loves, he knows what this voice cries. A loud cry in the ears of God, is
the burning love of the soul, which says: My God, my love, thou art wholly
mine, and I wholly thine.

6. Enlarge me in love, that my heart may taste how sweet it is to love, and to
be dissolved, and swim in thy love. Let me be possessed by love, mounting
above my self, with excessive fervor, and admiration. Let me sing the song of
love, let me follow thee on high my beloved, let my soul faint in thy praises
rejoicing with love. Let me love thee more then my self, and not my self but
for thee, and all in thee, that truly love thee, as the law of love commands
which shines in thee.

7. Love is swift, 1. Cor. 13.
sincere, pious, sweet and delightful: strong, patient, faithful, prudent,
suffering, full of courage, and never seeking it self. 1. Cor. 10.
For where one seeks himself, there he falls from love. Love is
circumspect, Ps. 2.
humble, and upright: not remiss, not mutable, nor attending unto vain
things; sober, chaste, constant, quiet, and guarded in all the senses. Love is
subject, and obedient to Superiors, mean and abject to it self, devout and
thankful unto God, trusting and hoping always in him, even then, when God
imparteth no sweetness unto it: for without sorrow none lives in love.

8. He that is not ready to suffer all things, and stand to the will of his
beloved, is not worthy to be called a lover. A lover ought to embrace willingly
all that is hard, and distasteful for his beloved, Romans 8.
and not to turn away from him, for any contrary accidents.

CHAP. VI. Of the proof of a true Lover.
SON Our Lord.
thou art not yet a strong and prudent lover. Wherefore The Servant.
Lord? Because Our Lord.
thou give over for a small adversity, and too earnestly seek comfort. A
constant lover stands firmly in temptations, and gives not credit to the
crafty persuasions of the enemy. As I please him in prosperity, Phil. 4.
so I am not unpleasant to him in adversity.

2. A prudent lover considers not so much the gift of his lover, as the love
of the giver. He rather esteems the good will, then the value, and places
all gifts under his beloved. A noble lover rests not in the gift, but in me
above any gift. All therefore is not left if sometimes thou have less taste of
me, and my Saints then thou would. That good and sweet desire which thou
sometimes feel, is the effect of present grace, and a certain taste of the
heavenly Country: whereon thou must not rely too much, for it goes and comes.
But to fight against evil motions of the mind which may happen unto thee,
Matt. 4.
and to despise the suggestion of the devil, is a sign of virtue and great
merit.

3. Let not therefore strange fancies forced into thee, of any matter
whatsoever, trouble thee. Retain a firm purpose and an upright intention to
God. Neither is it an illusion that sometimes thou art suddenly rapt on high,
and presently returnest again unto the accustomed vanities of thy heart. For
thou do rather unwillingly suffer them, then commit them: and as long as they
displease thee, and thou striuest against them, it is a merit, and no loss.

4. Know that thy ancient enemy does ever strive to hinder thy desire to good*
and to divert thee from all devout exercise: to wit, from the worshipping of
Saints, from the devout memory of my passion, from the profitable remembrance
of thy sins, from the guard of thine own heart, and from the firm purpose of
profiting in virtue. He thrusts many evil thoughts into thy mind, that he
may cause a wearisomnes, and horror in thee, to draw thee from devout prayer
and reading. Humble cofession is displeasing unto him, and if he could, he
would cause thee to cease from receiving the Sacrament of my Body. Trust him
not, nor care for him, although he should often set snares of deceit to entrap
thee. Charge him with it, when he suggesteth evil, and unclean thoughts unto
thee: Say unto him: Auant filthy spirit, blush miserable wretch, thou art
filthy that bring such things into mine ears. Matt. 4. and 16.
A way from me wicked deceauer, thou shall have no part in me: but Jesus shall
be with me as a strong warrior, and thou shall remain confounded. I had
rather dye and undergo any torment, then to consent unto thee. Hold thy peace
and be silent. I will hear thee no more, though thou should work me many
troubles. My Lord is my light and salvation, Ps. 26.
whom shall I fear? If whole armies should stand together against me, my heart
shall not fear. Our Lord is my helper, and my Redeemer.

5. Fight like a good soldier: Ps. 26. and 1. Tim. 6.
and if thou sometimes fall through frailety, recover greater forces then
before, trusting in my more abundant grace: and take great heed of vain
pleasing of thy self, and pride. This brings many into error, and makes them
sometimes fall into almost incurable blindness. Let the fall of the proud
foolishly presuming of themseues, serve thee for a warning, and a perpetual
humiliation.

CHAP. VII. That grace is to be hid under the veil of humility.
SON Our Lord.
it is more profitable, and safe for thee to hide the grace of devotion, not to
extol thy self, nor to speak much, nor to esteem much thereof; but rather to
despise thy self, and fear it, as given to one unworthy thereof. This
affection is not to be cleaued unto, which may be quickly changed into the
contrary. Think when thou art in grace, how miserable and needy thou art wont
to be without it? Neither does therein only consist the profit of spiritual
life, when thou have the grace of comfort; but when thou humbly, resignedly,
and patiently suffer the withdrawing thereof: so that thou be not then less
diligent in the exercise of prayer, nor suffer thy self to pass over the rest
of thy accustomed good works: but that thou willingly perform what lies in
thee, according as thou art able and understand to be fit: not neglecting
thyself wholly for the dryness, and trouble of mind, which thou feel.

2. There are many that when it succeeds not well with them, presently they
become impatient or slouthful. Hierem. 10. and Romans 9.
The way of man is not always in his power, but it belongs to God, to give,
and to comfort when he will, how much he will, and whom he will, as it shall
please him and no more. Some unadvised persons have overthrown themselves for
the greedy desire which they had of the grace of devotion: attempting more then
they were able to perform, not waighing the measure of their weakness, but
following rather the desire of their heart, then the judgment of reason. And
because they presumed on greater matters then was pleasing to God, they quickly
lost their grace. Esa. 14.
They were made needy, and left in a dejected estate that built themselves
nestes in heaven: to the end that being humbled, and impouerished, they may
learn not to fly with their own wings, but to live in hope under my feathers.
They that are yet new, and unacquainted in the way of our Lord, unless they
govern themselves by the counsel of discreet persons, may easily be deceived
and over thrown.

3. And if they will rather follow their own judgment, then give credit to
others that are experienced, their end will be dangerous, if they cannot be
drawn from their own conceit. Seldom those that are wise in their own
opinion, suffer themselves humbly to be governed by others. Psalm. 15. and 16.
A little knowledge with humility, and a slender understanding, is better then
great treasures of learning with a vain selfe-liking. It is better for thee to
have less, then much of that whereof thou may be proud. He does not
discreetly, that wholly gives himself over to mirth, forgetting his former
poverty, and the chaste fear of God, which fears to loose the grace which he
has obtained. Neither is he virtuously wise, that in time of adversity or any
tribulation whatsoever, yeildeth to despairing thoughts, and thinks and
imagines of me less confidently then he ought.

4. He that will be over secure in time of peace, 1 Thessalonians. 5.
shall be often found in time of war too dejected and fearful. If thou
could always continue humble, and lowly within thy self, and temper, and
govern thy soul well, thou should not so soon fall into danger and
offense. It is good counsel, that when thou conceauest fervor of spirit, thou
should think what will become of thee, when that light shall leave thee.
Job. 17.
And when that does happen, remember the light may return again, which for
thy instruction and my glory I have withdrawn for a time.

5. Such proof is often more profitable, then if thou should always enjoy
prosperity according to thy desire. For merits are not to be waighed in a man
by the number of visions and comforts which he has, or by his knowledge in
Scriptures, or by his being placed in high degree: but in that he is grounded
in true humility, and replenished with divine charity: if he always purely and
entirely seek the honor of God, if he esteem himself nothing, and with a
sincere heart despise himself, and rejoice more to be despised and humbled by
others, Ps. 83.
then to be honored.

CHAP. VIII. Of a mean conceit of our selves in the sight of God.
SHALL The Servant.
I speak unto my Lord, since I am dust and ashes? If I esteem better of my
self, behold thou sta^dest against me, Genesis 18.
and my iniquities bear true witness, neither can I speak against it But if I
abase and esteem nothing of my self, and cast of all selfe-conceipt, and (as
I am) account my self to be dust, thy grace will be favorable unto me, and
thy light will be near unto my heart: and all estimation how little soever
shall be swallowed up in the depth of my nothing, and perish everlastingly. There
thou show my self unto me, what I am, what I have been, and whither I am
come: for alas I am nothing, and I knew it not. And if I be left to my self,
behold I become nothing, and a mass of infirmity. But if thou suddenly look
upon me, I am presently made strong, and filled with new joy. And it is a great
marvel, that I am so suddenly lifted up, and so graciously embraced by thee,
that of mine own weight always sink downward.

2. Thy love is cause hereof, freely preventing me, and releeuing me in so
many necessities, preserving me also from grievous dangers, and (as I may
truly say) delivering me from innumerable evils. For surely by evil loving
my self, Joan. 12.
I lost my self: and by seeking thee alone, and sincerly loving thee, I have
found both my self and thee, and for thy love have more deeply brought my
self to nothing For that thou, o most sweet Jesus, dealest with me above all
desert, and above all that I dare hope and request.

3. Blessed be thou my God; for although I be unworthy of all good, yet the
noblenes of thy bounty and thy infinite goodness, never cease to do good even
to the ungrateful, Matt. 5.
and to them that be turned away far from thee. Turn us unto thee o Lord, that
we may be grateful, humble, and devout: for thou art our safety, our power,
and our strength.

CHAP. IX. That all things are to be reserred unto God, as unto the last end.
SON Our Lord.
I ought to be thy chiefest and last end, if thou desire to betruly blessed.
With this intention thy affection shall be purified which is oftentimes
inclined inordinatly to it self, and unto creatures. For if in any thing thou
seek thy self, thou presently faintest and driest up within thy self Direct
therefore all things chiefly unto me, for I am he that have given all. Eccles.
1.
Consider every thing as flowing from the highest good: and therefore all things
are to be reduced unto me, as unto their first beginning.

2. Out of me, as out of living fountains, the little and the great, the poor
and the rich, Joan. 4.
do draw the water of life: and they that willingly, and freely serve me, shall
receive grace for grace. 1. Cor. 1.
But he that will glory out of me, or be delighted in any particular good,
shall not be grounded in true joy, nor enlarged in his heart, but shall be many
ways hindered and straightened. Thou ought therefore to ascribe no good unto thy
self, nor attribute the praise of virtue unto any man: but give all unto God,
without whom man has nothing. I have bestowed all, 1. Cor. 4.
and will that all be returned to me again: and with great severity I require
thanks

3. This is the truth that puts to flight vainglory. And if heavenly
grace, and true charity enter in, there shall be no envy nor grudging of heart,
neither shall there be any place for self love. For divine charity overcomes
all, and enlarges all the forces of the soul. If thou understand aright, in
me alone thou will rejoice, in me alone thou will hope: for none is good, Matt.
19. and Luc. 18.
but God alone, who is to be praised above all things, and to be blessed in all.

CHAP. X. That despising the world, it is sweet to serve God.
NOW The Servant.
I will speak again Lord, and will not be silent. I will say in the ears of
my God, my Lord, and my King that is on high: O how great is the multitude of
thy sweetness Lord, Ps. 30.
which thou have hidden for those that fear thee! But what art thou to them
that love thee? What to them that serve thee with their whole heart? Truly
unspeakable is the sweetness of thy conte^plation, which thou bestowest on them
that love thee. Genesis 1.
In this chiefly thou have showed me the sweetness of thy charity, Ps. 118. and
Matt. 15.
for that when I was not, thou made me: and when I went astray far off from
thee, thou broughtest me back again, that I might serve thee: and have
commanded me to love thee.

2. O fountain of everlasting love, what shall I say of thee? How can I forget
thee, that have vouchsafed to remember me, even when I withered away and
perished! Thou have used mercy with thy servant beyond all the expectation of
my heart: and have bestowed thy grace and friendship beyond all merit. What
shall I return unto thee for this grace? Psalm. 115.
For it is not granted to every one to forsake all things, to renounce the
world, and to undertake a life of religion and perfection. Is it much that I
serve thee, whom all creatures are bound to serve? It ought not to seem much
unto me to serve thee: Iudic. 16.
but this rather seems much, and marvelous unto me, that thou vouchsafest to
receive into thy service one so poor and unworthy, and to join him with thy
beloved servants.

3. Behold all is thine which I have, 1. Cor. 4.
and whereby I serve thee. And yet in very deed thou rather seruest me then I
thee. Behold heaven and earth, which thou have created for the service of man
are ready at hand, and do daily perform whatsoever thou do command; and this
is little: Ps. 90. and Heb ^1.
yea thou have also appointed the Angels to the service of man. But that which
exceeds all, is that thou thy self have vouchsafed to serve man, and
promised to give thy self unto him.

4 What shall I give thee for all these thousands of benefits? I would I could
serve thee all the days of my life! I would I were able at least for one day to
do thee some worthy and acceptable service! Thou art truly worthy of all
service, of all honor and everlasting praise. Thou art my Lord, and I thy
poor servant, that am bound to serve thee with all my forces, neither ought I
ever to cease to praise thee. And this I wish to do, this I desire: and
whatsoever is wanting unto me, vouchsafe I beseech thee to supply.

5. It is a great honor, a very great glory to serve thee, and to despise al
things for thee. For great grace shall be given to them that shall willingly
submit themselves unto thy most holy service. Matt. 19.
They shall receive most sweet comfort of the holy Ghost, that for thy love
shall renounce all carnal delights. They shall attain great freedom of mind,
Matt. 7.
that for thy names sake shall enter into the narrow way, and shall have left
off all care of this world.

6. O sweet and delightful servitude of God, Matt. 11. and 1.10.5.
by which man is truly made free and holy! O sacred state of religious bondage,
which makes man equal to Angels, pleasing to God, terrible to devils, and
grateful, and of great esteem to all the faithful! O service to be embraced,
and always wished for, by which we obtain the greatest good, and attain to
that joy which never shall have end!

CHAP. XI. That the desires of our heart are to be examined and moderated.
SON Our Lord.
thou ought to learn many things more, which thou have not yet well
learned. The Servant.
What are those Lord? That Our Lord.
thou frame thy desire wholly according to my pleasure: and be not a lover of
thy self, but a diligent follower of my will. Thy desires oftentimes do stir
thee up, and drive thee forwards with violence: but consider whether thou art
moved rather for my honor, then for thine own profit. If I be the cause, thou will be well content with whatsoever I shall ordain: but if there lurk in thee
any self inclination, behold this is it that hinders thee, Phil. 2.
and waygheth thee down.

2. Beware therefore thou incline not too much upon any desire that comes to
thy mind, before thou ask my counsel: least perhaps afterward it repent
thee, and that thou begin now to dislike that which before did please thee,
and which thou earnestly desiredst as the best. For every affection that
seems good, is not presently to be followed: nor every contrary affection at
the first to be sled. It is expedient sometimes to use a restraint even in good
desires and endeauours: least by importunity thou incur distraction of mind,
and by evil example become a scandal unto others: or being gainsaid by
others, thou be suddenly troubled and fall.

3. Yet sometimes thou ought to use violence, Phil. 2.
and resist manfully thy sensual appetites, Romans 8. and 2. Cor. 4.
and respect not what thy body would, or would not: but rather to labor, that
even perforce it be subject to the spirit. 2. Cor. 10.
And it is to be chastised so long, and to be forced under servitude, 1. Cor. 9.
until it readily obey an all things, and learn to be content with a little,
and to be pleased with ordinary things, and not to murmur against any
inconvenience.

CHAP. XII. Of the effect of Patience, and of strise against Concupiscence.
LORD The Servant. Heb. 10.
God, I perceive patience is very necessary unto me: for that many adversities
do happen in this life. Job. 7.
Howsoever I shall dispose of my peace, my life cannot be without war and
affliction. Our Lord.
So it is Son. And my will is not that thou seek after that peace which is
void of temptations, or that feels no contrarieties: but then think that
thou have found peace, when thou art exercised with sundry tribulations, Iac. 1.
and tried in many adversities.

2. If thou say that thou art not able to suffer much, how then will thou
endure the fire of Purgatory? Of two evils the less is always to be chosen.
That thou may therefore avoid everlasting punishments in the next world,
endeavor to suffer patiently for God the present evils of this. Do thou
think that men of this world suffer little or nothing? Thou art deceived.
Look into the life even of them that live in greatest delicacies, and thou
shall find it otherwise. But thou will say they have many delights, and follow
their own wills, and therefore they make small account of their tribulations.
Be it so, that they have whatsoever they will; but how long do thou think it
will last?

3. Behold the wealthy of this world vanish away like smoke, Ps. 67.
and there shall be no memory of their joys past. Yea even while they live
also, they rest not in them without grief, irksomeness, and fear. For the
selfsame thing in which they take their delight, is oftentimes the cause of
sorrow unto them and much affliction. They have their desert, who for that they
immoderately seek, and follow delights, they do not obtain them, but with
shame and sorrow.

4. O how short and deceiptful, how inordinate, and filthy are those pleasures!
Yea so senseles and blind are men that they understand it not: but like dumb
beasts, for a little pleasure of a corruptible life, they incur the eternal
death of their soul. Do not thou therefore, my Son, follow the disordinate
inclinations of thy corrupt nature, but forsake thine own will. Eccls. 28. Ps.
36.
Delight in our Lord, and he will give thee the desires of thy heart.

5. If thou desire true delight, and to be more plentifully comforted by me:
behold, in the contempt of all worldly things, and in the cutting off of all
base delights, shall be thy blessing, and abundant comfort shall be given
thee. And how much the more thou withdrawest thy self from all comfort of
creatures, so much the sweeter and more forcible consolations shall thou find
in me. But at first thou can not attain unto them without a certain grief,
labor, and strife. The old custom will make resistance, and thou must
overcome it with another custom that is better. Thy flesh will murmur: but
thou must bridle it with fervor of spirit. The old serpent will sting and
trouble thee: but by prayer he shall be put to fight: and with profitable
labor thou shall shut the door against him.

CHAP. XIII. Of the humble obedience of a subject, according to the example of
Christ.
SON Our Lord.
he that endeavors to withdraw himself from obedience, withdraws him
self from grace. And he that seeks to have things in private, Matt. 16.
shall loose the common. He that does not willingly and freely submit himself
to his Superior, it is a sign that his flesh is not yet perfectly obedient
unto him, but oftentimes rebelleth and murmureth against him. Learn therefore
readily to submit thy self to thy Superior, if thou desire to subdue thine
own passions. For the outward enemy is sooner overcome, if the inward man be
in good estate. There is no worse enemy, nor more troublesome to the soul,
then thou unto thy self, not agreeing well with the spirit. Thou must of
necessity have a true contempt of thy self, if thou will preauaile against
flesh and blood.

2. Because thou love thy self as yet too inordinatly, therefore thou art
afraid to resign thy self wholly to the will of others. But what great matter
is it if thou that art dust, Luc. 2. and Joan. 12.
and nothing submittest thy self to a man for God: when I the Almighty and
highest sovereign, who created all things of nothing, humbly submitted my
self unto man for thee? I became the most humble and abject of all men, that
thou might overcome thy pride with my humility. Learn to obey thou that art
dust. Learn to humble thy self thou earth and clay, and put thy self under
the feet of all men. Learn to break thine own will, and to yield thy self
to all subjection.

3. Take courage against thy self, and suffer not pride to live in thee: but
humble and submit thy self to all, that every one may go over thee, and tread
thee as dirt of the streets under their feet. Vain man, what can thou
complain of? what can thou answer foul sinner to them that reprove thee,
who have so often offended God, and so many times deserved hell? But mine eye
has spared thee, because thy soul was precious in my sight: that thou
might know my love, and always remain grateful for my benefits: that thou
might continually give thy self to true subjection and humility, and
might bear patiently the contempt of thy self.

CHAP. XIIII. Of the secret Judgments of God to be considered, least we be
extolled in our good deeds.
THOU The Servant.
thundrest thy judgments over me, Lord, and shakest all my bones with fear
and trembling, and my soul is sore afraid. I stand astonished, Job. 15.
and consider; for that heavens are not pure in thy sight. Job. 4
If thou have found wickedness in Angels, and have not pardoned them, what shall
become of me? Apoc. 8.
Stars fell from heaven, and what do I presume that am dust? They whose works
seemed laudable, fell into the lowest: and I have seen them, that did eat
bread of Angels, to be delighted with the husks of swyne.

2. There is no sanctity, if thou o Lord, withdrawest thy hand. No wisdom
avails, if thou ceasest to govern. No strength helps, if thou leauest to
defend. No chastity secure, if thou do not protect it. No custody of our
own profitable, if thy sacred watchfullnes be not present: For if thou leauest
us, we sink, and perish; but if thou vouchsafest to visit us, we are raised
up, and do enjoy life. We are inconstant, but by thee we are strengthened: we
wax could, but by thee we receive heat.

3. O how meanly and basely ought I to think of my self! how little, yea
nothing ought I to esteem it, if I seem to have any good! O Lord, how ought I
to submit my self under thy unsearchable Judgments: where I find my self to
be nothing else, but nothing, and nothing! O unmeasurable weight! O sea that can
never be passed over: where I find my self only and wholly nothing! Where then
is the lurking hole of glory? Where is the confidence conceived of virtue? All
vain glory is swallowed up in the depth of thy Judgments, which hang over my
head.

4. What is all flesh in thy sight? Eccls. 23. and Esa. 29.
Shall clay glory against him that frames it? How can he be lifted up with
vain words, whose heart is truly subject to God? All the world cannot move him
to any elation of mind, whom truth has subjected unto it, neither shall he be
moved with the tongues of all his praisers, that has settled his whole hope in
God. For they also that speak, behold, are nothing: they shall pass away
with the sound of the words: Ps. 116.
but the truth of our Lord remains for ever.

CHAP. XV. What we ought to do, and say in every thing which we desire.
SON Our Lord.
say thus in every thing: Lord if it be pleasing unto thee, let this be done
in this sort. Lord if it be to thy honor, Iac. 3.
let this be don in thy name. Lord if thou see it expedient for me, and
allowest it to be profitable, then grant unto me, that I may use this unto
thine honor. But if thou know it will be hurtful unto me, and not
profitable to the health of my soul, take from me all such desire. For every
desire proceeds not from the holy Ghost, though it seem unto man right and
good. It is hard to judge whether a good spirit, or the contrary drive thee to
desire this or that: or whether also by thine own spirit thou be moved
thereunto. Many are deceived in the end, who at the first seemed to be lead by a
good spirit.

2. Always therefore, whatsoever occurreth unto thy mind to be desired, let it
be desired with the fear of God, and with humility of heart: and above all thou
ought to commit it unto me with full resignation of thy self: and thou
ought to say: Lord thou know what is best, do this, or that, as thou
please. Give what thou will, and how much thou will, and when thou will. Do
with me as thou know, and as best pleases thee, and is most for thy honor.
Set me where thou will, and deal with me in all things according to thy will.
I am in thy hand, turn me, and turn me again which way soever thou please.
Behold I am thy servant, ready to obey thee in all things: for I desire not to
live unto my self, but unto thee: and would to God it might be in some worthy
and perfect manner.

A prayer for the fullfilling of the will of God.

3. Grant The Servant.
me thy grace sweet Jesus, that it may be with me, and labor with me, and
persevere with me until the end. Grant me always to desire and will that
which is most acceptable unto thee, Sap. 9.
and best pleases thee. Let thy will be mine, and let my will ever follow
thine, and agree perfectly with it. Let my will and nill be all one with thine:
and not to be able to will, or refuse any thing else, but what thou will, or
reiectest.

4. Grant that I may dye to all things that are in the world, and to love for
thy sake to be contemned, and not to be known in this world. Grant that above
all things that can be desired, I may rest in thee, and make my heart to enjoy
peace in thee. Thou art the true peace of the heart, thou art the only rest: out
of thee all things are troublesome and unquiet. In peace in the self same:
that is, Ps. 4.
in thee, one chiefest, eternal good I will sleep and rest. Amen.

CHAP. XVI. That true comfort is to be sought in God alone.
WHATSOEVER The Servant.
I can desire, or imagine for my comfort, I look not for it in this life, but
hereafter. For if I should alone have all the comforts of the world, and might
enjoy all the delights thereof, it is certain, that they could not long endure.
Wherefore my soul, thou can not be fully comforted, nor have perfect delight
but in God, Psalm. 76.
the comforter of the poor, and the receauer of the humble. Expect a while my
soul, expect the divine promise, and thou shall have abundance of all good
things in heaven. If thou desire inordinatly the things that are present, thou
shall loose the celestial and eternal. Have temporal things in use, and the
eternal in desire. Thou can not be filled with any temporal goods, because
thou art not created to enjoy them.

2. Although thou enioyest all that is created, yet can thou not be happy
thereby nor blessed: but in God that has created all things, Sap. 2.
thy whole beatitude and happiness consists: not such as is seen, and
commended by the foolish lovers of the world; but such as the good faithful
servants of Christ expect, Phil. 3.
and the spiritual, and clean of heart, whose conversation is in heaven,
sometimes take a taste of. Vain and short is all human comfort. Blessed and true
is the comfort which is received inwardly from truth. A devout man every where
carries with him Jesus his comforter, and says unto him: Be present with me
Lord Jesus in every place, and time. Let this be my comfort to be always
willing to want all human comfort. And if thy comfort be wanting, let thy will
and just proof be unto me, as the greatest comfort: Ps. 102.
for thou will not be angry always, neither will thou threaten for ever.

CHAP. XVII. That all our care is to be placed in God.
SON Our Lord.
suffer me to do with thee what I please. I know what is expedient for thee.
Thou think as man: thou iudgest in many things as humane affection
persuades thee. The Servant. Matt. 6. and Joan. 6.
Lord, what thou say is true. Thy solicitude for me is greater, then all the
care that I can take for my self. For he stands at too great a hazard, that
casts not his whole care upon thee. Lord, so that my will may remain right
and firm in thee, do with me whatsoever it shall please thee. For it cannot be
but good, whatsoever thou do with me.

2. If it be thy will I should be in darkness, be thou blessed: and if it be thy
will I should be in light, be thou again bl^ssed If thou vouchsafest to
comfort me; be thou blessed: and if thou will afflict me, be thou also ever
blessed. Son, Our Lord.
so thou ought to be, as ready to suffer, as to receive joy. Thou ought
to be as willing to be poor and needy, as plentiful and rich.

3. Lord, The Servant.
I will willingly suffer for thee, whatsoever thy pleasure is shall befall me. I
will receive indifferently from thy hand, Job. 2.
good and evil, sweet, and sower, delightful, and sorrowful: and give thee
thanks for all that happens unto me. Keep me from all sin, Ps. 22.
and I will neither fear death, nor hell: so as thou do not for ever cast me
from thee, and blot me out of the book of life, what tribulation soever befall
me, shall not hurt me.

CHAP. XVIII. That temporal miseries, by the example of Christ, are to be
borne patiently.
SON Our Lord.
I descended from Heaven for thy health: I took upon me thy miseries, Joan. 8.
my charity and not any necessity drawing me thereunto: that thou might
learn patience, and not refuse to bear temporal miseries. For from the hour
of my birth, Esa. 53.
until my death on the Cross, I was not without suffering of grief. Luc. 2.
I suffered great want of temporal things: I often heard many complaints
against me: I bare patienly shame and reproaches, for benefits I received
ingratitude; for miracles, blasphemies, for heavenly doctrine, reprehensions.

2. Lord, The Servant.
for that thou were patient in thy lifetime, chiefly in fulfilling the
commandment of thy Father, it is reason that I miserable sinner should have
patience in all things according to thy will, Joan. 5.
and for mine own health bear the burden of this corruptible life, as long
as thou will. For although this present life be burdensome, yet notwithstanding
it is now by thy grace made very meritorious: and by thy example and the
footsteps of thy Saints, more plain and tolerable to the weak. Yea, much
more comfortable also, then it was in times past in the old law, when the gate
of heaven remained shut: and the way also to heaven seemed darker, when so few
took care to seek after thy Kingdom. Neither they also that then were just,
Matt. 7.
and were ordained to be saved, could enter into the heavenly glory before thy
passion, and the debt of thy sacred death was discharged.

3. O how great thanks am I bound to give thee, that thou have vouchsafed to
show unto me, and to all faith full souls a direct, and sure way to thy
everlasting kingdom! For thy life is our way, and by holy patience we go unto
thee that art our Crown. If thou had not gone before us and taught us, who
would have taken care to follow? Alas how many would stay behind, and remain
far off, if they beheld not thy excellent examples! Behold we are yet could
although we have heard of so many of thy wonders, Joan. 12.
and thy heavenly documents! what would become of us if we had not so great
light to follow thee?

CHAP. XIX. Of suffering of injuries, and who is proved to be truly patient.
WHAT is it Our Lord.
thou say, Son? Cease to complain, considering my passion, and that of my
other Saints. Thou have not yet made resistance to the sheeding of blood. Heb.
12.
It is but little thou suffer, in comparison of them that have suffered so
much, Heb. 11.
so strongly tempted, so grievously afflicted, so many ways tried and
exercised. Thou ought therefore to call to mind the heavy sufferings of
others, that thou may the easier bear the little adversities which thou
suffer. And if they seem not little, beware least thy impatience because
thereof. Yet whether they be little, or great, endeavor to bear all patiently.

2. How much the better thou disposest thy self to suffering, so much the more
wisely thou do, and so much the more do thou merit thou shall more easily
also endure it, if thy mind be prepared, and thy self accustomed thereunto. Do
not say; I cannot suffer these things of such a one, at the hands of such a
person, nor such things are not to be suffered by me, for he has done me great
wrong, and vpbraided me with those things which I never thought or: but or
another I will willingly suffer, and as I shall see cause. Such a thought is
foolish, it considers not the virtue of patience, nor by whom it shall be
crowned; but rather wargheth the persons, and the injuries offered.

3. He is not truly patient, that will nor suffer but as much as he thinks
good, and by whom he lists. But he that is indeed patient, minds not by
whom he is exercised, whether by his Superior, or some of his equals, or by
his inferior: whether by a good and holy man, or by a perverse and unworthy
person. But indifferently from all creatures, how much soever, or how often
soever any adversity happens unto him, he takes all thankfully as from the
hands of God, and esteems it a great gain: for that nothing before God, how
little soever, so it be suffered for God, can be without merit.

4. Be thou therefore always prepared for the fight, if thou will have the
victory. Without combat thou can not attain unto the Crown of patience. If
thou will not suffer, thou refusest to be crowned. But if thou desire to be
crowned, 2. Tim. 2.
fight manfully, and endure patiently: without labor there is no coming to
rest: nor without fight can the victory be obtained. Lord The Servant.
let that be made possible to me by thy grace, which seems impossible to me
by nature. Thou know that I can suffer little, and that I am quickly
dismayed, when a small adversity arises. Let all exercise of tribulation be
made pleasing unto me, and be welcome for thy name: for to suffer and to be
troubled for thee, is very profitable for my soul.

CHAP. XX. Of the acknowledging of our own infirmity: and of the miseries of
this life.
I will The Servant. Psalm. 31.
confess against me my injustice: I will confess unto thee o Lord my
infirmity. Oftentimes it is a small matter that discomforteth, and grieueth me.
I purpose to resist with courage, but when a small temptation comes, it
brings me into very narrow straits. It is sometimes a very trifle, from whence
great temptations do proceed. And whilst I think my self somewhat lase, when
I least expect it, I find my self sometimes overcome with a small blast.

2. Behold therefore Lord, my humility, Psalm. 24.
and my frailty every way known unto thee. Ps. 68.
Have mercy on me and deliver me out of the mire of my infirmities, that I
stick not fast therein: let me not for ever remain dejected. This is that which
oftentimes bears me back, and confounds me in thy sight: for that I am so
subject to fall, and weak in resisting of my passions. And though I do not
altogether consent, yet their continual assaults are troublesome and grievous
unto me: and it is tedious, and a very irksome thing to live thus daily in
strife. Hereby my infirmity is made known unto me: for that wicked fancies do
always much more easily enter in upon me, then they can be cast out again.

3. O mighty God of Israel, the zealous lover of faithful souls; let it
please thee to consider the labor and sorrow of thy servant, and assist him in
all whatsoever he undertakes. Strengthen me with heavenly force, least my old
man, my miserable flesh; not fully as yet subject to the spirit, prevail and
get the upper hand: against which I ought to fight, as long as I breath in this
miserable life. Alas, what a kind of life is this, where tribulations and
miseries are never wanting! where all is set with snares, and compassed with
enemies! For when one tribulation or temptation goes away, another comes,
yea and during the first conflict also, many others come unlooked for one after
another.

4. And how can a life be loved that has so many afflictions, and is subject
to so many calamities and miseries? How is it called a life that begets so
many deaths, and plagues? And yet it is loved, and many seek to delight
themselves therein. The world is oftentimes blamed, that it is deceiptfull and
vain, and yet it is not easily forsaken, because the inclinations of our flesh
do too much ouerrule us. Some things draw us to love it, others to contemn it.
To the love of the world do draw us the concupiscence of the flesh, 1. Joan. 2.
the concupiscence of the eyes, and the pride of life: but the pains and
miseries that do justly follow them, causes a hatred and loathsomnes thereof.

5. But alas wicked pleasure overcomes the mind which is given over to the
world, Job. 30.
and she esteems it a delight to be under thorns: because she has neither
seen nor tasted the sweetness of God, and the inward delight of virtue But they
that perfectly contemn the world, and endeavor to live to God under holy
discipline, these are not ignorant of the divine sweetness, promised to the true
forsakers of the world, and do more clearly see how grievously the world
erreth, and how it is many ways deceived.

CHAP. XXI. That we are to rest in God above all his gifts.
ABOVE The Servant.
all things, and in all things, my soul, thou shall ever rest in God, for he
is the everlasting rest of the Saints. Grant me most sweet and loving Jesus,
Romans 8.
to rest in thee above all creatures, above al health and beauty, above all
glory and honor, above all power and dignity, above all knowledge and learning,
above all riches and arts, above allioy and gladness, above all same and praise,
above all sweetness and comfort, above all hope and promise, above all merit and
desire, above all gifts and presents that thou can give and impart unto us,
above all joy and iubily that the mind of man can receive and feel: lastly
above Angels and Archangels, and above all the heavenly Host, above al visible
and invisible things, and above all that, that thou art not, my God.

2. For that thou, my Lord God, surpassest all, thou alone most high, thou
alone most powerful, thou alone most full and sufficient, thou alone most
sweet, and comfortable, thou alone most beautiful, and loving, thou alone most
noble and glorious above all things: in whom all good things together both
are perfectly, and ever have been and shall be: and therefore it is too little
and not sufficient, whatsoever thou bestowest on me besides thy self, or
reuealest unto me of thy self, or promisest whilst thou art not seen, and not
fully obtained: for surely my heart cannot rest, nor be fully contented unless
it rest in thee, and surmount all gifts and creatures what soever.

3. O my most beloved spouse Christ Jesus, the most chaste lover, the governor
of all creatures: Ps. 53.
who will give me wings of true liberty to fly, and rest in thee! O when shall
it be fully granted me to consider in quietness of mind, and see how sweet thou
art my Lord God! When shall I fully recollect my self in thee, that for thy
love I may not feel my self, but thee alone, above all sense, and feeling, in
a manner not known unto all. But now I oftentimes lament, Dan. 13.
and bear my infelicity with grief. For that many euells occurr in this vale
of miseries, which do often trouble, grieve, and darken me, often hinder and
distract me, allure and entangle me, to the end I should not have free access
unto thee, and that I should not enjoy those sweet and heavenly imbracings,
which thou always give to the blessed and celestial spirits. Let my sighs
and manifold desolation on earth move thee.

4. O Jesus, splendour of eternal glory, and comfort of the pilgrim soul!
with thee is my tongue without voice, and my silence speaks unto thee. How
long does my Lord delay to come! Let him come unto me his poor servant, and
make me glad. Let him put out his hand, and deliver me miserable wretch from al
anguish. Come, come blessed Lord: for without thee I shall have no joy full
day, nor hour. Thou art my joy, and without thee there is nothing but want. A
wretched creature I am, and in a manner imprisoned, and laden with irons:
until thou comfortest me with the light of thy presence, and give me
liberty, and show a favorable countenance unto me.

5. Let others seek what they please instead of thee: but for me, nothing else
does, nor shall delight me, but thou only my God, my hope, my everlasting
health. I will not hold my peace, nor cease to pray, until thy grace return
again, and thou speak inwardly unto me. Behold Our Lord.
I am here: behold I come unto thee, because thou have called upon me. Thy
tears, and the desire of thy soul, thy humility, and the contrition of thy
heart, have inclined and brought me unto thee. And The Servant.
I said: Lord I have called thee, and have desired to enjoy thee being ready to
forsake all things for thee. For thou first have stirred me up that I might
seek thee. Blessed be thou therefore o Lord, that have showed this goodness to
thy servant, according to the multitude of thy mercies.

6. What has thy servant more to say before thee, but that he do greatly
humble himself in thy sight, always mindful of his own iniquity, and
baseness? For there is none like unto thee in all whatsoever is wonderful, Ps.
^5.
in heaven and earth. Thy words are good, thy judgments true, and by thy
providence all things are governed. Praise therefore and glory be unto thee, o
wisdom of the eternal Father: let my tongue, my soul, and all creatures
together praise and bless thee.

CHAP. XXII. Of the remembrance of the manifould benefits of God.
OPEN The Servant.
o Lord my heart in thy Law; and teach me to walk in thy commandments. Grant
me to understand thy will, Ps. 118.
and to remember thy benefits, as well in general, as in particular, with
great reverence and diligent consideration: that hence forward I may be able
worthily to give thee thanks. But I know, and confess, that I am not able to
give thee due thanks, for the favors which thou bestowest upon me, even in the
least moment. I am less then the least of thy benefits: and when I consider
the excellency of thy Majesty, the greatness thereof makes my spirit to faint.

2. All that we have in our soul and body, and whatsoever we possess
outwardly or inwardly, naturally or spiritually, are thy benefits, and do
praise thee as bountiful, pious, and good, from whom we have received all
that is good. Although one has received more, another less, all
notwithstanding are thine, and without thee even the least cannot be had. He
that has received greater, cannot glory of his own desert, nor extol
himself above others, nor insult over the lesser: for he is greater and better
that ascribes least unto himself, and is more humble and devout in rendering
thanks. And he that esteems him self basest of all men, and judges himself
most unworthy, is fittest to receive greater blessings.

3. And he that has received fewer, ought not to be sorry nor bear it
impatiently, nor envy them that are enriched with greater store, but attend
rather unto thee, and chiefly praise thy goodness, for that thou bestowest thy
gifts so bountifully, so freely, and so willingly without respect of persons.
All things proceed from thee, and therefore in all things thou art to be
praised. Thou know what is fit to be given to every one: and why this man
has less, and he more, it is not ours, but thine to determine, who do weigh
in just measure the deserts of every one.

4. Wherefore my Lord God, I esteem it as a great benefit not to have much,
whereby outwardly and before men I might seem worthy of praise and glory: so
that he, who considers his own poverty, and baseness, ought not therefore to
conceive grief, or sorrow, or to be therefore troubled, but rather to take
great comfort, and to be glad: for that thou, O God, have chosen the poor and
humble, 1. Cor. 1.
and the despised of this world for thy self, Ps. 44.
and for thy familiar and domestical friends. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
Witnesses are thy Apostle themselves, whom thou have appointed princes over
all the earth. And yet they lived without complaint in the world, so humble and
simple, mean to the eyes of men, without all malice and deceit, Act. 5.
that they rejoiced to receive co^tumelies for thy name: and what the world
abhors, they embraced with great affection.

5. Nothing therefore ought so to rejoice him that loves thee, and
acknowledges thy benefits, as the accomplishment of thy will in himself, and
the pleasure of thy eternal appointment: wherewith he ought to be so contented
and comforted, that he would as willingly be the least, as any would wish to be
the greatest: and as peaceable and content in the last as in the first place:
and as willingly to be despised and contemned, and to be of no esteem or
account, as to be preferred in honor before all others, and to be greater in
the world. For thy will and the love of thy glory, ought to be preferred before
all things: and to comfort him more, and please him better, then all the
benefits which he has received or can desire.

CHAP. XXIII. Of sour things that bring much peace.
SON Our Lord.
now I will teach thee the way of peace, and true liberty. Do The Servant.
Lord, I beseech thee, as thou say, for I shall be very glad to hear it.
Endeavor Our Lord. Matt. 26. and Io. 5.6. 1. Cor. 10.
my Son to do rather the will of another, then thine own. Ever choose rather
to have less then more. Always seek the lowest place, and to be inferior to
every one. Wish always, and pray, Lue. 14.
that the will of God may be wholly fulfilled in thee. Behold such a man enters
into the limits of peace and most quiet rest. Matt. 6.


2. Lord The Servant. Matt. 5.
this thy short speech contains much perfection. It is little in words but
sull in sense, and abundant in fruit. For if it could exactly be kept by me,
then should I not so easily be troubled. For as often as I feel my self
unquiet, and afflicted, I find that I have straied from this doctrine. But thou
that can all things, and ever love the good and profit of my soul,
increase in me thy grace, that I may fulfill thy words and perfect mine own
health.

A Prayer against evil thoughts.

3. My The Servant. Ps. 70.
Lord God, be not far from me: my God have regard to help me, for sundry
thoughts have risen up against me, and great fears afflicting my soul. How
shall I pass through them without hurt? How shall I break them? I, says he,
Our Lord.
will go before thee, and will humble the glorious of the earth. I will open the
doors of the prison, Esa. 45.
and reveal unto thee the hidden secrets. Do The Servant.
Lord as thou say, and let all evil thoughts fly from before thy face. This
is my hope, and my only comfort, to fly unto thee in all tribulation, to trust
in thee, to call upon thee from my heart, and to expect patiently thy comfort.

A Prayer for enlightening of the mind.

4. Enlighten The Servant.
me good Jesus, with the clearnes of inward light, and expel all darkness of my
heart. Repress the many wandering thoughts, and beat down the fury of the
re^ptations which violently assault me. Fight strongly for me, and vanquish the
evil beasts, that is the alluring concupiscences, that peace may be made in
thy virtue, and abundance of thy praise sound in thy holy Court, which is a
pure conscience. Command the winds and tempests: say unto the sea, Matt. 3.
Be still: and to the north wind, Blow not; and a great calm shall ensue.

5. Send forth thy light and thy truth, Psalm. 42.
that they may shine upon the earth, for I am empty and unprofitable earth,
until thou impartest thy light unto me. Power out thy grace from above, wash
my heart with heavenly dew, give waters of denotion, to wash the face of the
earth, to bring forth good and perfect fruit. Lift up my mind, ouercharged with
the weight of sin: draw up my whole desire to heavenly treasures, that having
tasted the sweetness of celestial happiness, it may loath to think of earthly
vanities.

6. Take me violently to thee, and deliver me from all unstable comfort of
creatures: for no created thing can fully quiet and satisfy my desire. Join
me unto thee with an unspeakable band of love: for thou only fillest the mind
of him that loves thee, and without thee all things are distasteful.

CHAP. XXIIII. Of flying curious inquiry of the life of others.
SON Our Lord. Eccls. 3. and 1. Tim. 5.
be not curious: trouble not thy self with idle cares. What is this or that to
thee? do thou follow me. For what is it to thee, whether that man be such or
no, or whether this man do, or speak this or that? Joan. 21.
Thou shall not need to answer for others, but shall give account of thy
self. Gal. 6.
Why therefore do thou trouble thy self? Behold I know every one what he is,
and do see all things that are under the sun: and do understand how it is
with every one, what he thinks, what he would, and at what his intention
aymeth. All things therefore are to be committed unto me: but do thou keep thy
self in good peace, and suffer the unquiet to do as they will. Whatsoever they
shall have done, or said, shall fall upon themselves, for they cannot deceive
me.

2. Desire not too great fame in this world, nor to be known to many, nor to
have the private love of men: for these things breed distractions, and cause
great darkness of heart. I would willingly utter my words, and reveal my secrets
unto thee, if thou did diligently observe my coming: and did open the
door of thy heart unto me. Be careful and watch in prayer, and humble thy self
in all things.

CHAP. XXV. VVherin does the firm peace of the heart, and true profit consist.
SON Our Lord.
I have said: Peace I leave to you, my peace I give to you: not as the world
gives, do I give to you. All do desire peace, but all care not for those
things that appertain unto true peace. Joan. 4
My peace is with the humble, and meek of heart. Thy peace shall be in much
patience. If thou will hear me and follow my voice thou may enjoy much
peace. What The Servant.
then shall I do? In Our Lord.
every thing attend unto thy self what thou do and what thou say: and
direct thy whole intention unto this, that thou may please me alone, and
desire or seek nothing out of me. Of the sayings and doings of others judge
nothing rashly: neither do thou entangle thy self with things not committed
unto thee: and doing thus, it may be thou shall be little or seldom troubled.

2. But never to feel any trouble at all, nor to suffer any grief of heart or
body, is not the state of this life, but of everlasting rest. Think not
therefore that thou have found true peace, if thou feel no sorrow, nor that
then all is well, if thou have no adversary: nor that it is perfect, if all
things be done according to thy desire. Neither do thou then esteem highly of
thy self, or imagine thy self to be especially beloved, if thou be in great
devotion, and sweetness: for in these things a true lover of virtue is not
tried: neither does the profit and perfection of man consist in having them.

3. Wherein The Servant.
then Lord? In Our Lord.
offering thy self from the very bottom of thy heart, unto the divine service,
not seeking thine own interest, or commodity, neither in great nor little,
neither in time nor eternity: so that with equal countenance, thou may
persist in thanksgiving, both in prosperity and in adversity, waighing all
things with an equal balance. If thou be of such courage and so patient in
hope, that when inward comfort is withdrawn from thee, thou prepare thy heart
to suffer greater matters, and not justify thy self, as though thou ought
not to suffer these, and so great afflictions, but justify me in whatsoever I
appoint, and praise my holy name; then thou walk in the true and right way
of peace: and thou shall have undoubted hope to see my face again with great
joy. And if thou attain to the full contempt of thy self; then shall thou
enjoy as great abundance of peace, as thy banishment may permit.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the excellency of a free mind, which humble prayer better
deserves, then reading.
LORD The Servant.
it is the work of a perfect man, never to slack his mind from the attentive
thought of heavenly things, and as it were to pass without care through many
cares: not faintingly, but with a certain priuiledg of a free mind, adhering
by inordinate affection to no creature.

2. I beseech thee most merciful God, preserve me from the cares of this life:
least I should be too much entangled thereby: and from the many necessities of
the body, least I should be enthralled by pleasure from all hindera^ces of the
soul, least broken with troubles I should be dejected and dismayed. I mean
not from those things that worldly vanity so greatly desires: but from those
miseries, that as punishments, do weigh down and hinder the soul of thy
servant, Genesis 3. and Romans 7.
with the general curse of mortality, that it cannot enter into liberty of
spirit, as often as it would.

3. O my God, the unspeakable sweetness, make bitter unto me all carnal
comfort, which may draw me away from the love of everlasting happynes, and
wickedly allure me to it self with the force of a certain present delight.
Romans 12.
Let not flesh and blood overcome me o Lord. Let not the world and the short
glory thereof deceive me. Let not the Devil and his subtle fraud supplant me.
Give me force to resist, patience to suffer, and constancy to persevere. Give
me instead of all the comforts of the world the most sweet unction of thy
spirit: and in lieu of carnal love, power into my soul the love of thy name.

4. Behold, meat, drink, clothes, and other necessaries for the maintenance
of the body, are burdensome unto a fervent spirit. Grant me to affect such
nourishments in due measure, and not to be entangled with an over great desire
of the^. It is not lawful to renounce them wholly, for that nature is to be
maintained: but to desire superfluityes, and those things that do rather
delight, then sustain, the law of God forbids: for otherwise the flesh
would rebel against the spirit. Here in I beseech thee, let thy hand govern
me, and teach me, that I may not exceed.

CHAP. XXVII. That private love most hinders from the chiefest good.
SON Our Lord.
, thou ought to give all for all, and to retain nothing of thy self. Know
that the love of thy self, does hurt thee more, then any thing in the world.
According to the love, and affection thou bear them, so does every thing
cleave unto thee more or less. If thy love be pure, simple, and well ordered,
thou shall be free from bondage. Matt. 6.
Covet not that which thou may not have. Be not willing to have that, which
may hinder thee and deprive thee of inward liberty. It is a wonderful thing
that thou committest not thy self wholly unto me, from the bottom of thy heart,
with all things, that thou can desire, or have.

2. Why do thou consume thy self with vain grief? Exodus 18. and Mich. 4.
Why tyrest thou thy mind with needless cares? Resign thy self to me, and
thou shall feel no loss at all. If thou seek this or that, and would be
here or there, to enjoy thine own commodity and pleasure, thou shall never
be in quiet, nor free from trouble of mind, for in every thing, somewhat will be
wanting, and in every place there will be some that will cross thee.

3. Not every external thing therefore attained, and heaped together helps
thee: but it rather avails, if thou despise it, and do root it out from
thy heart, which thou must not understand only of thy revenues and wealth, but
of the desire of honor also, and vain praise; all which do pass away with
this fading world. The place avails little, Esa. 4.8.
if the spirit of fervor be wanting: neither shall that peace which is sought
abroad long continue, if the state of thy heart be destitute of a true
foundation: that is, unless thou persist in me, thou may change, but not
better thy self. For when occasion does happen, thou shall find that which
thou soughtest to fly, and perhaps more.

A Prayer for cleansing the heart, and obtaining of heavenly wisdom.

4. Confirm The Servant. Ps. 50.
me Lord with the grace of thy holy spirit. Give me force to strengthen my
inward man, and to purge my heart from all unprofitable care, and grief; Ephesians. 3.
not to be drawn away with sundry desires of any thing either little or great:
Matt. 6.
but to consider all things, Eccls. 1. and 2.
how they are transitory, and do quickly fade, and that my self do also pass
away together with them: for nothing is permanent under the sun, where all
things are vanity, and affliction of mind. O how wise is he that so considers
them!

5. Grant me Lord heavenly wisdom, that I may learn above all things to
seek and find thee, above all things to delight in thee, and to love thee: and
to think of all created things as they are, according to the disposition of
thy wisdom. Grant me prudently to avoid him, that flatters me, Ephesians. 4.
and to suffer patiently him that contradicts me. It is great wisdom not to be
moved with every blast of words: nor to give ear to dangerous flattery: for
so we shall go on securely in the way which we have begun.

CHAP. XXVIII. Against the tongue of Slaunderers.
SON Our Lord.
be not grieved if some think evil of thee, and speak that which thou do
not willingly hear. 1. Cor. 4.
Thou ought to judge the worst of thy self, and to think no man weaker
then thy self. If thou walk according to spirit, thou will not much esteem
of flying words. It is no small wisdom, to be silent in time of evil, and
inwardly to turn to me, and not to be troubled with the judgment of men.

2. Let not thy peace be in the tongues of men For whether they judge well or
evil, thou art nevertheless always the same. Where is true peace, and true
glory? Is it not in me? And he that coueteth not to please men, Joan: 17.
nor fears to displease them, shall enjoy much peace. From inordinate love
and vain fear arises all disquiet of heart, and distraction of the senses.

CHAP. XXIX. How we ought to call upon God, and bless him when tribulation
draws near.
BLESSED The Servant.
(o Lord) be thy name for ever: since it pleases thee that this temptation and
tribulation should fall upon me. Job. 1. and Ps. 112.
I cannot fly it: but have need to fly to thee, that thou may help me, and
turn it to my good. Lord I am now afflicted, and it is not well with me, I am
much troubled with this present grief. And now, beloved Father, what shall I
say? Matt. 26.
I am taken in narrow straits, save me in this hour. Yea therefore I am fallen
in this hour, that thou may be glorified, when I shall be greatly humbled,
and by thee delivered. Let it please thee Lord to deliver me: for poor wretch
that I am, what can I do, and whither shall I go without thee? Grant patience
Lord, even this time also. Help me my God, and then I will not fear how much
soever I be oppressed.

2. And now in this, what shall I say? Matt. 6.
Lord, thy will be done. I have well deserved to be afflicted and grieved. Surely
I ought to bear it: and I would to God I might bear it with patience, until
the tempest be passed over, and it become calm. But thy omnipotent hand is
able to take this temptation from me, and to assuage the violence thereof, that
I utterly sink not under it, as oftentimes heretofore thou have done unto me,
my Lord, my Mercy. And how much the more hard it is to me, so much the more
easy is this change of thy mighty hand to thee.

CHAP. XXX. Of craving the divine aid, and confidence of recovering grace.
SON Our Lord.
I am thy Lord, who do use to give comfort in the day of tribulation. Nahu^. 1.
Come unto me when it is not well with thee. Matt. 11.
This is that which most of all hinders heavenly consolation, that thou art
slow in turning thy self unto prayer. For before thou do earnestly commend
thy self to me, thou seek many comforts, and delightest thy self in
outward things. And hence it proceeds that all does little profit thee,
until thou consider that I am he, that deliver those that trust in me: and
that out of me there is neither powerful help, nor profitable counsel, nor
remedy that can continue. But now thou having recovered breath after the
tempest, gather strength again in the light of my mercies: for I am at hand
says our Lord, Matt. 23.
to repair all, not only entirely, but also abundantly.

2. Is there any thing hard to me? or am I like unto him that promises and
performs not? Where is thy faith? Be firm and constant. Take courage and be
patient, comfort will be given thee in due time. Attend me, expect, I will come
and cure thee. It is a temptation that vexes thee: and a vain fear that
affrighteth thee. What else does the care for furture incertainties bring thee,
but sorrow upon sorrow? Sufficient for the day is the evil thereof. Matt. 6.
It is a vain and unprofitable thing to be grieved, or to rejoice for future
things, that perhaps will never happen.

3. But it is incident to man, to be deluded with such imaginations: and a
sign of little courage to be so easily drawn away by the suggestion of the
enemy. For he cares not so he delude and deceive thee, whether it be true or
false which he proposes: whether he overthrow thee with the love of present,
or the fear of future things. Let not therefore thy heart be troubled, Ps. 90.
neither do thou fear. Believe in me and put thy trust in my mercy. When thou
think thy self furthest off from me, often times I am nearest unto thee.
When thou iudgest that almost all is lost, then oftentimes greatest gain of
merit is at hand. All is not lost when any thing falls out contrary unto
thee. Thou must not judge according to that which thou feel for the present:
nor give thy self over to any grief from whence soever it comes, as though
all hope of delivery were quite gone.

4. Think not thy self wholly left, although for a time I have sent thee some
tribulation, or with drawn thy desired comfort: for this is the way to the
Kingdom of heaven. And without doubt it is more expedient for thee, and the
rest of my servants, that ye be exercised with many adversities, then that ye
should have all things according to your desires. I know the secret thoughts of
thy heart, and that it is very expedient for thy souls health, that thou be
left sometimes without taste and feeling of spiritual sweetness, least perhaps
thou should be puffed up with good success, and should please thy self
in that which thou art not. That which I have given. I can take away, and
restore it again when I please.

5. When I give it, it is mine: when I withdraw it, I take not any thing that
is thine: for mine is every good, Iac. 1.
and every perfect gift. If I send thee affliction, or any cross whatsoever,
repine not, nor be not dismayed: I can quickly lift thee up again, and turn
all thy sorrow into joy. Nevertheless I am just, and greatly to be praised,
when I do all this unto thee.

6. If thou be wise, and consider well thy case, thou will never yield so
cowardly to grief, for any adversity that befalles thee, but rather rejoice
and give thanks: yea to account this thy only joy, that afflicting thee with
sorrows, I do not spare thee. As my Father has loved me, I also love you, said
I unto my beloved Disciples, whom certainly I sent not to temporal joys,
Joan. 15.
but to great conflicts: not to honors, but to contempts: not to idleness, but
to labors: not to rest, but to bring much fruit in patience. My Son remember
these words.

CHAP. XXXI. Of the contempt of all creatures to find our Creator.
LORD The Servant.
, I stand yet in need of great grace, if I must go so far as that no man or
creature can hinder me. For as long as any thing houldeth me, I cannot fly
freely unto thee. He desired to fly with great liberty that said, Who will give
me wings like a dove, Ps. 54.
and I will fly and rest? What thing more quiet then a simple eye? Matt. 6.
And what more free, then he that desires nothing upon earth? Man ought
therefore to ascend above all creatures, and perfectly to forsake himself, and
to remain in excess of mind: and consider that thou, who art the maker of all
things, have nothing amongst creatures like unto thee. And unless a man be
free from the affection of all creatures, he cannot with freedom of mind
attend unto divine things. And for this cause there are so few contemplative
men to be found, for that few can wholly sequester themselves from fading
creatures.

2. Much grace is necessary to lift up a soul, and to carry it above it self.
And unless a man be lifted up in spirit, and delivered from all creatures, and
wholly united unto God: whatsoever he knows, and whatsoever he has, is of
little account. Long shall he be little, and lie in earthly baseness, that
esteems any thing great, but the one only unmeasurable and eternal good. For
whatsoever is not God is nothing, and ought to be accounted as nothing. There
is great difference between the wisdom of a spiritual and devout person, and
the knowledge of a learned and studious Clerk. Far more noble is that learning
which flows from above, from the divine influence, then that which is
painfully gotten by the wit of man.

3. There are many that desire contemplation, but they endeavor not to
exercise those things that are required thereunto. It is a great hinderance
that we rest in signs and sensible things, and have little true mortification.
I know not what it is, nor by what spirit we are lead, nor what we pretend, we
that seem to be called spiritual, that we take so much pains, and so great
care for transitory and base things, and scarce or seldom think of our own
inward profit, with full recollection of our senses.

4. Alas, presently after a slight recollection, we break forth: and weigh
not our works with diligent examination. We mind not where our affections lie:
nor bewail the impurity and many faults that are in all our actions. For all
flesh had corrupted her way, Genesis 6. and 7.
and therefore did that general flood ensue. Since our inward affection then is
much corrupted, it must needs be that our action proceeding thereof, be
corrupted, as a sign of the want of inward vigor. From a pure heart proceeds
the fruit of good life.

5. We ask how much one has done: but how virtuous his actions are, is not so
diligently considered. We inquire whether he be strong, rich, beautiful,
handsome, a good writer, a good singer, or a good labourer: but how poor he is
in spirit, how patient, and meek, how devout and spiritual, is seldom spoken
of. Nature respects outward things, grace turns herself to the inward
virtues. That is often deceived: this has her trust in God, to the end she be
not deceived.

CHAP. XXXII. Of the denrall of our selves, and forsaking all our affections.
SON Our Lord.
, thou can not possess perfect liberty, unless thou wholly deny thy self.
All such as be lovers of themselves are bound in setters, Matt. 16. and 19.
they are covetous, curious, wanderers, seekers of ease, and not of those
things that appertain to Jesus Christ; but oftentimes devising, and framing
that which will not continue. For all shall perish that proceeds not from
God. Keep this short and complete word, Forsake all, and thou shall find all.
Leave thy inordinate desires, and thou shall find rest. Consider this well: and
when thou have fulfilled it, thou shall understand all.

2. Lord The Servant.
, this is not one days work, nor childrens sport: yea in this short sentence
all the perfection of Religious persons is included. Son Our Lord.
, thou must not go back nor straight ways be dejected, when thou hear the
way of the perfect; but rather be stirred up to more worthy and noble atte^pts,
or at least to conceive an earnest desire thereof. I would it were so well with
thee, and thou were come so far, that thou were no longer a lover of thy self,
but did stand meetly at my beck, and at his whom I have appointed a Father
over thee; then thou should exceedingly please me, and all thy life would
pass away in joy and peace. Thou have yet many things to forsake which
unless thou wholly resign over unto me, thou shall not attain to that which
thou desire, I counsel thee to buy of me purified gould, Apoc. 3.
that thou may become rich, that is, heavenly wisdom, which treads
underfoot all base and earthly things. Set little by the wisdom of this world,
and esteem not of the contentment of men, nor thine own fancyes.

3. I said, that thou should buy the mean and base things, with the
precious, and those that were with men of great esteem. For true heavenly
wisdom seems very base, and of small account, and is scarce thought of by
men: for that esteems not highly of it self, nor seeks to be magnified
upon earth, which many praise from the teeth outward, but in their life they
are far from it: yet is it the precious pearl which is hidden from many. Matt.
13.


CHAP. XXXIII. Of Inconstancy of heart, and of directing our final intentions
unto God.
SON, Our Lord.
trust not to thy affection: that which now is, will quickly change into
another. As long as thou live thou art subject to mutability, even against
thy will: so that now thou art merry, now sad, now quiet, now troubled, now
devout, now distracted, now diligent, now idle, now heavy, now light. But he
that is wife, and well instructed in spirit, remains always one in the
midst of these changes, not heeding what he seeks in himself, or which way
the wind of mutability blows: but that the whole intention of his mind, may
tend as it ought, to the most perfect and best end. For so he may continue one,
and the self same, without any change in the midst of so many sundry chances,
directing always the sincere eye of his intention unto me.

2. And how much purer the eye of the intention is, Matt. 6.
so much the more constantly does he pass through the variety of many contrary
waves. But in many things the eye of a sincere intention waxes blind, for it
quickly looks upon some delight, some object that occurreth. And it is rare
to find one that is wholly free from all blemish of seeking himself. So the
Jews in times past came into Bethania to Martha and Mary, Joan. 11.
not for Jesus alone, but to see Lazarus also. The eye of our intention
therefore, is to be purged, Matt. 6.
that it may be sincere and pure, and to be directed unto me, neglecting the
multitude and variety of earthly objects,

CHAP. XXXIIII. That God is sweet above all things, and in all things to him
that loves.
BEHOVLD The Servant.
my God, and all things! What would I have more, and what can I desire more
happy? O sweet and comfortable word! but to him that loves the word, not the
world, nor those things that are in the world. My God, and all things! Enough
is said to him that understands: and it is pleasant to him that loves, to
repeat it often. For when thou art present, all things do yield delight, but
when thou art absent, al becomes irksome. Thou give quiet of heart and much
peace, and pleasant joy. Thou make men think well of all, and praise thee in
all things: neither can any thing please us long without thee: but if it be
pleasant and delightsome, thy grace must be present, and it must be seasoned
with the sweetness of thy wisdom.

2. What can be distasteful unto him, to whom thou art pleasing? And whom
thou delightest not, what can be pleasant? But the wise of the world, 1. Cor.
1. Romans 8. and 1. Io. 2.
and that have their contentment in sensual things, cannot attain to thy
wisdom, for in the world is much vanity, and in the flesh is death. But they
that follow thee by the contempt of worldly things, and mortification of the
flesh, are proved to be truly wise: for they are changed from vanity to truth,
from flesh to spirit. To these God is sweet, and what good soever is found in
creatures, they wholly refer unto the praise of their Maker. Notwithstanding
great, yea very great is the difference between the sweetness of the Creator,
and of the creature, of eternity and of time, of uncreated and created light.

3. O everlasting light, surpassing al created lights, cast forth the beams of
thy brightness from above, and pierce the most inward corners of my heart:
purify, rejoice, clarify and quicken my spirit with all the powers thereof,
that I may cleave unto thee with excess of unspeakable joy. O when will that
blessed and desired hour come, that I may be filled with thy presence, and
thou may be unto me all, in all things: as long as this is not granted me, I
shall not have full nor perfect joy. Alas! my old man yet lives in me, Romans 7.
he is not wholly crucified, he is not perfectly dead. He does yet covet
strongly against the spirit, and moves civil wars, and suffers not the
kingdom of my soul to be in peace.

4. But thou that rulest the powers of the sea, Ps. 88.
and asswagest the motion of the waves, Psalm. 7^.
rise and help me: dissipate the people that desire war, and destroy them in
thy might, and let thy hand be glorified: Ps. 30.
for there is no hope nor refuge for me, but in thee, my Lord God.

CHAP. XXXV. That there is no security from temptation in this life.
SON Our Lord.
, there is no security in this life: as long as thou live thou shall always
have need of spiritual armor. Thou live among enemies, Job. 7.
and art assaulted on all sides: if therefore thou defendest not thy self on
every side with the shield of patience, 2. Cor. 6.
thou can not be long unwounded. Moreover if thou fix not thy heart on me
with a sincere will to suffer all things for me, thou can not sustain the
heat of this battle, nor get that victorious crown which they have that are
in glory. Thou ought therefore manfully to go through all, and to use a
strong hand against whatsoever withsta^deth thee. For to him that overcomes
is given Manna; Apoc. 2.
and to the negligent is left much woe.

2. If thou seek rest in this world, how will thou then attain to
everlasting rest? Give not thy self to much ease, but to much patience. Seek
true peace, not in earth, but in heaven; not in men, nor in any creature, but
in God alone. Thou ought for the love of God willingly to undergo
whatsoever labors, to endure whatsoever griefs, temptations, vexations,
anxieties, necessities, infirmities, injuries, detractions, reprehensions,
humiliatio^s, confusions, corrections, and contempts: these help to the
attaining of virtue: these try a Nouice of Christ, these make a heavenly
crown. I will give an everlasting reward for a short labor, and infinite glory
for transitory confusion.

3. Think thou, that thou shall always have spiritual consolations at
will? My Saints had not so, but many afflictions, and sundry temptations, and
many discomforts: all which they endured patiently, and trusted rather in God,
then in themselves: Romans 8.
knowing that the sufferings of this time are not condign to the deserving of
future glory. Will thou have that straight ways, which many after tears, and
great labors have hardly obtained? Expect the coming of thy Lord, Ps. 26.
do manfully, be of good courage: fear not, do not fly, but offer both body
and soul for the glory of God. I will reward thee in most plentiful manner,
and I will be with thee in all thy tribulations.

CHAP. XXXVI. Against the vain Judgments of men.
SON, Our Lord.
fix thy heart steadfastly on God, and fear not the judgments of men, when thy
conscience gives testimony of thy justice and innocence. It is a good and a
happy thing to suffer in that sort: neither will it be burdensome to an humble
mind, nor to him that trusts rather in God, then in himself. The most part
of men are given to talk much, and therefore little care is to be had of their
words: Cor. 9.
neither is it possible to satisfy all. Though the Apostle endeavored to
please al in our Lord, Cor. 4.
and made himself all unto all, yet he little regarded that he was judged by
humane day. ^ol. 1.


2. He did for the edification and health of others as much as he could, and
lay in him: yet could he not hinder, but that he was sometimes judged, and
despised by others. Therefore he committed all to God, who knew all, and
defended himself with patience, and humility against evil tongues, and such
as thought vanities and lies, and spoke what they listed: Yet sometimes
notwithstanding he answered, least the weak might have received scandal by
his silence.

3. Who art thou, that fear a mortal man? to day he is, and to morrow he is
not seen. Fear God and the terror of men shall not trouble thee. 2. Mac. 2.
What harm can the words or injuries of any do thee? he rather hurts
himself then thee: Romans 2.
neither can he avoid the judgments of God, be he what he will. 1. Cor. 11.
Have thou God before thine eyes, and contend not with complaining words. And
if for the present thou seem to be troaden down, Heb. 12.
and to suffer shame and confusion, without desert, do not repine, neither do
thou lessen thy crown by thy impatience; but rather lift up thine eyes to me
in heaven. I am able to deliver thee from all shame and wrong, and to repay
every one according to their works.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of a full and pure resignation of our selves for the obtaining
freedom of heart.
SON Our Lord.
, leave thy self, and thou shall find me. Make choice of nothing, appropriate
nothing to thy self, and thou shall ever gain. For greater grace shall
always be given thee, when thou do perfectly resign thy self, and not
turn back to take thy self again. Lord, The Servant.
how often shall I resign my self? and wherein shall I forsake my self?
Allwaies, Our Lord.
and in every thing, as well in little as in great. I do except nothing, but do
require that thou be as it were naked and void of all things. Otherwise, how
can thou be perfectly mine, and I thine, unless both within and without thou
be free from all self-wil? And how much the sooner thou do this, so much the
better shall thou find thy self, and how much the more fully and sincerely
thou do it, so much the more shall thou please me, and so much the more shall
thou gain.

2. Some there are that resign themselves, but with some exception. For they
put not their whole trust in God, and therefore do labor to provide for
themselves. Some also at the first do offer all, but afterward being assailed
with temptations, do return again to that which they had left, and therefore
they go not forwards in the way of virtue. These shall not attain to the true
liberty of a pure heart, nor to the grace of my divine familiarity, unless they
first make an entire resignation, and offer themselves a daily sacrifice unto
me. For without this can never be obtained the union with me, wherewith my
Saints enjoy me.

3. I have often said unto thee, and now again I say the same: Forsake thy
self, resign thy self, Matt. 16.
and thou shall enjoy internal peace. Give all for all, seek nothing, require
nothing, repose thy self purely and with a full confidence in me, and I will
give my self unto thee, and darkness shall not cover thee. Let this be thy
whole endeauour^, let this be thy prayer, let this be thy desire, that casting
of all propriety, thou may all naked follow thy naked Savior Jesus: and
dying to thy self, may live eternally to me. Then shall vain fantasies,
evil perturbations, and all superfluous cares fly away: then shall immoderate
fear leave thee, and inordinate love shall dye.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of good government in outward things, and of recourse to God in
dangers.
SON Our Lord.
, thou ought with all diligence to procure, that in every place and action,
or external business, thou be inwardly free, and master of thy self, and
that all things be under thy disposition, and thou not subject to them; that
thou may be Lord and Master of thy actions, not a servant or a hireling, but
rather a freeman, and a true Hebrew, belonging to the lot and freedom of the
sons of God, who put the things that are present under their feet, and place
their thoughts on that which is eternal: who look on transitory things with
the left eye, and with the right do behold the things of heaven: who suffer
not themselves to be drawn to cleave unto them, but rather dispose and use
them, as they are ordained by God, and appointed by the Creator of all, who
has left nothing in his creatures without due order.

2. If thou remain firm and steadfast in all events, and do not weigh by
the outward appearance, not with a carnal eye, the things which thou see and
hear; Exodus 33.
but presently in every occasion do enter with Moses into the Tabernacle to
ask counsel of our Lord, thou shall sometimes hear the divine and celestial
oracle, and shall return instructed of many things both present and to come.
Moses had always recourse to the Tabernacle for the deciding of all doubts
and obscure questions, and fled to the help of prayer, for the remedy of the
iniquity and dangers of men. So ought thou in like manner to fly to the
closet of thy heart, earnestly craving the divine favor. For the Scripture
testifies, that therefore was Iosue and the children of Israel deceived by the
Gabaonites, Iosue 9.
because they consulted not first with God, but giving too lightly credit to
fair words were deluded with counterfeit piety.

CHAP. XXXIX. That a man be not over earnest in his affairs.
SON, Our Lord.
always commit thy cause to me, I will dispose well of it in due time: expect
my ordination, and thou shall find it will be for thy good. Lord, The Servant.
I do most willingly commit all unto thee, for my care can profit little. O
that I cleaued not too much to future events, but offered my self with all
readiness of mind to thy divine pleasure!

2. Son, Our Lord.
oftentimes a man does earnestly labor for that which he desires: and when he
has gotten it, he begins to be of another mind, and not to esteen e so much
of it, as before he did: for man's affections do not long continue fixed on one
thing, but do pass from one to another. I^ is therefore a matter, not of least
moment,, to forsake our selves even in the least things.

3. The true spiritual profit of man, consists in denying and forsaking of
himself; and he that is resigned, lives in great freedom and security. But
the ancient enemy, who always labors to withstand the servants of God, 1.
Pet. 5.
omitteth at no time his wonted temptations, but day and night lies still in
wait, to cast the unwary, if he can, into the snare of deceit. Watch therefore
and pray, says our Lord, Matt. 26.
that you enter not into temptation.

CHAP. XL. That man has no good of himsefe, nor anything whereof he can glory.
LORD, The Servant. Psalm. 8.
what is man, that thou art mindful of him, or the soon of man, that thou
vouchsafest to visit him? What has man deserved that thou should give him
thy grace? Lord, what cause have I to complain, if thou forsake me? Or if thou
do not that which I desire, what can I justly say against it? Surely, this I
may truly think and say: Lord, I am nothing, I can do no thing, I have
nothing that is good of my self: but in all things I do fail, and am
defective, and do ever tend to nothing: and unless thou help me, and do
interiourly instruct me, I become cold, and am dissolved.

2. But thou, o Lord, art always the same, Ps. 101.
and endurest for ever, always good, just, and holy, doing all things well,
justly, and holily, and disposing all things with wisdom. But I that am more
inclined to fall, then to go forwards, do never continue in one estate: for
seven different times are changed over me, yet does it soon turn to the
better, when it so pleases thee, and when thou vouchsafest to stretch forth
thy helping hand. For thou alone can help me without the favor of man, and
so strengthen me, that my countenance shall be no more changed, but my heart
shall be converted, and rest in thee alone.

3. Wherefore if I could once perfectly forsake all humane comfort, either for
the love of devotion, or for mine own necessity, which inforceth me to seek
after thee (for none else can comfort me) then might I well hope in thy grace,
and rejoice in the gift of new consolation.

4. Thanks be unto thee, from whence all proceeds, as often as it goes well
with me: but I am meet vanity, and nothing before thee, an unconstant and
weak man. Where of then can I glory? Or why do I desire to be esteemed of? Is
it not of nothing? And this is most vain. Truly vain glory is an evil plague
and very great vanity: because it draws from true glory, and robs the
soul of heavenly grace. For whilst a man pleases himself, he displeases
thee: whilst he gapeth after the praise of men, he is deprived of true virtue.

5. But true glory, and holy exultation, and joy, Abac. 3.
is for a man to glory in thee, and not in himself; to rejoice in thy name,
and not in his own virtue, Psalm. 112. and 1^3.
nor to delight in any creature, but for thee. Praised be thy name, not mine:
magnified be thy work, not mine: let thy holy name be for ever blessed, but to
me let no part of men's praises be given. Thou art my glory, thou art the joy of
my heart. In thee will I glory and rejoice all the day; but for my self I will
not joy, but in my infirmityes.

6. Let the Jews seek the glory, Joan. 5.
which one man gives to another: I will desire this, which is from God alone.
For all humane glory, all temporal honor, all worldly highness, compared to
thy eternal glory, is vanity and folly. O my truth, my mercy, my God, most
Blessed Trinity, to thee alone be all praise, honor, virtue, and glory for all
eternity.

CHAP. XLI. Of the contempt of all temporal honors.
SON, Our Lord.
trouble not thy self, if thou see others honored and advanced, and thy
self contemned and debased. Lift up thy heart unto me in heaven, and the
contempt of men in earth will not grieve thee. Lord, The Servant.
we are blind, and quickly seduced with vanity. If I look well into my self,
I cannot say, that any creature has done me wrong, and therefore I cannot
justly complain of thee.

2. But because I have often and grievously sinned against thee, all creaturs
do justly take arms against me: for shame and contempt is due unto me, but
unto thee praise, honor, and glory. And unless I do so prepare my self, that
I be willing, and do rejoice to be despised and forsaken of all creatures, and
to be esteemed nothing at all, I cannot obtain internal strength and peace,
nor be spiritually enlightened, nor wholly united unto thee.

CHAP. XLII. That our peace is not to be placed in men.
SON, Our Lord.
if the peace thou have with any, be grounded on the opinion which thou have of
him, or on the contentme^t thou receauest in his company, thou shall ever be
unconstant and subject to disquiet: but if thou have recourse unto the
everliving and eternal Truth, a friend going from thee or dying shall not
grieve thee. The love of thy friend ought to rest in me, and for me is he to be
beloved, whosoever he be, whom thou think well of, and is verily dear unto
thee in this life. No friendship can avail, or continue without me; neither is
the love true and pure, which they have, whose hearts are not joined together
by me. Thou ought to be so dead to such affections of beloved friends, that
(forasmuch as appertains unto thee) thou should wish to be without all
company of men. Man approaches so much the nearer unto God, how much the
further off he departs from all earthly comfort: so much the higher also he
ascends unto God, by how much lower he descends into himself, and how much
the baser he is in his own co^ceipt.

2. But he that attributes any good unto himself, hinders the coming of
Gods grace into him. For the grace of the holy Ghost ever seeks an humble
heart. If thou could perfectly annihilate thy self, and purge thy self of all
created love, then should there flow into thee great abou^dance of my grace.
When thou castest thy eyes on creatures, the sight of thy Creator is taken
from thee. Learn to overcome thy self in all things, for the love of thy
Creator; and then shall thou be able to attain to heavenly knowledge. How
little soever it be, if it be inordinately loved and regarded, it defiles the
soul, and hinders the enjoying of the chiefest good.

CHAP. XLIII. Against vain and secular knowledge.
SON, Our Lord.
let not the fair speeches and subtle sayings of men move thee. 1. Cor. 4.
For the Kingdom of God consists not in words, but in virtue. Observe well
the words which I speak; for they inflame the heart, and enlighten the mind,
induce co^punction, and bring sundry comforts. Do thou never read to show thy
self learned or wise: but labor to mortify thy vices, for that will profit
thee more, then the knowledge of many hard and difficult questions.

2. When thou shall have read and known many things, thou ought ever to
return to one beginning. I am he, that teaches man all, knowledge: and do give
to little ones* a more clear understanding, then can be taught by man. He
therefore, to whom I speak, shall quickly be wise, and shall profit much in
spirit. Woe be to them, that inquire many curious things of men, and do little
desire to know the way how to serve me. The time will come, when the Master of
Masters shall appear, Christ the Lord of Angels, to hear the lessons of all,
that is, to examine the consciences of every one: and then he will search
Jerusalem, with a candle, Soph. 1. 1. Cor. 4.
and the hidden things of darkness shall be laid open, and the inventions of
tongues shall be silent.

3. I am he that in an instant do raise up the humble mind, to under stand more
reasons of the everlasting truth, then can be gotten by ten years study in
schools. I teach without noise of words, without confusion of opinions, without
ambition of honor, without contention of arguments. I am he that teaches to
despise earthly things, to loath things present, to seek the everlasting, to
delight in the things that are eternal, to fly honors, to suffer scandalls, to
place all hope in me, to desire nothing out of me, and above all things
fervently to love me.

4. For one by loving me entirely, learned divine things, and spoke wonders: he
prosited more in forsaking all things, then in studying subtilties. To some I
speak ordinary things, to others, things more especial: to some I appear
sweetly by signs and figures, but to some I reveal mysteries with much light.
The voice of bo^ks is one, but it teaches not all men alike. For I am the
internal teacher, I am the Truth* the searcher of the heart, the understander of
thoughts, the setter forwards of good works, distributing to every one
according to my will.

CHAP. XLIIII. Of not drawing outward things to our selves.
SON, Our Lord.
in many things thou ought to be ignorant, and esteem thy self as dead
upon earth; and as one to whom the whole world is crucified. Thou must also
pass over many things with a deaf ear, and rather think of that, which
appertains to thy peace. It is more profitable to turn thine eyes from the
sight of unpleasing things, and to leave unto every one his own opinion, then
to strive with contentious words. If thou stand well with God, and
considerest his judgments, thou shall the more easily yield to the will of
others.

2. O The Servant
Lord, to what an estate are we come! Behold, we bewail a temporal loss, and
for a little gain we toil and spare no labor, and the spiritual damage of
our soul is forgotten, and hardly at length called to mind. That which little
or nothing profits, is always remembered, and that which is chiefty
necessary, is neglige^tly passed over, because man's nature carries him to
external things; and unless he quickly return unto himself, he lies
drowned in them with delight.

CHAP. XLV. That credit is not to be given to all men: and how prone man is to
offend in words.
HELP me The Servant.
Lord, in my tribulation, for vain is the defense of man. How often have I
been deceived, finding want of faith, Psalm. 59.
where I thought it sure? And how often have I found faith, where I least
expected it? It is vain therefore to trust in men: but the safety of the just,
o Lord, is in thee. Blessed be thou my God, in all things that befall us. We
are weak and inconstant, quickly deceived, and soon changed.

2. Who is he, that is able so warily to keep himself, that he never fall into
any deceit or doubt? But he that trusts in thee, o Lord, and seeks thee
with a pure heart, Prou. 10.
does not easily fall; and if he fall into any tribulation, be he never so much
inthralled, yet he shall quickly be delivered or comforted by thee For thou will
not forsake him for ever that trusts in thee. The friend is rare to be found,
that continues faithful in his friends distress, but thou, o Lord, thou
alone art faithful at all times, and there is none like unto thee.

3. O how wise was that holy soul that said: My mind is firmly settled and
grounded in Christ! If it were so with me, then would not humane fear so
easily trouble me, nor words move me. Who can foresee all things* Who is able
to beware beforehand of future evils? If things even foreseen do oftentimes
hurt us, how can things unlooked for choose but wound us grievously? But why
did I not provide better for my self, miserable wretch? Why also have I so
easily given credit to others? But alas we are men, and God knows weak and
frail men, although by many we are reputed and called Angels. To whom shall I
give credit Lord? to whom but to thee? Thou art the truth that neither do
deceive, nor can be deceived. And on the other side, every man is a liar,
weak, unconstant, and subject to fall, especially in words: and therefore we
must not easily give credit even to that, which in outward show seems at the
first a certain truth.

4. O with how great wisdom have thou warned us to take heed of men! and
because the enemies of man are his familiar and domestical acquaintance, not to
trust, Matt. 7.
if one should say: Behold here, or behold there. I am taught to my cost,
and I would to God I might thereby increase my care, and not my folly. Be wary,
faith one, be wary, keep unto thy self what I tell thee: and whilst I hold my
peace, and think it is secret, he cannot keep that secret, which he desired
should be secret, but presently discloseth me and himself, and goes his way.
From such tales, and such improuident people, protect me Lord, that I fall not
into their hands, nor ever commit such errors, Give me grace my God to observe
truth, and constancy in my words, and remove far from me a deceiptfull tongue.
What I am not willing to suffer, I ought by all means to avoid.

5. O how good and quiet a thing it is to be silent, and not to talk of
others, nor to believe all that is said, nor easily to report what we have
heard; Prou. 25.
to lay ones self open to few; Esa. 24.
always to seek after thee, the behoulder of the heart; not to be carried
about with every wind of words, but to desire that all things both within and
without, be accomplished according to thy will and pleasure. How secure is it
for the keeping of heavenly grace, to fly the sight of men? And not to seek
those things, that seem to cause admiration abroad, but to follow that with
all diligence, which brings amendment of life, and increase of fervor.

6. To how many has virtue, known and over hastily commended been hurtful?
How profitable has grace been, kept with silence in this mortal life, which
is nothing but a perpetual temptation, and a warfare?

CHAP. XLVI. Of putting our trust in God, when evil words arise.
SON, Our Lord.
be constant, and put thy trust in me. For what are words, but words? They
pass through the air, but hurt not. Psalm. 36.
If thou be guilty, determine willingly to amend thy self: if thou be
innocent, resolve to suffer this willingly, at least for God. It is a small
matter to suffer sometimes a few words, if thou have not yet the courage to
endure stripes. And why do small matters go to thy heart, but for that thou art
yet carnal, and regardest men more then thou ought? Because thou art afraid
to be despised, therefore thou will not be reprehended for thy faults, and
therefore seek shadows of excuses.

2. But look better into thy self and thou shall see, that the world yet
lives in thee, and a vain desire to please men. For when thou refusest to be
humbled, and reproved for thy faults, it is surely evident, that thou art
neither truly humble, nor dead to the world, nor the world perfectly crucified
to thee. But give diligent ear to my words, and thou shall little respect ten
thousand words spoken by men. Behold, if al should be spoken against thee
that could be most maliciously invented, what would it hurt thee, if thou
sufferedst it to pass, and made no reckoning at all of it? Matt. 10. Luc. 11.
Could al those words pluck as much as one hair from thy head?

3. But he that has not his heart within him, nor God before his eyes is
easily moved with every little dispraise, when as he that trusts in me, and
confideth not in his own judgment, shall be free from humane fears. For I am
the Judge and the discerner of all secrets. I know how the matter passed, Psalm.
7.
I know him that offers the injury, and him that suffers it. From me has
this word proceeded: this has happened by my permissio^, that out of many
hearts thoughts may be revealed. I shall judge the guilty and the innocent, Luc.
2.
but by a secret judgment I would beforehand try them both.

4. The testimony of men oftentimes deceaueth: my judgment is always true, it
shall stand, and not be overthrown. It is commonly hidden and secret, and not
known in every thing but to few: notwithstanding it never erreth, neither can
it err, although to the eyes of the foolish it seems not right. Men ought
therefore to return to me in every judgment, and not to stand in their own
opinions. For the just man will not be troubled, Prou. 12.
whatsoever happens unto him for God: and if any thing be wrongfully brought
forth against him, he will not much care, neither will he vainly be glad, if
by others he be with reason excused. Psalm. 7.
For he considers that I am he, that searches the heart and reins, and do
judge, not according to the outward face, nor humane appare^ce. For that is
oftentimes found culpable in my sight, that in the judgment of men is
commendable.

5. O Lord The Servant
my God, the just Judge, strong and patient, thou know the frailty and
peruersity of man, be thou my strength, and all my trust, for mine own
conscience suffices me not. Thou know that which I cannot reach unto, and
therefore in every reprehension I ought to have submitted my self, and to have
borne it patiently: vouchsafe mercifully to pardon me, as often as I have
failed heerin, and give me again grace of greater sufferance. For thy
bountiful mercy is more auaylable to me for the obtaining of pardon, then my
conceived justice for the defense of my hidden conscience. 1. Cor. 4.
Although my conscience accuse me not, yet I cannot hereby justify my self;
Ps. 142.
for if thy mercy be away, no man living shall be justified in thy sight.

CHAP. XLVII. That all grievous things are to be endured for life everlasting.
SON, Our Lord.
let not the pains dismay thee which thou have undertaken for me, neither be
thou disco^forted for the tribulatio^s which do befall thee; but let my promise
strengthen and comfort thee in all events. I am able to reward thee above all
measure. Thou shall not long toil here, nor always be oppressed with grief.
Attend a while, and thou shall see a speedy end of thy evils. There will come
an hour when all labor and trouble shall cease. Little and short is all that
passes away with time.

2. Do as thou do, labor faithfully in my vineyard, I will be thy reward.
Write, read, sing, M^tt. 20.
mourn, observe silence, pray, suffer crosses ma^fully: life everlasting is
worthy of all these and greater co^bats Peace shall come in the day which is
known unto our Lord, and it shall not be day nor night, to wit, of this time,
but everlasting light, infinite brightness, steadfast peace, and secure rest.
Then thou shall not say, Who shall deliver me from the body of this death? Romans
7.
nor cry, Woe be unto me, for that my dwelling in a strange country is
prolonged! Psalm. 119.
For death shall be thrown down, and health shall be without decay, no
anxiety, blessed joy, sweet and glorious company.

3. O if thou had seen the everlasting crowns of the Saints in heaven, and
with how great glory they now rejoice who in times past were conte^ptible to
this world, Sap. 3. and 5.
and esteemed unworthy of life it self: truly thou would presently humble
thy self even unto the earth: and would rather seek to be under the feet of
all, then to have command, so much as over one: neither would thou desire
pleasant days of this life, but rather rejoice to be afflicted for God, and
esteem it thy greatest gain to be reputed as nothing amongst men.

4. O if thou had a feeling of these things, and did suffer them to enter
into the depth of thy heart, how durst thou so much as once to complain! Are
not al paineful labors to be endured for everlasting life? It is no small
matter to leese or to gain the Kingdom of heaven. Lift up thine eyes therefore
unto heaven: behold I, and all my Saints with me, who in this world had great
conflicts, do now rejoice, now are comforted, now are secure, now do rest, and
shall remain with me everlastingly in the Kingdom of my Father.

CHAP. XLVIII. Of the everlasting day, and shortness of this life.
O most The Servant.
blessed mansion of the heavenly City! o most clear day of eternity, which
night obscureth not, Apoc. 21.
but the highest truth ever enlightneth, day ever pleasant, ever secure, and
never changing into contrary state! O that, that day would once appear, and
all these temporal things were at an end! To the Saints it shines glistering
with everlasting brightness, but to those that are Pilgrims upon earth, it
appears only a far off, and as it were through a glass.

2. The inhabitants of heaven do know how joyful that day is: but the banished
children of Eve be wail the bitterness and tediousnes of this. The days of
this life are short and evil, Job. 7.
full of sorrow and anguish, where man is defiled with many sins, encumbered
with many passions, disquieted with many fears, filled with many cares,
distracted with many curiosities, entangled with many vanities, compassed about
with many errors, worn away with many labors, vexed with temptations,
weakened with delights, tormented with want.

3. O when shall these evils be at an end! Romans 7.
When shall I be delivered from the miserable bondage of sin! Ps. 70.
When shall I think, o Lord of thee alone! When shall I perfectly rejoice in
thee! When shall I be free from al impediments in true liberty, without all
grief of mind and body! When shall I have firm peace, peace secure and without
trouble, peace within and without, peace every way assured! O good Jesus, when
shall I stand to behold thee! When shall I contemplate the glory of thy
Kingdom! When will thou be unto me all in all things! O when shall I be with
thee in thy Kingdom, which thou have prepared for thy beloved, from before all
worlds! I am left a poor and banished man in the land of mine enemies, where
there are daily wars, and great misfortunes.

4. Comfort my banishment, assuage my sorrow: for my whole desire sends up
sighs unto thee. For all is burdensome to me, whatsoever this world offers
for my comfort. I desire familiarly to enjoy thee, but I cannot attain unto
it. I would gladly fix my heart to the things of heaven, but temporal cares
and unmortified passions weigh me down. In mind I would be above al things,
Romans 7. and ^.
but to my flesh I am enforced to be subject against my will. Thus unhappy man
that I am, I fight against my self, and am become grievous to my self, whilst
my spirit seeks after the things that are above, and my flesh that which is
below.

5. O what do I inwardly suffer, when in mind I consider heavenly things, and
presently in my prayers a multitude of fleshly fantasies present themselves
before me! Psalm. 70.
My God, be not far from me, depart not in thy wrath from thy servant. Cast
forth thy lightning, and disperse them: send out thy darts, and break all the
fantasies of my enemy. Gather my senses together unto thee, make me forget
the things of this world: grant me grace to cast away speedily the fantasies of
vices. Succor me, o everlasting truth, that no vanity may move me. Come
heavenly sweetness, and let all impurity fly from thy face. Pardon me also,
and mercifully forgive me as often as I think upon any thing else besides thee
in prayer. I truly confess, that I am wont to be subject to many
distractions: for oftentimes I am not there, where I do corporally stand, or
sit, but rather there, whither my thought do carry me. Where my thought is,
there am I: there is oftentimes my thought, where my affection is. That quickly
occurreth unto me, which is naturally delightsome, and by custom pleasing.

6. And for this cause, thou that art truth it self, have plainly said: Matt.
6.
Where thy treasure is, there is also thy heart. If I love heaven, I willingly
think of heavenly things. If I love the world, I rejoice at the felicity of the
world, and grieve for the adversity thereof. If I love the flesh, I imagine
oftentimes those things, that are pleasing to the flesh: If I love the spirit,
I delight to think of spiritual things. For whatsoever I love, thereof do I
willingly speak, and hear, and carry home with me the forms and
representations thereof. O blessed is that man, that for thee, o Lord,
forsakes all creatures; that violently resists nature, and out of the
fervor of spirit crucifieth the concupiscences of the flesh; that with a
clear conscience he may offer sincere prayers unto thee, and be worthy of the
company of the angelical quiers, all earthly things outwardly and inwardly
being excluded.

CHAP. XLIX. Of the desire of everlasting life, and how great rewards are
promised to those that fight valiantly.
SON, Our Lord.
when thou perceauest the desire of everlasting bliss to be given thee from
above, and desire to depart out of the Tabernacle of this body, that thou
may without shadow of any enterchange behold my light; open thy heart, and
receive this holy inspiratio^ with thy whole desire. Give great thanks to the
heavenly goodness, that deals with thee so favorably, visits thee
mercifully, stirs thee up fernently, houldeth thee up powerfully, least
through thme own weight thou fall down to the vanities of the earth. Neither
do thou obtain this by thine own thought or endeavor, but by the only
favor of heavenly grace and divine bou^ty, that thou may profit in virtue,
and obtain greater humility, and prepare thy self to future battles, and
endeavor to cleave unto me with the whole affection of thy heart, and serve me
with a fervent desire.

2. Son, fire often burns, but the flame asce^deth not up without smoke: so
likewise the desires of some men are earnestly carried to heavenly things, and
yet they are not free from temptation of carnal affection: and therefore it is
not altogether purely for the honor of God that which they so earnestly
request of him. Such is also oftentimes thy desire, which with such importunity
thou presentest unto me. For that is not pure and perfect, which is infected
and defiled with the love of thine own proper commodity and interest.

3. Ask not that which is delightsome and profitable to thee, but that which
is grateful to me, and appertains to my honor, for if thou iudgest aright,
thou ought to prefer and follow my appointment, rather then thine own
desire, or any desired thing. I know thy desire, and have heard thy often
groans. Now thou would be in the freedom of the glory of the Sons of God:
now does the everlasting habitation, and the heavenly Country full of joy
delight thee, but this hour is not yet come: it is yet another time, to wit,
of war, time of labor and trial. Thou desire to be filled with the
chiefest good, but thou can not attain it for the present. Job. 7.
I am he, says our Lord, expect until the Kingdom of God does come.

4. Thou art yet to be tried upon earth, and to be exercised in many things.
Comfort shall be sometimes given thee, but abou^dant fulness thereof shall not be
granted. Iosue 1.
Take courage therefore, and be constant as well in doing, as in suffering
things contrary to nature. Ephesians. 4.
Thou ought to put on a new man, and to be changed into another. Thou must
oftentimes do that which thou would not, and leave undone that thou would
do. That which is pleasing to others, shall go well forwards, that which thou
wishest, shall not speed. That which others say, shall be heard, what thou say
shall be nothing regarded. Others shall ask, and shall receive, thou shall
ask and not obtain.

5. Others shall be great in the praises of men, but of thee there shall be no
speech; to others this or that shall be committed, but thou shall be accounted
fit for nothing. At this nature will sometimes repine, and it is much if thou
endurest it with silence. In these and such like, a faithful servant of our
Lord is wont to be tried, how he can deny and overcome himself in all things.
There is scarce any thing, wherein thou have such need to mortify thy self,
as in seeing and suffering those things that are contrary to thy will,
especially when that is commanded, which seems unto thee inconvenient, or to
little purpose. And for that thou being placed under authority, dare not
resist a higher power, therefore it seems hard unto thee, to walk at the
beck of another, and to leave wholly thine own opinion.

6. But consider, Son, the fruit of these labors, the end near at hand, and
the reward above all measure, and thou shall receive no grief thereby, but
great comfort of thy patience For in regard of that little of thy will, which
now thou willingly forsakest, thou shall always have thy will in heaven. There
thou shall have all that thou will, or can desire: there thou shall enjoy all
good without fear of loosing it, there shall thy will be ever one with me; it
shall desire nothing, strange or private; there no man shall withstand thee, no
man complain of thee, no man hinder thee, nothing come against thee: but all
things desired shall be there together present, and delight thy whole desire,
and fulfill it to the highest degree: there I will give thee glory for the
reproach which here thou sufferedst, a garment of praise for former grief,
for the lowest place, a seat of an everlasting Kingdom; there shall the fruit
of obedience appear, the labor of pe^nance rejoice, and humble subjection
shall be gloriously crowned.

7. Now therefore bow thy self with great humility under the hands of all, and
regard not who said, or commanded this; but take great heed, that whether thy
Superior, or thy Inferior, or thine equal require any thing of thee, or do
insinuate their desire, thou take it all in good part, and endeavor to fulfill
it with a sincere intention. Let one seek this, another that, let him glory in
this, the other in that, and be praised a thousand thousand times; but do thou
neither rejoice in this, nor in that, but in the contempt of thy self, and in
my pleasure and honor alone. This art thou to wish, that whether by life or
death, God may be always glorified in thee.

CHAP. L. How a desolate person ought to offer himself into the hands of God.
LORD God, The Servant
Holy Father, thy holy name be now and for ever blessed; because as thou will,
so is it done, and what thou do, is good. Let thy servant rejoice in thee,
not in himself, nor any thing else, for thou alone art the true gladness, thou
art my hope and my crown, thou art my joy and my honor, o Lord. What has thy
servant, 1. Cor. 4.
but what he has received from thee, even without any desert of his? Thine is
all that thou have given, and whatsoever thou have made. I am poor, and in
labors from my youth: Psalm. 87.
and sometimes my soul is heavy even unto tears, sometimes also it is
troubled in it self, by reason of passions which rise against her.

2. I desire the joy of peace, I crave the peace of thy children that are fed
by thee in the light of comfort. If thou give peace, if thou infuse holy joy,
the soul of thy servant shall be full of heavenly sweetness, and shall become
devout in thy praise, but if thou withdraw thy self, as very often thou art
wont, he will not be able to run the ways of thy commandments, but rather
he boweth his knees, and knocks his breast, for that it is not with him, as
it was yesterday, and the day before, when thy light shined upon his head, and
he was protected under the shadow of thy wings, from the temptations which
violently assaulted him

3. O righteous Father, and ever to be praised, the hour is come, that thy
servant is to be proved! Be hold Father, it is fit, that in this hour thy
servant suffer something for thee. O Father worthy of eternal honor, the
hour is come, which from all eternity thou did foreknow should come: that
for a short time thy servant should outwardly be oppressed, but inwardly live
for ever with thee: he should be a little despised, and humbled, and made as an
abject in the sight of men, and much afflicted with passions and infirmities,
that he may rise again with thee, in the rising of new light, and be clarified
in heaven. Holy Father, thou have so appointed it, and wilt have it so: and
this is fulfilled which thy self have commanded.

4. It is a grace and a favor to thy friend to suffer, and to be afflicted in
the world for the love of thee, how often soever, and by whomsoever thou
permittest it to fall upon him. Without thy counsel and providence, Ps. 118.
and without cause nothing is done in earth. It is good for me, Lord, that thou
have humbled me, that I may learn thy righteous indgments, and cast away all
haughtines of heart and presumption. It is profitable to me, that shame has
conered my face, that I may rather seek to thee for comfort, then to men. I
have learned also heerby to dread thy inscrutable judgment, that afflictest the
just with the wicked, but not without equity and justice.

5. I give thee thanks, that thou have not spared my sins, but have worn me
away with bitter stripes, inflicting sorrows, and sending griefs within and
without. There is none under heaven that can comfort me, Tob. 13.
but thou my Lord God, the heavenly Physician of souls, Psalm. 17.
that strikest and healest, bring into hell, and drawest out again: let thy
correction be upon me, and let thy rod instruct me.

6. Behold beloved Father, I am in thy hands, I bow my self under the rod of
thy correction: let my neck and shoulders feel the stripes of thy
chastisement, that my crookedness may be conformed to thy will. Make me a
devout and humble disciple of thine, as thou art wont well to do, that I may be
ready at every beck of thy divine pleasure. I commend my self and all mine
unto thee to be corrected. It is better to be rebuked here, then hereafter
Thou know all and every thing, and there is nothing hidden in the conscience
of man, which can be hidden from thee. Before things are done, thou know
that they will happen, and have no need that any should teach thee, or admonish
thee of those things, which are done on earth. Thou know what is expedient
for my good, and how much tribulation is fit for purging the rust of my sins.
Do with me according to thy desired pleasure, and despise not my sinful life,
better and more clearly known to none then to thee alone.

7. Grant me, Lord, to know that which is to be known: to love that, which is
to be beloved: to praise that which pleases thee most: to esteem that which
is precious unto thee: to despise that which is contemptible in thy sight:
suffer me not to judge according to the sight of the exterior eyes, nor to
give sentence according to the hearing of the ears of ignorant men; but to
determine of visible and spiritual things with a true judgment, and above all
things ever to search after thy will and pleasure.

8. The senses of men are often deceived in their judgments, the lovers of the
world are also deceived in loving only visible things. What is a man the
better, for that he is esteemed great by man? The deceiptfull man deceaueth the
deceiptfull, the vain the vain, the blind deceaueth the blind, and one feeble
likewise another, whilst he exalts and praises him. For how much every one is
in thy sight, so much he is, and no more, says humble S. Francis.

CHAP. LI. That a man ought to employ himself in works of humility, when
force is wanting for higher exercises.
SON, Our Lord.
thou art not able always to continue in the fervent desire of virtue, nor to
persist in the high pitch of conte^plation, but thou must sometimes of
necessity by reason of original corruption descend to inferior things, and
bear the burden of this corruptible life even against thy will, and with
irksomenes. As long as thou carriest a mortal body, thou shall feel trouble
and heaviness of heart. Thou ought therefore in flesh oftentimes to bewail
the burden of flesh: for that thou can not always persevere in spiritual
exercises, and divine contemplation.

2. It is then expedient for thee to fly to humble and exterior works, and to
refresh thy self with good and virtuous actions, to expect with a firm
confidence my coming, and heavenly visitation, to bear patiently thy
banishment, and the dryness of thy mind, till thou be visited again by me,
and delivered from all anxiety. For I will make thee forget thy former pains,
and enjoy inward quietness. I will lay open before thee the pleasant fields of
holy Scripture, that with an enlarged heart thou may begin to run the way of
my commandments. And thou shall say, that the sufferings of this time are not
condign to the glory to come, Romans 8.
that shall be revealed in us.

CHAP. LII. That a man ought not to esteem himself unworthy of comfort, and
to have deserved stripes.
LORD, The Servant.
I am not worthy of thy comfort, nor of any spiritual visitation, and therefore
thou dealest justly with me, when thou leauest me poor and desolate. For if I
could sheed teates like a so, yet I were not worthy of thy comfort. For (alas)
I deserve nothing, but to be scourged and punished, in that I have grievously
and often offended thee, and sinned in many things. All things therefore duly
considered, I am not worthy even of the least comfort. But thou mild and
merciful God, who wilt not that thy works do perish, to show the riches of
thy goodness in the vessels of mercy, even beyond his desert, vouchsafest to
comfort thy servant above humane measure. For thy comforts are not like to the
vain words of men.

2. What have I done, o Lord, that thou should impart any heavenly comfort
unto me? I remember not, that I have ever done any good, but have been always
prone to sin, and slothful in my ame^dment. It is true, and I cannot deny
it. If I should say otherwise, thou would stand against me, Job. 9.
and there would be none to defend me. What have I deserved for my sins, but
hell and everlasting fire? I confess in the truth of my heart that I am worthy
of all scorn and contempt, and it is unfit that I should be remembered amongst
thy devout servants. And although I be unwilling to hear this, yet
notwithstanding for the love of truth, I will lay open my sins against my
self, that I may the better deserve to obtain thy mercy.

3. What shall I say, being guilty, and full of confusion? I can utter out of
my mouth no other word but this: I have sinned, Psalm 50.
Lord, I have sinned, Job. 10.
have mercy on me: pardon me, suffer me a little, that I may bewail my grief,
before I go unto the land of darkness, and be covered with the shadow of
death. What do thou require of a guilty and miserable sinner, but that he be
contrite and sorrowful, and do humble him self for his offenses? In true
contrition and hu^blenes of heart, is bred a hope of forgiveness, a troubled
conscience is reconciled again, grace lost is restored, man is defended from
future wrath, and God and the penitent soul meet together in the holy kiss
of peace.

4. Humble contrition for sins is an acceptable sacrifice unto thee, Psalm. 50.
o Lord, sauouring much sweeter in thy sight then burning frankincense. This is
also the pleasant ointment, Luc. 7.
which thou would have powered upon thy sacred feet, Psalm. 50.
for thou never despisest a contrite and humble heart. There is a place of
refuge from the face of the wrath of our enemy: there is amended, and washed
away whatsoever uncleanness has been elsewhere gathered, and whatsoever is
defiled.

CHAP. LIII. That the grace of God is not given to those that savor of earthly
things.
SON Out Lord.
my grace is precious, it suffers not it self to be mingled with external
things, nor earthly comforts Thou ought therefore to cast away all
hindrances of grace, if thou desire to receive the infusion thereof. Choose
therefore a secret place to thy self, love to live alone with thy self, desire
the conversation of none* but rather power out devout prayers unto God, that
thou may keep thy mind compunct, and thy conscience pure. Esteem the whole
world as nothing: Matt. 19.
prefer my service before all outward things: for thou can not attend unto
me, and be delighted also in transitory vanities. Thou ought to sequester
thy self from thy acquaintance and friends, and to keep thy mind deprived of
all temporal comfort. So the blessed Apostle Peter required, 1. Pet. 2.
that the faithful of Christ should keep themselves as strangers and Pilgrims
in this world.

2. O how great a confidence shall he have at the hour of death, whom no
affection to any earthly thing detaineth in the world. But the weak mind is
not yet capable of so retired a heart; neither does the fleshly person
understand the freedom of a recollected mind. Notwithstanding if he will be
truly spiritual, he ought to renounce as well that which is far off, as that
which is nearest unto him, and to beware of no man more then of himself. If
thou perfectly overcome thy self, thou shall with more ease subdue the rest.
It is a glorious victory to triumph over our selves. For he that keeps
himself subject in such sort, that his se^sualitie be subdued to reason, and
reason in all things be obedient to me, he is truly a conqueror of himself,
and Lord of the world.

3. If thou desire to mount unto this height of perfection, thou must begin
manfully, and set the axe to the root, that thou may pluck up and destroy
thy hidden and inordinate inclination to thy self, and unto all private and
earthly good. Of this vice (that man too inordinately loves himself) almost
all depends, whatsoever is wholly to be overcome: which being once overcome
and subdued, there will presently ensue great peace and tranquillity. But for
that few endeavor perfectly to die unto themselves, and to forsake themselves
wholly, therefore they remain entangled in themselves, and cannot be lifted up
in spirit above themselves: but he that desires to walk freely with me, it is
necessary that he mortify all his inordinate affections, and not adhere unto
any creature by private love.

CHAP. LIVE. Of the different motions of Nature and Grace.
SON, Our Lord.
mark diligently the motions of thine own nature, and my grace, for in very
contrary and secret manner these are moved, and can hardly be discerned but by
him that is spiritual and inwardly enlightened. All men desire that which is
good, and pretend some good in all their words and deeds, and therefore under
pretense of good, many are deceived. Nature is deceiptfull and seduceth,
intangleth, and deceaueth many, and always proposes her self for her end,
but grace walks with great sincerity, and auoideth all show of evil,
pretends not deceipts, and does all things purely for God, in whom also she
finally rests.

2. Nature will not willingly dye, nor be kept in, nor overcome, nor be subject
to any, nor be subdued: but grace labors to mortify her self, resists
sensuality, seeks to be subject, is willing to be overcome, and will not use
her own liberty, she loves to be kept under discipline, and desires not to
rule any, but always to live and remain wholly subject unto God, and for God
is ready humbly to bow unto all men. Nature strives for her own commodity,
and considers what profit she may reap by another: but grace considers not
what is profitable and commodious unto herself, but rather what is profitable
to many. Nature willingly receaueth honor and reverence: but grace faithfully
attributes all honor and glory unto God.

3. Nature fears shame and contempt, but grace rejoices to suffer reproach
for the name of Jesus. Nature loves idleness, and bodily rest, but grace cannot
be idle, but willingly imbraceth labor. Nature seeks to have those things
that be curious and precious, abhors that which is mean and base: but grace
delights in plain and humble things, despises not course and mean, nor
refuses to wear that which is old and torn Nature respects the things of
this world, rejoices at earthly gain, sorroweth for loss, is moved with
every little injurious word; but grace thinks on that, which is everlasting,
and cleaves not to that which fades with time; she is not troubled with
loss, nor exasperated with injuries, for that she has placed her treasure and
joy in heaven where nothing perishes.

4. Nature is covetous, and does more willingly receive then give, she loves
proper and private things; but grace is pitiful and liberal to all, auoydeth
singularity, is content with a little, thinks it happier to give, then to
receive. Nature inclines to creatures, yields to her own flesh, follows
vanities, and listneth to discourses: but grace draws unto God, and seeks
after virtues, renounceth creatures, flesh the world, hates the desires of the
flesh, restrains wanderings abroad, blusheth to be seen in public. Nature is
willing to have some outward comfort, wherein she may delight her senses, but
grace seeks comfort in God alone, and delights above all visible things in
the highest good.

5. Nature works all for her own gain and profit, she can do nothing
freely, but for bestowed benefits: she hops to obtain either that which is
equal, or better, either praise or favor, and coueteth to have her works and
gifts much esteemed: but grace seeks no temporal thing, nor asks any other
reward for her deserts then God alone, not desires more of temporal
necessaries, then what may serve her for the obtaining of everlasting glory.

6. Nature rejoices to have many friends, and kinsfolks, she glories of
Noble birth and descent, pleases the powerful, fawneth upon the rich,
applaudeth those that are like herself: but grace loves her enemies, and is
not puffed up with multitude of friends, nor esteems place or birth, but
where it is joined with greater virtue, she rather favors the poor, then
the rich, has more compassion of the innocent, then the powerful, rejoices
in the simple, and respects not the deceiptfull, exhorts ever the good to
labor for the better gifts, and by virtue to resemble the son of God. Nature
quickly complains of any want and trouble: grace constantly suffers all
kind of need.

7. Nature turns all things to her self, strives and contendeth for her
self: but grace reduces all to God, from whence originally they proceed: she
ascribes no good to her self, neither does she arrogantly presume of her
self: she contendeth not, nor prefers her opinion before others, but in
every sense and understanding submits her self unto the eternal wisdom,
and to the divine judgment. Nature coueteth to know secrets, and to hear
news; she will appear a broad, and make proof of many things by the
experience of her own senses, she desires to be known, and to do those
things, for which she may be praised and admired: but grace cares not for
hearing news, nor to understand curious matters, for that all this springs
from the ancient disorder of our corrupt nature, seeing nothing that is new, is
durable upon earth. She teaches therefore to restrain the senses, to avoid
vain pleasing, and ostentatio^, humbly to hide those things that are worthy of
praise and admiration, and of every thing and every knowledge to seek
profitable fruit, and the praise and honor of God: she will not have her
self nor hers publicly praised, but desires that God should be blessed in
his gifts, who of mere charity bestows all things.

8. This grace is a supernatural light, and a certain special gift of God,
and the proper mark of the elect, and pledge of everlasting salvation, which
lifts up a man from earthly baseness to love things of heaven, and of a
carnal makes him a spiritual person. How much the more therefore nature is
depressed and subdued, so much the greater grace is infused, and the inward man
daily by new visitations more perfected according to the Image of God.

CHAP. LV. Of the corruption of nature and efficacy of divine grace.
MY God, The Servant
who of thy mere goodness have created me to thy Image and likeness, Genesis 1.
grant me this grace which thou have showed to be so great, and so necessary
to salvation, that I may overcome my wicked nature, which draws me to sin,
and to the loss of my soul. For I feel in my flesh the law of sin; Romans 7.
contradicting the law of my mind, and leading me captive, to obey sensuality
in many things: neither can I resist the pass^ons thereof, unless thy holy
grace fervently infused into my heart do assist me.

2. Thy grace o Lord, and great grace is needful, that nature may be overcome,
which is ever prone to evil from her youth. For by Adam the first man, it
falling and being corrupted by sin, the penalty of this stain has descended
upon all mankind, in such sort, that nature it self, which by thee was created
good, and without defect, is now accounted for vice, and for the infirmity of
a corrupted nature, for that the motion thereof left unto it self, draws to
evil and abject things. For the little force which remains, is like a
certain spark, lying hidden in ashes. This is natural reason it self,
compassed about with great darkness, still retayning power to discern good
and evil, and the distance be tweene true and false, although it be unable to
fulfill all, that it approves and enjoys not now the full light of truth,
nor the former integrity of her affections.

3. Hence it is, my God, that according to my inward man I delight in thy law,
Romans 7.
knowing thy comman dements to be good, just, and holy, reproving also all
evil and sun, and do know that it is to be fled.. But in my flesh I serve
the law of sir^, whilst I rather obey sensuality then reason. Hence it is, that
I have a will to do good, but know not how to perform it. For this cause I
often purpose many good things, but: for that I want grace to help my
infirmity, for a light resistance I go back, and faint. I know the way of
perfection, and see clearly enough what I ought to do, but pressed with the
weight of mine own corruption, I rise not unto it.

4. O Lord, how needful is thy grace for me, Joan. 13.
to begin any good work, to go forward, and to accomplish it. For without it I
can do nothing, but in thee I can do all things, when thy grace does comfort
me. O heavenly grace, without which our own merits are nothing, and no gifts
of nature are to be esteemed. Arts, riches, beauty, and strength, wit, or
eloquence are of no worth with thee, o Lord, without thy grace. For gifts of
nature are common to good and evil, but the peculiar gift of the elect is grace
and love, where with being marked, they are esteemed worthy of everlasting life.
This grace so much excels, that neither the gift of prophecy, nor the
working of miracles, nor any speculation, how high soever, is of any esteem
without it. Neither faith, nor hope, 1. Cor. 13.
nor other virtues are aceptable unto thee without charity and grace.

5. O most blessed grace, that make the poor in spirit rich with virtues,
and the rich in many blessings, humble in heart, come down unto me, replenish
me in the morning with thy comfort, least my soul should faint with wearines,
and wither away with dryness of mind. I beseech the Lord, Psalm. 22.
that I may find grace in thy sight, for thy grace suffices, though other
things that nature desires be wanting. If I be tempted and vexed with many
tribulations, I will not fear evils whilst thy grace is with me: she is my
strength, she gives advise and help: she is stronger then all enemies, and
wiser then all the wise.

6. Thy grace is the mistress of truth, the teacher of discipline, the light
of the heart, the solace in affliction: she drives away sorrow, she expels
fear, she is the nurse of devotion, the bringer forth of tears. What am I
without it, but a rotten piece of wood, and an unprofitable stalk only meet
for the fire? Let thy grace therefore, Lord, always prevent me, and follow me,
and make me ever diligent in good works, through Jesus Christ thy Son, Amen.

CHAP. LVI. That we ought to deny our selves, and imitate Christ, by the Cross.
SON, Our Lord.
look how much thou can go out of thy self, so much may thou enter into
me. As to be void of all desire of external things, makes inward peace; so
the forsaking of our selves joins us internally to God. I will have thee
learn the perfect leaving of thy self unto my will, without contradiction and
complaint. Joan. 14.
Follow me, I am the way, the truth, and the life. Without the way there is no
going, without truth there is no knowledge, without life there is no living. I
am the way which thou ought to fo^low, the truth which thou ought to
trust, the life for which thou ought to hope. I am the way which cannot lead
amiss, the truth which cannot err, the life which cannot end. I am a most
strait way, a supreme truth, a true life, a blessed life, an increated life. If
thou remain in me, thou shall know the truth, and truth shall deliver thee,
and thou shall apprehend everlasting life.

2. If thou will enter into life, Matt. 19.
keep the commandments: if thou will know the truth, believe me. If thou will
be perfect, sell all. Luc. 9.
If thou will be my disciple, deny thy self. If thou will possess a blessed
life, Joan. 12.
despise this present life. If thou will be exalted in heaven, Luc. 14.
humble thy self upon earth. If thou will reign with me, bear the cross
with me. For only the servants of the cross find the way of bliss and true
light.

3. Lord Jesus, The Servant.
forasmuch as thy way is narrow, strait and contemptible unto the world, grant
me grace to imitate thee in suffering willingly all worldly contempt. For the
servant is not greater then his Lord, Matt. 7.
nor the Disciple above his Master. Luc. 6.
Let thy servant be exercised in thy holy life, for there is the health and the
true sanctity of my soul: whatsoever I read or hear besides, does not
recreate or delight me fully.

4. Son, Our Lord.
now that thou know and have read these things, happy shall thou be, if thou
fulfill them. He that has my commandments and keeps them, he it is that
loves me, and I will love him, and will manifest my self unto him, and will
make him sit with me in the Kingdom of my Father. Lord The Servant.
Jesus, as thou have said and promised, so give me grace to deserve, that it be
fulfilled. I have received the Cross, I have received it from thy hand, and I
will bear it, and bear it till death, as thou have laid it upon me. Truly the
life of a good religious person is the cross, and it is a sure guide to
heaven. It is now begun, it is not lawful to go back, neither is it fit to
leave that which I have undertaken.

5. Let us then take courage my brethren, and go forwards together* Jesus will
be with us, for Jesus sake we have undertaken this cross: for the love of
Jesus let us persevere in the cross. He will be our helper, who is our guide
and forerunner. Behold our King goes before us, who also will fight for us:
let us follow him cheerfully, let us not be dismayed, but be ready to dye with
courage in the battle, and let us not blemish our glory by flying from the
Cross.

CHAP. LVII. That a man be not too much dejected, when he falls into some
defects.
SON, Our Lord.
patience and humility in time of adversity, are more pleasing to me, then
much comfort and devotion in prosperity. Why art thou grieved for every little
trifle spoken and done against thee? Although it had been much more thou
ought not to have been moved. But now let it pass, it is not the first that
has happened, nor any new thing, neither shall it be the last, if thou live
long. Thou art cheerful enough as long as no adversity occurreth. Thou can
give good counsel also, and can strengthen others with thy words, but when
any tribulation suddenly knocks at thy door, thou art destitute of counsel,
and void of force. See therefore thy great fraily, which thou often prouest in
very small occasions. It is notwithstanding permitted for thy good, when these
and such like occasions befall thee.

2. Put it out of thy heart the best thou can, and if it touch thee, yet let
it not detect thee, nor trouble thee long: bear it at least patiently, if thou
can not joyfully. Although thou be unwilling to hear it, and feel in thy
heart some motion of disdain, yet repress thy self, and suffer no inordinate
word to pass out of thy mouth, which may be a scandal to the weak* The
storm which now is raised, shall quickly be appeased, and inward grief shall
be assuaged by the return of grace. I do yet live, Esa. 49.
says our Lord, and am ready to help thee, and to give thee greater comfort
then before, if thou put thy trust in me, and call devoutly upon me.

3. Be more patient, and prepare thy self to greater suffering. All is not
lost, if thou feel thy self often afflicted, or grievously tempted. Thou art
a man, and not God: thou art flesh, not an Angel. How can thou look to
continue ever in the same state of virtue, when an Angel in heaven has
fallen, and the first man in Paradise lost his standing? I am he that do give
healthful comfort to them that mourn, Genesis 3.
and do raise up unto my Godhead those that know their own frailty.

4. Lord, The Servant.
blessed be thy sacred word, more sweet unto my mouth then the honey, and the
honey comb. Ps. 118.
What should I do in these my so great tribulations and anguish, unless thou
did comfort me with thy holy, sweet, and heavenly speeches? What matter is
it, how much, and what I suffer, so as I may at length attain to the haven of
bliss? Grant me a good end, grant me a happy passage out of this world. Be
mindful of me, my God, and direct me the straight and ready way to the
everlasting Kingdom, Amen.

CHAP. LVIII. Of not searching into high matters, and into the secret judgments
of God.
SON, Our Lord.
beware thou dispute not of high matters, not of the secret judgments of God,
why this man is forsaken, and he assumed to so great grace: why also this man
is so much afflicted, and he so greatly advanced. These things exceed all
humane power, neither can any reason or discourse of any man search out the
judgment of God. When the enemy therefore suggesteth these things unto thee, or
some envious people demand the^ of thee, answer that of the Prophet: Psalm. 118.
Thou art just, o Lord, and thy judgment is right. And again: The judgments of
our Lord are true and justified in themselves. Psalm. 1^.
My judgments are to be feared, not to be discussed, for they are such as
cannot be comprehended by the understanding of man.

2. In like manner I advise thee not to inquire, nor dispute of the merits of
the Saints, which of them is holier then the other, and which is greater in the
Kingdom of heaven. These things oftentimes breed strife and unprofitable
contentions, 1. Tim. 2.
they nourish also pride and vain glory, from whence do usually spring envy
and dissentions, whilst one will needs foolishly have this Saint preferred, and
the other, another. To desire to know and search out such things, is to no
purpose, but to displease the Saints, of whom they speak. For I am not the
God of dissension, but of peace, which peace consists rather in true
humility, then in exalting our selves.

3. Some are carried with zeal of affection, to love these, or those most, but
this love is rather humane then divine. I have made all the Saints, and have
given them grace: I have made them partakers of my glory. I know the merits of
every one, I have prevented them in the benedictions of my sweetness. I
foreknew my beloved before the beginning of the world. Joan. 15.
I chose the^ out of the world, they chose not me first. I called them by
grace, I drew them by mercy, I led them through sundry temptations. I have sent
the^ great inward comforts, I have given them perseverance, I have crowned
their patience.

4. I know the first and last: I embrace all with inestimable love. I am to be
praised in all my Saints, I am to be blessed above all things, and to be
honored in every one, whom I have thus gloriously exalted, and predestined
without any precede^t merits of their own. He therefore that contemns one of
the least of my Saints, Iac. 2.
honors not the greatest, for that I made both the less and the greater.
Sap. 6.
And he that dispraiseth any of my Saints, dispraiseth also me, and all the
rest in the Kingdom of heaven. All are one by the band of Charity, they think
the same, they will the same, and are all knit together in one perfect band of
love.

5. But yet (which is much more high) they love me more then themselves, and
more then their own merits. For being ravished above themselves, and drawn
out of the affection of themselves, they tend wholly unto the love of me, in
which also they rest, enjoying me with unspeakable glory. Nothing can put them
back, nothing press them down; for being full of everlasting truth, they
burn with the fire of unquenchable charity. Let therefore carnal and
earthlymen, that can affect no other but private joys, forbear to dispute of
the state of Saints. They add and take away according to their own fancies,
not as it pleases the everlasting Truth.

6. There is in many great ignorance, specially in those that be slenderly
enlightened, and these can seldom love any with perfect spiritual love. They
are always much drawn by a natural affection, and humane friendship to this
man or to that, and according to the experience they have of themselves in
their earthly affections, so they frame an imagination of heavenly things. But
there is an incomparable distance between the things, which the imperfect
frame in their conceits, and those which illuminated persons do see by
revelation from above.

7. Beware therefore, my Son, that thou treat not curiously of these things,
Eccli. 3.
which exceed thy knowledge, but rather so apply thy endeauours, that thou may
at least have the meanest place in the Kingdom of heaven. And if any one did
know which of the Saints exceeded others in sanctity, or is esteemed greater in
the Kingdom of heaven, what would this knowledge avail him, unless he should
thereby humble himself the more in my sight, and stir up his mind to praise
my name with greater fervor. His labor is much more acceptable unto God, that
thinks of the greatness of his sins, and his want of virtues, and how far
off he is from the perfection of the Saints; then he that disputes of their
greatness. It is better to pray to the Saints with devotion and tears, and to
crave their glorious suffrages with an humble mind, then to search their
secrets with vain curiosity.

8. They are well and right well contented, if men could content themselves and
refrain from these vain discourses. They glory not of their own merits, for
they ascribe no good unto themselves, but attribute all to me, who of my
infinite charity have bestowed my blessings upon them. They are replenished
with so great love of my Godhead, and so superaboundant joy, that there is no
glory nor happiness, that is, or can be wanting unto them. All the Saints how
much the higher they be in glory, so much the more humble they are in
themselves, and nearer and deerer unto me. And therefore thou haft it written,
Apoc. 4.
That they did cast their Crowns before God, and fell down upon their faces
before the Lamb, and adored him that lives for ever.

9. Many inquire who is greatest in the Kingdom of God, that know not whether
they shall ever be numbered there amongst the least. It is no small matter to be
even the least in heaven, where all are great, for that all there shall be
called, and shall be indeed the Sons of God. The least there shall be great
among thousands, and the sinner of a hundred years shall die. Matt. 18.
For when the Disciples asked who was the greater in the Kingdom of heaven,
they received this answer: Unless you be converted, and become as little
children you shall not enter into the Kingdom of heaven. Whosoever therefore
shall humble himself as this little child, he is the greater in the Kingdom of
heaven.

10. Woe be unto them that disdain to humble themselves willingly with little
children. Matt. 6.
For the low gate of the Kingdom of heaven, will not give them entrance. And
woe be to the rich, that have their comforts here, for whilst the poor enter
into the Kingdom of God, they shall be waiting without. Rejoice you that be
humble: and you that be poor, Matt. 5.
be you glad, for yours is the Kingome of God, if you walk according unto
truth.

CHAP. LIX. That all our hope and trust is to be fixed in God alone.
LORD, The Servant.
what trust have I in this world? Or what is the grea test comfort, that all
things under heaven do yield me? Is it not thou, my Lord God, whose mercies
are without number? Where has it been well with me without thee? Or when could
it be ill with me, when thou were present? I had rather be poor for thee, then
rich without thee. I rather choose to be a Pilgrim in earth with thee, then to
possess heaven without thee Where thou art, there is heaven: and there is
death and hell, where thou art not. Thou art my desire, and therefore it
behooves me to send forth deep sighs from my heart, and cry and pray unto
thee. For I have none to trust unto, none that can help me in time of
necessity, but thee alone, my God. Thou art my hope, and my trust; thou art my
comforter, and most faithful unto me in all my distresses.

2. All men seek their own gain, Phil. 2.
thou only seek my salvation and my profit, and turnest all things to my
good. Although thou permittest many temptations to assault me, and many
adversities to befall me, yet thou ordainest all this to my good and profit,
who art wont to prove thy beloved servants a thousand ways. In which proof
thou ought no less to be loved and praised, then if thou did replenish
me with heavenly comforts.

3. In thee therefore, my Lord God, I put my whole hope and refuge: in thee I
place my tribulation and anguish, for I find all to be weak and unconstant,
whatsoever I behold out of thee. For neither can many friends avail, nor
forcible helpers aid, nor wise counselors give profitable answer, nor the
books of the learned comfort, nor any wealth deliver, nor any secret, or
pleasant place defend, if thou thy self do not assist, help, comfort,
instruct, and keep us.

4. For all things that seem to be ordained for the rest and solace of man,
when thou art absent, are nothing, and do bring indeed no joy, nor comfort at
all. Thou therefore art the end of all that is good, the light of life, the
depth of wisdom: and the most forcible comfort of thy servants, is to trust in
thee above all things. To thee therefore do I lift up mine eyes: In thee my
God, the Father of mercies, I put my whole trust. Bless and sanctify my soul
with thy heavenly blessings, that it may be made thy holy habitation, and the
seat of thy eternal glory: and that nothing may be found in the Temple of thy
greatness, that may offend the eyes of thy Majesty. According to the greatness
of thy goodness, and multitude of thy mercies, take pity upon me, and hear
the prayer of thy poor servant, who is far exiled from thee in the land of
the shadow of death. Protect, and keep the soul of thy servant, amidst so
many dangers of this corruptible life, and by the assistance of thy grace,
direct it in the way of peace, to the country of everlasting light, Amen.

The end of the third Book.
OF THE FOLLOVVING OF CHRIST. THE FOVRTH BOOK.
A devout Exhortation unto the blessed Sacrament.
The voice of Christ.

COME unto me all ye that labor and are burdened, Matt. 11.
and I will refresh you, says our Lord. The bread which I will give, Joan. 6.
is my flesh, for the life of the world. Matt. 26.
Take ye and eat, this is my body that shall be delivered for you. 1. ^ 1.11.
Do this for the commemoration of me. He that eats my flesh, and drinks my
blood, remains in me, and I in him. Joan. 6.
The words which I have spoken unto you, are spirit and life.

CHAP. I. With how great reverence Christ ought to be received.
THESE are thy words o Christ, everlasting Truth, though not spoken all at one
time, nor written in one and the self same place. Because therefore they are
thine and true, they are all thankfully and faithfully to be received by me.
They are thine, and thou have spoken the^, and they are mine also, because thou
have spoken them for my salvation. I willingly receive them from thy mouth,
that they may be the deeper imprinted in my heart. These devout words so full of
sweetness and love, do stir me up, but mine own offenses do amaze me, and
my impure conscience drives me back from the receiving of so great mysteries.
The sweetness of thy words does encourage me, but the multitude of my sins
do oppress me.

2. Thou commaundest me to come confidently unto thee, if I will have part with
thee: and to receive the food of immortality, if I desire to obtain
everlasting life and glory. Come, say thou, unto me, all ye that labor and
are burdened, Matt. 11.
and I will refresh you. O sweet and lovely word in the ear of a sinner, that
thou my Lord God should inuit the poor and needy to receive thy most
blessed body. But who am I Lord, that I may presume to approach unto thee?
behold the heavens cannot contain thee, and thou say: Come ye all unto me.
Matt. 12.


3. What means this most pious benignity, and so loving inuitation? How shall
I dare to come, that know not any good in me, whereupon I may presume? How
shall I bring thee into my house, that have often offended thy most gracious
countenance? The Angels and the Archangels honor thee, the Saints and just men
do fear thee; and thou say, Matt. 11.
Come ye all unto me. Unless thou o Lord did say it, who would believe it to
be true? And unless thou did command it, who would dare to come unto thee?
Behold Noe a just man labored a hundred years in the building of the Arc,
Genesis 6.
that he might be saved with a few: and how can I in one hours space prepare
my self to receive with reverence the maker of the world?

4. Moses thy great servant, and especial friend, made an Arc of
incorruptible wood, which also he covered with most pure gold, to put the
Tables of the Law therein: and I a rotten creature, how shall I so lightly dare
to receive the maker of the Law, and the giver of life? Solomon the wisest of
the Kings of Israel, 3. Reg. 6.
bestowed seven years in building a magnificent Temple, in praise of thy
name, and celebrated the feast of the Dedication thereof eight days together:
3. Reg. 8.
he offered a thousand peaceable sacrifices, and set the Ark in the place
prepared for it, with the sound of trumpets, and joy: and I the most unhappy
and poorest of men, how shall I bring thee into my house, that can scarce spend
one half hour devoutly? and I would to God it were once almost one half
hour, in worthy and due manner!

5. O my God, how much did they endeavor to please thee, and alas how little
is that which I do? How short time do I spend, when I prepare my self to
receive? I am seldom wholly recollected, very seldom altogether free from
distraction; and yet surely no indecent thought should occur in the presence
of thy Deity, nor any creature draw me unto it: for I am not to harbor an
Angel, but the Lord of Angels.

6. And yet there is great difference between the Arc and the Relics
thereof, and thy most pure body with his unspeakable virtues: between those
legal sacrifices, figures of future things, and the true Sacrifice of thy
body, the complement of all ancient Sacrifices Why therefore do I not become
more fervent in thy venerable presence? Wherefore do I not prepare my self
with greater care to receive thy sacred gifts, since those holy ancient
Patriarchs, and Prophets, yea Kings also and Princes with the whole people
have showed so great zeal of devotion to thy divine service?

7. The most denout King David daunced before the Ark of God with all his
force, 2. Reg. 6.
calling to mind the benefits bestowed in times past upon his forefathers. He
made Instruments of sundry kinds, he published Psalms, and appointed the^ to
be sung with joy: himself also oftentimes played upon the harp. Being
inspired with the grace of the holy Ghost, he taught the people of Israel to
praise God with their whole heart, and with pleasant voices every day to bless
and praise him. If so great devotion was then used, and such memory of divine
praise before the Arc of the Testament, what reverence and devotion is now to
be performed by me, and all Christian people in the presence of this Sacrament,
in receiving the most precious body of Christ?

8. Many go to sundry places to visit the Relics of Saints, and are
astonished when they hear of their miraculous works: they behold the spacious
buildings of their Churches, and kiss their sacred bones wrapped in silk and
gould: And behold thou art here present with me on the altar, my God, the Holy
of Holies, the maker of all things, and Lord of Angels. Oftentimes in those
devotions there is but curiosity of men and nouelty of the beholders in the
seeing of such sights, and little fruit of amendment is gotten thereby,
especially where there is so unconstant wandering without true contrition. But
here in the Sacrament of the altar, thou art present, my Lord, God and Man,
Christ Jesus, where also plentiful fruit of everlasting salvation is
obtained, as often as thou art worthily, and devoutly received. No leuity, no
curiosity, or sensuallity draws unto this, but firm faith, devout hope, and
sincere charity.

9. O God the invisible Creator of the world, how wonderfully do thou deal
with us! how sweetly and graciously do thou dispose of all things with thy
elect, to whom thou offerest thy self to be received in the Sacrament! O this
exceeds all understanding of man; this chiefly draws the hearts of the
devout, and inflameth their desire. For thy true faithful servants that
dispose their whole life to amendment, by this most worthy Sacrament,
oftentimes receive great grace of devotion, and love of virtue.

10. O admirable and hidden grace of this Sacrament, which only the faithful
of Christ do know: but the unfaithful, and such as are slaves unto sin,
cannot conceive nor feel. In this Sacrament spiritual grace is given, and
lost virtue is restored in the soul: and beauty disfigured by sin
returns. again. This grace is sometimes so great, that with the fuinesse of
devotion, which is here given, not only the mind, but the weak body also
feels great increase of strength.

11. Our coldness and negligence surely is much to be bewailed and pitied,
that we are not drawn with greater affection to receive Christ, in whom all
the hope and merit of those that are to be saved does co^ fist. For he is our
sanctification and redemption: he is the comfort of passengers, and the
everlasting fruition of Saints. It is much therefore to be lamented that many do
so little consider this comfortable mystery, which rejoices heaven, and
preserves the whole world* O blindness and hardness of man's heart, that does not
more deeply weigh the greatness of so unspeakable a gift, but rather comes by
the daily use thereof, to regard it little or nothing.

12. For if this most holy Sacrament should be celebrated in one place only,
and consecrated by one only Priest in the world: with how great desire do
thou think would men be affected to that place: and what esteem would they
have of such a Priest of Almighty God, by whom they might enjoy the
consolation of these divine mysteries? but now there are many Priests, and
Christ is offered up in many places, that so the grace and love of God to man
may appear so much the greater, how much the more this sacred Communion is
common through the world. Thanks be unto thee, good Jesus, everlasting Pastor
of our souls, that have vouchsafed to refresh us poor and banished men, with
thy precious Body and Blood, and to inuit us to the receiving of these
mysteries with the words of thy own mouth, saying: Come unto me all ye that
labor and are burdened, Matt. 11.
and I will refresh you.

CHAP. II. That great goodness and charity of God is bestowed upon man in this
Sacrament.
The voice of the Disciple.

PRESVMING of thy goodness and great mercy, o Lord, being sick, I approach
unto my Savior, hungry and thirsty to the fountain of life, needy to the King
of heaven, a servant unto my Lord, a creature to my Creator, desolate to my mer
cifull comforter. But whence is this to me, that thou vouchsafest to come unto
me? Who am I that thou should give thy self unto me? Luc. 1.
How dare a sinner presume to ap pear before thee? And thou, how do thou
vouchsafe to come unto a sinner? Thou know thy servant, and see that he
has no good thing in him, for which thou should bestow this benefit upon
him I confess therefore my unworthiness, and I acknowledge thy goodness: I
praise thy mercy, and give thee thanks for this thy unspeakable charity. For
thou do this for thine own goodness, not for any merits of mine, to the
end that thy goodness may be better known unto me, thy charity more
abundantly showed, and thy humility more highly commended. Since therefore it
is thy pleasure, and have commanded that it should be so, this thy bou^ty is
also pleasing to me, and do wish that my offenses may be no hinderance.

2. O most sweet and bountiful Jesus, how great reverence and thanks, with
perpetual praise is due unto thee for the receiving of thy sacred body, whose
worth and dignity no man is able to express! But what shall I think of at
this time, now that I am to receive this divine Sacrament, and to approach unto
my Lord, to whom I am not able to give due reverence, and yet I desire to
receive him devoutly? What can I think better, and more profitable, then to
humble my self wholly before thee, and to exalt thy infinite goodness above
me? I praise thee my God, and will exalt thee for ever: and I do despise, and
submit my self unto thee, even into the depth of my unworthiness.

3. Behold thou art the Holy of Holies, and I the skum of sinners! behold thou
bowest thy self down unto me, who am not worthy so much as to look up unto
thee! Behold thou come unto me: it is thy will to be with me, Psalm. 77.
thou inuitest me to thy banquet. Joan. 6.
Thou will give me the food of heaven, and bread of Angels to eat, which is no
other truly then thy self, the lively bread, that descendest from heaven, and
give life unto the world.

4. Behold from whence this love proceeds! what kind of favor and benignity
is this which shines upon us! What thanks and praises are due unto thee for
these benefits! O how good and profitable was thy counsel, when thou
ordainedst it! How sweet and pleasant the banquet when thou gave thy self to
be our food! How wonderful thy work, o Lord, how powerful thy virtue, how
unspeakable thy truth! For thou said the word, Genesis 1 and Psalm. 148.
and all things were made; and this was done which thou commanndest.

5. A thing of great admiration, and worthy of faith, and surpassing the
understanding of man, that thou, my Lord God, true God and Man, should be
wholly contained under a small form of bread and wine, and should be eaten
by the receauer without being consumed. Thou who art the Lord of all things,
and stand in need of none, have pleased to dwell in us by means of this thy
Sacrament: preserve my heart and body unspotted, that with a cheerful and pure
conscience I may often celebrate thy mysteries, and receive the^ to my
everlasting health, which thou have chiefly ordained and instituted for thy
honor, and perpetual memory.

6. Rejoice my soul, and give thanks unto God for so noble a gift, and
singular comfort left unto thee in this vale of tears. For as often as thou
call to mind this mystery, and receauest the body of Christ: so often do
thou work the work of thy redemption, and art made partaker of all the merits
of Christ. For the charity of Christ is never diminished, and the greatness of
his mercy is never lessened. Therefore thou ought always to dispose thy
self hereunto by a fresh renewing of thy mind, and to weigh with attentive
consideration this great mystery of thy salvation. So great, new, and joyful
it ought to seem unto thee, when thou say, or hear Mass, as if the same
day Christ first descending into the womb of the Virgin, were become man, or
hanging on the cross, did suffer and dye for the salvation of mankind.

CHAP. III. That it is profitable to communicate often.
BEHOLD, o Lord, I come unto thee, Ps. 67.
that I may be comforted in thy gift, and be delighted in thy holy banquet,
which thou, o Lord have prepared in thy sweetness, for the poor. Behold in
thee is all whatsoever I can, or ought to desire: thou art my health, and my
redemption, my hope and my strength, my honor, and my glory. Make joyful
therefore this day, the soul of thy servant, Psalm. 85.
for that I have lifted it up to thee my sweet Jesus I desire to receive thee
now with devotion, and reverence. I do long to bring thee into my house, that
with Zachaeus I may deserve to be blessed by thee, and numbered amongst the
children of Abraham. My soul thirsts to receive thy body, my heart desires
to be united with thee.

2. Give thy self to me, and it suffices. For besides thee no comfort is
auailable. I cannot be without thee, nor live without thy visitation. And
therefore I must often come unto thee, and receive thee as the only remedy of
my health, least perhaps I faint in the way, if I be deprived of thy heavenly
food. For so, most merciful Jesus, thou once did say, preaching to the
people, and curing sundry diseases: Matt 15.
I will not send them home fasting, Matt. 8.
least they faint in the way. Deal thou therefore in like manner now with me,
who have vouchsafed to leave thy self in the Sacrament for the comfort of the
faithful. For thou art the sweet refection of the soul, and he that eats
thee worthily, shall be partaker, and heir of everlasting glory. It is
necessary for me, that do so often fall and sin, so quickly wax dull and
faint, that by often prayers and confession, and receiving of thy sacred body,
I renew, cleanse, and inflame my self, least perhaps by long abstayning I fall
from my holy purpose.

3. For man is prone unto evil from his youth, Genesis 8.
and unless this divine remedy help him, he quickly slideth to worse. This
holy Communion therefore draws back from evil, and comfort in good, For if
I be now so often slack and negligent when I communicate, or say Mass, what
would become of me, if I received not this remedy, and sought not after so
great a help? Though every day I be not fit, nor well prepared to say Mass, I
will endeavor notwithstanding at convenient times to receive the divine
mysteries, and make my self partaker of so great a grace. For this is the
only chief comfort of a faithful soul, whilst she wandreth from thee in
this mortal body, that being mindful of her God, she often receive her
Beloved with a devout mind.

4. O wonderful benignity of thy mercy toward us, that thou, Lord God, the
Creator and giver of life to all spirits, do vouchsafe to come unto a poor
soul, and with thy whole Godhead and humanity to replenish her hunger O happy
mind and blessed soul, that deserves to receive thee, her Lord God, with
devout affection, and in receiving of thee to be filled with spiritual joy! O
how great a Lord does she intertaine! How beloved a ghest does she harbor! how
pleasant a companion does she receive! how faithful a friend does she accept!
how beautiful and noble a spouse does she embrace! she imbraceth him who is to
be loved above all that is beloved, and above all things that may be desired.
Let heaven and earth and all their beauty be sile^t in thy presence. For what
beauty and praise soever they have, it is received from thy bounty, and shall
not equal the beauty of thy name, of whose wisdom there is no end. Psalm. 146.


CHAP. IIII. That many benefits are bestowed upon them that communicate
devoutly.
The voice of the Disciple.

MY Lord God, Psalm. 20.
prevent thy servant in the blessings of thy sweetness, that I may deserve to
approach worthily and devoutly to thy holy Sacrament: stir up my heart unto
thee, and deliver me from all heaviness and sloth: Psalm. 105.
visit me with thy comfort, that I may taste in spirit thy sweetness, which
plentifully lies hid in this Sacrament, as a fountain, Give light also to
mine eyes to behold lo great a mystery, and strengthen me to believe it with
undoubted faith. For it is thy work, and not man's power, thy sacred
institution, not man's invention. For no man is of himself able to comprehend
and understand these things, which surpass the understanding even of Angels.
What therefore shall I unworthy sinner, earth and ashes, be able to search and
comprehend of so high and sacred a mystery?

2. O Lord in sincerity of heart, with a good and firm faith, and at thy
commandment, I come unto thee with hope and reverence, and do verily believe,
that thou art here present in the Sacrament, God and Man. Thy holy pleasure
is, that I receive thee, and by charity do unite my self unto thee. Wherefore I
do recurre unto thy Clemency, and do crave special grace, that I may wholly
melt in thee, and abound with love, and hereafter never admit any external
comfort. For this most high and worthy Sacrament is the health of the soul and
body, the remedy of all spiritual sickness: by it my vices are cured, my
passions bridled, temptations overcome or weakened, greater grace infused,
virtue increased, faith confirmed, hope strengthened, and charity inflamed and
enlarged.

3. For thou have bestowed, and still oftentimes do bestow many benefits in
this Sacrament upon thy beloved that receive it devoutly, my God the Protector
of my soul, the strengthener of humane frailty, and the giver of all in ward
comfort. Thou impartest unto them much comfort against sundry tribulations, and
liftest them up from the depth of their own baseness, to the hope of thy
protection, and do inwardly refresh and illustrate them with a certain new
grace, in such sort, that they who before Communion felt themselves heavy and
indisposed, afterward being strengthened with heavenly meat and drink, do
find in themselves a great change to the better: Which thou do so dispose to
thy elect, that they may truly acknowledge, and patiently prove, how great
their own infirmity is, and what benefit and grace they receive from thee. For
they of themselves are cold, dull, and undevout, but by thee they are made
fervent, agile, and full of devotion. For who is there, that approaching humbly
unto the Fountain of sweetness, does not carry away from thence at least some
little sweetness? Or who standing by a great fire, receaueth not some small
heat thereby? Esa. 12. Leuit. 6.
Thou art a fountain always full and ouerflowing, a fire ever burning and
never decaying.

4. Wherefore if I cannot draw at the full out of this fountain, nor drink my
fill, I will notwithstanding set my lips to the mouth of this heavenly
conduite, that I may draw from thence at least some small drop to refresh my
thirst, to the end I wither not wholly away and perish. And though I be not
altogether celestial, nor so inflamed as the Cherubims and Seraphims, not
with standing I will endeavor to apply my self to devotion, and dispose my
heart to obtain some small spark of divine fire by humble receiving of this
life-giuing Sacrament. And whatsoever is hereunto wanting in me, good Jesus,
most blessed Savior, do thou supply for me, most benign and gracious Lord,
who have vouchsafed to call us unto thee, saying: Come unto me all ye that
labor and are burdened, Matt. 11.
and I will refresh you.

5. I labor in the sweat of my brows, I am vexed with grief of heart, I am
burdened with sins, I am troubled with temptations, I am entangled and
oppressed with many evil passions, and there is none to help me, none to
deliver and save me, but thou, Lord God, my Savior, to whom I commit my
self, and all mine, that thou may keep me, and bring me to life everlasting.
Receive me to the honor and glory of thy name, who have prepared thy Body and
Blood to be my meat and my drink. Grant, Lord God, my Savior, that by
frequenting thy mysteries, my zeal and devotion may increase.

CHAP. V. Of the dignity of this Sacrament, and Priestly sunction.
The voice of Christ.

IF thou had angelical purity, and the sanctity of S. John Baptist, Matt. 11.
thou were not worthy to receive, nor handle this Sacrament. For it is not
within the compass of the deserts of men, that man should consecrate and
handle the Sacrament of Christ, and receive for food the bread of Angels.
Psalm. 77.
A great mystery, and great is the dignity of Priests, to whom is granted
that, which is not permitted to the Angels. For Priests only instituted in the
Church, have power to celebrate, and consecrate the body of Christ. The Priest
is the Minister of God, using the words of God, by Gods commandment, and
appointment; but God is there the principal actour, and invisible worker, to
whom is subject all that he pleases, Genesis 1. Psalm. 148. Romans 9.
and all that he commands, does obey.

2. Thou ought therefore to give more credit to God Almighty in this most
excellent Sacrament, then to thine own sense, or to any visible sign. And
therefore thou art to come unto this Mystery with fear and reverence. Consider
attentively with thy self, what that is, whereof the Ministry is delivered unto
thee by the imposition of hands of the Bishop. Behold thou art made a Priest,
and consecrated to say Mass: 1. Tim. ^.
see now that in due time thou offer Sacrifice unto God faithfully and
devoutly, and carry thy self so, as thou may be without reproof. Thou have
not lightened thy burthe, but art now bound with a straiter band of discipline,
and art obliged to a more perfect degree of sanctity. A Priest ought to be
adorned with all kind of virtues, and to give example of good life to others.
His conversation should not be according to the ordinary and common proceedings
of men, Phil. 3.
but like to the Angels in heaven, or to perfect men on earth.

3. A Priest clothed in sacred garments is the Vicegere^t of Christ, to pray
humbly, Heb. 5.
and with a prostrate mind unto God for himself and the whole people. He has
before, and behind the sign of the Cross of our Lord, to the end he may ever
remember the Passion of Christ: he bears the Cross before him in the
Vestement, that he may diligently behold the footsteps of Christ, and
fervently endeavor to follow them. He is behind marked with the cross, that
he may patiently suffer for God whatsoever adversities shall be laid upon him
by others. He bears the cross before, that he may lament his own sins,
and the same he has also behind, that he may with a compassionate heart bewail
the offenses of others, and know that he is place as a mediator between God
and the sinner. Neither ought he to cease from prayer and holy oblation, till
he deserve to obtain grace and mercy. When a Priest does celebrate, he
honors God, rejoices the Angels, edifieth the Church, helps the living,
gives rest to the dead, and makes himself partaker of all good deeds.

CHAP. VI. An Interrogation of the exercise before Communion.
The voice of the Disciple.

WHEN I weigh thy greatness, o Lord, and my unworthiness, I tremble, and am
confounded in my self. For if I come not unto thee, I fly from life, and if I
unworthily intrude my self, I incur thy displeasure. What therefore shall I
do my God, my helper, and my counselor in necessity?

2. Teach me the right way, appoint me some brief exercise suitable to this holy
mysterv of sacred Communion. For it is good for me to know, how I should
reverently and devoutly prepare my heart unto thee, for the profitable
receiving of thy Sacrament, or for the celebrating of so great and divine a
Sacrifice.

CHAP. VII. Of the discussing of our own conscience, and purpose of amendment.
The voice of the Beloved.

ABOVE all things, the Priest of God ought to come to celebrate, handle, and
receive this Sacrament with great humility of heart, and lowly reverence, with a
full faith, and a Godly desire of the honor of the divine Majesty. Examine
diligently thy conscience, and to thy power, purge and cleanse it with true
contrition, and humble confession: so as there may be nothing in thee, that may
be burdensome unto thee, or that may breed thee remorse of conscience, and
hinder thy free access to these heavenly mysteries. Repent thee of all thy
sins in general, and in particular bewail thy daily offenses. And if thou
have time, confess unto God in the secret of thy heart, all the myseries of thy
disordered passions.

2. Lament and grieve, that thou art yet so subject to sensuality, and so
addicted to the world, so unmortified in thy passions, so full of the motions
of concupiscence, so vnwatchfull over thy outward senses, so often entangled
with many vain fantasies, so vehemently inclined to outwardthings, so
negligent in the interior, so prone to laughter and immodesty, so hard to
tears and co^punction, so prompt to ease and pleasures of the flesh, so dull
to austerity and fervor, so curious to hear news and see vain sights, so
slack to embrace that which tends to thine own humiliation and contempt, so
covetous of abundance, so niggardly in giving, so fast in keeping, so
inconsiderate in speech, so unbridled to silence, so loose in manners, so
outrageous in deeds, so greedy to meat, so deaf to the word of God, so hasty
to rest, so slow to labor, so watchful to tales, so drowsy to watch in the
service of God, so hasty to the end thereof, so inconstant in attention, so
negligent in saying thy office, so undevout in saying Mass, so dry in
receiving, so quickly distracted, so seldom wholly recollected, so suddenly
moved to anger, so apt to take displeasure against another, so prone to judge,
so severe to reprehend, so joyful in prosperity, so weak in adversity, so
often purposing much good, and performing little.

3. These and other thy defects confessed, and bewailed with sorrow, and great
dislike of thine own infirmity, make a firm purpose always to amend thy
self, and to go forwards in virtue. Then with full resignation, and with thy
whole will offer thy self up to the honor of my name, a perpetual sacrifice
in the altar of thy heart, faithfully committing thy body and soul unto me,
that thou may so also deserve to come worthily to offer sacrifice unto God,
and to receive profitably the Sacrament of my body.

4. For there is no oblatio^ more worthy, nor satisfaction greater, for the
washing away of sins, then to offer up our selves unto God purely and wholly
with the oblation of the Body of Christ in the Mass, and in Communion. And
when a man shall have done what lies in him, and shall be truly penitent, as I
live, Ezec. 18.
says our Lord, who will not the death of a sinner, but rather that he be
converted and live, I will not remember his sins any more, but they shall be
all forgiven him, and fully pardoned.

CHAP. VIII. Of the oblation of Christ on the Cross and resignation of our
selves.
The voice of the Beloved

AS I willingly offered up my self unto God my Father, with my hands stretched
forth on the Cross, and my body naked for thy sins, so that nothing remained
in me that was not turned into a sacrifice, for the appeasing of the divine
wrath: so ought thou also to offer up thy self willingly unto me daily in
the Mass, as a pure and holy oblation, with thy whole force, and desire, in as
hearty a manner as thou can. What do I require of thee more, Prou. 23.
then that thou resign thy self wholly unto me? Whatsoever thou give besides
thy self, is of little account in my sight, for I seek not thy gift, but thee.

2. As it would not suffice thee to have all things whatsoever besides me; so
neither can it please me whatsoever thou give, if thou offerest not up thy
self. Offer thy self unto me, and give thy self, all that thou art, for God,
and thy offering shall be grateful. Behold I offered up my self wholly unto
my Father for thee, and gave my whole body, and blood for thy food, that I
might be wholly thine, and thou remain mine. But if thou abidest in thy self,
and do not offer thy self up freely unto my will, thy oblation is not
entire, neither shall the union between us be perfect. Therefore a free
offering up of thy self into the hands of God, ought to go before all thy
actions, if thou will obtain freedom and grace. For this cause so few become
in wardly illuminated, and enjoy true liberty of heart, for that they do not
resolve wholly to deny themselves. My saying is undoubtedly true: Joan. 14.
Unless one forsake all, he cannot be my Disciple. If thou therefore wish to be
mine, offer up thy self unto me with thy whole desires.

CHAP. IX. That we ought to offer up our selves and all that is ours unto God,
and to pray for all.
The voice of the Disciple.

THINE, O Lord, are all things that are in heaven and in earth. Psalm: 23.
I desire to offer up my self unto thee, as a free oblation, and to remain
always thine O Lord, in sincerity of my heart, I offer my self unto thee this
day, in sacrifice of perpetual praise, to be thy servant for ever. Receive me
with this holy oblation of thy precious body, which in the presence of the
Angels inuisibly attending here upon thee, I offer up this day unto thee,
that it may be to the health of my soul, and the salvation of all thy people.

2. I offer unto thee, o Lord, all my sins and offenses, which I have
committed in the sight of thee, and thy holy Angels, from the day wherein I
first could sin, to this hour, upon thy holy altar: that thou may consume
and burn them al with the fire of thy charity, and wash out all the stains of
my sins, and cleanse my conscience from all offense, and restore to me again
thy grace, which I lost by sin, forgiving me all my offenses, and receiving
me mercifully in the kiss of peace.

3. What can I do for my sins, but humbly confess and bewail them, Psalm. 31.
and entreat always for mercy without intermission? I beseech thee, hear me
in thy abundant mercy, when I stand before thee my God. All my sins are very
displeasing unto me I will never commit them any more, but I am sorry, and will
be sorry for the^ as long as I live, and am ready to do penance and to satisfy
for the^ to the uttermost of my power. Forgive me, o God, forgive me my sins,
for thy holy names sake: save my foul, which thou have redeemed with thy
precious Blood. Behold I commit my self unto thy mercy, I refigne my self
over into thy hands. Do with me according to thy goodness, not according to my
wickedness, and manifold iniquity.

4. I offer up also unto thee all whatsoever is good in me, although it be very
little and imperfect, that thou may amend and sanctify it, that thou may
make it grateful and acceptable unto thee, and always perfect more and more
that which thou have begun, and bring me also, who am the slothful and
unprofitable creature, to a good and blessed end.

5. I offer up also unto thee all the Godly desires of devout persons, the
necessities of my parents and friends, my brethren and sisters, and of al those
that are dear unto me, and that have done good either to myself or others for
thy love, and that have desired me to say Maste and pray for them, and all
theirs, whether they be yet alive, or already dead: that they all may receive
the help of thy grace and comfort, protection from dangers, delinery from
pain, and being freed from all evils, may joyfully give worthy thanks to
thee.

6. I offer up also unto thee my prayers, and sacrifices, especially for them
who have in any thing wronged, grieved, or slaundered me, or have done me any
damage or displeasure, and for those also, whom I have at any time grieved,
troubled, and scandalized by words, or deeds, wittingly, or at unawares: that
it may please thee to forgive us al our sins and offenses, one against the
other. Take, o Lord, from our hearts all jealousy, all indignation, wrath, and
contention, and whatsoever may hurt Charity, and weaken brotherly love. Have
mercy, o Lord; have mercy on those, that crave thy mercy: give grace unto
them, that stand in need thereof, and grant that we may be worthy to enjoy thy
grace, and attain to life everlasting, Amen.

CHAP. X. That the holy Communion is not lightly to be forborne.
The voice of the Beloved.

THOU ought often to have recourse to the Fountain of grace, and of divine
mercy, to the Fountain of goodness, and of all piety, that thou may be
cured of thy sins and passions, and deserve to be made more strong and
vigilant against all temptations and deceipts of the Devil. The enemy knowing
the greatest profit, and remedy to consist in the holy Communion, endeavors
by all means and occasions to withdraw and hinder faithful and devout persons
from it.

2. Some when they purpose to receive the sacred Communion, suffer greatest
assaults of the Devil. For that wicked spirit (as is written in Job) comes
amongst the Sons of God, to trouble them with his accustomed malice and
impiety, or to make them over fearful and perplexed, that so he may diminish
their affection, or by his subtle assaults, take away their faith, to the end
they may either altogether abstain from this divine food, or at least come
unto it with less devotion. But there is no heed to be taken of his frauds and
malicious suggestions, be they never so filthy and hideous, but all is to be
turned back upon his own head. We ought to contemn and scorn him miserable
wreth, and not to omit the sacred communion for his assaults, and the troubles
which he raises.

3. Oftentimes also an excessive care for the obtaining of devotion, and a
certain anxiety for the making of our Confession hinders us. Follow in these
occasions the counself of the wise, and put away all anxiety and scruple, for
it hinders the grace of God, and overthrows devotion. Omit not for every
small vexation of the mind which happens, to receive this holy Sacrament, but
go presently to confession, and willingly forgive others, whatsoever offenses
they have done against thee: and if thou have offended any, humbly crave
pardon, and God will willingly forgive thee.

What avails it to delay confession, and to defer receiving? Purge thy self
with speed, spit out the venom presently, make have to take a remedy, and thou
shall find it better, then if thou deferredst it long. If thou omittest it to
day for this cause, perhaps to morrow some greater will fall out, and so thou
may be hindered a long time from these divine mysteries, and become more
unfit. Stir up thy self, and shake off all heaviness and flouth, with the
greatest force and speed thou can. For it profits nothing to continue long
in disquietnes and trouble of mind, and for daily occurring impediments to
withdraw thy self from the Sacraments. Yea it hurts very much to defer
Communion long, for it is wont to breed a great and dangerous dullness. Alas,
some cold and dissolute people, do willingly delay their confession, and do
therefore defer the sacred Communion, least they should be bound to greater
watch over themselves.

5. O how little charity and weak devotion have they that so easily omit the
receiving of these holy mysteries! How happy is he and grateful to God, who
orders so his life, and keeps his conscience in such purity, that he may be
ready and fit to communicate every day, if it were convenient and might be
done without note. If any one sometimes abstain of humility, or by reason of
some lawful impediment, he is to be commended for the reverence which therein
he shows. But if it proceeds of coldness, he must stir himself up, and do
what lies in him, and God will prosper his desire, for the good will he has
to do it, which God does chiefly respect.

6. And when any lawful hindrance does happen, he must always have yet a good
will, and loving desire to communicate, and so shall he not loose the fruit of
the Sacrament. For a devout person may every day and hour profitably and
without let, receauc Christ spiritually: and yet on certain days, and at time
appointed he ought to receive Sacramentally with a reverend desire the Body of
his Redeemer, and rather seek the honor and glory of God, 1. Cor. 11.
then his own comfort. For he co^municateth mystically, and (...) inuisibly
fed, as often as he devoutly calls to mind the mystery of the Incarnation,
and the Passion of Christ, and is inflamed with his love.

7. He that prepares not himself, but when a feast draws near, and when
custom compels him thereunto, shall often be unprepared. Blessed is he that
offers himself up as an Holocaust and burnt offering to our Lord, as often as
he does celebrate or communicate. Be not too long nor too short in saying
Mass, but keep the accustomed manner of those, with whom thou live. Thou
ought not to be tedious and troublesome to others, but to observe the common
course according to the appointment of thy Superiors: and rather frame thy
self to the profit of others, then to thine own devotion or desire.

CHAP. XI. That the Body of Christ, and the holy Scripture are most necessary
unto a faithful soul.
The voice of the Disciple.

OMOST sweet Lord Jesus, how great is the delight of a devout soul that
feasteth with thee in thy banquet, where there is no other meat offered to be
eaten, but thy self her only beloved, and most to be desired above all the
desires of her heart. And verily it would be a great comfort unto me, to power
out tears from the bottom of my heart in thy presence, Luc. 7.
and with devout Magdalen to wash thy feet with the tears of mine eyes. But
where is this devotion? Where is so plentiful shedding of holy tears? Surely
in the sight of thee and thy holy Angels, my whole heart should be inflamed and
dissolve into tears for joy. For I enjoy thee in the Sacrament really present,
although hidden under another form.

2. For to behold thee in thine own divine brightness, mine eyes would not
be able to endure it, neither could the whole world stand in the clearness of
the glory of thy Majesty. Thou therefore prouidest for my weakness in that thou
couerest thy self under the Sacrament. I do really enjoy and adore him, whom
the Angels adore in heaven, but I as yet for the time in faith, they in his
proper form, and without shadow. I ought to be contented with the light of
true faith, and to walk therein, until the day of everlasting brightness
break forth, and the shadows of figures pass away. But when that shall come
which is perfect, 1. Cor. 13.
the use of Sacraments shall cease. For the blessed in heavenly glory need not
the remedy of Sacraments, who rejoice without end in the presence of God,
behoulding his glory face to face, and being tra^sformed by his brightness
into the brightness of the incomprehensible Deity, they taste the word of God
made flesh, as he was from the beginning, and as he remains for ever.

3. Whilst I remember these thy wonderful works, all spiritual comfort
whatsoever becomes very tedious unto me: for that as long as I behold not my
Lord openly in his glory, I make no account of whatsoever I see or hear in
this life. Thou art my witness, o God, that nothing can comfort me, no creature
give me rest, but thou my God, whom I desire to behold everlastingly. But
this is not possible whilst I remain in this mortal life. Therefore I must
frame my self to much patience, and submit my self to thee in all my desires.
Heb 10. and 11.
For thy Saints also, o Lord, who now rejoice with thee in the Kingdom of
heaven, whilst they lived expected in faith and great patience the coming of
thy glory. What they believed, I believe; what they hoped for, I expect;
whither they are come, I trust I shall come by thy grace. In the mean time I
will go forward in faith, strengthened by the examples of the Saints. I have
also devout books for my comfort, and for the guide of my life, and above all
these, thy most holy Body for a singular remedy and refuge.

4. For I perceive two things to be chiefly necessary for me in this life,
without which this miserable life would be insupportable unto me. Whilst I am
kept in the prison of this body, I acknowledge my self to stand in need of
two things, to wit, food, and light. Thou have therefore given unto me, Joan. 6.
weak creature, thy sacred Body for the refection of my soul and body, and
have set thy word as a light unto my feet: Psalm. 118.
without these two I could not well live. For the word of God is the light of
the soul, and thy Sacrament, the bread of life. Psalm. 22. Heb. 9. etc 13.
These also may be called the two tables set on the one side and the other, in
the storehouse of the holy Church. One is the table of the holy Altar,
containing the sacred bread, that is, the precious body of Christ: the other is
of the divine law, containing holy doctrine, teaching true faith, and
certainly leading to the part of the Temple within the veil, where are the
Holy of Holies. Thanks be unto thee, Lord Jesus, light of everlasting light, for
thy table of holy doctrine, at which thou seruest us by thy servants the
Prophets and Apostles, and other Doctors.

5. Thanks be unto thee Creator and Redeemer of man, who to manifest thy
charity to the whole world have prepared a great supper, Luc. 14.
wherein thou have offered to be eaten, not the mystical lamb, but thine own
most sacred Body and Blood, Joan. 6.
rejoicing all the faithful with thy holy banquet, and replenishing them to
the full with thy heavenly Cup, Psalm. 22.
in which are all the delights of heaven, Sap. 16.
and the holy Angels do feast with us, but with a more happy sweetness.

6. O how great and honorable is the office of Priests, to whom it is granted
with sacred words to consecrate the Lord of Majesty, with their lips to bless
him, with their hands to hold him, with their own mouth to receive him, and to
administer him to others! O how clean ought to be those hands! How pure that
mouth! How holy the body! How unspotted the heart of the Priest, into whom the
Author of purity so often enters! Nothing but holy, no word but chaste and
profitable ought to proceed from the mouth of the Priest, which so often
receaueth the Sacrament of Christ.

7. Simple and chaste ought to be the eyes, that are wont to behold the body of
Christ, the hands pure and lifted up to heaven, that use to handle the Creator
of heaven and earth. Unto the Priests especially it is said in the Law: Be ye
holy, Leuit. 19. and 20.
for that I your Lord God am holy.

8. Assist us Almighty God with thy grace, that we, who have undertaken the
office of Priesthood, may serve thee worthily and devoutly in all purity, and
with a sincere conscience. And if we cannot live in so great innocence as we
ought to do, grant us notwithstanding in due manner to bewail the sins
which we have committed, and in the spirit of humility, and sincere intention
to serve thee hereafter with more fervor.

CHAP. XII. That he that is to communicate, ought to prepare himself with
great diligence.
The voice of the Beloved.

I AM the lover of purity, Psalm. 23. and Matt. 5.
and the giver of all sanctity. I seek a pure heart, and there is the place of
my rest. Marc. 14. and Luc. 22.
Make ready and adorn for me a great chamber, and I will make with thee the
Pasch with my Disciples. If thou will have me come unto thee, and remain with
thee, purge the old leaven, 1. Cor. 5.
and make clean the dwelling of thy heart: shut out the whole world, and all
tumult of vices: sit like a sparrow solitary upon the house top, and think of
thy offenses in the bitterness of thy soul. For every lover prepares the
best and fairest room for his beloved, and heerin is known the affection of
him that intertaineth his beloved.

2. Know thou notwithstanding that the worth of no action of thine, is able to
make this preparation sufficient, although thou should prepare thy self a
whole year together, and think on nothing else: but of my mercy and grace
only thou art suffered to come to my table, like a beggar invited to dinner to
a rich man, who has nothing else to return him for his benefits, but to
humble himself, and give him thanks. Do what lies in thee, and do it
diligently, not for custom, nor for necessity, but with fear and reverence,
and hearty affection receive the body of thy beloved Lord and God, who
vouchsafes to come unto thee. I am he that have called thee, I have commanded
it to be done, I will supply what is wanting in thee, come and receive me.

3. When I bestow the grace of devotion on thee, give thanks to God, for it is
given thee, not for that thou deseruest it, but because I have mercy on thee.
If thou have it not, but rather feel thy self dry, continue in prayer, sigh
and knock, and give not over until thou deserve to receive some crumme or drop
of grace. Thou have need of me, not I of thee, neither come thou to sanctify
me, but I come to sanctify and make thee better. Thou come that thou may be
sanctified by me, and united unto me, that thou may receive new grace, and be
stirred up again to amendment. Neglect not this grace, but prepare thy heart
with all diligence, and receive thy beloved into thy soul.

4. But thou ought not only to prepare thy self to devotion before
Communion, but carefully also to conserve thy self therein, after thou have
received the Sacrament. Neither is the careful guard (...) thy self after,
less exacted, then devout preparation before. For a good guard afterward is
the best preparation thou can make for the obtaining again of greater grace,
because that man's mind becomes very indisposed, if he presently power
himself out to outward comforts. Beware of much talk, remain in some secret
place, and enjoy thy God. For thou have him whom all the world cannot take
from thee. I am he, to whom thou ought wholly to give thy self, that so
thou may live hereafter not in thy self, but in me, without all care.

CHAP. XIII. That a devout soul ought to desire with her whole heart to be
united unto Christ in the Sacrament.
The voice of the Disciple.

HOW may I obtain this, o Lord, that I may find thee alone, and open my whole
heart unto thee, and enjoy thee as my soul desires? And that no man may look
upon me, nor any creature move me or respect me, but thou alone may speak
unto me, and I to thee, Exodus 33. and Ca^t. 8.
as the beloved is wont to speak to his beloved, and a friend to banquet with
his friend. This I pray for, this I desire, that I may be wholly united unto
thee, and may withdraw my heart from all created things, and more and more, by
sacred Communion and often celebrating, learn to taste of heavenly and
everlasting sweetness. O Lord God, when shall I be wholly united and absorpt by
thee, and altogether forgetful of my self! thou in me, Joan. 15.
and I in thee, and so grant us both to continue in one.

2. Thou art my beloved, Cant. 5.
the choicest amongst thousands, in whom my soul has taken pleasure to dwell
all the days of her life. Thou art my peacemaker in whom is greatest peace,
and true rest, without whom is labor and sorrow, and infinite misery. Thou
art a hidden God, and thy counsel is not with the wicked, but thy speech is
with the humble and simple of heart. Prou. 3.
O Lord, how sweet is thy spirit, Sap. 12.
who to the end, thou might show thy sweetness toward thy children,
vouchsafest to feed them with the most delightsome bread which descends from
heaven, and is full of all sweetness. Surely there is no other Nation so great,
Deuteronomy. ^.
that has Gods approaching unto them, as thou our God art present to all thy
faithful, unto whom for their daily comfort, and for the lifting up of their
hearts to heaven, thou give thy self to be eaten and enjoyed.

3. For what other Nation is there so famous, as the Christian people? or what
creature under heaven so beloved, as a devout soul, to whom God himself
comes to feed her with his glorious flesh? O unspeakable grace! O admirable
favor! O infinite love singularly bestowed upon man! Psalm. 115.
But what shall I give unto our Lord in return of this grace, for so singular
a charity? There is no other thing more grateful that I am able to give, then
to bestow my heart wholly on my God, and to unite it perfectly unto him. Then
shall all my bowels rejoice, when my soul shall be perfectly united unto God.
Then he will say unto me: if thou will be with me, I will be with thee. And I
will answer him: Vouchsafe, o Lord, to remain with me, and I will be with thee
This is my whole desire, that my heart be united unto thee.

CHAP. XIIII. Of the fervent desire of some devout persons to receive the Body
of Christ.
The voice of the Disciple.

O HOW great is the store of thy sweetness, Psalm. 30.
o Lord, which thou have hidden for them that fear thee! When I remember some
devout persons who come unto thy Sacrament, o Lord, with great devotion and
affection, I am oftentimes confounded, and blush within my self, that I come
so negligently and coldly to thy Altar, to the table of holy Communion, that I
remain so dry, and without spiritual motion or feeling, that I am not wholly
inflamed in thy presence, my God, nor so earnestly drawn and moved, as many
devout persons have been, who out of a vehement desire of receiving, and a
feeling affection of heart, could not contain themselves from weeping, but with
the desire both of soul and body they earnestly longed after thee, o God, the
lively fountain, being not otherwise able to temper nor satisfy their hunger,
but by receiving thy body with all joy and spiritual greediness.

2. O most ardent faith of those persons, a probable argument of thy sacred
presence. Luc. 24.
For these truly know their Lord in the breaking of bread, whose heart burns
so within them, whilst thou; o blessed Jesus, walk with them. Such desire and
devotion, so vehement love and feruency is oftentimes far off from me. Be
merciful unto me, good Jesus, sweet and benign Lord, and grant me thy poor
needy creature, to feel sometimes at least, in this holy Sacrament, a little
cordial desire of thy love that my faith may be more strengthened, my hope in
thy goodness increased, and that my charity once perfectly inflamed, after the
rafting of heavenly Manna, may never decay.

3. Thy mercy, o Lord, is able to give me the grace I desire, and to visit me
in thy bounteous clemency with the spirit of fervor, when it shall please
thee. For although I burn not with so great desire as those that are so
especially devoted unto thee: yet notwithstanding by thy grace, I desire to
have this great inflamed desire, praying and craving that I may participate
with all such thy fervent lovers, and be numbered among them in their holy
company.

CHAP. XV. That the grace of devotion is obtained by humility and deny all of
our selves.
The voice of the Beloved.

THOU ought to seek the grace of devotion instantly, to ask it earnestly,
to expect it patiently and confidently, to receive it joyfully, to keep it
humbly, to work with it diligently, and to commit the time and manner of this
heavenly visitation to God, until it shall be his pleasure to come. Thou
ought chiefly to humble thy self, when thou feel inwardly little or no
devotion, and yet not to be too much dejected, nor to grieve inordinately for
it. God often gives in a short moment that, which he has long time denied: he
gives sometimes in the end that, which in the beginning of prayer he differred
to grant.

2. If grace should be always presently given, and at hand ever with a wish,
it could not be well endured by a weak man. Therefore devotion is to be
expected with good hope, and humble patience: yet impute it to thy self, and
thy sins, when it is not given thee, or when it is secretly taken from thee.
It is sometimes a small matter that hinders and hides grace from us, if it be
to be called small, and not rather a great matter, that hinders so great a
good. And if thou remove this, be it great or small, and perfectly overcome it,
thou shall have thy desire.

3. For presently as soon as thou give thy self to God, and seek not
this, nor that, for thine own pleasure or will, but fetlest thy self wholly in
me, thou shall find thy self united unto him, and quiet. For nothing will taste
so well, and please thee so much, as the will and pleasure of God. Whosoever
therefore with a sincere heart directs his intention to God, and purges him
self from all inordinate love, or dislike of any creature, shall be most fit
to receive grace, and worthy of the gift of devotion. For our Lord bestows
his blessing there, where be finds his vessels empty. And how much the more
perfectly one forsakes these basest things, and dies to him self by contempt
of him self: so much the more speedily grace comes, and enters in more
plentifully, and lifts up the heart that is free, to a higher state of grace.

4. Then shall be see, and abound, Psa. 60.
and wonder, and his heart shall be enlarged, because the hand of our Lord is
with him, and he has put himself wholly into his hand for ever. Behold so
shall the man be blessed, that seeks Almighty God with his whole heart, and
takes not his soul in vain. This man deserves great grace of divine union,
in receiving the holy Eucharist, for that he regards not his own devotion
and comfort, but above all devotion and comfort, he prizeth the honor and
glory of God.

CHAP. XVI. That we ought to manifest our necessities unto Christ, and to crave
his grace.
The voice of the Disciple.

O MOST sweet and loving Lord whom I now desire to receive devoutly, thou
know my infirmity, and the necessity which I endure, with how many sins I
am oppressed, how often I am grieved, tempted, troubled, and defiled. I come
unto thee for remedy, I crave of thee thy heavenly comfort, and the ease of my
pain. I speak to him that knows all things, to whom all my secrets are
open, and who can only perfectly comfort and help me. Thou know what it is,
whereof above all things I stand in most need, and how poor I am in virtues.

2. Behold I stand before thee, poor and naked, calling for grace, and
craving mercy. Refresh this thy hungry and needy creature, give heat unto my
coldness with the fire of thy love, give light unto my blindness with the
brightness of thy presence. Turn all earthly things unto me, into
bitterness, all things grievous and contrary, into patience, all base and
created things, into contempt and oblivion. Lift up my heart to thee in heaven,
and suffer me not to wander upon earth: be thou only sweet and delightsome unto
me from henceforth for evermore, for thou only art my meat, and my drink, my
love and my joy, my delight and all my good.

3. O that with thy presence thou would wholly inflame, burn, and change me
into thee, that I might be made one spirit with thee, by the grace of inward
union and melting of burning love! Suffer me not to go from thee hungry and
dry, but deal mercifully with me, as thou have oftentimes dealt wonderfully
with thy Saints. What marvel if I should be wholly inflamed by thee, and dye
in my self, since thou art fire ever burning and never decaying, love purifying
the heart, and inlightening the understanding.

CHAP. XVII. Of burning love and vehement desire to receive Christ.
The voice of the Disciple.

WITH great devotion and burning love, with most hearty affection and fervor
I desire to receive thee, o Lord, as many Saints and devout persons have
desired thee, when they received thy Sacrament, who were most pleasing unto
thee in holiness of life, and most fervent in devotion. O my God the
everlasting love, my whole good my happiness without end, I would gladly
receive thee with the most vehement desire, and worthy reverence, that any of
the Saints ever had, or could feel.

2. And although I be unworthy to have all those feelings of devotion, yet I
offer unto thee the whole affection of my heart, as if I alone had those most
sweet inflamed desires: yea whatsoever also a devout mind can conceive and
desire, all that, with greatest reverence, and most inward affection I offer
and present unto thee. I wish to referue nothing to my self, but freely and
most willingly to sacrifice my self and all mine unto thee, my Lord God, my
Creator, and my Redeemer. I desire to receive thee this day with such
affection, reverence, praise and honor, with such gratitude, worthiness, and
love, with such faith, hope, and purity, as thy most blessed Mother the
glorious Virgin Mary received, and desired thee, when she humbly and devoutly
answered the Angel, who declared unto her the mystery of the Incarnation, and
said: Behold the handmaid of our Lord, Luc. 1.
let it be done unto me according to thy word.

3 And as thy blessed Forerunner, the most excellent amongst the Saints John
Baptist cheerfully leaped with joy of the holy Ghost, whilst he was yet shut up
in his mothers womb: and afterward seeing Jesus walking amongst men, humbling
himself very much, said with devout affection: The friend of the Bridegroom
that stands and hears him, Joan. 3.
rejoices with joy for the voice of the Bridegroom: so I also wish to be
inflamed with great and holy desires, and to offer my self up to thee with my
whole heart. Wherefore I offer also and present unto thee the joys, fervent
desires, excesses of mind, spiritual illuminations, and heavenly visions of
all devout hearts, with all the virtues and praises exercised, and to be
exercised by all creatures in heaven and earth, for my self, and all such as
are commended to me in prayer, that by all thou may be worthily praised, and
glorified for ever.

4. Receive, my Lord God, the affections of my heart and desires, which I have
to give thee, infinite praise and thanks, which according to the measure of
thy unspeakable greatness are due unto thee. These I yield thee, and desire to
yield thee every day and moment, and I do entreat, and inuit all the
heavenly spirits, and all thy devout servants to give thanks and praises
together with me.

5. Let all People, Tribes, and Tongues praise thee, and magnify thy holy and
sweet name with great joy, and fervent devotion: and let all that reverently
and devoutly celebrate thy most high Sacrament, and receive it with full faith,
deserve to find grace, and mercy at thy hands, and pray humbly for me sinful
creature. And when they shall have obtained their desired devotion and joyful
union, and depart from thy sacred heavenly table well comforted and
meruailously refreshed, let them vouchsafe to remember my poor and needy soul.

CHAP. XVIII. That a man be not a curious searcher of this Sacrament, but an
humble follower of Christ, submitting his sense unto faith.
The voice of the Beloved.

THOU ought to beware of curious and unprofitable searching into this most
profound Sacrament, if thou will not sink into the depth of doubt. Prou. 25.
He that is a searcher of Maiesty^, shall be oppressed by glory. God is able to
work more then man can understand. A pious and humble inquiry of truth is
tolerable, so he be always ready to be taught, and do endeavor to walk in
the sound paths of the ancient Fathers doctrine.

2. Bessed is that simplicity, that forsakes the difficult ways of questions,
and goes on in the plain and assured path of Gods Commandments. Many have
lost devotion, whilst they would search after high things. Faith and sincere
life are exacted at thy hands, not height of understanding, nor the depth of
the mysteries of God. If thou do not understand, nor conceive those things
that are under thee, how shall thou be able to comprehend those that are above
thee? Submit thy self to God, and let thy sense be subject to faith, and the
light of knowledge shall be given thee in that degree, as shall be profitable
and necessary for thee.

3. Some are grievously tempted about faith and the Sacrament, but this is not
to be imputed to the^, but rather to the enemy. Do not regard nor dispute with
thy thoughts, neither do thou give answer to the doubts moved by the enemy,
but believe the words of God, believe his Saints and Prophets, and the wicked
Serpent will fly from thee. It is oftentimes very profitable to the servant of
God to suffer such things. For he tempts not Infidels and sinners, whom he
already securely possesses, but he sundry ways tempts and vexes the
faithful and devour.

4. Go forward therefore with a sincere and undoubted faith, and come to the
Sacrament with unfeigned reverence. And whatsoever thou art not able to
understand, commit fecurely to Almighty God. God deceaueth thee not: he is
deceived that trusts too much to himself. Ps. 19. etc. 118.
God walks with the simple, Matt. 11.
reuealeth himself to the humble, gives understanding to little ones, opens
the senses of pure minds, and hides grace from the curious and proud. Humane
reason is weak, and may be deceived, but true says cannot be deceived.

5. All reason and natural search ought to follow faith, not to go before it,
nor impugn it. For faith and love do chiefly excel, and work in a hidden
manner in this most blessed and excellent Sacrament. God, who is everlasting,
and of infinite power, does great and inscrutable things in heaven and in
earth, and there is no searching of his wonderful works. If the works of God
were such, as might be easily comprehended by humane reason, they were not to
be called wonderful and unspeakable.

FINIS.

