Now goes ye Judgment over this world: now is ye prince of this world cast
out: John ^2:



Now is ye Salvation ye por^^^ and ye Kingdom become our gods and ye Might his
Christ's. Revet. ^2 D.

Mirabilia opera Dei: Certain wonderful Works of God which happened to H. N.
even from his youth: and how the God of Heaven has united himself with him,
and raised up his gracious Word in him, and how he has chosen and sent him to
be a Minister of his gracious Word*

Published by Tobias a Fellow Elder with H. N. in the Household of Love.

Translated out of Base Almain.

Now come hither and behold the works of the Lord, Ps. 46 66. Know ye that the
Lord leads his Saints wonderfully, Ps. 4. a. And take heed that ye do not
despise the works of the Lord, lest there come upon you that which is said in
the Prophets. Behold, ye despisers and wonder and perish, for I do a work in
your days, which you will in no wise believe though a man declare it unto you,
Hab. 1. a. Acts 13. b. THE PREFACE.
Tobias (with H. N. a fellow Minister of the gracious Word of the Lord) wishes
to all lovers of Truth, Salvation and Peace, in Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.
FOrasmuch as I Tobias, a fellow Elder with the Oldest Elders in the Household
of Love, have always been present with H. N. (in all what the Lord has
revealed unto him) and now in this day of the Love of Jesus Christ, am impulsed
of the Holy Ghost, to declare and to publish among the children of men, under
the obedience of the love of the Truth of certain wonderful works of God, which
befell H. N. and us the oldest Elders in the house of Love, and that I also
know, that H. N. (Gods chosen Minister) and his ministration of the gracious
Word of the Lord has been disorderly rejected, and censured with several false
judgments, by many false hearts, and good-thinking wise-ones, by many false
Christians, and unsent Teachers, or Preachers, and by some unfaithful and
opinionated self-seekers, who are turned away from us. And that the Godly
Testimonies of the holy Spirit of the Love of Jesus Christ (published by H. N.
were by many disgracefully contemned and reproached, (as if God had neither
chosen nor sent H. N. to be a Minister of his holy and gracious Word, and as if
the holy Spirit of the Love of Jesus Christ were an unclean thing.) So have I
for Gods cause, and in regard of the Love which I bear and have to all men's
salvation, I could not omit to declare to all God-fearing-understandings and
Lovers of the Truth, (That they may believe the Truth, understand the Godly
Testimonies of the holy Spirit of Love, and may be preserved in these dangerous
times) and to witness the Truth before them, how and in what manner the Lord,
the living God of Heaven has chosen H. N. from his youth, to the ministration
of his holy and gracious word, and has sent him thereunto in his old age of
the holy and godly understanding through the holy Spirit of his Love.

2 For the holy Spirit of the Truth of God, and of the Love of Jesus Christ was
always powerfully abiding upon H. N. (in all his ministrations) after that the
Lord had anointed him Esaias 61. a.
with the same spirit, and has through the same spirit raised and sent him for
to declare to all people, the true Esaias 58. a. 4 ^sd. 1. a.
repentance for their sins, and to draw and bring in (through his
ministration of the holy and gracious Word) all those that love Gods Truth, and
the accomplishment of the Godliness in Jesus Christ, and hunger and thirst
after righteousness Mat. 9. a.
to the peaceable Love and his Godly service for the preservation of them all
in the Godliness) that all they which H. N. and our fellowship may have their
communion in Jesus Christ, and may not be seduced in these dangerous times, (in
which if it were possible the very elect Mat. 24. b. Act. 7. g. Heb. 10. c.
should be seduced) with the unprofitable prating of the false hearts and
unsent Teachers or Preachers (which always oppose the Truth of God; 2 These.
(...)
and blaspheme against the holy Spirit) nor through any depraved hearts and
Apostates, (who continually accuse with falsehood the true Ministers of the
gracious word, and endeavor with all their power to abolish the same
ministration,) nor should be kept of or held back, from our most holy Service
of the gracious word under the obedience of the Love, to their condemnation.

3 And therefore, and for the Truth of Gods cause, and for to declare the
knowledge that the Promises of God the Father, and of the Lord Jesus Christ
Deuteronomy 10. 30. Mat. 22. d. Romans 13 b. 1 Cor. 13. b. 1 (...) 1. a.
be fullfilled and established in the Love. So is there also now presently in
this same day of the Love (in plain words) to all understanding, and before all
good-willing hearts unto the righteousness through H. N. testified and
published, what that very thing which the Gracious Word of the Lord, (which the
Lord now has raised up according to his Promises) does require of all men.

4 And for to witness and publish the truth that the Lord has chosen and sent
H. N. therefore have I (through the holy Spirit of the Love of Jesus Christ)
[plainly] testified and declared the sending of H. N. also certain wonderful
works of God, which from his youth happened unto him from the living God, That
all those which read or hear all the Godly Testimonies of our writings, may
believe the Truth with a single heart, to have a right regard to the true
Promises of the Father, and of the Son (our Lord Jesus Christ) and of the
accomplishing of the same, and may hope upon the fulfilling of the requiring of
the gracious word and of his service of Love; and rightly and in Truth follow
and imitate our Lord Jesus Christ (in the saving word of his holy Spirit of
Love) Mat. 16. c. 1 Pet. 2. c.
and might be of one mind with us and our communialtie of the Saints John 17. c.
in the Love of our Lord Jesus 1 Cor. 1. a. ^. Cor. 13. b.
into all unity and peace.

5 And likewise that through the same declaration the enemies of H. N. together
with all the opposers and reprochers of the Truth, and of the holy Spirit of
the Love of Jesus Christ may see and know, That they have villified and
contemned not only H. N. a choseu servannt of God, but also God the Father
(the builder of our house of Love) and the Lord Jesus Christ (our Phisician and
Savior) and the holy Ghost (the inheritance of our spiritual and heavenly
goods) Math. 1^.
and have pulled upon their own necks, the wrath and judgment of their
condemnation, That they with humble hearts) might bring forth real fruits of
repentance.

6 For it is not unknown or uncertain to us that H. N. does testify out of
the Truth of God and his gracious word; and that the office of the ministration
of the gracious Word is imposed and entrusted to him (through 1 Cor. 3. b. 15.
a.
God's (grace) to administer, for the Lord has chosen him thereunto from his
youth, to witness the same Testimonies of the Truth of God, And to administer
Gods holy and gracious word, and to manifest his heavenly works, and to declare
upon the earth now in these last times (under the obedience of the love of
Jesus Christ) Gods Truth and upright being, and the acomplishment of the
Godliness in Jesus Christ.

7 Thus in this election by the living God: H. N. has declared on earth to
this present day, from the 1 Cor. 13. b. 2 Cor. 3. b.
uncovered face of God and of Christ) Gods real Truth, and the requiring of his
upright righteousness, together with his righteous Judgment and the
fulfilling of the Godliness in Jesus Christ.

8 Now whether this be believed, or not believed, however he has revealed the
the same out of Gods true light and eternal life) and in manifest declaration
brought it to light in this holy day of the love of God and Christ.

9 And the same day of the love of God and of Christ (which is come unto us
from Gods grace) is the newest or last day of which long ago the Prophets of
God, and the Evangelists of Jesus Christ have foretold and published, and is
the day Acts 17. c.
which God has appointed or ordained, for to judge on the same the whole
circuit of the Earth with righ^eousnesse.

10 For on the same day of the Love of God and of Christ Romans ^. a. 2 ^hes. 1.
2 b.
shall all unbelievers and disobedient ones to the gracious Word of the Lord,
and all evil surmisers toward the Ministers thereof, together with all
opposers of H. N. and blasphemers of the holy Spirit of the Love of Jesus
Christ, be 1 Cor. 4.
revealed, and Mat. 25. d. Jude 1. b.
judged, and according to their works shall receive their reward.

11 Therefore take warning by this declaration of mine, all ye people which
love the truth of Jesus Christ, that you in no wise oppose neither the gracious
Word of God, nor his chosen servant H. N. because God the Father with his Son
Jesus Christ, dwells and lives perfectly Perfectly, that is, withal that
concerns the Diety of Jesus Christ, or is of one being therewith.
in H. N. in the heavenly being, and has anointed him with the holy Spirit of
God and of (s) Jesus Christ, Esaias 61. a.
and that no man without the fellowship of H. N. or without the obedience of
the requiring of his doctrine, can be brought or gathered to the true living
God, nor to his Son Jesus Christ, nor united with the same good being.

12 Behold out of a very hearty love, which I have to all your preservations in
the godliness, am I presently in this day of the Love, impulsed and forced,
(through the holy Spirit of the love of Jesus Christ) to make the same known
before all your understandings, and to declare unto you how the calling H. N.
came to pass by the living God, and how he was chosen of the same God to
Administration of his holy and and gracious word, under the obedience of the
love of Jesus Christ.

13 And also to testify unto you some mysteries Mat. 13. b.
of the Kingdom of the God of heavens, and of the heavenly revelations and
workings of God, which were revealed and showed to H. N. by the living God, out
of his heavenly being, even from the youth of H. N.

14 The Lord grant unto you all mercy and his Graee that in the hearing of
these Testimonies, your hearts may not be offended nor be hardened against the
Truth Heb. 3. b.
of the same Testimonies, but that ye may hear them humbly, receive and accept
of them in all thanksgiving to God for his grace, be well minded to the holy
and gracious word of the Lord and his service of the Love to your preservation
in the Godliness, and may enter into the requiring of the same obediently.
Amen, So be it.

Take it to heart.
Certain wonderful Works of God, which befell H N. from his youth.
CHAP. I.
IN the eighth year of the age of H. N. (in Maximilian the first, being made
Roman Emperor by virtue or power of the Electoral Princes of the Roman Empire
and the German Nation) it fell out on an Evening in a Winter season, That the
Father of H. N. exhorted his Family, and instructing them (with many words,)
That they should fear God, Job. 4. a.
and to give praise and thanks unto him for the grace he bestowed on man.

2 The same time, The Lord opened the mouth of the child H. N. and touched his
lips and tongue, and with this the child spoke to his Father, and said.
Instruct me, O my Father, what is that singular Grace bestowed on us, for which
we ought to give praise and thanks to God.

3 When the child had asked this questiof his Father, The Father looked on the
child, and wondered that the child should ask him so earnestly, and answearing
the child said to him.

Jesus Christ, and is set forth unto us daily in the service of the Mass, and
often also and abundantly is attested by Preaching, how that God the Father by
reason of Adams sin; (whereby we all became the children Rom 5. b. ^ph. 2. a.
of death and damnation,) caused his dear Son (Jesus Christ) to suffer the
ignominious ^^sa. 5^. b. Wisd. 2. c. Mat. 27. Phil. 2. a.
death on the Cross, and that thus Jesus Christ has (born) the sins of Adam,
satisfied for the same on the Cross, and delivered us from that sin, (into
which Adam did fall) has reconciled us to his Father Romans 5. b. Col. 2. b.
and has set up again the sincere righteoness, and the true Tim. 1. b.
life of Godliness, and so all is found and restored again that was lost by
Adam, and that same is joined again Ezekiel. 34. c.
and made whole which through Adam was broken and wounded: And this is that
singular Grace, which God, bestowed on us, to the laud and praise of his great
Power.

5 Then said the child, O my Father, I do read indeed of the sufferings of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and I hear it daily testified in Sermons, that God the
Father has bestowed on us his great mercy, and that his beloved Son Jesus
Christ has suffered the ignominious death of the Cross by reason of sin
Mat. 27. Romans 5. a. 1 Pet. 2. c.
but I find not according to Truth, that the sin is amended in us, nor that
the true righteousness Genesis 1. e. 2. b.
(wherein Adam was created and placed) is restored in us or set up again.

6 Then said the Father, Oh my son, what I have told you about the grace of
God showed to us through Jesus Christ, you need not to doubt of it, believe the
same in simpleness of heart, and, that it all is come to pass as I have told
you.

7 Then said the child, O my Father Jesus Christ, and all that which is
preached to us of Christ, and his satisfaction for the sin, as that he
(through the death on the Cross) has prepared and obtained for us Mat. 1, c.
Ephesians. 5. c.
the Salvation from the Sin, I believe also firmly, That Jesus Christ (for
to bring us again in all Godliness to God his father) 1 Pet 2. c.
is gone before us in Mat. 16. c. 1 Pet. 2. c.
that death of his Cross, and has opened to us the way and passage to the
Kingdom of God his Father, and to the everlasting life, And John 14. a.
has prepared the way for us, that we might obtein the same.

8 For I understand (out of the preaching of Christ,) That Jesus Christ is
preached unto us (in his Gospel) to such an end, that we should believe in him,
John 3. b.
and should obediently Heb. 5. b. 12. a 1 Pet. 1. 5.
follow him in the same Passover of his sufferings till unto the fulfilling of
our Godliness, in the same Jesus Christ, and then also, that we (through Jesus
Christ) should obtain again the inheritance of our God, the upright Ephesians. 1.
^.
righteousness together with the spiritual and heavenly goods, the (which as
it stands to me in my understanding) is the same Grace and Mercy of God, which
is come unto us through Jesus Christ: So I cannot conceive, that it is any
otherwise brought again, or shall be restored: which was lost through the fall
of Adam, or that we have missed by reason of Adams sin.

9 For as I have heard preached in the Church, that the Work of God, which he
did make in the beginning, and also the man Genesis 1. c. Wisd. 2. c. Ecclus 17. a.
when he created him, was perfect, between which perfect work of God, there
came in a breach or rent through the sin Genesis 3. b.
whereby the man also is turned off from his God, and is wholly Ephesians. 4. b.
estranged from his upright manly estate, and from the union with his God.

10 Now if all this same shall be restored Ezech. 34. c.
joined together again, and the man, with all that God has made and ordained,
(even as it was in the beginning) must be set again in his upright Genesis 1. c.
form and order, which we see now plainly and perceive, that the same is not
yet come to pass, or accomplished in us; Therefore it appears altogether (in
my understanding,) That God for the bringing again of the man into his upright
being, and that the repentance or satisfaction for our sins, must have another
performance, and fulfilling, then many men suppose or conceive.

11 Then the Father mervailed much at the distinct expressions of the child,
and said, O my son, hold they self iu silence, lest you dig too deep into the
works of God. I will relate the matter to our spiritually learned (which are
our advisers) or instructers
they shall well instruct thee therein (to the belt) for I my self, do not
understand this business, nor thou neither as I suppose, and besides, thou art
yet too much young to be able to comprehend such things, therefore let us
hearken to our Advisers, and simply believe them herein.

12 Then said the child, Father it is well, let it be so, I submit my self
always to your authority, and so in that evening) there was no more talk of
it.



14 And his Confessor gave to him this answer, That he should bring his son
to him, then he would take to himself a good brother, and would resolve them
of all these matters.

15 The Father did according to the direction of his Confessor, and at a
convenient time he went with his young son H. N. to the Minorie-brethren,
That both of them (the Father and the child) might hear and understand the
right instruction, (of what the child had spoken) and therein might be *
pacified.

CHAP. II.
NOw when both of these came to H. N, then the Confessor looked on the child,
which was very young and little, and said to the Father, Is that the lad thou
told'st me of. That has such strange whimses in his head? Surely, he is to
childish yet, as to trouble himself with such things as you told me of. Thou
should of right (with a rod) chastise him from the same, and neither to hear
nor answer him in his sayings, for it is not otherwise then the madness of a
child.

2 Then said the Child, hold there Sir, why do you speak forth such words? It
is true that I am yet young and childish, and am still under the Rod and
Discipline of my Father, and stand under his doctrine and instruction, And if
my Father (at his convenient time) does instruct me, And I cannot conceive or
comprehend (in my apprehension of my Fathers saying, should it not be granted
or permitted me to ask for the sense and true meaning thereof?

3 When the Confessor observed the Lad's so modestly answered him, he began to
be somewhat moved in himself; And answered then to the child more discreetly,
and said, yea, in truth my son it behooves, you indeed, to ask what the
right understanding is, but you are yet much too young and too small of
capacity, to search into the S^p. 9. e. Romans 11.
deep profound mysteries of the godly things, or to fathom them.

instructed and taught therein (from my youth) of my Elders and Teachers.

5 Then said the Confessor it is well done my sonue if you keep there, but me
thinks, that thou make a doubt, (as thy father informs me) of the
satisfaction of Christ, for the transgression of Adam and for all our sins.

6 Then said the child: no Sir, thereof I doubt not: but my saying is, that I
do plainly see, Rom 6. 8. a.
That the satisfaction in Christ for our redemption or deliverance from the
sinue, (for which Christ suffered death on the Cross Romans 6. a. Phil 2. a.
Heb. 5. 9. b. 12. a.
and made satisfaction) is not performed as yet in us, and that we have not
followed Christ in his Passover to his Father, and if I pereeive this, and
find it to be so. Is it ill done that I akse whether the satisfaction or the
upright fruits of repentance be still owing, or how Luke 1. 8. Ephesians. 1. a. Col.
1. b.
we shall be delivered from the sins, and be brought to the upright
righteousness?

7 And when I inquiring after this, and likewise have and hope that it be
performed in us, and that the righteousness in which Adam was created and set
into shall be restored unto us, and that we also shall be delivered from the
fall and transgression of Adam, this is (I hope) no doubt of Christ
satisfaction, but I may justly doubt of our satisfaction; for I conceive in my
understandings, that we are still indebted to God concerning our satisfaction
in Jesus Christ.

Christ and our salvation.

9 Then said the child, well Sir, I will simply believe all as you say, yet
must I ask something of thee out of my simplicicy, and desire for the love of
Jesus Christ, that thou would answer to my simple question.

10 Then said the Confessor, well my son, ask and I will answer thee.

11 Then said the child. if Adam had lived simply according to the commandments
of God, and had not fallen off from God, and had not transgressed the command of
God, should then he, and we, have lived, in the sin or in the righteousness?

12 The Confessor said, Adam and we all should have lived eternally in the
righteousness, and no sin nor Genesis 2. a. Sap. 1. b.
death should have reigned over us.

13 Furthermore the child asked and said, when God created Heaven and Earth and
all that is therein Genesis 1. c. 2. a
and the man also, whom he made after his own Image, did not God then make all
chings good and perfect, and came it not to pass as he would have it?

14 The Confessor said O, yea, my son, Genesis 1. 2.
what ever God has made, he made it well, and good, and all what God said and
Psalm. 32. b. 140. a. John 1. a.
commanded to be, it stood there present: and all things had their progress or
forthgoing
toward perfection, according as God would have it, and even so the man in his
upright being.

15 Then said the child, Seeing the man Genesis 1. a. Sap. 1. b. 2. c.
to live eternally in Gods upright righteousness, and that he remained not
steadfast therein. And that God (for to reduce the man to his right estate
again) has given up his beloved Son Jesus Christ to the death of the Cross 1 John 3. b. Romans 8. d.
and so (through the death of the Cross of Jesus Christ to re-establish Act 1.
a. 3 c.
the man and all that was fallen, in his right state and condition; Therefore
all must then be Luke 24. c.
restored to the same, in his right form, (through Jesus Christ and his death
of the Cross) even as it was from the beginning, the transgression of Adam must
be mended, and we must be Heb. 9. b.
justified or cleansed from the sin, and must be M^t 19. d. John 3 b. 1 Cor.
15. 4.
borne again unto the Image of God.

16 Behold Sir, in my understanding I conceive it so, and that we ought to
take heed to this mercy of God Cor. 6. a. Gal. 6. a.
and to follow our Lord Jesus Christ (in his Mat. 16. c. 1 Pet. 2. c.
death of the Cross) and to be wholly incorporated into him (with his Romans 6.
a. Phil. 2. ^. Col. 2. b.
like death) where through in us also, the Romans 6. b.
sin of Adam (and our sin) becomes amended and blotted out in us from the
death of sin, her 1 Cor. 15. 2 Timothy 1. b. Heb. 2. b.
power and dominion taken away, and the upright righteousness and simplicity,
and the eternal life (to which Adam was created Genesis 2. b.
and set, and was ordained to live therein eternally) be raised up again.

life of Jesus Christ, but the sin and the death reigns and has dominion
over us, for me thinks, that the right ground of this (whereof we now speak^)
is not yet by many entered into, nor rightly understood, and that the most
necessary part of our Godliness in Jesus Christ, and the Mat. 16. a. 19. a. 1
Pet. 2. c. 4. a. Heb. b. 12. a.
obedience which God requires of us, through his Son Jesus Christ, is still to
be performed by us and in us.

CHAP. III.
WHen the Confessor had heard all

2 Then said his fellow brother, surely thou art bereaved of thy wit, do
thou not perceive that it is foolery and childishness the boy speaks, and I
wonder also very much why thou exchangest so many words about it, for if men of
judgment were present, they would say that you were more childish then the boy
himself, because thou hear and answerest him in all his foolish words
whereas they are merely unprofitable things, after which he diggeth and
searches, and should with these matters (if he be let alone) bring himself
into weakness of mind. Therefore it is most needful that he be punished for
these things, and make him to forget them.



4 Then said the Confessor, O my son, thou have nigh committed the greatest sin
that man can do on Earth; for thou have with thy thoughts dug and searched
and troubled thy self (which is not permitted to any man upon the Wisd. 9. c.
Mat. 11. c. 1 Co^. ^. b.
Earth, let him be never so judicious) to know the secrets of God; I scarce
know whether this sin may be forgiven to thee, or whether thou shall for this
go to hell; and he made the child quite astonished, so that he spoke no more of
the same, nor asked after any more instruction, but fell on weeping; and said:
Oh that I and all men might be saved.

Then said the Confessor.

5 O my son seeing thou art now sorry for thy sin, I promise salvation unto
thee, and that thy sins are forgiven.

6 Then said the child I thank you Sir, and will commit the cause to God let it
come to pass according to his will: And so his Father thanked the Minory
brethren for that they had well taught and instructed his son, and so
departed from each other, and the Minory brethren went their way and thought no
more on this business, or gave little respect unto it.

7 But child was not appeased with the sayings of the Minory brethren nor
satisfied in his understanding but went up and down with a sad heart, and
seeing could not forget the things he had spoke off; So kept he all the same
within himself, and imparted the business no more to any man, till he came to
the day of his manly oldnesse with the gray hair, and was still more and more
an earnest lover of Service and Ceremonies of the Roman Catholic Church, and
the requiring of it, and being alone busied himself daily with divine matters,
and with the fulfiling of the Godliness in Jesu Christ.

CHAP. IV.
H. N. (in the days of the Emperor Maxmilian the first) there was revealed to
H. N. after midnight near upon day breaking (by Gods grace) a great wondrous
work of God, and wonderful vision of a heavenly mystery out of the heavenly
being, for he was compassed about with a mighty Mat. 17. a. Acts 9. a.
great being of the glory of God, and the same was ad a very great Mountain of
glorious Beauty.

And when he was surrounded by this huge great Mountain, and was thoroughly
illuminated in all his being with the glory thereof, then this great Mountain
wholly united it self with him in his whole spirit and mind, so that his
spirit and mind, with the same great and glorious Mountain, became so great
and broad, that he became also of an equal greatness and like being, with the
same, in altitude, latitude, and profundity.

3 With which revelation and wondrous work of God, it was declared to H. N.
That the same and the uniformity thereof John 17. c.
within the man is the true accomplishment of the Godliness in Jesus Christ,
and the righteous 4 Esd. 7. d.
Judgment of God, or the great day Mat. 4. a.
of the Lord, (which for righteousness) is promised to come upon the Earth.

4 And as then that great Uision and wonderful Revelation of God vanished
wholly from his eyes and sight, so found he himself awakened lying on his bed,
and was very much troubled and wearied in all his being and mind, and in
respect of that weariness he had a mind to sleep.

5 And whilst H. N. lay thus on his bed

6 And being fallen asleep, there were then revealed unto him in his sleep
wonderful things, which should befall him, and the Saints of God; for at that
time understood he it not so well, as he did when the same befell him.

7 In this sleep he saw in a Uision, That many Saints of God were with him on
the Earth, and that the same Saints of God and he, jointly rejoiced much with
one another in the Godliness of our Lord Jesus Christ, And that he loved all
men highly to the same Godliness, and called and invited them all thereto that
they with him should rejoice in the same, and that he also (out of great Love)
showed to manifold men great friendship and many kindnesses, and for that he
might likewise rejoice (in the same Godliness) with men like as with the Saints
of God. And that he held forth unto them (with all pleasantness and
discreetnesse and lovely speech) the transcendant worthy nobleness of man and
the most peaceable life of Godliness, to which Genesis 1. c. 2. a. Sap. 1. b. 2.
c. Ecclus 17. a.
God has created, man and chosen him thereto through Jesus Christ.

8 And he saw also in this Uision, that many men (which did not accept or take
to heart the friendship and love which he showed unto them (thereby to bring
them to a peaceable life of Godliness, and did not repeut (were withered and
changed into dry and ex^cicated trees Jude.
and that many of these Trees, were wholly eaten hollow (by knawing worms) and
inwardly were mouldred Psalm. 1. a. 37. a. b. c. Isaiah 29. a.
away to dnst and consumed away to nothing, and that there was not left the
least Psalm. 9. b.
monument or being of greenness or blooming.

9 He saw also in the same Uision, that Sap. 2. c.
tear, and wholly to devour him, and the Saints of God, and that they jointly
together, (with great bitterness and and hardness of heart) exceedingly
bellowed and foamed against him and the Saints of God, and (with clamor and
extreme horrible noise) came on against him, and railed and raged very terribly
against him and the Saints of God, for to destroy and consume them.

10 In which horrible and terrible out cryings and fury of these horrible
beasts, awakned H. N. out of his sleep (through great fear that they should
tear and destroy him and all the Saints of God that were on earth with him)
and at his awaking he cried out aloud, Oh how long shall these yet judge or
reign.
over my soul?

11 When he thus cried out and awakened from his sleep he found himself much
disquieted and perplexed at his Uision.

Oh how long shall these yet judge r^ign.
over my soul?

13 But H. N. out of a heavy mind did sigh, and said, I ayle nothing, but I am
somewhat sorrowful, and a little weakness is upon me. And he remained in all
silence and stillness, and related nothing of all what had happened unto him,
however (by the commotio^ in his Uision) he found himself not well in his
body, and was made very weak and feeble in all his joints from that commotion.

14 When he was recovered in his joints, and got his health again, yet would
he say nothing of any thing that befell him in his Uision, and spoke not at all
of that heavenly Revelation, (which awakened him on his bed) nor of the Uision
that appeared to him in his sleep, but kept all this in his heart.

CHAP. V.
IN the nine and thirtieth year of the H. N. (in the days of Charles the
fifth, being made Roman Emperor by virtue or power of the Electoral Princes of
the Roman Empire, and the German Nation) there was revealed to H. N. from the
high heavens a mighty revelation of the living Godhead: and by the same was
showed and manifested unto him, the upright Truth and Righteousness of God,
together with the faithful love of his dear Son Jesus Christ.

2 Which heavenly manifestation of the living Godhead together with all that
was showed unto him, descended to H. N. and wholly comprehended him to it self.

3 And the same God of heaven, excited and revealed in H. N. his holy and
gracious word, even as he of old had promised to Jer. 33. c.
raise up the same through his holy Prophets, and with the same word, and out
of the same word the Lord Joel 2. c. Acts 2. a.
poured upon H. N. his holy Spirit of the of the Love of Jesus Christ.

4 With this heavenly glory and outflowing of the same holy Spirit of the true
Love of Jesus Christ upon H. N. the Lord chose him to be a Minister of his holy
and gracious word which He (the Lord) had excited and revealed in him.

5 And the Lord prepared or ordained to H. N. for his assistance in the same
ministration, Daniel, Elidad, and Tobias which continued always with him, and
assisted him in all his ministration of the the gracious word of the Lord.

Love of Jesus Christ) H. N. was driven in his whole spirit and mind for to
administer (ont of the holy and gracious word, and holy spirit of the Love of
Jesus Christ) the most holy Office of the Love, according to the command of
God, and to attest and set down in writing the godly truth of God and of
Christ, and the 4 Esd. 7. a. Mat. 7. 16. c. 1 Pet. 2. c. 4. a.
upright way of the through-going or Passe-over which reaches to the npright
righteousness, and to the eternalllife, and to publish and express writingly
in letters, before all eyes of understanding.

7 H. N. being thus chosen of the God of life to the ministration of his
gracious word, and was impulsed by the holy spirit of the Love of Jesus Christ,
to set To write or describe.
forth the manefestatton of the Truth of God and of the Godliness of Jesus
Christ, and let the Sons of men to know their errors, (that they repenting
of their sins Acts 2. c. 3. c. 17. d.
may turn from their error, and sincerely endeavor to keep the truth of God,
and the godliness of Jesus Christ. So he gave himself obediently at that time
to that service and work of the Lord, and carefully endeavored to set down
all, that the Lord revealed and commanded him, and that should be most
profitable and necessary for the Sons of men, to their Salvation and Peace,
and to the entrance of the upright life.

8 But in his beginning of the same service and writings the word of the Lord
came to him and said H. N. stay thy hand from writing in this place, and get
thee up and travel out of this land, wherein now thou live, that thy soul may
be preserved alive, in my service and work; and be not devoured by
bloodthirsty men, and in thy going out from this land, take thy journey
Eastward, and dwell there, till I my self (by the hand of my Angel) bring thee
from thence.

9 For whilst thou live there, thou shall apply thy self for the most part
to be in the land Pietas, that thou may be diligent there, (rightly and
according to the truth, to manifest my honor and Love, and to reveal the same
to those who are worthy of love.

10 For there, in the manifesting of mine honor and Love, thou shall testify
and figure forth in writing, the godly and heavenly things, which I do reveal
and make known unto thee, and that profitable for the children of men, unto
Godliness.

11 To thee shall also (from henceforth) many mysteries of my heavenly Kingdom
(which hitherto have been kept and concealed from the Mat. 3. b. Ephesians. 3. a.
Col. 1. c.
world and her wise and letter-learned) be revealed and made known, for to
bring the same to light.

12 At the time (according to the word and command of the Lord) H. N. instantly
took his journey Eastward, and became an Inhabitant in the land of the East,
and was for the most time iu Pietas, even as the Lord had commanded him.

ae3 And the Lord (the God of heaven) revealed to him in Pietas many godly
mysteries, and in these revealed mysteries H. N. excereised himself, in Gods
holy understanding, to the serviceable benefit or utility of the children of
men, and to all their good knowledge of their Salvation and peace in Jesus
Christ.

14 There were revealed unto him also many wonderful Acts or Works of God,
many of which are testified and brought to light in the writings of H. N. to
the knowledge of the upright Godliness in Jesus Christ.

15 But in all this, which the Lord has H. N. he was rejoiced too exceedingly,
insomuch that he forgot all the sore ways, which he in great sadness had
passed through.

16 And the Lord afflicted him heavily through his enemies, for the Lord
suffered him to fall into the hands of the wicked (his enemies) whose ungodly
being is the false destruction, which has brought on the Earth death, or Sap.
1. b.
mortality, namely, the Kingdom of the Devil and of hell, which God has not
willed that it should be in the Earth, but be condemned in the Apoc. 17. b. 19.
c. 20. c.
bottomless pit and the everlasting darkness, from whence it also came; And
that the Numl. 14. c. Jsaia 340. a.
Glory of Jesus Christ should be revealed on the earth, and reign over it
eternally.

17 Yea the same wicked Being must be abolished in the condemna^ion, at the
appearing of Jesus Christ in his glory, for that same is the Mat. 13. c. 2
These. 2. c.
envious man against God and his righteousness, and against all that is Godly,
and religious.
God-service Apoc. 18. b. c.
and wherewith the man practices his whoredom and adultery, to the disobeying
and resisting his God, so that thereby the man every where Sap. 14. b. Romans 1.
c.
turns or inclines to himself, and to things which are vain and
unprofitable, whereby also the same ungodly being in the false light (of the
man's disobedient knowledge) is become predominant.

18 Behold into this Abyss or Depth, the Lord let fall his chosen servant H.
N, and suffered him to taste and feel the condemnation of all ungodly ones in
the hellish fire, the most horrible perdition, and the most ugly abomination of
desolation.

19 But, when now H. N. found himself thus captived in misery; wherein he was
sorely vexed by his enemies, so there came on him a great and mighty sadness,
and he could find no comfort at all, insomuch that by reason of his great
heaviness of mind, he wringed his hands and exceedingly bewailed his sins,
and cried aloud to God, and besought him for his Grace, and continued therein
day and night; And in this his misery he composed these Psalms of mourning and
lamentation, and did not hide his sins, and thus calling on, and praying to
the Lord he spoke forth his mourning Psalms with weeping and lamentation.

Here follow the Psalms of H. N. and the declaration of his weeping and
praying in his chastisement.
The Rod and punishment gives wisdom. Pro. 29. For whom the Lord loves, he
chastises and delights in him, as a Father does in his son. Pro. 3.
Therefore shall the ear which barkeneth to the correction of the Lord, dwell
among the wise: but he that lets go the chastising Instr^ction, or turns
away from it, he rejects his own ^oul. Pro. 2.

CAAP. VI.
Psalm I.
1 O My Lord my God, Psalm. 6. a.
my heart quaketh upon my sins, my bones do shake, and great Esaias 13. a.
sadness, pain and smart fall on me.

2 Thus I fear, O Lord, thy punishment, for with the same tho^ make known
unto me my sins, and thou let me see the evil things which have ensnared
me.

3 O God, will thou not deliver me from these evil things, so must I continue
in misery, and must fear thy hand continually.

4 But thou O Lord art he, which Psalm. 146. a. Hosea 6. a.
woundest, and healest again, help me as thou usest to do.

5 Let my sighings Psalm. 130. a.
out of the bottom of my heart come before thee, and turn not thy mercy from
me.

6 For, O Lord, I do not Psalm. 119. a.
forget thee, but wait daily for thy goodness.

Psalm. 25. b. 129. a.
on my misery, and leave me not in death, nor let me be lost for ever.

8 Psalm. 51. a.
Take away (O Lord) the sin from me, and let thy Spirit of life refresh me,
otherwise (O Lord) O Lord of Lords, I have no life in me.

9 Therefore (O Lord, of life) when thou art my life, then I live, and my bones
must rejoice.

10 When I find mercy in thine eyes, then is comforted the inward mind of my
soul.

11 But, O Lord, when thou art Hosea 13. c. 1 Cor. 15. f
a death to me and art angry with me, then am I like unto the dead, and go
Psalm. 88. a.
down to hell as the wicked that are damned.

12 Out of which Psalm. 13 c. ^.
depth now my

13 For thou, O Lord, art the strength and Psalm. 18. a.
Savior of men from the sin, he that takes hold on thee, Psalm. 125. a.
falls not into transgressions.

14 But the man which relyeth on h^s own strength, he falls soonest, and then
must he confess, that thou alone, O Lord, art the life of his Salvation.

15 When thou take pity on him, and raisest him again, then he obtains
mercy, and must praise thy goodness continually.

16 For what is man? (O Lord) without thy grace; is he any thing? ah no, he is
nothing of himself John 15. a. 2 Cor. 4. a.


17 Therefore let thy mercy Psalm. 79. a. Isaiah 64. c.
shine about me, and do not think on my transgressions.

18 Therefore my joy O God is in thee, and with thankfulness must I praise
the grace of thy Love.

19 For thou comfortest the low Psalm. 46. a. Esaias 66. a.
minded and those which be forsaken, thon blotest out their sins, and take
Ezech 36. c.
away the evil heart of their misdeedes.



21 But in case thou do hide thy self, then is the sin active, and when
thou do rise up to punish, (O Lord) who can then Psalm. 76. a. 130 Mal 3. a.
Nahum 1. a.
stand before thee.

22 Is not a man like unto Job 14. a. Psalm. 90. 103. b. Esaias 40. a. 1 Pet. 1. c.
the blossom of the field which thy heat causes to wither, and like unto
Psalm. 1. b. Esaias 29. a. Ecclus 17. d.
dust and ashes which the wind does ^catter here and there.

23 Therefore have thou mercy on me (O my God) and Father, and let thy good
spirit support me Psalm. 51. b.
otherwise I shall vanish into nothing.

CHAP. VII.
Psalm II.
Psalm. 89. a.
anger be turned about, and punish me not continually in thy displeasure. Psalm.
6. 3^. a. Jeremy 10. c.


2 O Lord Psalm. 18. c.
punish me not according to my sins, but chastise me unto amendment, and
Psalm. 119. d.
teach me also thy Laws, and hide not thy mercy from me.

3 Reject me not O Lord, nor wholly Psalm. 5^. br
forsake me; but bring to my knowledge my transgressions.

4 And chastise me even so O my God, with a Prove. 3. a. Heb. 12.
fatherly correction, so shall I turn unto thee.

5 But if thou totally rejectest me, to Psalm. 139. b
shall I then go, O God and King of all righteousness? for thou alone art my
Psalm. 61. a. 91. 142. b.
comfort.

6 For vain is the comfort of P^al. 68. 61. b. 10^. b.
man, and all the Treasures of the world, are (O God) no joy to me.

7 The sin is an abomination unto me, the worlds joy with the pleasures
thereof, are all dead unto me.

8 If thou Lord Psalm. 69. b.
hidest the lovely being of thy countenance from me, O Lord what is then my
life.

9 Therefore, O God, remember not Psalm. 79. a. Esaias 64. c.
always my sins but guide my Psalm. 119. c.
feet in the way of life.

10 Then shall I praise thy mercy (O Lord) among the Psalm. 114. d.
living, and spread thy praise among the upright.

11 For I acknowledge my Psalm. 32. a.
transgressions, and my sins are a Psalm. 38. a.
heavy burden unto me.

Psalm. 38. a. Sap. 5. a.
heavily was I wearied in the ways of my errors what cumbersome ways did I go
through.

13 Now sin with its death has Psalm. 18. 116. a
thoroughly pierced me, the Devil with his bands ruled over me, and Hell with
its power, has shut me into the stocks, to devour me.

14 But thou O Lord. that can deliver from death, deliver Psalm. 59. a. 143. b.
me from all mine enemies.

15 Help me out of my misery, and forsake me not in my sorrow.

CHAP. VIII.
Psalm III.
Deuteronomy. 32. d. 1 Kings 2. a. Wisd. 1. 16. b. Toby 13. a.
killest and make alive again.

2 Art thou not a God who condemnest and 1 Kings 2. a. Toby 13. a.
bring into hell, and from thence bringect again and savest.

3 How Long, O Lord, shall I go on into perdition? how long yet shall sin
reign over me.

4 How long shall the Psalm. 18. a. 116. a.
bonds of death hold bound? How long shall the power of the Devil and of Hell
captive me?

5 If thou deliver me (O Lord then am I freed, but if thou forsakest me, then
am I desolate, and must remain comfortless eternally.

6 Therefore, O Lord, be thou my aid, and from the bottomless Psalm. 51. a.
mercy of thy love succor me; and according to the multiplicity of thy grace,
blot out mine iniquity.

7 For I am filled up with sins, and lie in the deep under them, and feel no
power of coming out Deuteronomy. 32 c.
by my self.

8 Seeing I am impotent, therefore have

9 And those which were sometimes my Psalm. 88. a. Job 19. b.
friends, now set their mouths horribly against me, and make a terrible face
at me, and show all their hatred toward me.

10 I looked every where up and down for a faithful Psalm. 69 c. Esaias 63. a.
friend, but there is not one of all my friends (as a faithful friend) adhered
to me, but they have all made up themselves in enmity against me, and whetted
their Psalm. 57. a. ^4. a. Ecc^us 12. b.
teeth at me, and sharpened their swords to destroy me.

11 O God, seeing thou punishest me now and art against me, therefore are all
become enemies to me, that are round about me, and all fall on me, there
stays not one with me, to my defense.

12 But they all cry, Psalm. 35. 40. b
there he lies, there he lies, he is fallen and shall never rise again.

Job 14. b. Psalm. 28. a. 62. b. Jeremy 17. b. ^ren. 3. g. Romans 2. a. Apoc. 2. c.
deserved recompense to me, let thy fierce wrath fall upon them, and root out
all my enemies totally.

14 Destroy and bring them all to shame, which imagine evil against my soul,
and which lie in wait for my life.

15 Yea, let them be condemned to Psalm. 9 b.
hell eternally, which profess themselves friendly to me, and there under mix
their poisonous falsehoods therewith to destroy me.

16 O Lord, (my God root out all the Psalm. 37. c. d.
wicked ones, for they have spoiled the earth and made it wast, that thy Saints
may take in the land, and inherit the same in truth and righteousness forever.

17 O my Father and my God, thou, Psalm. 46. a. 61. a. 71. a.
who art my strength and Savior, support me, for I lie fallen among the midst of
the wicked.

18 They have bound me with their cords or snares, and deal very unmercifully
with me.

19 Look on my Psalm. 9. b.
sorrows, and how miserable

20 But they have in hate rewarded me with wickedness, they have wounded me
deadly, and they have pierced through all my inward parts with poison.

21 They fed me with Psalm. 69 c.
wormwood or bitterness, when I was in the snares of death, and have poured me
forth poison, and bitter drink for wine, when I thirsted after a little
refreshment, and sought comfort in my soul.

22 O Lord, heal thou my soul lest I perish, and let thy Word of life shine
about me, then shall my soul recover her health.

23 O Father, Psalm. 27. b. 71. a.
forsake me not for ever in thy displeasure, but let thy mercy be a comfort to
my soul.

24 When I called thus long and the [or as a lost one.]

25 O Lord, shall thy punishment upon me not cease? can there no grace be found
for me in thine eyes? O thou most high God, thou that art full of all mercy.

26 Therefore (O God) chastise me yet to amendment, and let me know what thy
pleasure is, and Psalm. 25. b. 27. a. 86. b.
guide me in thy way which thou would have me to walk.

27 Strengthen, O Lord, my bones, and Psalm. 5^. b.
create in me an upright heart and mind.

28 Then shall I be able to walk uprightly in thy ways, else my undertakings
are without strength, as nothing.

CHAP. IX.
Psalm IV.
Psalm. 38. a.
how heavy stand before me, my transgressions.

2 For the anguish of them over-burthen me exceedingly, O Lord, if thou do
not ease me, I must consume to nothing.

3 O Lord, do thou delight in the death of sinners? do thou not rather
desire that we should Ezekiel. 18.
turn and live.

4 Thou have no pleasure in our destruction, therefore Psalm. 22. 35. c.
arise, O God, and help me that I may praise thee, and may tell among all the
Congregations of thy mercy, to the honor and praise of thy holy name.

Psalm. 51. a.
let the great bounty of thy mercifulness come upon me.

6 Forgive me, O Lord, mine iniquities, and guide me in thy righteousness, let
not (O Lord) thy wrath devour me.

7 But pour forth thy ^sal. 79. b.
anger upon the ungodly, and destroy them before mine eyes, which imagine
nothing but mischief against me, and their delight is only to destruction.

8 And let thy goodness, O Lord, assist me, prepare my heart according to thy
will, and have compassion upon any ignorance and weakness.

9 My ignorance Psalm. 25. 79. a.
and my conversation with the iniquity, remember not (O Lord) forever, but
deliver thy servant out of their hands.

10 For thou (O Lord) have made known unto me the ways of my errors, but to
come again into the right way, the knowledge nor the power is not in me.

11 Therefore O Lord, make them 4 Kings 6. d.
all

12 Deliver me Psalm. 140. a.
out of the hands of the crafty, for they have no good in their minds.

13 If so be, O Lord, that I find mercy before thine eyes, then is my soul
rejoiced.

14 Then will I (O Lord) with thy power rule over all mine enemies, and break
them to pieces as earthen vessels.

15 But now (O Lord) heal me of my torment, and take away all ignorance from my
thoughts, and Psalm. 119. a.
teach thy servant thy Statutes.



17 Thereby is made known thy great mercy, that thou show mercy again to
those, who were Ier. 5. a.
estranged from thee, and have sinned against thee.

18 For I (O Lord) have transgressed, and turned my back on thee, and feared
not thy great power nor glory.

19 But seeing thou now chastifest me (O God) for my errors, my soul
submits before thee, confessing that I am worthy of death and damnation.

20 Therefore, O God of life, (thou who art an error to the erring, and a
death ^^osea 13. 1 Cor. 15. c.
unto the dead, for to prepare a conquest of death for the living, and to lead
the upright (out of all error into thy ways) take me now by thine hand, and
lead me out from among the wicked, who all surround me like so many Bears and
fierce Psalm. 7. 17. b.
Wolves.

21 O Lord, make have before they devour my soul, for thy Goodness Psalm. 136.
endures for ever.

CAAP. X.
Psalm V.
1 AH why is it thus woeful with me?

2 That which I would not, that must I endure: and that which I Romans 7. c.
desire, flies far from me.

3 The evil presses and tormenteth me, the devils power tyrannizeth over me.

4 O Lord, deliver me from these snares, and let thy life be gracious to me,
and refresh my mind.

5 Grant, O Lord, that my soul be refreshed

6 For what am I that I should be able to stand Psalm. 56. a. 130. a. Mal. 3. a.
Nahum 3. a.
when thou, O Lord, pourest forth thy wrath upon me?

7 Or will thou quite destroy me O God of life, and no more reveal salvation to
me.

8 What is then my life? if I may commend them for happy, which never Job 10.
b. Jer 20. b.
lived: and that never knew thee nor thy Glory.

9 For who, O Lord, shall praise thee most, but he whom thou have delivered out
of great misery, and freest him from all vexation of his soul.

10 Therefore, O Lord, be Psalm. 51. a.
merciful unto me: mercy (O Lord) mercy, and through the great abundance of thy
mercies, deliver me from my torments.

CHAP. XI.
Psalm VI.


2 For sadness compasses Psalm. 18. a. 88. a. b.
me above measure, and the snares of death have environed me, my sins stand in
my sight, against Psalm. 51. a.
me, and the Devil 1 Pet. 5. b.
roareth to devour me.

3 Hell takes hold on me, and the Psalm. 88. a.
sorrows of my mind oppress me.

4 My heart is cut through with Luke 2. b.
the sword of anguish, and my thoughts bring forth all perplexities.

5 Therefore must my soul now lament Esaias 59 b.
as one that is forsaken without comfort

6 O Lord, will thou not once look down, and will thou quite turn away thy
loving countenance from me, what is then my soul which thou have begotten and
Genesis 1. 2. Wisdom 2. c. Ec^lus 17. d.
brought forth to life.

7 Or, O Lord, do thou try my Manhood, Psalm. 1. 103. c. Ecclus 17. d.
and is able to do nothing, as a thing which is nothing.

8 For it is now become as a spoiled instrument which is unprofitable to thy
service.

9 Therefore, I must confess, unto thee my weakness and impotency, be thou, O
Lord, my power, my life, and my ability.

10 For if thou hidest thy self from me, then am I as Psalm. 88. a. b.
the dead in the grave.

11 And I find my self in great misery, Ps. 18. ^16. a.
like to those that are in Hell.

12 Therefore, O Lord, consider my misery,

13 For who is he among the Ps. 6. a. 130. d. 88. b. 115. b. Esaias 38 b.
dead which remembers thee? in Hell there are no praises sung unto thee.

14 But when thou (O Lord) do afflict, then the sighs of the poor come
before thee, and when thou make glad again, then they sing with joy, a song
of praise whereby thy name is magnified as holy.

CHAP. XII.
Psalm VII.


2 That thou, O God, would guide me in thy ways, and would lead me in
thy Psalm. ^99. c.
paths, and would deliver me from my adversaries, and from all Psalm 7. 142.
a.
mine enemies which have made up themselves against me: Then would I, O God,
out of the whole mind of my soul, bring unto thee an offering of joy, and
offer up a sacrifice of thanksgiving.

3 O Lord, let not my adversaries have their pleasure over me, let not my
enemies prosper against me.

4 O that the wicked might give up themselves to flight, and not reign over me
for ever: to the end that my Psalm. 35. c.
enemies boast not, that they have destroyed me.

5 O Lord, assist me, and rise up against mine enemies Psalm. 35. c. 70 8. 71. b.
that they may all be put to shame that assault me.

6 O Lord, let thy goodness embrace me, cleanse me from my sins, and deliver me
from the murtherous Psalm 7. 69. a. 115. a. 142. b.
persecutors of my soul: that my soul may dwell in thee thee (O my God) in
peace and without care.

7 Ah, how long shall I yet endure mine enemies? how long shall they torment my
soul with disquietness?

8 Well: I will be of good cheer, in the

9 Oh my soul (thou oppressed one Psalm. 2. b. 42. 43. 1. a.
be of good cheer in thy perplexity, and expect the comfort of the Lord in
long-suffering.

10 For he will comfort thee in peace Tren. 3. c. James 5. a.
if thou take patience to thee as a precious treasure.

11 He will bring unto thee meek-mindedness for an ornament, and the burden of
the wicked shall be lightened in thee, and Isa. 61. d. Luke 1. 8.
thy mind shall be refreshed in God.

CHAP. XIII.
Psalm VIII.
1 WHy art thou so troublesome to me Psalm. 43. a.
O thou unbelief and distrust: for my hope is in the living God, that he will
yet heal my soul.

2 O Lord, Psalm. 6. a.
heal me, and take away from me the evil nature, namely, all the opposition of
thy goodness.

3 Ah, I am doubtless very deeply wounded, there is Psalm. 38. a. Esaias 1. a.
no soundness in my soul.

4 O God, I am very miserable by reason of my torments, is there any so ^say 53
a.
distempered as I am.

5 I am not now like unto any Psalm. 22. 49. d.
man but to those which have changed their humane form and shape.

Job 3. b. 10. b. Jer. 20. b.
upon the earth, for I perish in great misery, and am good for no use.

7 O that my Father had let fall the seed of which I was begotten (like Onan
the son Genes. 38.
of Juda) that I had never been.

8 Or that I for or to my Fathers sin (like the first born son of David 2
Kings 12.
by Bashsheba) had died.

9 Ah, that the earth would open it self, and receive me, that the Isaiah 2. b.
Hosea 10. a. Luke 23. c. Apoc. 6. b. 9 a.
hills would fall on me, and cover and smother me in the earth, that I might no
longer see this horrible abomination.

10 For I am bereaved of all comfort, riches, honor, and wisdom.

11 All unsoundness, torment, Psalm. 18. a. 88. a. 116. a.
sin, death, Devil, and Hell is fallen upon me.

Ps. 31. b. 55. a. ^1. b.
heart is thus afflicted, and my mind is so much disquieted.

13 My ^ones Psalm. 6. a.
quake, my feet tremble, and my jaw bone is shaken.

14 My teeth chatter, my hands are wrung about [or turned round] my eyes weep,
and my thoughts affright me.

15 All evil spirits domine^^ over me, and and my enemies drive me upon
doubtings.

16 Anguish and Isaiah 13. a. Wisdom 5. a.
perplexity more heavily oppress me, then if the whole world lay on me.

17 Doubt of deliverance, and all despair Luke 21. c.
assault me, the unbelief brings desperation before me, as if I were forsaken
eternally.

18 There is no where any refreshment Luke 16. c.
for my soul that I might revive my self a little.

19 Ah how hard does the punishment Psalm. 83. b.
burning coals and flames of fire.

20 I am afraid that the heat of his fire Deuteronomy. 4. c. Heb. 12. c.
will consume me to nothing.

21 Or that he will hold his fierce countenance continually over me, and hide
his lovely face for ever from me.

22 Ah, I must bewail my sins continually, for these hard stripes torment me.

CHAP. XIV.
Psalm IX.
Job 19. b. Psalm. 38. b. 55. b. 88. a. b.
made up themselves against me, and became my enemies.

2 And they also cried out against me with great accusation: and said, Job 20.
27. b.
O yea, that is his reward: the accursed.

3 Kill him, Psalm. 41. a.
away, away with this wicked one, condemn him for ever into hell.

4 His sins are manifested to be beyond mercy, for his evil deed is as of the
most ungodly wicked one.

5 Yea, God thus rejects all those which fall off from him, and never more
come to his favor again.

6 Therefore let all shame, reproach, and the eternal death befall him, and let
not God help or succor him for ever.

Psalm. 59 71. b.
themselves, and when they are smitten down let them never rise again.

8 They have intended mischief against me Psalm. 55. 64. a.
O Lord, repay them that they have Psalm. 28. 6^. b.
deserved on my behalf.

9 For why should the wicked rule over thy Sanctuary, and drive out thy beloved
ones?

10 Yea, let themselves be cursed Genesis 27. c.
which intend me evil, and let them with thee (O God) find no mercy.

11 Let them be totally rooted out with root and branch, for they fall on me
very heavily, and bring an evil report on me among the people.

12 Yea, they are such which appeared as friends, Psalm. 41. b.
did eat bread with me daily, and are become secret Traitors to me.

13 For those which sometimes praised

14 Yea, my wife Micha 7. a.
which lies in my arms, (who is one flesh and bone with me) where all my
heart, delight, comfort and mind was fixed, brings also all wicked outcries
against me, with all accusations for to condemn me.

15 Now when I consider all this, and that all things are averse, and fall
contrary to me, which formerly I loved, so it afflicts me much more then the
rebuking of God.

16 But seeing all my love is thus requited with malice, therefore all my
oppression, misery and anxiety is a heavy burden above measure.

17 Now when I (out of my heavy burden) call on God then mine enemies (which
sometimes were my friends) Job 19. b. Psalm. 38. 53. b. 88. a b.
rise up against me.

18 They reproved and Job 8.
contested with me, why I was so bold and presumptuous, as to call to God for
mercy.

19 They all cried against me with one voice: Thou have neither help nor Psalm.
3. 41. a. 42. b.
comfort with the Almighty, for he has poured forth his wrath on thee
everlastingly.



21 I looked up to the highest, and down again to the lowest, and round about
me, far and near: whether any one did take to heart my cause for to defend me,
Psalm. 69. c. Isaiah 63. a.
but I found none.

22 But my enemies (which sought my life, and were against me Psalm. 22.
stood in great multitudes (even as grass in the field) round about me to
condemn me.

23 And my ways, which sometimes they commended for good, they presented
before me as evil to a great accusation, and I beheld them all as an Matthew. 24.
b. Mark 13. b. Luke 21. b.
abomination of desolation.

24 This same grieved me exceedingly: and I suffered great great sadness with
heavy oppression in my heart.

25 Wherever I did go or stand Psalm. 22. 86. 68. b, 109. b. c.
there was I surrounded with my enemies: and they speak nothing but evil
against me.

26 And I was full of woe in my soul: sadness, and out of great anguish I called
on the Lord for help, or else I had perished.

CHAP. XV.
Psalm X.
1 O God, Psalm. 39. b.
hearken to my crying and Psalm. 7. 25. a. 71. a.
remain ashamed.

2 I am now fallen in the sin, Psalm. 38. b.
and am estranged from thy light: and go up and down as one that is condemned
and lost.

3 I am as the weakest among the children of men: Psalm. 31. b.
for there is no strength of any virtue in me.

4 Those that look on me according to the judgment of mine enemies, abhor me,
Psalm. 22. a.
for my enemies cry all shame and disgrace upon me.

5 But thou, O Lord, (in whom I hope) let me not perish in the darkness: but
Psalm. 13. a.
inlighten me with thy light, and take away my shame and reproach.

6 For my sins and transgressions are a loathing to me: and to do any thing
which thou have prohibited, or is against thy will, is no pleasure to my soul.

7 But I remember thee in my anguish: and take a Psalm. 119. c.
delight in thy righteousness.

8 Therefore, O Lord, take not the rod of thy correction from me until that I
love thy law, and forget not that which thou have commanded.

Psalm. 39. b.
to speak of thy truth through shamefastness of my sin.

10 For they stand as an abomination in my sight: and have made me dismayed in
my mind.

11 The ungodly reigned over me, and would draw me from thy law: that I (O God)
should no more think on thee and thy law.

12 They have presented lies before me, as a snare, and had honey in their
lips, Psalm. 55. c.
wherewith they kissed me friendly.

13 But Psalm. 140. a. Romans 3. b.
poison was under their tongue, and they mingled that same in my soul: and
they, O God, stirred up thy wrath against me.

14 For those which were friendly in their falsehood, and made a show as if they
loved me, have brought me to shame.

15 But they themselves must fall into the pit, Psalm. 7. 9. b. 35. a. 141. b.
Prove. 26. b. c. Ecclm 28. a. Eccles. 10. a.
and perish in the destruction which they have prepared for my soul.

CHAP. XVI.
Psalm XI.
1 O God, Psalm. 40. b. 70, 71. a.
make have to come unto me, Psalm. 140. a.
praise thy Name in the land Psalm. 27. d.
of the living.

2 Root out the ungodly, make thy salvation break forth: and let thy Name be
glorious over all thine enemies.

3 O Lord, thou Eternal and Almighty God, forsake me not Psalm. 25. a.
for my ignorance: remember not O God) for ever mine errors in the time of my
youth.

4 But teach Psalm. 88. a. b.
in thy truth, that I may

5 I rejoice me in my soul: when as thy hand of correction hu^bleth me under
thee.

6 And that I endure my punishment for the folly and ignorance of my youth.

7 That I might have my walking among the Psalm. 113. a.
Elders in Israel, and have my habitation among the Citizens of Jerusalem.
Zach. S. a.


8 Therefore, O God, circumcise Jer. 4. a.
the

9 That I may come up to worship with thy people Psalm. 43. a.
into thy holy Temple or Tabernacle, Isa. 12. 56. a.
and with Micah 4. a.
offerings and gifts (which may be acceptable and well pleasing unto thee) for
an eternal joy upon mount Sion.

10 O Lord, help: yea, (O God Jesus) help and draw my spirit to thee, in thy
holy heaven, in thy appearing to me in glory.

CHAP. XVII.
Psalm XII.


2 Have I hoped in thee in vain? or hidest Isaiah 57. b.
thou thy goodness for a while from me?

3 Let me entreat thee, O God, Psalm. 5. 8. b. 139. b.
strengthen me, and lead me aright. O God, lead me aright otherwise, must I
perish by reason of my sin.

4 O Lord, hear thy servant, who is full of sorrow and misery.

5 Ah: how long shall I be deaf, before I shall hear? how long shall I yet be
blind before I shall see? how long shall I be dying, before that I live?

6 Is there then Kings 19. b.
no remnant unto righteousness Isaiah 1. a.
O God, must I then perish in my sins? Romans 11 a.


7 O God, (thou who art the God of all the world) turn thee in mercy to me,
that the enemy destroy me not: and let not thy Psalm. 69. b.
wrath abide upon me for ever.

8 My sins make me fearful: and my transgressions make me timorous to speak of
thy righteousness.

9 Therefore am I become dumb Psalm. 39. a.
as if I had no speech in my mouth.

10 I am become ashamed of my self, because

11 O God, support me under thy rod, P^ov. 3. a. 5. c.
and chastising instruction, that I forget not thee, Heb. 12. b. 13.
nor thy law.

12 Cleanse Psalm. 51. a.
me O God, from my sins: from the Heathenship, and from all ungodly being.

13 O how presumptuous are the despisers! and the gainsayers of thy holy Name?

14 How long must I (O God) endure thy reproach and thy adversaries.

CHAP. XVIII.
Psalm XIII.
Psalm. 140. a.
shootest thou forth thy poison, Pro. 5. a.
according to the nature of the Serpent. Romans 3. b.


2 Thou allurest forth my soul as to a life of sweetness: and embracest me
Prove. 5. 7, a.
as with a faithful love.

3 Thou walk before me in show of a Lamb: thy ways are laid forth, as if
they led to a peace of good rest.

4 Thou risest up, as a light unto life: and among the impenitent, thou art as
Is^iah 14. b.
a morning star, to the uprising of the day.

5 The sound of thy voice is delightful, Prove. 2. b. 5. a. 7. a.
and thy speech seems very pleasant.



7 Thou fallest a roaring as a Lion 1 Pet. 5. b.
that would tear in pieces: and spewest out thy fiery flames as a Dragon.

8 Thou destroyest as a Wolf, and show there through thy robbing as a Thief
John 10. a.
and so indevourest thee as a Murderer to destroy my soul.

9 O God, Father, thou Almighty Lord, how long shall I be set with the wicked,
and be judged or accused by them? How long shall I taste of their poison, and
endure their false testimonies against me?

10 In all my ways where I go, they Psalm. 35. a^* 140. a.
Psalm. 38. b.
my soul, and to bring an accusation against it.

11 For in my presence many of them show as if they were my friends, and
account me for one of their kindred and brethren.

12 O God, make their dissimulation to be an abomination to me, and make me an
enemy to them: pour out thy fierce Psalm. 69. 79. a.
wrath on them, that they may fly far from me.

13 That my soul may seek for her comfort only in thee: and may be delivered
from her plagues.

CHAP. XIX.
Psalm XIV.
Romans 7. c.
inclination of my own will: and purge my heart from the offense.

2 Let (O Lord) no bitter Heb. 12. b.
root grow in me, lest envy take possession in my heart.

3 But, O Lord, my God change my being, and refresh my miude.

4 For the taking on of my own Isaiah 58. a.
will, plant in me the submission.

5 Instead of perverseness and bitterness, 1 Cor. 1. 13. a.
plant thy nature of the love, and the virtuous being.

6 That I also, O Lord, may walk uprightly before thee, and show thy mercy to
me, that I may tell it forth Psalm. 26. b.
continually, and forever.

7 For I am fallen down in sins, and there is no comfort in my heart, for there
is no power in me of rising.

8 Therefore, O Lord, let thy grace shine on me, and help those that are weak.
For I am smitten down even unto Hell.

9 And now is my soul afflicted: and I must Job 7. a. 10. b. Jer. 15. 20 b.
lament my untimely birth.

10 Because I am born upon the earth, such a disobedient one to thy truth.

11 Therefore, O Lord, consider that I am Psalm. 51. a.
brought forth in sin, yet will I love thy goodness: but without thee and thy
power John 15. a. 2. Cor. 3. a.
I am not able to inherit any thing of thy goodness.

12 All the intentions of my own counsel [or mind] are vain: and my own Isa.
55. 59. a.
thoughts meditate nothing but folly.

13 There is no strength Romans 7. c. 2 Cor. 4. a.
nor understanding in me to do good: how shall I then, O Lord, be able rightly
to turn unto thee.

14 Therefore, O Lord, consider me, and

15 Turn me to thee through thy light: Jer. 31. d.
then, O Lord) am I rightly turned unto thee?

16 And give unto me [such] a portion of faith:
as I may through thee (O Lord) conquer the iniquity.

17 For I have kept nothing by me) neifaith, nor spirit whereby I may live.

18 For all my portion Luke 15. b.
which I have received of thy goodness, have I spent, wasted and consumed upon
strangers.

19 And now seek I here and there, my feeding [or food:] but I find no comfort
^n my soul among strangers to my satisfaction.

20 As I ponder of all this in my heart, then sigheth my soul out of great
distress.



22 When I consider this, that I, (of my own accord) have wandered from thence,
then suffers my soul far greater sorrow.

23 Forasmuch now (O my God and Father) as I have consumed all thy good gifts,
therefore am I not worthy to be called after thy name.

24 But let me find from thee the favor of a stranger, and that I may stand in
thy favor (as one of the meanest of the servants of thy servants) and that my
sins might be forgiven me.

Mat 25. b. e.
unfaithful servant, which buried his talent in the earth which he received
from thee.

26 O God, I have yet done more unfaithfully with thy goods, for I have not
done so well as to bury thy goods: but have made them away: and therewith
committed unrighteousness.

27 Therefore I am ashamed of my self: and desire now (O God) nothing else from
thee, but only thy mercy, that thou would pardon Psalm. 51. a. Mat. 6. b.
mine iniquities, and blot out my transgressions.

28 And that I may Luke 15. b.
walk in thy house among the meanest of thy servants, and might feed upon a
morsel of thy bread.

29 But now (O Lord) I lie down before Psalm. 110. a. Esaias 66. a.
as a footstool of thy feet: and submit to thee in the greatest humiliy of my
heart: receive me, O God, into thy mercy.

30 Plant in mine inwardness Psalm. 40. a. Jer. 31. d. Heb. 9. 10.
thy law, and write it in the mind of my thoughts: and hide not thy will from
me.

31 But take away from me the perverse mind and thoughts, which are against
thee.

32 And guide me, O Lord, in thy truth Psalm. 25. a. 27. 86. 114. b.
in the way in which thou will have me to walk.

33 And give then (O my God and Father) such an Psalm. 51. b.
heart and mind, in which I may live and praise thee.

CHAP. XX.
Psalm XV.
Romans 6. a. Phil. 2. a.
his death of the cross: and thus did manifest that I was humbled, and willing
to all obedience: Then the goodness of God the Father appeared to me aagain:
And I spoke with great thankfulness in my heart and said.

Matthew. 5. a.
thirsts after the righteousness, and is no man's enemy therein: and so Prove.
3. b.
boweth himself under the rod of his God, and endures his correction: And
waits in James 5. a.
patience on the goodness of the Lord and his compassion.

3 For, behold, the punishment Psalm. 30. a. Mich. 7. b.
lasts only for a short time, which comes to an end: but the mercy of the
Lord, and his goodness Psalm. 103. b.
endures for ever, and his love has no end. Psalm. 32. 85. a. 103. a. Ezech.
18. d. Joel 2. b.


4 He forgiveth and blotteth out the sins of the people which turn unto him
with all their heart: for they meditate upon that which is holy and good, and
learn also to practice that which is Genesis 18. b.
right and reasonable.

5 Yea, this the Lord turns away his fury and displeasure from his Elect, and
turns his wrath on his enemies, which must perish through his indignation as
Psalm. 1. a.
chafe and dust.

6 Therefore, O God, my soul Psalm. 103. a. 104. a. d.
shall Psalm. 21. a. b.
must be brought to nothing.

7 O Lord, how is thy Goodness and Mercy out of thy love so great! Ezec. 34. b.
that thou set them free, who were taken and bound by others.

8 And thou make that good again, which was spoiled and corrupted by another.

9 Again thou Matthew. 15. c. 28. b. Luke 19. b. John 10. a.
seek and find that which was lost by another even unto nothingnesse.

10 Thou bring Ezekiel. 34. c.
to right again, that which was misled by another.

11 Thou revivest that Deuteronomy. 22 d. 1 Kings 2. a. Job 31. a.
which was put to death by another.

12 Thereby is known (O Lord) thy Almightinesse, for this (O God) is thy Love,
Power and Mercy.

CHAP. XXI.
Palm XVI.
Psalm. 105. a. 106.
Great and wonderful is his mightiness.

2 Where is there such a God as the God of Deuteronomy. 32. d. ^ Kings 2. a. Wisdom 2.
a.
Israel who makes the dead alive, and delivers his Elect, out of the Psalm.
30. a. 86. 116. 4.
condemnation and judgment of hell.

3 And brings them away out of all the straights of their enemies, to his
holy inheritance of rest and peace: according as he has Jer. 30. 51.
promised and sworn of old.

1 King. 18. 21 29. a. Ecclus 47. a.
kills Thousands and has killed ten Thousand for to deliver his.

5 He rises early against his enemies, which are oppressors of his, who out of
anguish call upon him for the injustice sake.

6 Therefore is the Lord a Psalm. 47. a.
King of all Glory: an over ruler of all Powers.

7 For with the Arm of his strength he takes in the land, and treads down his
enemies, as if they were loame or ^lay.

Psalm. 104. d.
scatters them away, as if they were dust and chaff.

9 And he delivers the Psalm. 72. a.
poor and miserable, which call upon him.

10 Therefore is the Lord great and mighty a Psalm. 47. 39. a. 96. b.
King, and God in Eternity Allelu-ia, Allelu-ia.

CHAP. XXII.
Psalm XVII.
1 THerefore exalt our God and praise his

2 Because he has taken the Kingdom, and the Scepter of his Kingdom is made
manifest.

3 For the Lord is Psalm. 47. 93. a 96. 97. a.
become King, wherefore let his people rejoice,

4 His Word has showed power: his righteousness is become manifest.

5 His Spirit has appeared like a light, and confirms his salvation forever.

6 The same God has renewed us in him, and given us a new understanding.

7 A new Ephesians. 4. c. Col. 5. b.
creature has he brought

8 Therefore the people speak with new tongues: the new song is in our mouth.

9 Lord, Jude 13. b. Psalm. 72. b. 77. b. 136. a.
wonderful are thy works: for thou have done mavelous acts among us.

10 The evil that was in us, is now no where to be found amongst us; that which
we knew not in the death, is now apparent to us in the everlasting life.

11 The sin is now, with us condemned in the sin Romans 8. a.
: The righteousness is declared unto us in righteousness.

12 The death is now among us swallowed up in the death Hosea 13. b. 1 Cor. 15.
f.
: the everlasting life is come unto us in the renewing of our lives.

13 The hell is judged or condemned in the Apoc. 17. 20. b.
pit of hell: the heaven is showed unto us in the heavenly being.

14 The lie is come to shame; the Truth is risen up unto us in the Truth.

15 The darknesses are gone into the bottomless pit to the darknesses Psalm.
30. a.
: the light has illuminated us in the light.

16 The Idol is fallen in his Idolatry: the living God is become known unto us
in the Diety, or Godhead.

17 Therefore we confess the majesty of our God; and the sanctification of
his people eternally.

CHAP. XXIII.
Psalm XVIII.
1 O Lord, thou almighty God, Great and Psalm. 139. b. Apoc 17. a.
Wonderful are thy Works.

2 Righteous Psalm. 24. b. 119. c.
and true are thy ways thou Prince and King of Saints.

3 Who should not fear and love thee, O Lord, of life, and praise thy Name.

4 For there is no holiness but thou: for thou only (O Lord) 1 Kings a.
art holy.

5 All people shall worship thee, in Psalm. 72. b. 87. a.
thy

6 For thy righteousness Psalm. 98. a.
are known, and thy holiness inherited by thy people.

7 But not a holiness by men's hands: but an holiness which is from Eternity,
and shall continue forever.

8 Therefore do thou (O Lord) remain

9 Thus are we now joyful in this portion, and sing Heja, Heja,

10 Play to the Lord a new Psalm 33. 96. a. 98. 104. a. d.
song, and sing Allelu-ja, Al elu-ja.

CHAP. XXIV.
Psalm XIX.
Psalm. 48. b. 97 Esaias 62. b. 66. Zeph. 3, b. Zach. 2. b. 8. a. 12. b. c.
daughters of Sion: an^ refresh you, ye Citizens and inhabitants of the City
Jerusalem.

2 Shout now Esaias 44. c. 49. b 65. d.
with triumph, all ye Generatious of Israel: And rejoice you in all love the
children of peace.

3 Behold, your King Zach. 9. a. Mat. 21. a. John 12. b,
appears unto you in meekness: and he comes Mat. 25. d.
with majesty.



5 But to his enemies, (the resisters of the Love) Jer. 23. b. 25. d. 30. c.
Mat. 4. a. Rom 2. a.
he appears in wrath and severity.

6 For to thrust them from him, and to Mat. 25. d.
shut them without his Kingdom eternally.

7 For he will put a period Zeph. 1. b.
to iniquity, and cast all falsehood and offencivenesse out of his Apoc. 21. 22.
Kingdom.

8 He will disperse the deceitful thoughts: his life, disposition and nature
he will bring to light.

9 He will establish his Kingdom in peace: and the Esaias 9. a. Dan. 2. c. 7. b.
peace of his Kingdom shall have no end.

10 Behold, this is the spiritual Kingdom of Christ the heavenly King for
ever. Allelu-ja, Allelu-ja.

CHAP. XXV.
Psalm XV.
1 WHerefore (O ye souls) Psalm. 95. a.
shout

2 From whom you were turned away, and are turned to him again.

3 Behold, that is the stone Psalm. 118. c. Esaias 28. b. Mat. 21. c. 1 Pet. 2. a.
which saves you, the eternal God of Israel, who the has made heaven and
earth.

4 His anointing is at his right hand: out of his spirit of Salvation comes
faithfulness and Truth unto us.

5 That which he has smitten and Ezech. 34. c.
healed and made whole again.

6 He can Deuteronomy. 32. d. 1 Kings ^. a. Wisd 16. b.
kill, and make alive again, he leads into hell and brings thence again.

7 He thrusts away and condemns, as it were in cursing: he calls to him
again in blessing as his best ^e loved.

8 He brings dov^ to dust, earth, and ashes: He exalts Psalm. 67. a. Luke 1.
^.
again above all Cedar trees.

9 He suffers to fall into sorrow, as if it were nothing, and as if he
esteem^d it not.

10 He makes it glad again, and esteems it more precious then Gold, Silver
and and precious Stones.

^er 10. a. Mich. 7. b.
as the God of Israel which moves [or overspreadeth] above all Heavens.

12 He has founded the earth upon his Word G. u. 1. a. Prove. 3. c.
the Firmament is comprehended in him.

13 Sun and Moon stand obedient to his commandment: all hearts of the living
has he in his hand.

14 He Psalm. 114. b.
does all what ever he pleases: he respects Mat. 22. b.
no man, neither wise, nor simple.

15 When he arises, all must stoop to him, and fear his mighty hand.

16 He chastises or rebukes for a certain time: Psalm. 30. a. Mich 7. b.
but his goodness Psalm 136.
endures for ever.

Psalm 148. b.
all ye Counselors in the Land: fear his Majesty all ye people.

18 He that works Wonders among the Heathens, and takes a delight in his
Elect.

19 He has a pleasure in the house of Israel, that he may plant the Generation
of Jacob in righteousness.

20 He will not Esaias 57. b. Jer 3. ^.
for ever be angry with his people: their punishment shall not always endure.

21 He punishes them for their sins: he saves and justifies them for his
holy Name sake.

22 He will not forget his Covenant, that Psalm. 105. a. Luke 1. ^. g.
he has made with Abraham Isaac, and Jacob.

23 He will not forsake his mercy, which he has promised by his Servants and
Prophets.

24 Yet once again will he move the Agge 2. a Heb. 12. d.
and gather his people together, Mat. 24. d.
from all ends of the Earth, and be 2 Much. 2. b.
gracious unto them.

25 A new Je^. 31. d.
covenant he will establish with them, he will give them a new name: Esaias 56.
62. b
the everlasting free ones, the redeemed of the Lord.

26 To whom the Law of the Lord, his Statutes and Rites, shall no more stand
written in Tables of stone.

27 But God will write them in their hearts, in the innermost Psalm. 40. a. Esaias
31. a. Jer. 31. d.
of their minds, in the ground of faith after the manner of Father Abraham.

28 Rejoice ye then that have been rejected among all heathen.

29 Psalm. 47. a.
Clap then with your hands, and dance then with your feet.

30 Make then your songs of joy at Sion: sing then Allelu-ja, Zach. 8. a. Tobir
13. a.
in all the streets and lanes of Jerusalem.

31 Then cast from you the mourning garment: for that is the end of your shame
and contempt.

32 Then put on Esaias 61 b.
the ornaments of joy: sing, play, and Psalm. 81. 98. a. 149, 150. a.
praise the Lord in triumphing.

33 Play upon Harpes, upon Lutes, upon Cymballs, Flutes, Tabors, Uialls, and
upon all manner of Instruments with strings.

34 For then will God be your King, your head and only Shepherd.

Jer. 38. c. Zeph. 3. b.
sin shall any more destroy you: no Prophets shall any more seduce you.

36 Then shall you all Jer. 31. d.
know the Lord your God, as also his Statutes and Ordinances.

37 Hope now thereon O Israel: the same shall come unto you all ye children of
Jacob. Allelu-ja, Allelu-ja, Amen.

38 Give perpetual thanks to the great God of Israel, for besides him there is
Deuteronomy. 4. a. Esaias 42. 44.
no other God.

CHAP. XXVI.
THus has the Lord who forsakes not Ecclus 2. a.
Elect, likewise, not forsaken, his chosen servant H. N. in his misery,
lamentation and prayers. For like as he brings his own even into the death,
and Ceut. 12. d. Tobit 13. a. Wisd. 16. b.
makes alive again, carries into hell, and brings from thence again,
permits the Baruch 5. a.
enemy to carry away into captivity, and again delivers them out of the
hands and captivity of their enemies: and exalts or honors them among his
living ones: So likewise the Lord delivered H. N. out of his misery, and out of
the bonds of his enemies: and brought him also with Gladness (with his
children of the Kingdom) again to his most holy being, which is full of all
pure beauty and heavenly riches: and revealed unto him the whole Tabernacle of
his Sanctuary, and the requiring of the service thereof.

2 And H. N. praised and thanked the most highest, for the abundance of his
mercy, because that he replenished him with all fullness of his godly
understanding, and H. N. diligently endeavored himself again to the
obedience of his Service: And the Lord revealed all things to him in the
understanding, that was needful for the children of men to know for their
salvation.

Jesus Christ and his holy Spirit of Love) to publish the same in writing: And
he has done the same and (through the help of God) in some measure
accomplished it.

4 But after that this ministration of the same godly Testimonies had had their
forth-going thus for some years through H. N. (in writing and Printed Letters.)
So were there some Writings of the same godly Testimonies come into the hands
of Whoremongers, into the hands of Traitors, and into the hands of
self-conceited wise ones, also into the hands of the generation of Cain, and of
the false hearts of the Letter-learned, whose Mat. 23. c. 26 Acts 7. s.
forefathers persecuted Christ, and his Witnesses, accused him falsely, and
killed him.

5 Which wicked generation of false H. N. and the same testimonies of God: and
have also out of their evil deeds manifested Luke ^.
the wickedness of their hearts: and that the good nature of Christ dwells
not in them Genesis ^. ^.
but the false nature of Cain, who murdered his brother Abel: also the evil
spirit of 1 Kings 18, 19
Saul, who persecuted the holy Prophet David: and the envious heart of the
Letter-learned, who Mat. 26, 27. Acts 2. 7 etc.
betrayed and killed Christ and his Witnesses.

6 These wicked Generations of the said wicked Fathers have not rested to Mat.
23.
accomplish the most horrid wickedness of their Fathers: but with their envious
hearts have they (with great diligence) endeavored to resist the godly
Testimonies of God, and his commiserating mercy, together with the love of the
holy Spirit of Jesus Christ, and Gods elect Servant, with all false
testimonies, lies and reproach: So that they are most fearfully fallen, against
Gods commiserating grace [which he on the earth to the commiseration of all men
(through his elect Minister H. N.) has testified, and published] and against
the Love of the holy Spirit of Jesus Christ, into all blasphemy of God, and
into contempt of his Truth.

H. N. (who yet was no man's enemy, nor contemned any man (in particular) for
his religion: but heartily wished to all Religion urgers (that they might have
the true light of life in the Lanthorn of their Service) has loved all people
(to the godliness in Jesus Christ) and behaved himself courteously to all men
in all upright conversation) and have also secretly exclaimed against him to
the Magistrate (when he was not there present) for a Seducer and Malefaor,
when he was not heard, or not at all speaking with him (although he yet walked
openly) very falsely accused him: and have also contrived a matter, [or charge]
very cunningly with all subtilty, against Law and all Christian Ordinances, to
the end that H. N. (through their accusation, and clamor) might by the
Magistrate be prosecuted or rooted out: And thereunto t^^ Magistrate
condescended.

CHAP. XXVII.
1 BUt at the same time in the nine and H. N. (in the time of Maximillian the
first, being made Roman Emperor, by virtue [or power] of the Electoral Princes
of the Roman Empire and the German Nation) then sought the Magistrate where H.
N. dwelled in the East (through the false relations of the enemies of H. N.
(and through the false slanders which they had spoken against him among the
people) to lie in wait for H. N. for to lay him fast in Prison: And so with the
consent of the same aforesaid Magistrate) was H. N. (in the same Land where he
dwelled) very vehemently persecuted. And many ambushes were laid for him, for
to bring him into prison. But the Lord smote them all with Kings 6 b.
great blindness, who were his enemies and persecuted him: insomuch that they
could by no means apprehend H. N.

2 Now when the Officers of the said Magistrate, had used all their diligence,
to bring H. N into their hands: then the Lord manifested his mercy and
assistance to him, carried him (by the hand of his Acts 12. a. b.
Angels) openly before the eyes of his persecutors away from that land without
hurt: And no man knew him, or could find out which way he traveled.

3 Now when H. N. (for the upright Mat. 5 ^.
righteousness of God, and the Godliness of Jesus Christ, and because that he
attested and published the same under the obedience of the Love) was thus
(through persecution) driven away through the hand of the Lord) he traveled
away before the eyes of his persecutors: (...) ^scaped.
notwithstanding they writ very earnestly after him to several places, and his
enemies made very diligent search after him, to find him out, nevertheless he
kept on in his journey (in the way of Patience) toward another land, which the
Lord showed him, and wherein it should be more quiet and peaceable for him to
inhabit.

Romans 2. a. ^ Th^ss. 2 b.
Truth of God: and shamefully despised the fulfilling of the godliness in Jesus
Christ; and undecently reproched the Mat 12. b. H^b. 18. c.
holy Spirit of the Love of Jesus Christ: and also persecuted him with wicked
hearts of Psalm. 5 a. Je^. 9. a. Romans 3. a.
lying slanderous lips, whom they had most cause to love, for as much as he
showed all love and all ministrations to the Godliness in full explanation to
them.)

5 And so in his traveling and sadness, H. N. took unto him to read the Psalms
of David: especially that Psalm, which the holy Prophet David (the anointed of
the Lord) had formerly spoken, when 1 Kings 16. b. 1S. b. 19. a.
Saul (after the good Spirit of the Lord was departed, and was much disquieted
with an evil spirit from the Lord) persecuted him: and sought to take away his
life: and when he was betrayed by 1 Ki^gs 12. b.
Doeg the Edomire: and first he made his preface to the Lord, and said.

6 O Lord God (heavenly Father) how Exodus 1. 3 Kings 22. c. Mat. 21. 23.
wise of the World always been, who do not fear thee, O God, with an humble
heart, nor walk uprightly before thee.

7 And how imbittered Acts 7. s
and hardened of heart, and how bloodthirsty in their spirits and minds, have
always been the Letter-learned, and also the urgers of ceremonial Services,
who have not (O God) believed thee in the Word of thy holy Prophets, nor been
obedient thereunto: And also all those who forsake the Doctrine of thy dear Son
Jesus Christ, and Mat. ^1. c.
his humility and meekness, and have not learned the upright righteousness to
the cleansing of their hearts, but framed and chose to themselves (out of the
letter, counterfeit ceremonial services, and invented holinesses, and have
neither known, nor received John 14 c,
the holy anointing of thy holy Spirit of the Love of Jesus Christ.

8 For like as Saul 1 Kings 16. 18, 19.
(with his evil and restless spirit) envyed and persecuted thine anointed David
(who walked uprightly, and without deceit before thee: and like as the false
hearts, of the Letter-learned have despised, belyed, reproached, and with
falsehood defamed, and persecuted as evil doers and seducers, thy 3 Kings 22 c.
Jer. 28. a. 26.
holy Prophets, and thy Mat 23. 26.
dear son (thine anointed Jesus) and his Act. 4. 7, 9, 12 14, 16, 21.
witnesses, and had an intention to root them out: Even so (O God) this wicked
Generation of the same wicked seed, and nature of the aforesaid false-hearts,
have persecuted, reproached, and belyed me H. N. thy chosen servant because (O
God) I love all people to the Godliness in Jesus Christ, And attest and set
forth before them, thy commiserating Grace and Love, and the upright
righteousness Luke 1. f. Ephesians. 1. a. b. Col. 1. ^. 3. b.
and holiness of thy beloved Son Jesus Christ, (out of thy holy and gracious
Word and Spirit of Love) and call and invite them all thereunto: And they have
resisted and Mat. 12. c. Heb. 10. c.
reproached also thy holy Spirit, whom thou now in these last times, have sent
to declare the Truth of thy Christ.

9 Therefore must I now also with thy David take up a speech against mi^e
enemies, and persecutors, and utter forth the same against their wicked deeds:
And will (O God) abase my self before thee: Job 12. a.
glory in thee and thy Goodness: Supplicate and pray unto thee, and give
thanks and praise to thee O God, for all the Goodness, which thou O heavenly
Father have bestowed on me H. N. thy chosen servant.

10 And thereupon when H. N. had spoken these words before the ears of the
most high, then he began this speech against his enemies out of the Psalm of
David and said.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Psalm. 52.
Tyrants: why do ye boast because ye can do mischief? whereas the goodness of
God endures yet daily.

2 Your tongues follow mischief, and with lies ye cut, as a sharp Razor.

3 Ye rathhr speak evil then good: and rather falsehood then truth.

4 Ye willingly speak, all that tends to destruction with false tongues.

5 Therefore will God also confound and totally consume you, remove you out of
his Tent, [or Tabernacle] and root you out of the land of the living.

6 And the righteous shall see it, and fear: and laugh at you, and say.

7 Behold, Psalm. 49 a.
these are the men, that held not God for their comfort* but trusted only in
their Ecclus 5. a.
great riches: and were mighty to do mischief.

8 But I shall continue as a green Olive tree, in the house of God: for I trust
in the goodness of God constantly and for ever.

9 I thank thee (O God) for ever: for thou art able to do it: I will rely on
thy Name, for therein have thy Saints joy.

10 Help Psalm. 84.
me (O God) through thy Name: and let me have justice through thy power.

11 Hear (O God) my prayers: hearken to the voice of my mouth.

12 Proud men set themselves against me, and Tyrants lay wait for my soul, and
have not God before their eyes.

13 Behold, God stands by me: the

14 He will reward the wickedness of mine Enemies: Deuteronomy. 32. d.
cast them out through thy faithfulness.

15 Then will I (O Lord) bring unto to thee an offering of joy, and thank thy
name, because it is so comfortable.

16 For thou delivere^^ me out of all my misery, so that mine eyes see their
desire on my enemies.

17 Deliver me Psalm 59. a.
my God from mine enemies: and protect me from them that set themselves
against me.

18 Deliver me from the evil doers, and help me from the bloodthirsty.

19 For behold (Lord) they lie in wait for my soul: the strong ones gathered
themselves against me, without any crime or m^^deed of mine.

20 Their Psalm. 59. ^
doctrine is mere sin, and they persevere in their pride: they preach mere
curses, gain-sayings, and detractions.

21 They think to extinguish him that is simple Psalm. 62. 8.
and are diligent to lie: give fair words, but they curse in their hearts.

22 But my soul waits upon God alone: for he is my hope.

23 For they have opened their Psalm. 1^9 a.
wicked and false mouths against me, and speak against me with false tongues.

24 They speak every where poisonously against me, and fight without a cause.

25 Because I love them, therefore are they against me: but I do pray.



27 Lord (O God) Psalm 64.
hear my voice, in my complaint: preserve my life from my cruel enemies.

28 Hide me from the gatherings of the wicked: from the multitude of evil doers.

29 Which whet their tongues as a sword: they aim with their poisonous words
as with arrows,

30 Secretly Psalm. 11. c.
to shoot at the upright: h^shly they shoot at them without fear.

31 They are bold in their evil attempts, and say, how that they will lay
snares, and say, The policy of all opposers of (...) Truth of God.
who can see it.

32 They invent deceit, and keep it secretly: they are destroyers and exercise
falsehood subtily.

33 But God will suddenly shoot them, that woe shall come upon them: their own
tongues shall overthrow them, and he that beholds them shall deride them.

34 And all men that see it, shall say: God has done this: and shall perceive
that it is his work.

35 But the Righteous shall rejoice in the Lord, and trust in him: and all
upright hearts shall glory thereat.

CHAP. XXIX.
1 I Thank thee, O Lord, and King, and Ecclus 52.
O God, my Savior.

2 I praise thy Name, that thou art my helper and protector.

3 For thou have preserved my body from destruction, and from the snares of
false treacherous tongues and lying lips: and thou ha^^ helped me against mine
enemies.

4 And according to thine abundant mercy, thou have delivered me from the
roaring of them which would devour me: and out of the hands of such, as sought
after my life: out of many sorrows which had surrounded me, and out of the
midst of the fire, that I should not be therein consumed.

5 Also out of the depth of Hell, and from the false praters and liars: and
also have delivered me from the King or Magistrate, and from the unrighteous
judgment of false tongues.

6 I was near to death, and my life was almost going down to Hell: for I was
compassed about on every side, and there was no man to help me.

7 I hoped indeed for the help of man: and behold there was none.



9 Against their fierceness I prayed unto God, and entreated for deliverance
from death: and called to the Lord my Father and Ruler, that he would not
forsake me in my trouble, for the proud have lifted up themselves, and when I
had no hope.

10 I will praise thy Name continually, and I honor and give thanks unto thee:
for my prayer is heard, and thou have delivered me from the destruction, and
from all evil.

12 Therefore will I (O Lord) thank and praise thee, and extol or magnify thy
Name.

12 When I was yet but young, and before any errors took hold to seduce me, I
very earnestly sought for wisdom in my prayer.

13 I went therefore into the Temple, and here, even until the last: and she
was unto me an early ripe Grape.

14 My heart rejoiced in the wisdom,

15 I hearkened, and inclined my ears after her, and took her to me, or united
me with her.

16 Then found I much wisdom, and through her I increase greatly, and praised
him who gave me wisdom.

17 I was resolved to do accordingly, and to endeavor carefully after the
good: and I was not there at ashamed.

18 I wrested there after with all my heart, and was diligent to do accordingly.

19 I lifted up my hands to Heaven, and my soul was enlightened through the
wisdom? that I knew my follishness.

20 I ordered my heart to wisdom, and found her pure in all things: and I
joined in all things: and I joined my heart with her, even from the beginning.

21 Therefore shall I not be forsaken, for my heart exceedingly longs after
her:

And therefore also have I obtained a good Treasure.

22 For the Lord has given me through her, a new tongue, that I, with her,
should praise him.



24 Behold, I have opened my mouth, and teach: therefore come now and buy
wisdom for your selves: forasmuch as ye can have her without money: and bow
your necks under her yoke: and be instructed: for she is now found near at hand.

25 Look on me: how I have had for a little time labor and trouble: and have
found a great comfort.

26 Therefore embrace the doctrine of wisdom as a great treasure: and keep her
as a great heap of gold.

27 Rejoice in the great mercy of God, and be not ashamed to praise him.

28 Do what is commanded you, whilst ye have time, and he will well recompense
you, in his time.

CHAP. XXX.
1 IN the 65 year of the age of H* N. in the Maximilian the second was made
Roman Emperor, by the power of the Electoral Princes of the Roman Empire, and
the G^rman Nation) the Word of Lord came to H. N. and said.

2 H. N. Arise, and be diligent to perform thy journey toward the land which
will be convenient and peaceable for thee to dwell in, and conceal thy self
very carefully from thy despisers: and keep thy self apart for a time from
thine acquaintance and friends, according to the ^lesh: especially from those
with whom thou have (outwardly) most friendship.

3 But from thy despisers, and from the lascivious whoremongers and from all
slanderous Traitors, accusers, and false censurers of the testimonies of the
holy Spirit of my Love, together also from all impenitent ones, which have
heard the same testimonies, and do not obediently take to heart (to the
reforming of their lives) the requiring of my holy and gracious word: but have
their conversation with the light-minded and mockers, and with the enemies of
my house of Love, and from all perjured and unfaithful ones which will not
repent, Thou shall (as much as possible thou may) wholly and altogether
separate: And shall keep thy self altogether separated from such so long as
they do not obediently humble themselves under my gracious word, and
ministration of Love, and bear not sorrow for their sins, neither confess, nor
repent. And so proceed in thy journey till [thou commest] to another land that
I will show thee, which is full of blessing: which I have prepared from the
beginning, for my Mat. 25. d.
chosen ones, with abundance of all my riches, to Heb. 3. b. 4. a*
a land of rest and peace.

Love (unto Obedience) and bring forth sincere fruits of repentance, likewise
all those which desire to assemble with thee, to the gracious Throne of my
Majesty, and have faithful hearts, and do mind righteousness and Love; will
indeed willingly follow thee, and be joined to the requiring of my Testimonies
and obedience, for to become John 17. c. Acts ^. c.
one in their heart and mind, in me.

5 They shall likewise, (for to come into the same land, and there to have
their walking in thy fellowship) willingly hear and believe, the out-flowing
words of thy mouth or of the Elders in the household of Love, and will
obediently perform the requiring thereof.

6 Therefore thy journey also and the way of thy Passover to the same land,
(as a preparation to the John 3. b
new birth in Jesus Christ) shall continually be kept in remembrance, and
plainly declared, showed and proposed to the lovers of the Truth, and the
upright Righteousness, and he thus passed through by the On-comming Elders, to
the end that all those (who are inclined to the new birth in Jesus Christ, and
desire to have their fellowship with thee, and with the Elders of the household
of Love) pass through the same way of preparation, to the entrance of the 4
Esd. 4. a. Mat. ^. b.
same good Land, and to the new Birth in Jesus Christ, uprightly, and
obediently, with an upright understanding of the Truth, and that they might be
assembled to thee, and thy heart and mind, in my hereditary land of rest, and
of peace) And should not err through their good thinking opinion) nor yet
suppose themto be therein before they be gone through the same way of the
Passover, and in any wise not deceive themselves.

[or disjoyned] from the Ancients thy fellow Elders in the Family of Love: nor
from the faithful ones: but take advise, keep friendship and all loveliness
with them even to eternity: For of them shall travel with thee 24, and they
shall be called unto me Separated, crowned, sanctified. Burning, or fiery.
Nazaraeans Numb. 6.


8 Further there shall travel with thee four of the chiefest. Seraphims in the
household of Love, who shall always be about and with you to the preservation
of you all.

9 Behold, with these four and twenty Elders, and the four chiefest Seraphims,
which I have ordained or joined to thee, shall thou travel forwards till that
thou come into mine holy land of the living, 4 Esdras 10. f
where there are no buildings of men.

10 Thou shall also out of all the testimonies of thy Writings which thou have
published, take of each one with thee, and bring it with thee into the holy
land of the living: For there shall thou with the said Elders, (through the
light of my wisdom) renew all the said testimonies of thy Writings, to make
them more plain to the understanding: and also testify the same in fuller
explanation, and write them again more distinctly.

11 For the Whoremongers, and the Adulterous generation, as also the earthly
and fleshly minded, and the enemies of my household of Love have out of the
testimonies of thy former Writings judged many sentences very unjustly, to
their own seducing, therefore shall thou now renew them all, in a more plain
declaration, and bring forth and publish the same to the wel-willers of my Love.

12 There shall also be renewed to all those Love and of the entrance to the
upright life) namely, unto such who (out of a good intention) apply them to the
testimonies of thy Writings, and have not rightly understood nor observed the
requiring thereof, and therefore have not showed the upright obedience to their
requirings, nor performed the first School-rule of the Christian Doctrine of
the Service of my Love, yet notwithstanding are well inclined, to bring forth
upright fruits of repentance) to the intent that to every one, who will permit
himself to be renewed, and repents, the truth of my word may be known: And
the Whoremongers and impenitent ones, or any of the enemies to the house of
Love, should understand the Mat. 11. c 13. b. ^ Cor. 2. b.
of the godly sayings.

13 I will yet also reveal unto thee in the land of the living, many of my
wonderful works, and will give thee to understand yet truth many mysteries.

14 I will also declare and show unto thee the appearing of my Glory, the Mat.
24. 25. Acts 1. b. 2 Thessalonians. 1. a. Titus 2. b.
glorious coming of my Christ, and the Resurrection of my Saints, among the
right believers, and obeyers of my word or Christ: and also how the right
believers and obeyers, shall be renewed in their Romans 12. a. Ephesians. 4.
spirit and mind, in this same day of Acts 17. d.
my righteous Judgment, and how the same renewing in the inward man, is the
true accomplishing of the Priestly Office of my Christ under the obedience of
the Belief: And how also in accomplishing the same, The said Priestly Office
reaches into the obedience of my Love, and to the inheriting of the spiritual
and heavenly riches of the holy spirit of my Christ.

H. N. praised and thanked the God of heaven for his great mercy and
compassion, and for his righteous judgment at the last time: And called to the
Lord and said.

16 O my Lord and God, now reveal unto me also which way I shall travel on,
with thy chosen Saints and chiefest Elders in thy Family of Love, and with thy
holy Testimo^ies of our writings, to perform thy holy will, and to come to thy
holy land, of which thou have told me, and also that I might do as thou have
commanded me.

17 Then said the Lord to H. N. the same way of the * suffering of my Christ,
and of all my Saints, (wherei^ thou now also walk) thou shall go on to
travel through it; and from the same way shall thou not turn thee N^mb. 10 b.
neither to the right hand nor to the left, for the same way is the true way 4
Esd. 7 b. Mat. 7. b.
to my holy land of the living; where no 4 Esd. 10. f.
manner of building of men are found,

18 Therefore travel on in the same, even as I have told thee: and in the
passing over the same, take good heed to the doctrine of my truth, the true
preparation to the entrance of my land of the living. For so in the fulfilling
of the same way, thou shall find thy self in the holy place; wherein I the
Lord dwell, live and reign eternally.

19 Be of good courage in the same way of thy forth-going, for in the same way
shall, nor can any selfishnesse nor humane conceited wisdom or subtlety
follow thee, nor by no means endamage thee.

20 And although they would seemingly travel through with thee the same way, yet
shall they not be able, but shall fail therein, and become unbelieving, and so
(through their stumbling or dislike) turn aside therefrom either to the right
hand or the left.

Mat. 10. c. ^4. b. Heb. ^. a.
(till to the end) constantly, and faithfully, and Mat. 16. 19 c. Luke 9 14. c.
forsakes all for my sake, and simply and faithfully in the requiring of the
obedience of my service of Love) follows thee, will I, (through my holy and
gracious Word and Service of Love) lead them rightly, into my holy land of the
living, and not Jer. 31. c. Heb. 8. 10. b.
remember their sins, nor their slumbling and falling any more.

22 Therefore, endeavor thee deligently with these my holy-ones (which I have
set before thee and with the godly testimonies of thy Writings to accomplish
more and more the foresaid way of Patience.

23 Likewise consult thou not with the Gal. 1. c.
flesh or blood of men, nor with any man's craft or subtilty, but travel upon
the Heb. 11. a.
belief or trust of my word, till thou with the four and twenty Elders, and
four chiefest Seraphims, be come to the holy place, where I shall reveal and
show unto thee my heavenly workings, where no 4 Esd. 10 f.
works of man can remain standing.

24 For there in my Inheritance of the living will I give thee an heritage for
ever. And confirm thee also in the Testaments of the holy Fathers ( Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob) to the end that thou may administer the same Testaments
Romans 6. b.
to the death of the sin, and till to the life of the righteousness among the
believers of my gracious word, and that then, all they also may be confirmed in
the same Testaments and be made heirs with thee in my hereditary land of the
living, and so know and understand, that my testaments of the holy Fathers, are
not administered forth of the knowledge of men, according to their conceiving:
but Isaiah 1. ^ Mich. 4. a.
out of my true being, according to the requiring of my gracious word and
service of Love.

25 That also my Inheritance of the living, Isaiah 55. a.
meaning, to the thoughts and meanings and plausible conceiving of men.

26 But all these words which the Lord did speak to H. N. he laid up in his
heart for to do accordingly, and he took himself to his journey (according to
the requiring of the Word of the Lord) with the 24 Elders and the four
Seraphims, and with the godly testimonies of his Writings.

27 And in this our traveling forward into the hereditary land of the living,
we were seven times seven days, that is nine and forty days.

28 And in this our journey in (all these nine and forty days) we eat 4 Esd. 9
c. 12 f.
no kind of food or creature, which had any breath of life in it self, or had
received any.

29 Neither did we drink in all this same time of our travel any Numb. 6. a.
wine or strong drink for to rejoice our hearts, nor to refresh our minds, that
we might not forget diligently to apply our selves to our journey.

CHAP. XXXI.
In this Chapter is plainly figured forth and declared the true preparation of
the believers of the Word, to the Passover of the new birth in Jesus Christ
and to become profitable and mere Elders and Ministers of the Word in the
household of the Love of Jesus Christ.
1 NOw the beginning of our journey

2 First of all (before we gave up our selves to travel forward Or Gods
ministry.
to the service-ablenesse) we earnestly endeavored us willingly and
obediently, out of entire Love, to fulfill the Lords will and all Mat. 3. c.
righteousness: and remembering the Law of Moses the Mat. 4. b.
servant of the Lord, which the Lord commanded him on the mount The mount Horeb
is the requiring of the obedience in the Laws and Ordinances of the Lord.
Horeb, we gave our selves and all that was in our power, wholly over (as a
free willing offering) to the Lord and his gracious word: and committed our
heart and mind (to obedience) unto the same gracious word and his requiring:
And preparing our Ecclus 2 a.
souls for assaulting, we prayed the Lord which dwells in the heavens.

3 And this (with willing hearts) we undertook our journey forward (like as the
Lord had said to us. And traveled the the first six days upon the assurance
or promises of the Lord) with cheerful minds, and we had in all these six
days of our travel no kind of grief nor assaulting, and we came on the first
sixth day to the (...)
view of the upright Righteousness as to the Glass of the same
Righteousness. In which Glass is represented unto us Luke ^. f. Ephesians. ^. a.
4. c.
the upright Righteousness, before God and man: unto which the man was created
Genesis 1. c. 2. a. (...). c.
from the beginning, and is, in his estranging from God, called and invited
thereto through Jesus Christ.

4 In the same Glass, was also represented to us the unrighteousness or
sin, Isaiah 59. a.
whereby the children of men estrange themselves and turn away from God and his
truth deal deceitfully one with another.

5 There was also figured forth, unto us, the right confession of sins, and
Mat. 3. a. Luke 3. a
the upright fruits of repentance, which all sinful men ought to bring forth,
And also earnestly to endeavor themselves (in reforming their lives) unto the
upright righteousness.

6 Now when all this was thus represented unto us, we were very earnestly
careful to have a right regard on the upright righteousness, and also of the
upright fruits of repentance, and amendment of life, That we might keep all
that in our hearts, unto a fruitful life in the same upright righteousness.

7 And therefore, that we might always uprightly endeavor our selves to all
this, so gave we our selves continually thereto, into a good watchfulness
namely, into the Heb. 11. 1 Pet. 1. b. c.
true Belief and Hope to the Righteousness, and into the Mat. 3. a. Luke 3.
13. a.
bewailing and confessing of sins unto an amendment of life.

8 And being in all friendship received by the Belief and Hope to the
Righteousness, and by the contrition for, and Confession of sins to the
amendment of life, and endevoring, and wholly submitting our selves to their
will and requiring, we rested with them the first seventh day.

9 The first day thereafter (next to the Belief and Hope to the
Righteousness, and in the Bewailing and Confessing of the sins to the
amendment of life) to exercise our selves in the understanding, and to be
instructed and taught in all these uprightly and according to the Truth. And so
we came on the second sixth day to the Teaching of the Righteousness, In which
Teaching we were fundamentally taught and rightly instructed in the upright
righteousness and in the Belief and Hope to the same, and in the upright
bewailing and confessing of sins to the ame^dment of life.

10 And that we might rightly and obediently endeavor us to the same doctrine
and instruction, so thereupon gave we our selves continually to a good
Watchfulnes^.
observation, namely, into Psalm. 40. a. Heb* 8. (...).
the Delight to do the will of God, and in the Freewilling obedience.

11 Being most friendly received of the Delight to do Gods will and of the
Freewilling obedience, and endeavoring and wholly giving over our selves to
their will and requiring, we rested with them the second seventh day.

Mat. 3* c.
all righteousness, even as we were instructed and taught by the Elders in the
doctrine of Righteousness.

13 In which exercising in the delight to do the will of God, and in the free
willing obedience to accomplish all Righteousness, we were (in all the three
six days of our travel) strongly Ephesians. ^. c. James 1. a. b.
assailed with diverse manner of false humane Or tempted
desires (for to do the will of the flesh) and with all self willed
obedience, Or lust.
(for to perform men's opiniated or good conceited Righteousness) And so
wholly to withdraw us from the delight to do the will of God, and from the
willing obedience, to accomplish all Righteousness, and from the doctrine and
instruction of the Elders in the Godly understanding unto the upright
Righteousness.

14 For we did in all these third six days of our journey all our best
endeavor and earnestness to overcome the assailing of the averse desires,
against the desire to do the will of God, and the disobedience against Gods
requiring, together with the false self willed obedience, and (with the
free-willing obedience unto Gods requiring) to be preserved there from Ecclus
2. a. Gal. 6 Mat 22.
And humbly praying to the Lord for it, we came on the third sixth day, to the
right Fasting and Praying, In which Fasting Mat. 17. c.
and Praying, we observed, how that men through the right Mat. 17. c.
Fasting and Praying, and through the constant [or earnest] willingness to the
good life) delivered from all false lusts or desires, and from all selfe-willed
inclinations to Deuteronomy. 6. 10. a. Mat. 4. b.
serve the Lord alone in his upright Righteousness and holiness.

15 And that we might uprightly endeavor thereunto, and overcome all that,
which is against the will of the Lord and his Righteousness, And (with the
will of the Lord and his Righteousness) obtain the upper hand there against,
Or watchfulness.
we gave our selves continually into a good observation: namely, unto the Gal.
5. b. 1 Pet. 2. b.
fasting and forbearance, of all that the flesh lusted after, and that which
the man selfishly conceived, and into the hunger Mat. 5. a.
and thirst after the Righteo^snesse.

16 And being in all friendship admitted by the fasting and abstaining from all
that the flesh desired and the man selfishly conceived, and the hunger and
thirst after Righteousness, and earnestly endeavoring, and wholly submitting
us to their will and requiring, we rested with them on the third seventh day.

or industry, and (with all our diligence to fall and abstain from all that
the flesh, and the man's good conceiving lusted after, and became also very
hungry and thirsty after the Righteousness: for to obtain the same, and that
it might everlastingly remain steadfast upon the 2 Pet. 3. b.
earth.

18 In which fasting and absteining, hungring and thirsting, we were (in all
the fourth six days of our traveling) most vehemently assailed [ or tempted^
with all manner of things which the flesh lusted after, and which the man
conceived to be good and wherein he loved his own life: and withal manner of
undecent food (for to esteem the same free for the believers) to eat or feed
upon, so in all the fourth six days of our journey, we most humbly besought
the Lord (in fasting and absteining, and in hungring, and in thirsting) that he
would keep us, from all deceitful, or sweet tasting-lusts of the ^lesh, and
the Man's good-thinking, that we yet might always Mat. 16. Gal. 5. b. 1 Pet.
2. b.
(in the fasting and absteining from the lusts of the flesh, and wherein the
man loves his own life, and in our hungring and thirsting Mat. 5. a.
after the Righteousness) remain steadfast unto the end, and at no time to live
after the lusts of the flesh, nor the Man's self will, nor take on or choose
any false righteo^snesse, according to the good-thinking of men: And thus we
came on the fourth sixth day into a Straightness, in which Straightness we
perceived that the way to the upright life (which men go thorough or pass
over in fasting and abstaining from all self lusts, and self minded life of
men, and in hunger and thirst after Righteousness) is 2 Esd. 7. a. Mat. 7. b.
very narrow and straight: especially for those which are turned to themselves,
and have placed their love and pleasure upon their own life.

19 Notwithstanding that we full well perceiving that to pass through the
straightness is an narrow Gate, and small Path, yet we feared not its passage:
but instantly betook our selves to a good observation, namely, Mat. 26. Luke 12
d.
Heaviness of heart and in Sorrowfulness of the mind to accomplish the way unto
the life uprightly.

20 Of this heaviness of heart, and perplexednesse of mind, for to pass through
the way unto the life uprightly, we were (in our sighing and praying to the
Lord) very willingly received: and obtained of them a good promise to our
comfort. For through the Elder Ne^emias, we were told (to our comfort) that we
should in no wise fear: but remember in all our heaviness and sadness. That
all those which desire to draw nigh to the living Godhead, and will be united
with him in the heritable land of the living, must enter through many Acts 14.
c.
tribulations, straightnesses, and sadness into the heritable land of the
living, and into the Kingdom of the God of Heavens. And comforting us in this
saying, and earnestly endeavoring, and wholly submitting our selves to the will
and requiring of heavi-mindedness, and perplexedness of thoughts to pass
through uprightly the way unto the life, we rested together with them on the
fourth seventh day.

21 The first day to it (next to the fourth of heart, and encumbrance of mind,
we (in sighing and praying unto God) remained constant till to the end M^t. 10.
c. 24. b.
.

22 In which heaviness of heart and encumbrance of mind, to pass over the way
to the life uprightly, we were Wisd. 2. b.
exceedingly assaulted, with all Or tempted.
light-mindednesse [or inconstancy] and carefulness about worldly and
corruptible things, Or inconstancy.
and with the love of the flesh to join our hearts thereto, O^ cumbers^mnes^.
and that we in all light-heartednes, and with confidence in worldly and
corruptible matters rest our selves pacified, forgetting heavy-mindedness, and
the carefulness of the Godly life, and (in respect of the love of our own
lives) should accept of all wordly wisdom, light-heartedness, and foolish joys,
or good thinkings, to our releasing from the same perplexity [or heaviness.]

23 Which Or temptation.
assaulting, we all the fifth sixth days of our journey (in sighing and praying
unto God) patiently endured, and always readily inclining us for to pass
through the small Mat. 7. b. Luke 13. c.
or narrow way to the entrance of the godly life: (in all obedience of the
requiring of the gracious Word, and his service of Love) and Mat. 10. 24. b.
till the end to remain steadfast therein. And so we came on the fifth sixth day
into the Perseverance in the same Or perplexity.
Heaviness, In which Perseverance we observed the upright Or stedfastness.
Constancy in the obedience of the Gracious Word of the Lord and his Or
God-service.
divine Worship, uprightly to pass the narrow way to the virtuous life: without
hurt and hinderance, and enter into the Good and Godly life.

24 And for to endeavor us more perfectly to the same Constancy, we betook
our selves continually in a good Watchfulness, namely, Psalm. 45. b. Deuteronomy. 33. a.
to a forgetfulness of all what is forsaken, and to a Remembrance of the Good
Life, which is to be traveled after.

25 Of the forgetting of all that which is forsaken, and of the remembering of
the Good Life which is to be traveled after, we were in all friendly manner
received: and uprightly endevoring us, in the forgetting it all that was to be
forsaken, and in the remembering of the good life which ought to be wholly after,
and wholly submitting to their will and requiring, we rested together with them
on the fifth seventh day.

26 On the first day to it, next to the fifth seventh day we traveled on in
our journey, and ceased not in all the sixth six days of our traveling to
perform our labor and diligence, totally to forget it all, that which men are
to forsake in respect of the good (or virtuous) life. And thus were we
carefully mindful of the good life, that we traveled after, that we might
(with upright renewed hearts and minds) enter into the same good [or vertuons]
life.

27 In which forgetting of all that is to be forsaken, and in remembering of the
good life that ought to be traveled after, we with all unprofitable and
unedifying things (which men ought to forsake, and to let in to the silence of
oblivion) and withal those things, which we for the good life's cause had
forsaken, and departed from, we were very vehemently tempted, to remember and
to take on the same again: And to set all our comfort of life and welfare
thereupon according to the flesh.

28 For the corruptible things, and the taking on of all these things, whereto
the natural minds and thoughts, and the destructionable lusts of errors, of the
unrepentant and unregenerate men do incline, were Or figured forth.
represented (or figured forth) in all our labor or travel (in all the sixth
six days of our journey) as upright things (which rightly belong to the good
and upright ones, in propriety to possess, and in freedom to enjoy before our
good-willing minds and thoughts to the good life of the upright righteousness,
that we should call to mind, and take hold of the corruptible and
destructionable things to our pleasure of life, to moil or cumber our selves
therewith, and so forget the everlasting uncorruptible good, and the doctrine
and administration to the same, and no more to think or set our minds
thereafter.

29 Which temptation we (in all the sixth six days of our traveling) Luke 12
c.
in the Patience passed by, and daily forsaking all corruptible things Mat. 16.
10 c Luke 19. 4. c.
and wholly forgetting them, we came on the sixth six day to the Supper of the
Lord Jesus Christ wherein we perceived in what manner the Supper of our Lord
Jesus Christ is John 6. f.
uprightly kept: And how that all those who rightly keep that same Supper with
the Lord Jesus Christ enter with Christ John 5. a.
(out of the death) into the good life, and totally delivered or freed from all
the enemies of the life, and from all their temptations.

30 Now when we observed all this, and obtained Or celebrate
to keep uprightly the same Supper: according to his requiring) submitted our
selves to a good Or de^ence,
safeguard, namely, to the Body and to the Blood of Jesus Christ: and having
assembled us to the same Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, we committed our
selves wholly to the Body of Jesus Christ, and his requiring, and to the Blood
of Jesus Christ, and his requiring.

31 And thus were kindly Or entertained.
received of the Body and of the Blood of Jesus Christ: and were also on the
same day, earnestly invited to the Supper of the Lord Jesus Christ, that in us,
with us, and through us also (with the Lord Jesus Christ) Mat. 3. c.
all righteousness should be accomplished and established, whereto God the
Father has chosen and loved Mankind.

32 Now for to Or celebrate
keep [or celebrate] rightly that same supper of the Lord Jesus Christ to which
we were invited by the Grace of the Lord, and his commiserating Love, we
endeavored us earnestly for the same, and joined our selves humbly, (as Or
guests.
invited ones, to the Table of the Lord, where at first were uttered forth
great praise and thanks to the Lord. Or said.


33 Now when all this was done, then the Mat. 26. c. Mark 14. c. Luke 22. b. 1
Cor. 11. c.
good food of the same Supper was administered to us: And then to it, the most
precious cup with the costly pure drink of the same Supper.

34 And so we did eat of the most worthy good food, and did drink: out of the
excellent cup of the precious pure drink, of the same Supper of the Lord.

35 And moreover also, when we had fed upon this good food and pure drink of
the same Supper, there was made known unto us (in the understanding) that all
must so be Luke 24. 2. Acts 3 c.
accomplished and fulfilled (in Jesus Christ with the manhood) which was
fore-appointed and written of Christ, and of the salvation of the Or mankind.
manly Generation.

36 But this good food which was administered unto us in the same Supper, was
Mat. 26. a. John 6. c. 1 Cor. 10 11. 5.
the Body of Jesus Christ, and the good drink was the Blood of Jesus Christ.
And that same Body and blood of Jesus Christ, was the good meat and pure drink
of which we did jointly eat and drink and the Cup out of which we drunk the
precious pure drink was the Mat. 20. c. 26. d. Luke 22. c.
Suffering [or Passion] of Jesus Christ.

37 Now when we (in the Supper of the Lord) had fed upon the body and blood of
Jesus and had received [or drawn] it in to our Body and blood. and we having
submitted us wholly to it and to the will, and requiring of the same Body and
blood of Jesus Christ (as unto a good Or safeguard
conserver. And thus being come with our body and blood) one John 6. ^. 1 Cor.
10. b.
body and blood with the body, and blood of Jesus Christ, so rested we with the
same body and blood of the Lord Jesus Christ on the sixth seventh day.

Jesus Christ) forward on our way: and rested us not in all the seven six days
of our journey, to do our labor and diligence, for to live and walk with the
body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ (with which we were one body and blood)
in Luke 1. f. ^ppes. 1. a. 4. b Col. 1. c.
all upright righteousness and holiness of our Lord Jesus Christ: and to
conquer with him and his armor of righteousness all enemies of the godly being
of Jesus Christ, and to Apoc 5. 22. a.
reign and to triumph with him eternally in the everlasting life and kingdom of
his heavenly Father.

39 For at that time, when we had fed on the body and blood of Jesus Christ,
and were (with our body and blood) become o^e body and blood with the body and
blood of Jesus Christ, and with him (as a Wife with a Husband) become one flesh
and Gen 2. b.
bone, of his flesh and bone, and endeavored us with all diligence to go forth
with him, in all upright righteousness and holiness, to his true being
according to the Spirit: then we observed how that all enemies of the Godly
life, and all those who were turned away from the obedience of the requiring of
our service of Love rose up very resistingly.

40 For all those who were turned to themselves, and their opinion and
imagination of the knowledge became our enemies together with the enemies of
the Godly Life, and upright being of Jesus Christ, all did resist [or strive]
(every one with his particular power and malice) against the body and blood of
Jesus Christ, and against us. Namely, the worldly hearts, with their worldly
pride, or lusts 1 John ^. ^.
of the flesh, lust of the eyes, and haughtiness of life: The false hearts of
the Letter-learned with their scribbling knowledge. Or Letter.
The hypocrites with Col. 2. c. 2 Pet. 2. b. Jude ^. b.
their self made holiness, and counterfeit ceremonial God-service: The self
Seekers, with their profit-seeking and Or cove^^^sness.
greediness: The self-conceited together with the Apostates from the obedience
of the doctrine of the service of Love, with their opinion of the humane
Self-conceitedness, and with the false freedom of impenitent unregenerate men:
The lascivious sinners and sinneresses with their ungodly and unchaste life: The
envious and slanderers, with their persecuting, and speaking lies: and all
spiteful and wicked doers, with their malice and falsehood, etc.

41 All these and such like, with their consorts, adherents, or companions,
used all their subtilty totally to destroy, and from the sight of their eyes to
put away, or root out from the earth, the holy Body and pure blood, or life of
Jesus Christ and his good or upright being, and so then to live free by
themselves in the separateness from the obedience of the doctrine of H. N. and
the service of the love of Jesus Christ.

22 For the eyes of the wicked hearts can by no means endure 2 Timothy 4. a.
the Goodness, nor the true doctrine of the love of Jesus Christ, nor also the
obedience to the entrance of his upright being, as Or to esteem it for good.
to cast a good lookon it, or to think well on it, but to make the worst
construction of it, and to despise, and to destroy his Body and blood.

43 Yea, they say one to another, he boasts himself too highly, and gives
himself out, that he is of one being with God, and John 10. f.
is the Son of God, and the heir of Gods spiritual and heavenly treasures, and
that there belongs not to us (though we yet know how to talk of it) to have
any Or po^tion.
share in the inheritance of the Lord: Let us accuse Him, Wisd. 2. c.
that is his body and blood, or his Fellowship of Love) with all manner of
malignity or unjust actions: and let us charge him with most wicked things, let
us destroy or kill him with the most shamefullest sufferings, or let him be
delivered up to the Judge (to his Or destinction.
slaughter, or destruction): So, remain Man. 21. d.
we in the Inheritance, and in the estimation among men that we are pure and
upright; and have right in our cause or demands against him and his Communialty
of Love.

44 Thus we observed (in the union with Jesus Christ that the wicked and
hardened) hearts against us, and the Body and blood of Jesus Christ, likewise
the apostates from the obedience of the Truth did all their endeavor [or
diligence] to have the estimation amongst Mat. 6. 23. a. Luke 16. c. John. 3. 6.
men, as if they against that Body and blood of Jesus Christ, and against us,
were Or just and inno^^^t.
upright, and did well therein, although they earnestly endeavored wholly to
dishonor Jesus Christ and us: and to make us detestable before men: and
likewise that precious pure blood of Jesus Christ (that was (to the forgiveness
of sins) Mat. 29. c. Luke 22. ^.
shead for many, and wherewith we with our blood are become one blood) to
defame as impure before all men, so that the same is Or (...).
despised for unclean among many. And, as unclean, might be poured forth and
trampled upon.

45 Now when we thus observed the rising up of the wicked, and all Hypocrites,
and enemies of the Godly Life, against the Body and blood of Jesus Christ: And
beheld that the Body and blood of Jesus Christ (wherewith we were become one
body and blood) was suffering all that with lowly and meek hearts (without
resisting: so we saw and observed, that the same Body and blood of Jesus Christ
(in all his suffering and reproach ( opened Isaiah 43. b. (...) Pet. 2. c.
not his mouth, even as a Lamb that is led to the slaughterhouse, and as a
sheep that is dumb before his shearer. Where through we also in all our
sufferings (wherewith we were one Body and blood with him) were wholly moved
with his sufferings: So that we also in our whole Body and blood obtained an
inclination to suffer with them, and we found our selves wholly prepared, rather
to suffer and to die with him (forasmuch as we knew him righteous, and then to
live in sin with the falsehood of the false hearts: and with the sin of sinners,
and enemies of the Godly life.

46 And thus traveling forth (in this-Good-willingness) with Jesus Christ,
Mat. 27.
we came on the seventh sixth day, to the Or performing*
accomplishing of the sufferings of Jesus Christ: wherein we observed the whole
sum of the finishing and fulfilling, or satisfaction of Jesus Christ, and his
Believers, unto the true Godliness.

47 For in this fulfilling, or [or accomplishing] we perceived in the
understanding, That all men who will live and reign with the Lord Jesus Christ,
(in his Glory) must also Act. 14. d. Apoc. 7. b.
suffer with Christ: and then likewise with Christ, enter into the Glory of
Christ, and inherit the same.

48 Furthermore, we observed also in this accomplishment, to what end this
Gospel of the Kingdom is Mat. 24. b. Apoc. 14. ^.
published in all the World, and from thence comes the accomplishment and
fulfilling of (...)
all that is written of Christ, and the salvation of man.

49 There was also in the same Or (...).
accomplishment fully revealed, and in clearness made manifest Or (...).
unto us. The whole Scripture, which testifies of Christ and of his Sufferings
or Passover, and of the upright righteousness of men in Jesus Christ And Luke
24 ^. Act. 2. (...) 13. d.
how that Christ (like as we have heard and seen of him (in his sufferings) and
passed through with him) must suffer all these things, and so to enter into his
Glory, and thus John 14. ^. Acts 1. b.
go before all sinful men in to the entrance of the eternal life, and the
Kingdom of Heavens, that they also should follow after him therein, and inherit
with him the eternal life.

50 For Christ Acts 3. c.
must thus Or fulfill, or perform.
suffer, and accomplish his love to us: and so go before us (as an Unguilty one.
Innocent) and that he also by his guiltless sufferings should be an example
[or patern] to all sinful men, and thereby to show unto them, that they (by
reason of their sins) are debtors to the same sufferings, and (as debtors) to 1
Pet 2. c. 4. a.
follow him therein, and to draw unto him all men who are laden with sins: and
also to acquit them (though his Body and blood, Or dischardg
and through his like sufferings) from their sins, to deliver Hos. 13. b. ^
Co^. 15. f. Heb 2. c.
them from the bonds of death and to save them: and restore, or bring them
again with him (in all upright righteousness and holiness) to their God (his
heavenly Father) and to his glory in the kingdom of God, and in the everlasting
life.

accomplishment (with the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Or manhood.
humanity) and rightly enter into, and inherit the same with the Lord Jesus
Christ according to the truth of Jesus Christ, and according to the requiring
of the obedience of his belief* So gave we up our selves there (on the same
seventh sixth day of our traveling) into a good Or watchfulness.
custody, with the Body and blood of Jesus Christ, which stands upon the
Mount Nebo Deuteronomy. 32. c.
on the uppermost height, top, or firmness, from whence we obtein'd the sight
of the holy inheritance, of God, and of his living ones.

52 And on the same Mount The Mount Nebo is the appearing or declaring of the
inheritance of the Righteous in their rising from the death.
Nebo, there was revealed and made known unto us also 2 Match. 2. a.
the secret place where the Prophet Jeremian, had hid the true Tabernacle and
Ark, and the true Altar of the Offerings of Incense: And the time also was come
or accomplished, in which the Lord should be merciful unto his people, and
bring them to his rest.

53 And the same good Or safeguard
watchfunless to which we betook our selves (on the Mount Nebo) was the true
John 11. a. Romans 6. a. Col. 2. b.
implanting with Christ in his like death: and the right implanting with Christ
in his like burial.

54 Of this implanting with Christ in his like death, and of the implanting
with Christ in his like burial we were very firmly embraced.

55 At the same instant in the embracing of the implanting with Christ in his
like death and burial, we offered to the God of Heaven (on his Altar of Incense
in the Holy of the true Tabernacle) our free willing Offering in the Offering
Or confor^^^ here to.
of the High Priest, Jesus Christ: And (...) 9. b. c.
the Offering of the High Priest Jesus Christ, kindled or fired our Offering:
And thus our Offering was a hollowed burnt Offering before the Lord. And the
Lord Jesus Christ made this our Offering, (through his Offering) acceptable
before God his Father: and the holy of his Tabernacle was full of sweet
perfumes, and the (...). 27. s. (...) 5. d.
veil opened asunder, and the most holiest in his pure and perfect beauty was
revealed, and Christ also according to the Spirit, as High Priest in the same
most holy, as a minister of the spiritual and heavenly Goods.

56 Thus had the Lord (our heavenly Father) through the Offering of our High
Priest Jesus Christ, to the accomplishing of the daily God-service (in the holy
of the true Tabernacle) a great delight in the accomplishing of our Offering
and God-service in the holy of the true Tabernacle of Jesus Christ under the
obedience of the Belief.

57 Which freedom to the entrance into the said holy (for to perform to the
living God of heaven such acceptable Offering and pleasing Service of God) we
have obtained and purchased through the blood of Jesus Christ Yea, verily, to
the accomplishing of the same, has Jesus Christ prepared for us the entrance
into the Holy by a new and living way the H^b. 10. c.
veil* that is, through his flesh.

58 And thus when we had finished or fulfilled our Offering and God-service
(under the obedience of the Belief) in the offering and God-service of our Lord
Romans 6. Col. 2. b.
Jesus Christ, we rested us with Christ in his like death and burial, on the
nine and fortieth day of our journey.

59 And thus on the nine and fortieth day resting us in our Lord Jesus Christ,
from our work and labor we have perfected or Or finished.
fulfilled our journey, and our offering and God-service, with Jesus Christ in
the holy, under the obedience of the Belief: And thus through Christ according
to the Spirit we have gotten and obtained the ministration of the spiritual
and heavenly Goods, and the everlasting life.

CHAP. XXXII.
1 BUt on the fiftieth day of our journey, on the day of Phase or Pasche] came
into us a still, soft, silent voice, wind or Spirit: And we were enlightened in
Christ, with the Mat. 17 a. Mark 9. a. Luke 9. d.
clearness [or brightness] of Christ: And thus in our illuminating Illuminated.
on the same fiftieth day, there appeared to us in a cloud the living Godhead
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and became altogether of one being with us, and
gathered us to the Mercy-Seat of his divine Majesty, and also to the holy Mount
Sion, Isaiah 2, a. Micah 4 a. Mount Sion is the Pe^^ection.
where the Law or Ordinance of the Lord is promised to go forth at the last
time: And to the true Jerusalem, where the Word of the Lord at the last time is
likewise promised to go forth.

2 And the Lord gave his mighty great sound out of Sion, and caused his voice
to be heard out of Jerusalem. And so Isa 2. a 59. a. Jer. 25. d. Amos 1. a.
Amos 1. a. Mich. 4. a. Romans 11. 1. d.
flowed the Law or Ordinance of the Lord out of Sion. And his Word forth of
Jerusalem. And the Scripture of the Godly Testimonies, were accomplished in us,
and with us in Jesus Christ: And the former kingdom full of all pure beauty,
and heavenly riches, and full of all virtues and upright righteousness, (which
God from the beginning 4 Esd. 6. f. Mat. 25. d.
has prepared for the man) was showed unto us in his perfect adorning, and we
were inherited therein eternally: and it was all Acts 3. c.
restored again to us, in us and with us, what God had spoken, wrought, and
appointed, and promised through the mouths of his holy Prophets from the
beginning of the World.

3 And that same is the new day, and the manifestation of the kingdom of
Heavens and his righteousness, wherein all Believers of Jesus Christ, (who
follow after Jesus Christ Mat. 29. d. John 3. a Romans 6. a.
to the second birth) do inherit: And the same new day with the fullness of his
beauties, riches, and virtues, is the day of which the Kingly Prophet David
has of old Evangelized: like as there stands written, this is the Psalm. 118.
d.
day the Lord has made, let us rejoice and be glad therein.

4 And thus in these wonderful works H N, and said: This holy Land; which thou
here at this present beholdest, and wherein thou art now everlastingly
inherited, is the holy inheritance of my living-ones: Psalm. 15. 24. a 132. b.
Heb. 3. b. 4. a.
and is my rest, and the holy place of my dwelling; it is also the true Rest,
which I have promised my people Israel, and all the holy-ones of my Christ, and
have given it for an eternal inheritance.

5 It is my true Building 2 Cor. 5. a. Ephesians. 2. c.
that I my self have prepared, (for all those who love me) and whereinto I
gather all my Lovers to me, and to my people: and it is my holy and godly
understanding, wherein I live eternally, and in which I illuminate and endue
all the Believers of my Christ, (in their second birth) with such an abounding
godly understanding, That they far excel all humane and Letter-learned
knowledges, and in the life of my godly clearness, far surmount the same.

6 It is my durable kingdom Daniel 2. c. Luke 1. c. Heb. 12. d.
wherein I will for ever plant, and firmly settle, all mine Elect (to an
eternal rest, and perfectly joy) now in the last times.

7 And I have from everlasting ordained them thereunto, to manifest therein for
ever and ever, my heavenly wonders, and also to declare the same from thence
upon the earth, for a witness. That I the Lord (who am an eternal and living
God) live from everlasting to everlasting: Mat. 22. d. Luke 20. g.
And that I now at the last time, Jer. 9, c.
bring upon the earth the judgment and the righteousness, and the Majesty of my
divine Glory.

8 Therefore shall thou H. N together with the four and twenty Elders, and the
four Seraphims dwell with me, and all my holy ones, in this my holy place
eternally.

1 Cor. 13. b. 2. Cor. 3. b.
uncovered face, shall thou also make known upon the earth: And (with the
testimonies of my righteousness, and with the publication of the joyful message
of my Kingdom) enlighten the whole World: and so declare, that now my true
kingdom of heavens, (with the fullness of it is pure beauty and heavenly riches)
is appeared, manifested, and comne upon the earth, according to the promises:
to the salvation and blessing of all men, who with their whole hearts seek the
same, and the righteousness thereof.

10 I also will yet show unto thee, in this holy place of my living-ones, more
of my heavenly workings: and give thee also to understand, many mysteries,
which hitherto has not bin known to the Mat. 13. b. Romans 16. c. Ephesians. 3. a.
Col. 1. c.
world. Also what my last Will or Testament is, of the ministration of my most
holy Priestly Office under the obedience of my Love.

11 For from henceforth in this day, will I look upon the estranging of men,
from my Truth, with the eyes of compassion, to give unto them out of my
Priestly Office of Love, Mat. 3. a. Luke 3. 13. a. Acts 2. 3. c.
the true repentance for their sins, and show forth the true entrance of the
Goodlife.

12 And because that all men in their estranging, or before they out of the
doctrine of my grarlous word, and out of the holy Spirit of my love are
renewed, or born again, bear Deuteronomy. 10. b. ler. 4. a.
a veil or covering before their hearts (betwixt them and my face) so will I
also now in this last time, be gracious unto all those (who believe my gracious
Word in its doctrine, and obediently enter into its requiring) and they shall
all (through the good exercising in my administration
Ordinances) be nourished up unto my upright righteousness, and unto my Love,
and be brought in, unto the peace of my Christ.

17 And like as I have in former times through my servant Moses Exodus 20. Deuteronomy.
5. a.
upon the Mount Horeb, given to my people good Ordinances and Statutes.
Exercises, which extend and bring in to my Christ, and to his belief of the
salvation from their sins, so will I now at the last time, through thee H. N.
from the mount Isaiah 2. a. Mich. 4. a.
Sion, give to the welaffected ones to my righteousness, good Ordinances, and
godly Exercises, which Or ^each.
extend and bring into me, and to my Love, and upright righteousness, to the
peace of my Christ, to the renewing of their lives and minds, and into this my
kingdom of Heaven: unto the inheriting of all these my spiritual and heavenly
treasures, and my upright lovely being, in the same kingdom, and everlasting
life: as also that I may reign (now at this last time,) everlastingly with my
people (in the righteousness) 2 Pet 3. b. Apoc. 5. 21. a.
over the whole World, unto all unity and peace on earth, and to a blessing of
all the Generations of the earth, according to my promises.

4 Seeing then I now declare on earth though my Love, and through the service
and the good exercise thereof, the upright righteousness of my Laws, the true
faith of my Christ, and the upright being of my holy Spirit: Therefore it is my
will and command, that all people on earth, shall obey the requiring of my Love
and her services, likewise the good Ordinances and Exercises thereof, and live
therein.

15 For all those who live and walk obediently in the service and ordinance of
my Love, the same are truly the right Disciples John 8. b. James 1. c. x 4 Esd.
6. f. Heb. 12. c.
of my gracious word and service of Love, also my firstborn in my Covenant or
Testament of the holy Fathers.

16 For thus in their obedience, the doctrines Love, shall be unto them, a
foregoing testament, which brings them to my new Jer. 8. 10. b. Heb. 8. 10. b.
and true Testament [that is to the new life of the mind of God which is full
of Love, and full of all spiritual and heavenly riches] and all they who are
led therein shall be to me, my second born in the new Covenant of the holy
Spirit of my Love in the heavenly being: as I have in former times (in the
accomplishing of my foregoing Testaments and Priestly Offices) brought to my
people the same new Covenant, to the end that all now in this last or newest
day, Acts 31 c.
be restored or established (under the obedience of my Love) which I from the
beginning of the World have spoken, wrought, and required: and my word, work,
and will continues on the earth unchangeably for ever and ever Mat. 6. b.
even as it is in the Heaven: and also that for ever and ever, (through the
Ministers and Priests of my Famlly of Love). The Disciples of my gracious Word
(with the Testimonies of my holy Spirit of Love) may be Romans 10. a. Gal. 3. 4.
a.
preserved and sustained to the Godly life Mat. 13. f.
taught to the kingdom of Heavens, and brought up (to Elders) in all Godly
wisdom and holy understanding.

17 And therefore will I here through thee H. N. set Institute or erect.
up my most holy Priestly Office of Love: and will also declare the same over
the World (through its Ministry under the obedience of my Love) to an
everlasting Jer. 35. b. c.
Priestly Office of the holy Spirit of my Christ: for renewing of life in my
love in them all through my love to them, who are implanted into my Christ with
his Romans 6. a. Col. 2. b.
like death and burial, or are fal^ asleep in him,

18 In the same Priestly Office, will I also (under the obedience of my Love)
be merciful to all penitent sinners, also to those who submit themselves to the
Family of my Love, That they may all now rejoice themselves (in this day of my
divine glory: appear with my Christ in Glory: and show forth my praise, and
wonderful great works.

19 Furthermore I will declare, and make known unto thee, and to all them who
Or submit.
humble themselves under my Love, and Priestly Office, that the same Priestly
Office of my Love, (which I will here presently set up with thee) is the
eternal fast-standing Kingly Priesthood 1 Pet. 2. a. Apoc. 1. a.
of my holy Spirit, and the everlasting peaceable Isaiah 9. ^er. 31. c. Daniel
2* c. Apoc. 12. b.
kingdom of my Christ, which shall never be destroyed [or moved] neither shall
it fall to any other: but shall of it self and by it self remain in my truth
everlastinly.

20 Whoever resists the same Priesthood of my holy Spirit of Love in his
office and requiring, the same, (if he do not repent) shall procure the
judgment of Dout. 27. ^.
the curse, and the eternal 2 These. ^. a
separation from the beholding of my face: But my Grace and mercy Psalm. 30 c.
Isaiah 54. a.
shall be always and for ever upon all men, who (through the same Priestood
and its office, under the obedience of my Love) turn themselves to me, and
repent them of their sins.

H. N. and to us the Elders and said, Seeing I my self, with all that which
concerns my Or Godhead
Godhead, and the judgament of my Righteousness have fully united with thee H.
N. and with the Elders: Thereshall ye also, and all they who are born of you
and your doctrine shall judge uprightly, out of my righteous judgment, according
to the Truth.

22 And all what ye out of the same my judgment curse, separate, and condemn
Mat. 18. b. John 20. c.
shall be accursed, separated, and into the Hell condemned: And all what ye
bless or give a benediction unto, shall be also blessed in the Heavens.

23 Therefore all whatever shall continue in your doctrine, shall be John 17.
b. Acts 4. d.
one heart and mind with you in my Godhead: but what separateth it self from
you and your doctrine shall likewise be separated from me and my Grace: find no
way to the eternal life, but shall die in hisn sin: and also be estranged from
me everlastingly.

24 But all those who through you and your doctrine and turned to me, and also
are Mat. 13. f.
taught to the kingdom of my heavenly being shall inherit the spiritual and
heavenly riches of my kingdom, and Mat. 25. Romans 6. c.
thereunto the eternal life.

25 At the same time when we thus heard Apoc. 21. a.
beauties and riches of God, all our hearts were fully delighted and made glad:
And so with joyful hearts we lauded and praised the most High in his holy Land
of the Living: and the four Seraphins gave Apoc. 4. 45.
all Honor, Laud, and Praise, unto him who lives therein from Everlasting
unto Everlasting.

26 After this our Thanksgiving and Praising the Lord, the Word of the Lord
came to H. N. and said:

27 Have thou H. N, well observed in thy journey into this my holy inheritable
land of the living, That the most part of the people, despise thy ministration
of my holy and gracious Word, and blaspheme my holy Spirit of Love: And also
that they despising [or contemning] the offerings of my Grace bring upon
themselves my Romans 2. a. 2. ^hess. 1. a.
wrath and displeasure and the judgment of their eternal condemnation.

28 Besides have thou also well observed that the many Godly Testimonies of thy
Writings (which thou with great diligence and care out of my holy Word and
Spirit of Love, have written and brought to light (are come among many
Whoremongers, forsworn, or unfaithful ones, and among many enemies reprochers
of my House of Love, and how falsely they do judge the same: and how disorderly
and shamefully that they Or mention.
handle and deal with the same: For with the same they commit their Whoredoms:
profane my holy Name: and break the marriage, of fidelity of the Covenant of my
conjunction.
Wedlock: and so after the nature of Harlots, and of impudent adulterous ones).
They manifest against me and my holy Word, and Spirit of Love all
unfaithfulness: So that they wholly contemn my upright Righteousness and Love,
and make a mock at it, and so continually procure upon themselves, the horrible
vengeance of the hellish fire.

CHAP. XXXIII.
H. N. Forasmuch as thy writings of my holy and godly Testimonies (which thou
hitherto with great care and diligence have written and published) are now come
into so many hands of the Enemies of my house [or Family] of Love, and into so
many hands of Whoremongers unfaithful-ones: And also that some impure hearts
which for a time have Or deaft.
meddled therewith, have mingled therewith, their impure sense and goodthinking
knowledge, also many (to the covering of their selfishness, and to their own
destruction) have therewith defended and covered the unclean minds of their
wicked justs and desires: and have not believed the Mat. 22. d. Ephel. 1. a. b.
upright Righteousness of my Love (according to the requiring of the Godly
Testimonies of thy Writings: So shall thou now the Godly Testimonies of thy
Writings (which thou broughtest of each one with thee) with the twenty four
ancient Supra 30. c.
Elders carefully peruse: and have a sharp regard upon all sayings with careful
consideration.

2 I the Lord will enlighten thy heart, Or most Ancients.
and the heart of the four and twenty Elders (who are with thee, and who are to
perform the laborious Service with thee) with my Godly Wisdom, and with the
true light of my Godly cleerness, more and more with my abounding Apoc 21. d.
22. ^.
Illumination.

3 And after the same perfect Illumination of my Godly cleerness, ye shall then
also renew, all the same Testimonies of thy Writings, to a more plain Or
explanation.
declaration: and witness all the same in a more perfect O^ plainness
cleerness, and write them more plainly then they have been: and likewise that
the Whoremongers remain Mat. 13. b. Luke 8. b. Apoc. 21. 22. c.
without the mystery thereof: and also without the marriage of my unity or
conjunction.

Love, and who (with their prudence out of the flesh) conceive themselves
Isaiah 5 c.
to be wise, shall in their whorishness, unfaithfulness and envious nature
(before all the believes and obeyers of my gracious word and service of Love)
be made manifest, and made known: In their whoredom and enmity and in all
the^^ goodthinking shall be wholly blinded, 1 Cor. 4. a.
scattered, laid waste, or hardened in their hearts: and also (if they repent
not) shall be excluded from my unity and heavenly Mat. 25. b. Apoc. 21. d. 2^.
c.
tiches.

5 And on the other side all believers and faithful obedient disciples of my
gracious word, and all penitent sinners, together with all those who preserve
in [or defend] the Service of my Love, and wish all good and prosperity, shall
be illuminated in the Godly life of my Love, and be made heirs Mat. 25. Ephesians.
1. a.
in my spiritual and heavenly riches.

6 And further, on the same fifteenth day Gal 2. 4. He. 7. 8, 9. b.
Testaments which tend into the upright being of Jesus Christ.

7 And for to observe out of it what God (through the ministration of his
gracious word and Testament) requires, and to what end that God himself (...).
has created and chosen the man, and to what an upright and lovely or
single-minded Godliness, that he (in his (...)
fall and estranging from God) has Mat. 23. 25. d. Acts 2. 3. c. etc.
called and invited him again through Jesus Christ: and whereunto be now in
these last days is loved through the Holy Spirit of the Love of Jesus Christ,
and through H. N. Gods Elect Minister.

Love, and that they may endeavor themselves rightly thereafter.

9 For all what God does to the man, (to reduce him to his upright
Righteousness, and to save him) comes all out of the Grace of the merciful
Love of God, for to bring the fallen and straying man again into the Mat. 3.
c. 7. b. 19. b. n. d.
right way of Life, to the Love of his God, and to the Love of his neighbor:
And then to deliver him also from all his sins: And to set him aright, and
make him faithful in all unity and Peace with God and his neighbor: and to
inherit him in all his spiritual and heavenly goods, and also Mat. 25. c.
thereunto his Kingdom of Heaven and eternal life.)

of our Lord and God) had begun, persued and transcribed all the godly
testimonies of our Writings, so neglected we no time, to endeavor with great
diligence, the same Godly Testimonies of our Writings which we had brought with
us, to read and to transcribe, and according to the requiring of the Lord, out
of his true light to declare it in the plainest manner, and desisted not to
proceed in the same work of the Lord till all was accomplished, etc.

Take it to heart. Charitas extorsit per TOBIAS.


