Saint PAVLS SHIP-VVRACK in his Voyage to ROME, With the entertainment he
found amongst the barbarous people of Melita.

Delivered in a Sermon at Meechny, alias Newhaven in Sussex, on the 8th of
February, 1634. and occasioned by a Shipwreck which happened in the same place
the Sunday-night before, being the first of February, to the loss of many Men's
lives.

By John Tillinghast, Rector of Tarring Nevill, in SUSSEX.

LONDON, Printed by R. B. for Andrew Kembe, and are to be sold at his shop at
S. Margarets Hill in South-warke. 1637.

To The Right Worshipful and Virtuous LADY, the Lady Margery Gratewicke, of
Sea-ford in Sussex.
GOOD Madam, these ensuing lines (such as they are) when they were first framed
(which is now above twelve months since) were at that time no farther
intended, than that place and congregation where they were then preached: but
in regard it has pleased Almighty God, since that time, to give diverse
occasions for the further pressing of this duty of hospitality to strangers;
and especially the other day, On Sunday morning the 21. of February, 1635.
when no less than sixteen or seventeen sail of Ships were at one time cast
away upon our Coast, to the great loss of many men's goods and lives; and that
our people for the most part (especially of the meaner sort) for ought I yet
perceive, continue still in their wonted course of barbarism toward the
distressed, Sic assueverunt, ut recte fieri patent. Erasm. Colloq. Pereg.
Religion. ergo.
being so accustomed herein, that (as he in Erasmus witnesses of the Marine
parts of this kingdom) They think they do well, in what they do;
notwithstanding the many admonitions to the contrary. Hereupon I have boldly
adventured to make that public to the view of many, which was first uttered,
in the hearing but of few; as hoping that this ^o necessary a duty, may again
and again be read, and thoroughly pondered, till at length it be practiced:
for our memories are dull, and commonly what goes in at the one ear, Vox
audita perit, littera scripta manet.
comes out at the other, but this may profit for ever. Truly, I cannot but
blush, when many times coming into other parts, I hear the reports that are
given of the uncivil carriage and evil behavior of our neighbors, (living
by the Seacoast) when such miserable objects of calamity, happen amongst them:
and that not only from men of our own nation, but from Forreiners, who
sometimes unhappily, having suffered shipwreck upon our shore, in mine own
hearing have said, That they had rather fall into the hands of Turks and
Infidels, and should find more courteous usage from them in these cases, than
from the English. Iam inde non belli gloria, qua^ humanitatis cultu inter
florentissimas orbis Christiani gentes inprimis floruit. Camden. Brit. de Norma.
Surely a great blot and blemish to so famous an Island as this has been
accounted, which (as a learned Countryman of ours says) Ever since the
Normans first coming into it, both for military matters, and all other of
humanity and civility, has bin parallelled with the most flourishing Kingdoms
of Europe and our Christian world: Visam Britannos hospitibus feros.
true it is, in ancient times the inhabitants of this Country, Horat. Carm.
lib. 3. Od. 4.
were accused of incivility and cruelty toward strangers, hospites mactabant
pro hostia (says Acron,) they killed them for sacrifice, and no marvel, for
then were they more heathnish, barbarous, and uncivil, (if that be true, which
Caesar and others report of them) than are the savage and wild people in the
Eastern and Western Indies at this day; void of the light of grace, not
acquainted with the laws of common courtesy: but being conquered by the
Romans, they learned more civility, and barbarism in this nature was esteemed
as a most heinous offense. Much more then ought it so to be accounted of in our
days, when both Nature, Reason, and Religion, jointly with one consent
condemn it. How displeasing it is in the sight of God, and clean repugnant to
that quiet and peaceable government (by his gracious providence) now settled
amongst us, I have here in this Sermon in some weak measure endeavored to
demonstrate. The which I present unto your Ladyship, not only to make manifest
mine unfeigned thankfulness, for your love and kindness expressed toward me
and mine, ever since my first coming into these parts; but also in that I am
certain, your Lady-ship can bear witness with me, that I speak the truth
concerning many particulars reprehended in this following discourse. Now if
these my weak meditations may be any whit availeable, for the redressing of
this so hateful a vice; I shall think my pains well bestowed; howsoever I
leave the success thereof unto God, and rest

Your Lady-ships much bounden, John Tillinghast.

Perlegi hane concionem cui Titulus (St. PAUL'S Shipwreck) in qua non reperio
quicquam impedimenti quo minus publica cum utilitate imprimi queat, ita tamen
ut si non intra 3. menses proxime sequentes, typis mandetur haec licentia fit
omnino irrita.

Gulielm. Haywood R. P. Archiep. Cant. Cap. Domest.

Saint PAVL's SHIPWRECK, in his Voyage to ROME, etc.
Acts 28.2. And the Barbarous people showed us no little kindness: for they
kindled a fire, and received us every one, because of the present rain, and
because of the cold.


IF you please but to read the precedent Chapter, you may easily conceive these
words of our Text to depend upon that story; Saint Paul being taken prisoner,
and delivered unto one Julius Centurion, who was of the Bond o Augustus, was
with him and other prisoners shipped toward Rome, in a Vessel of Adra
myttius, which was a City of Aeolia, purposing to sail by the Coasts of Asia,
the next day they arived Si don; from whence departing, they sailed hard by
Cyprus, because the winds were contrary. At length they came to Mira which was
a City of Lysia; where their Captain finding a Ship of Alexandria bound for
Italy, they hyring passage, went along with him. In which voyage they were sore
troubled; their sailing being very dangerous, the Sea tempestuous, partly by
reason of the time of the year, which was thought to be in the month of
September: but especially because of a stormy wind which arose over against
the Island of Candie, which tossed them exceedingly, insomuch that they were
feign to throw out part of their lading, and cut off their Mast by the board.
At length supposing they were near some shore, they sounded and found twenty
Fathomes, afterward fifteen, whereupon they cast Anchor; and in the morning,
so soon as day appeared, they espied a certain Haven, into which they minded
to thrust the Ship, and then weighing up their Anchors, committed themselves to
the Sea, and having loosed the Rudder bands, and hoysed up the main sail to the
wind, they drew toward the shore; missing of the Haven, they fell into a place
where two seas met, and there thrusting in the Ship, the forepart stuck fast
and moved not, but the hinder part brake through the violence of the waves:
whereupon the Passengers and Sailors, being in number two hundred seventy and
six; some swimmed, others got upon boards and broken pieces of the Ship, and so
came to Land.

The place where they run aground, was Melita, an Island situate in the
Mediteranean Sea, distant from Sicilia sixty miles, and from Africa an hundred
and ninety. There were two Islands called by this name, this, and another which
lies in the Adriatic Sea near to Dalmatia. Some ascribe S. Paul's shipwreck
to this latter: Ortel. in Thesan^.
but their opinion Beza in his annotations on this place learnedly confuteth,
and proves it to be that Melita within the Straits, which at this day is
called Malta; and is one of the places most renowned in the World, for
repelling of the Turks; when Solomon the Emperor of them did send against it
a most mighty Army, it was then defended by them, who are called the Knights of
Malta, being in the year 1565. concerning whose valor and success in
resisting that mighty adversary, Curio bellum Melitense. Viperanus.
Knoles. page 796.
diverse have written at large, in their books of that Argument.

But now what entertainment our Apostle and the rest of his company found,
being h^re put ashore, my Text, with some of the subsequent verses in this
Chapter, does plainly show.

The words which at this time I have made choice to speak of, do mention a
kindness which they received, at their first coming out of the Sea; being al
wet and bewraied with the ^ome of the Sea, Calvin. in (...).
and stiff with cold (as Calvin describes them) and with much ado, crawling
to the shore, they received (as S. Luke, who was one of them, confesses) no
little kindn^sse, which the barbarous people showed unto them; For they kindled
a fire, etc.

This courtesy we have here described,

1 By the persons who showed it, Parts 3.
The Barbarous people.

2 By the thing wherein it was shown, with the Apostles acknowledgement of it,
They kindled a fire, etc. which he confesses to be no little kindness.

3 By the cause or reason moving them thereunto, which was, The present rain
and the cold.

1 The persons, were the inhabitants of the Island, which are here called,
Barbarous people. Of Barbarians we may read in other places, viz. In the
Romans, the Corinthians and the Colossians: in which places the word is taken;
either,

1 For one, who is rude and unlearned, as Romans 1.14. or,

2 For one, who so speaks as he is not understood; as 1 Cor. 14.11. or,

3 For one of another Nation different from the Jews, and the Greeks, as Col.
3.11.

S. Paul in that place before named, of the Romans, by Greeks understanding
men that were more civil, which were governed with good and civil laws; by
the Barbarians a wilder sort, which were more savage and fierce, more rude, and
that in a twofold respect.

1 In pronouncing the Greek tongue, Quia asper^ magis and horridiore lingua
videbantur uti, Aretius.
being ignorant thereof, they were esteemed by the Greeks as Barbarous; for the
Greeks were won^ to call, Omnes Barbaros non Graece loquentes, all Barbarians
that could not speak their tongue. The Romans also, after the Empire was
translated unto them, Hinc. barbarismus p^o vitio La^ini aut Graeci se^monis.
were so wont to esteem of all those who were ignorant of the Greek and the
Latin Tongue. Whence the Poet in his exile complains, that because he could
not understand them, he was no other than a Barbarian amongst them; Barbarus
hic ego sum; Ovid in Pont.
quia non intelligor ulli.

2 In regard of their rude behavior in comparison of the Greeks: for the
Grecians were the civillest, nearest, finest, and gentilest people that were
under the Sun; where all Arts were refined, whither all men of note traveled
for good breeding in all good literature, and for understanding of all good
discipline for peace and for war. From whence, the Romans first of all other
Nations, by reason of their commerce with them, and the apt situation of their
Country, learned their civility and knowledge of Arts and good Laws; unto
whom we of this Land, by reason of their conquest thereof, are beholding for
the greatest part of that good breeding which is amongst us.

But to come to these people here mentioned in my Text; they were as Aretius
and others think, Aretius in loc.
a mixed people consisting of Africans and Italians, as it often happens in
such places whose confines are near adjoining the one to the other.

From them, in this place, receiving the Apostle and the rest of the company
into their houses, making them fires because of the cold and rain in Winter,
courteously lodging them; and when they departed (being such as had suffered
shipwreck, and were thereby in want) helping them with necessaries; we may
observe,

It is not a thing only commendable in these Heathens, Doct: 1.
but also to be imitated by us Christians, Vide Aretiu^ and Piscat. in l^^.
to be harboursome to strangers, and courteously to succor them in their
wants.

A duty which indeed is much commended in the Scriptures unto all Christians,
as a sweet fruit of liberality; God Almighty from his own example does
admonish men to the performance hereof, when he says of himself, Deuteronomy. 10.18.
That he executes the judgment of the fatherless and widow, and loves the
stranger, in giving him food and raiment; he inferres thereupon this duty
belonging unto us: Verse. 19.
Love ye therefore the stranger. He appoints it to the Jews, as a part of that
fast which he had chosen, to deal their bread to the hungry, Esaias 58.^
and to bring the poor that are cast out, to their houses; and when they see
the ^aked, to cover them, and not to hide themselves from their own flesh, etc.
Often by his Apostles does he press this duty unto the people. Saint Paul
numbers it in the Catalogue of those days which are required of us, and set
down in the 12. of the Romans, Romans 12.13
Be given to hospitality: and writing to the Hebrews, Heb. 13.2
he would have them not forgetful to entertain strangers. Saint Peter would
have his auditors and all others to use hospitality one to another without
grudging: 1 Pet. 4.9.
by which places (besides the example of these heathen Melitenses, here
mentioned, who had learned by nature this point of courtesy) we may see the
truth of this doctrine, viz. That it is our part and duty to be harboursome
unto strangers, and freely to succor them in their distresses.

Reas. 1. Reas. 1.
Because it is a Law not only written in the book of God, but even imprinted in
the very nature of man, though we know not the purposes of their hearts, and
what their intents may be; yet we are to use them courteously for identity of
their nature; that is, because they are Men, children of Adam, as our selves
are. It was nature, and not Religion that moved the King of Egypt to give
commandment for Abraham, Genesis 12.20
that none should hurt him, or any of his possessions, and here in this place,
common nature (says Calvin) did wring out of these Barbarous Gentiles, Calvin
in ^oc.
some affection of mercy, in this so great necessity.

Reas. 2. Reas. 2.
Christian charity requires this at our hands; 1 Cor. 13.4, 5.
does not the Apostle in that great commendation of Charity, say of her, that
she is kind, and that she seeks not her own? And does not the same Apostle
exhort the Philippians, Phil. 2.4.
not only to regard their own estate, but the estate also of others? Surely
yes: and wri^ing to the Galathians, Gal. 6.10
he would have us, as opportunity and occasion shall be offered, to do good
unto all, but especially to them who are of the household of faith.

Reas. 3. Reas. 3.
The common condition of all men binds us hereunto: All things (says Solomon)
come alike unt all: Eccl. 9.2
and there is no man (says a Heathen man) that can say this or that I shall
never endure: Men and. apud Plut* de tranq.
Quae sua sor^ hodie est, cras fore vestra potest; that which is their estate
to day, may be thine to morrow. This reason the Lord Himself uses; when he
commanded the Israelites, Exodus ^2.21.
that they should not vex the strangers, but handle them courteously, Lev.
10.19.
for that they themselves also were strangers in Egypt. Who is there now so
certain of his home and habitation here, that he can be assured that he shall
never be a stranger else where. It is as easy to go out, as to come in to our
own Land: thou may as soon be driven to other places, out of thine own
country to be a stranger there, as others have bin from theirs into thine, to
be a stranger here. Observe then the Apostles rule, Remember them which suffer
adversity, as being your selves also in the body; So Theoph. Cajetan. Erasm.
Beza.
that is, in the body of flesh and frailty, subject to the like misery.

Use 1. Use 1.
The consideration of this does reprove the uncharitable disposition of many,
who far unlike, and indeed much worse than these barbarous people, do show but
little kindness to distressed strangers, which even hear the cry of the poor
and harbourlesse at their gates; yea, at their doors, and yet will not be
moved to relieve and succor them. Oh tell me, whosoever thou art; thou that
pitiest not the wants of them that are in misery, and mindest not their
griefs, tell me I say, if the Lord should ever strip thee of what thou have,
(as he can do it in a moment, for he that gave all, can take all) who,
think thou, should succor thee, what eye would pity thee, or what hand
would spare thee? when as neither thine heart yearneth, nor thine eye waters,
at the miserable desolation and heavy calamity of others. Does not this
beast-like behavior, and uncharitable carriage, argue a want even of natural
affection; and what shall we think of such men? are they not given up to a
reprobate mind? (...)
Romans 1.28 30.
I am sure Saint Paul makes this defect in them a note hereof; (...)
and S. Bernard calls them the children of wrath, that have no sense of Gods
wrath; Born. Epist. 256.
nec tristantur in trist^bus, that are not affected with those that are
afflicted. Howsoever it is an evident badge or cognizance of an unmercifull
man; and wh^t is more odious? Ab humanitate homines dicimur.
Yea, what more against nature, than to be inhumane: when (as Aretius, Aretius.
fitly, upon our Text has it) humanity takes its denomination from man. Oh
that men would lay these things to heart, and from hence be moved to a more
courteous usage of distressed and harbourlesse people; Judge. ^.4, 5
then should not Gideons army faint for want of br^ad, Chap. 19.18.
nor a poor Levite pass from Bethlehem Judah toward the side of Mount
Ephraim, and have none to receive him to house: But churlish Nabal would have
compassion on David and his men being in want, 1 Samuel 25.5, 6, etc.
and send them some part of that cheer, which he had provided for his feast,
to succor them therewithal.

Use 2. Use 2.
Let every one from hence learn (as God has made him in ability, and does
daily offer him opportunity) to be careful in the performance of this duty,
comfort the distressed in their wants, yield supply unto them; if harbourlesse,
house them; if naked, cloth them; if hungry, feed them, etc.

Quest. Quest.
But must we do thus unto all? Are there not some who are thus in want, which
deserve no such courtesy? their pretenses it may be are evil, and shall we
for all this succor them?

Answ. Answ.
I answer: First, Christian wisdom and ^^ristian love, must go hand in hand:
here is a case in which charity must overruled the matter; and charity is not
suspicious, but hops the best of every one, where there is no evident proof
or presumption to the contrary; if thou receivest a distressed man, in the name
of a righteous man, and give him but a cup of cold water with a good heart,
in that thou think he belongs to Christ; let him be what he will be, at
his own peril, thou shall loose neither gift nor reward, for Christ has
undertaken to repay thee.

2 Thou may for humanity or courtesy, receive a Turk or a Pagan, a Jew, an
Infidel, or Heretic, to talk or table, for a night or a small time, so thou
keep thy self from his pollutions; we must be courteous and give regard unto
wicked men, respect them, not as they are wicked men, but as they are men, love
their persons, and loath their vices. Genesis 31.54
So did Jacob feast his Idolatrous Father-in-law, and Kinsmen, when they
pursued him to the Mount of Gilead with purpose to hurt him: and Chirst bids us
feed our enemies, and give them drink if they thirst. So Elisha to the host of
the Syrians, ^ King 6.23.
who being sent for to take him, yet when he had taken them and led them to the
City, he would not suffer the King to do them any hurt, but refresht them with
meat and drink, and sent them away in safety. Our outward courteous receiving
of Infidels, is like unto coals of fire, to draw them in love with our inward
religion. Pacomius a soldier under Licinius the Emperor, Surius in vita 14.
Maij
seeing the entertainment that Christian soldiers gave one to another; how
they pitied, helped, and succored one another, being in want, or sick, or
wound^d, was moved to approve of their Religion, which taught them so much
goodness^, and was upon that occasion converted. Who knows what good thy
courteous carriage and kind usage may do? Howsoever, if it work not their
conversion, yet it may further thine own salvation, it being a fruit of faith,
which shall further thy reckoning.

Use 3. Use 3.
Lastly therefore, for our further encouragement to the performance of this
duty, and our better direction in the manner of doing it, let us consider
certain motives to induce us thereunto; and some particulars concerning the
matter wherein, and the manner how it ought to be performed.

The motives may be taken either,

Motive.
1 From the examples of others, who have thus done, who have been courteous and
hospitable unto distressed strangers, and especially of the faithf^ll. The
Scriptures are full of presidents to this purpose: in Genesis Genesis 18.3, 4, 5.
we may read of Abraham and Lot: Chap. 19.2 Chap. 24.3
of Laban to Abraham's servant, who bad him come in, and prepared house-roome
for him and his Camels: In Exodus of Revel, the Father-in-law of Moses, Exo.
2.20.
who before he was acquainted with him, gave succor unto him, called him in,
gave him bread, etc. when he was fled from the fac^ of Pharaoh, who sought to
slay him: Josh. 2.1
In Joshua of Rahab: In Judges, Judge. 19.16.
of the old man of Gibea, who entertained the poor Levite: In the Kings, of the
Widow of Zarephath, 1 Kin. 17 10.15.
who entertained the Pr^phet Eliah, and gave him bread and drink: In Job, of
himself, who would not suffer a stranger to lodge in the Job 31.32
streets; but opened his door to the traveller. In the New Testament we may
read of many: but these may be sufficient to stir up any man to the
performance of this duty, if they have any desire to do as faithful and holy
men have done: but if this will not do it; to shame us, we may produce the
examples even of Heathens, of Barbarians; who (as our Apostle in our Text
witnesses) have showed no little kindness to men in heaviness: they by the
light of nature saw, (...).
how that God had a care over strangers, therefore they worshipped, Vide Homer
in lib. 2. Odyss.
Jupiter hospitalis. Oh wha^ an ignominy and reproach is this unto Christians;
whose name and title should put them in mind of pity and compassion, to be
even out stripped by heathens! and that barbarous savage people, should be more
courteous than those, who in outward show would seem to be most pious! surely
these at the last day, will rise up in judgment against many in this Kingdom,
in this Country, in this Place: oh with what face will thou plead for mercy,
when thy conscience shall accuse thee for being unmercifull I will thou say
unto the Judge, neminem occidi, I have killed no man; surely he will reply,
but thou have deprived many of their goods, thou have denied them succor,
whereby they might p^eserve life, etc. Oh what ^ woeful prosp^ct will i^ be
unto thee, to see those who have perished through thy default, to stand and
accus^ thee before Gods Tribunal* and to have not only Gods faithful people,
but even Infidels and Ba^barians, to witness against thee in this particular!

Mat. 25.34, 3^, 36
of the world for them, saying, I was an hungry, and ye gave me meat;
thirsty, and you gave me drink; a stranger, and ye took me in; naked, and ye
clothed me; sick, and ye visited me, etc. has not the H. Ghost recorded the
memorable examples of the faithful in this kind to eternity, for their
everlasting fame and renown? When the Scripture speaks of Abraham, Lot, Job,
and the rest before named, how they were hospitable, is it not spoken to their
glory? and what could be spok^n to the greater comme^da^ions of a man, than S.
Paul of Gaius, when he says; Gaius mine Host, Romans 16.23.
and the Host of the whole Church; he was no Inne-keeper, but his house was as
open as an Inn to receive distressed Christians; whose love and affection
toward them, made S. John to rejoice: if this be the man (as Ambrose thinks)
to whom he wrote his third Epistle, surely it was a title of great worth, which
the Apostl^ there gives him; and assuredly persuade thy self, that as he that
shall give unto those that have no need shames his Father (as Soloman speaks,
Pro. 28.7.
) so on the contrary, he that shall distr^bu^e to those that have need, he is a
glory to his family.

read of many that have gained by it; the examples of all those aforementioned
Saints are a sufficient witness hereof: Heb. 13.2.
did not Abraham and Lot, hereby entertain Angels at unawares? Had not the one
with them the promise of a Son, and destruction of Sodom revealed unto him?
and was not the other delivered from the same? Did not Raguel get a good match
for his Daughter? and was not Laban blessed for entertaining of Jacob? How
profitable was that nights lodging that Rahab gave unto the Spies; was not she
and hers by this means saved in the sacking of Ierico? Surely, surely, this is
a fruitful and a gainful course of Christianity; Tanta est apud Deum
hospitalitatis gra^ia ut ne potus q^i ^e aquae f^igidae a p^^em^is
remunerationi^ immunis sir. ^mbros. de ossic.
and so acceptable unto God, that he will not suffer it to go unrewarded; the
Holy Ghost is very ample and large in describing the benefit that is gotten, by
the due manner of performing of this duty; to omit many other places; that in
Esaias aforementioned declares as much; when the Lord by his Prophet had showed the
people, how they should deal their bread to the hungry, etc. in recompense
thereof he adds; then shall thy light break forth as the morning, ^say 58.8,
9, 10, 11, 12.
and thine health shall spring forth speedily, and thy righteousness shall go
before thee, the glory of the Lord shall be thy rererereward; then shall thou
call and the Lord shall answer, etc. In a word, so gainful are the works of
Charity in this nature, that both GOD, our selves, and others reap profit
hereby. God, in regard it is a means to procure praises unto him, from them
whom we relieve: will not they say, God I thank thee which have raised up such
an one to administer succor unto me in my distress: thus men by their riches
and increase may be said to honor the Lord. Prove. 3.9.


Our selves, in regard of the manifold mercies and favors, which for thus
doing are powered upon us; mercies which are great in number, excellent in
quali^y, 2 Cor 9.9 Esa. 58.1^
and everlasting for durancy. Others, for that by this means, such as are able
and at liberty, may by our example, be stirred up to the p^rformance of so
gainful a duty, and those that ^re distressed, shall be much comforted and
relieved. Oh then, say not, that it is in vain to succor the harbourlesse,
and relieve those that are in misery: but remember the promise, The liberal
soul shall be made fat, Pro. 11.25
and he that waters, shall be watered also himself. Think upon that
proverbial speech of Solomon, Cast thy bread upon the waters, Eccl. 11.1.
and after many days thou shall find it again. When men bestow their gifts
for they know not what, they are wont to say, I had been as good, I had
thrown my money down the River: but in this case, though we seem to throw our
money or our food into the River or Sea it self, we shall have it restored
with advantage, and even then when we think all is forgotten.

But this is a Paradox to miserable niggards, who are mere strangers to
commiseration and pity; they ^hink al too much that goes this way, and esteem
it no better than lost, Mark ^^.4
as Judas did of the Box of Ointment: Hence it is they are so loath to
contribute to the nece^sity of any, and one penny to the poor distressed comes
as hard from them, as if a distress of a fine or an amercement were to be
extorted of them: these indeed are such to whom the Lord has given riches,
Eccl. 6.2.
but they know not how to use them. But did we indeed seriously consider the
great benefit that comes by our works of mercy, we would be more forward in
time of distress to show pity.

If what has been spoken will not be enough for our encouragement to this
duty, then, in the last place,

Fac aliis fieri, quod cupis ipse tibi: It was given by our Savior, Whatsoever
you would that men should do to you, Mat. 7.12.
do ye even so to them, which (as S. Augustine says) must be understood of an
upright and just will. For when we desire to have any thing done unto us which
is upright and just, Aug. de Sermon. Domini in monte.
it is meet that we perform the same thing unto another man: but if we our
selves should desire any thing that is filthy or unjust, then it is not meet
that we should do the same thing unto our neighbor: for suppose there were an
unchaste and wicked man, which through filthy counsel would b^e content his
wife should play the harlot; shall he therefore without sin defile another man's
wife? And if a man being in desperation, in adversity, would desire that one
should kill him, shall it for that cause be lawful for him to kill his neighbor,
surely no: therefore in an upright and a just way, let us do unto others, as we
would they should do unto us.

And would not thou be pitied in distress? Suppose that thou were the object
of misery, and that God should impose upon thee, what thou see inflicted upon
others; would thou not desire relief? would not thy heart yearne after
compassion? would thou not complain as the Church in the Lamentations; Lam. 1
12
Is it nothing to you, al ye that pass by, etc. Were thou (to instance in this
particular of my Text) the man that should suffer shipwreck, and to have
both life and goods in danger of losing; would thou not cry out; oh Friends,
oh Countrymen, help and save me, or else I perish? and should thou in this
sad disasture, lose both life and goods, and have thy body and all exposed to
the open air upon the stony beach, would thou not willingly have that poor
carkase of thine, to be covered with earth, and hid from the publik view of all
passengers: or would thou otherwise justify the proceedings of those, that
should wreak and tear thy goods from thee before thine eyes, and make sale of
thine own commodities, not respecting thy private interest in them? Would
thou think it well done, or conscionably done, of such as should extort upon
thee, in the purchase of some convenient necessaries, either to feed or cloth
thy body, or safely to shelter the remainder of thy goods: Oh tell me, does not
that great witness within thy breast avouch unto thee, that in every of these
particulars thou would desire mercy; and that if thou were the man, that
should thus suffer, Scito omnem conditionem versauile^ esse, and quicquid in
ullum incurri^ posse in te quoque incurrere. Senec.
thou would also be he that should crave relief: well then, thou know
not how soon thou may be the man: be persuaded then, from the consideration
of this, to cloth thy self with the robes of pity, toward them that are in
misery; assuring thy self that this is the way to make others to hear thee,
when thou make moan to them; if thou will hear others when they make moan to
thee, to comfort thee in thy sorrows, if thou will comfort them in theirs.

And thus much for the encouragement to the performance of this duty.

2 The next thing is for Eleemosyna fiat vel mente, vel verbo, vel opere.
we are to know that both our thoughts, words, and deeds, are to be exercised
in this duty of pity and compassion, toward distressed people.

Vide Concionosorii in Dominic. 16 post Pentecosten.
1 Our thoughts, we must meditate upon their misery, that thereby we may whet up
our affections, to compassion and commiseration toward them; to this purpose
we should think with our ^elves, that if their case were ours, what a woeful
estate would we deem our selves to be in; questio^lesse this was Jobs wont,
Job 30.2^
Did not I weep for him that was in trouble? was not my soul grieved for the
poor? The Prophet Esaias describing a bountiful man, says that he Will devise
of liberal things; that is, Esaias 32.8
he will meditate and think with himself, when and where and how to bestow
his gifts, for the best advantage and comfort of the distressed. Hence it is,
that the Psalmist pronounces a blessing unto him, that considers the poor,
the Lord will deliver him in the time of trouble. Psalm. 41.1.


2 Our wo^ds; and that by speaking comfortably unto them; and by speaking unto
God for them.

1 Merciful Joseph by consolatory speeches, Genesis 50.
raised up the hearts of his poor brethren, when they were cast down with
fear; whereas on the contrary, churlish Nabal, 1 Samuel 25.10
by his froward and untoward language, in disgracing David and setting light by
his person, saying, Who is David? and esteeming no better of him and of all
those that were with him, than runnagates from their master; this, I say, could
not choose but disconsolate the hearts of his Young men who were then in
distress. Job tells his friends, Job 16.5.
that if they were in the same case that himself was in; that is, in so great
extremity as he was, That he would then strengthen them with his mouth, and the
moving of his lips should assuage their gri^fe. ^hen indeed have men most need
of cheering up, when they are by misery most pressed down.

Ovid de Pont.
Temporis officium est solatia discere certi,
Dum dolor in cursu est --
2 We must ^peake unto God for them, and that by our prayers, by commending and
rem^mbring their afflicted estate; a means which the poor^st man that lives
may use, and be hereby a sp^ciall assistant unto his affl^cted brother: what
though thou have not wh^rwith to lodge him, no bread to feed him, never a penny
to relieve him; yet so long as thou have a mouth to speak, or a heart to
conceive, thou may either by outward expressions, or inward ejaculations, be
a comfort unto him, for prayer has a large extent; and poverty does not
deprive a man of this privilege, neither take away the presence of Gods
spirit, or the virtue of his promises; and who can tell, but that thou by thy
prayers may obtain that for thy poor distressed brother, which he himself
with his own cannot do? see an example hereof in Job; Job 4^.8, 9.
God was pleased to accept his prayer which he made in the behalf of his
friends, rather than their own, which they made for themselves. The^e are means
which God has appointed and blessed, for the great good of such as are in
misery; these support in trouble, these sanctify afflictions, and remove them,
these have evermore been accounted 1 Samuel 7.8, 9.
as special helps in the time of distress, when they have been faithfully
used, Act. 12.5
either by the afflicted themselves, or by others for them: see Josh. the 7.6.
to 10.

3 Our deeds: and that as the need of the afflicted shall require, and our
ability give us leave: for we must not love (as the Apostle says) in word and
tongue only, 1 John 3.18.
but in deed and truth: for what avails it (says S. James) If a brother or a
sister be naked and destitute of daily food, James 2.15, 16
and one of you say unto them, Depart in peace, be you warmed and filled;
notwithstanding ye give them not those things which are needful to the body:
No, we must do more than this; there must be real expressions of this duty, as
we shall hereafter show in the second part of our Text, when we come to speak
of the thing wherein this courtesy of the barbarous people was shown. In the
mean time let this suffice for our direction concerning the matter wherein
this duty must be performed; a word or two for the manner how, and so we will
proceed to the next point.

In our works of pity and compassion toward the distressed, such as are
harbourlesse, etc. We must know that they are to be done, speedily,
willingly, and wisely,

1 Speedily; the common Proverb is, Optimum condimentum beneficii celeritas,
and bis dat qui cito dat; the best sauce to a good turn is to do it quickly,
and who gives so, gives twice; thou must not say, go and come again to
morrow; delays in this kind may be dangerous: for eith^r the object of thy
compassion may perish, while thou with-holdest thy helping hand; or else (as
Mordecai sometime told Hester) GOD may by other means send help and
deliverance, Esther 4.15.
and so thou shall lose the honor of being a means, and an instrument under
God of his delivery, Judge 4 ^
as Deborah said to Barak; it shall not be for thine honor.

2 Willingly, not grudgingly, nor of necessity, for God loves a cheerful
giver: 2 Cor. 9.7
hence S. Paul says, Romans 12.31.
Given to hospitality, where is a great emphasis in that phras, noting an eager
affection and following of a thing; as we say of a covetous man, given to
money; of a drunkard, given to company; of a common gamester, given to play,
etc. the meaning is, he has a longing desire, and is ready upon all occasions
to do it. This willingness appeared in Abraham, who waited not until
strangers came home to him, to desire to be received in, and to require
harbor; but going of his own accord out of his Tabernacle, he looked round
about to see if he could epsy any stranger whom he might receive into his
house, and if he saw any, he ran to him, and prayed him not to pass his house;
Genesis 18.2, 3.
If I have found favor in your eyes, etc. So Let sat in the Gate of the City,
not as a Judge, because he sat in the Gate, which was the place or judgment;
nor to meet his Sheepherds, that he might be present at the folding and
stalling of the Sheep; but (as Calvin thinks) because he would let pass by
no occasion to do good, when he saw strangers to pass by, upon whom he might
bestow his benevolence.

3 Wisely; Psalm. 112.5.
A good man is merciful and lends, and will measure his affairs by
judgment, and knows when and where to bestow his favors: the truth is, most
men through want of discretion mistake this duty, and glory much in their
hospitality, while they keep Great Houses, have great resort, and company flock
unto them, but in the mean time, there is little or no entertainment for the
poor religious distressed strangers that are in want and necessity; these are
shut out of doors, which indeed, especially should be let in. Questionless
the rich Glutton kept such hospitality; Gallants, and Good-fellowes, and
Gentlemen of the Country had entertainment enough at h^s Table, but poor
Lazarus must be gone, there is neither meat nor lodging for him nor such as he
was. This I say is a great mistake in the performance of this duty, which
indeed has (as will appear when we come to speak of the latter part of our
Text) for its proper object, such as are in misery. But let this suffice to
have spoken of the first part, viz. The persons who showed this courtesy or
entertainment to the Apostle and his company, namely, The barbarous people.

2. Now more particularly, Part 2.
we are to speak of the thing wherein it was shown, with the Apostles
acknowledgement of it, They showed us no little kindness; for they kindled a
fire, and received us every one.

Wherein we may observe: 1 Them truly hospitable. 2 S. Paul, truly thankful.


1 Their hospitality was right: for they observed that Rule of Charity
according to S. John's direction, 1 John 3.18.
Non tantum verbo, sed opere; not to love in word and tongue only, but in deed
and truth. Had they only commiserated their estate, with terms of alas poor
people, we are sorry for your sad disasture, God help you, and send you
house-roome, etc. the^ might the truth of their commiseration have been called
in question, and themselves found to be guilty of a cold charity, and lip love,
which is common every where, Iam. 2.16
and no whit availeable to such as are miserable. But they went further than
so, and performed that part and office of kindness unto them, which did carry
an express signification of their ^ender commiseration and compassion toward
them; For they kindled a fire, and received them every one.

From whence we may observe that, They are truly hospitable, Doct. 2
who not only in word and tongue, but in deed and truth are charitable.

A doctrine much like unto that which went before it, for the matter, though
now commended unto you in another form.

S. Paul in his exhortations to this duty of hospitality, (...).
for the most part uses such a word, as signifies, one friendly to strangers,
Rom 12 Heb. 13.2
and ready to lodge and entertain them. For hospitality indeed (as it is
defined by some) is a relieving of strangers which are destitute, and taking
them and entertaining them into our houses. It is a species of beneficence or
liberality, Qua peregrinos and hospites, vera benevolentia, and omnibus
officiis hospitalibus complectimur; whereby we entertain strangers and ghests
with true benevolence and all duties belonging to hospitality. Lu^her in 1 Pet.
4.9.
He is truly harborous (says Luther) not which wishes well, and speaks
fairly, but which cheerfully and heartily receives and entertaineth
strangers.

In all those aforenamed examples of Abraham, Lot, etc. that which made them
truly hospitable, was not their good words and courteous speeches, their well
wishes, Genesis 18.4, 6, 7, 8.
and fair proffers; but their real expressions of charity in some outward
actions; as in Abraham, his calling for water, washing their feet, his making
of cakes for them, his dressing of a Calfe, his setting before them Butter and
Milk, etc. In Lot, Cap. 19.3
his making them a Feast, in baking unleavened bread for them, etc. In the
Shunamite, her calling in the Prophet, constraining him to eat bread, and
consulting with her husband to make a chamber for him, to set a Bed in it, a
Table, a Stool, 2 Kin. 4 8.10.
and a Candlestick, to entertain him when he came that way; these were lively
demonstrations of true hospitality. So the Inhabitants of the Land of Tema,
Esaias 21.14.
They brought water to him that was thirsty, and prevented with their bread,
him that fled. H^re was more than good words, more than courteous language,
more than kind proffers only; here indeed was that which made them truly
hospitable, their deeds of charity expressed in a real performance of such
offices, as did serve for the comfort and refreshing of those which were in
want and misery.

Now least any one should think that every man which is bountiful, is truly
hospitable; we are for the further amplification of this point to consider,
Gal. 6.10
that this duty stands not in the entertainment of all sorts; (...). Illis enim
uno humanitatis, istis praeterea fraternitatis vinculo communica^e obligamur.
Tareus in loc.
I mean of drunkards and vicious persons, in keeping open house for gaming and
such like sports and disorders, or in feasting of carnal men, which indeed
bears the name of hospitality among many in these days; but it is to be
shown unto such as are in want and distress, to those that are not otherwise
able to help themselves, and especially to such as suffer in a good way, and
for a good cause, according to the Apostles Rule, Do good unto all, but
especially to them that are of the household of faith, as being bound to them,
not only by a bond of humanity; but of fraternity; by which means we are tied
so much the faster, as grace is superior to nature; and are therefore the
rather bound, to perform the real acts of charity toward them; though we are
not to neglect it to any in some measure, which are in want and misery. Now the
reasons why they are truly hospitable, who not only in word and tongue, but in
deed and truth are charitable, may be these.

Reas. 1. Reas. 1
Because to speak kindly, and to proffer fairly, it is but the least part of
this duty; true it is, comfortable wo^ds uttered to a man in misery, are spoken
in their place, and therefore are compared by Solomon, Pro. 25.11.
To Aples of Gold with pictures of silver. Yet are they in themselves simply
considered, but adjuncts and attendants on this duty of hospitality, without
which it may subsist in its bare nature; and therefore they being presupposed
always to go with it, and attend on it, may indeed be said to be necessary, ad
been esse, to the well doing of this work; but not necessary simply, ad esse,
as if it could not be done without them.

Reas. 2. Reas. 2
Because, if real performances be wanting, the party in distress is little
benefited; though pleasant words are as an Honeycombe, sweet to the soul,
Pro^. ^6.24.
and health to the bones; yet must we not think that men are of the Camelion
kind, to live with Ephraim upon wind; to be fed with fair words and courteous
speeches: Hos. 12.1
no, he that shall thus do, sine supplemento necessitatis, Aquin. in Jacob. c.
2.15.
(as the Schooleman speaks) without supplying of their wants, shall profit
them but little.

Reas. 3. Reas. 3
Because in true hospitality, there must be shown, as well the outward as the
inward acts of mercy; now the inward acts of mercy, are only the pitying and
commiserating the estate of the afflicted, bewailing and and lamenting their
heavy mis-hap, etc. But the outward acts go further than so; there be seven of
them appertaining to the body; comprehended in this Verse, Visito, poto, cibo,
redimo, tego, colligo, condo. To visit them which be sick, to give drink to
them which be thirsty, to feed the^ which be hungry, to redeem them that be in
captivity, to cloth the naked, to lodge the harbourlesse, and to bury the
dead; they which shall thus do, may indeed be said to be truly hospitable,
because not only in word and ^ongue, but in deed and truth they are charitable,
as these Miletenses here were, who kindled a fire, and gave house-room to Paul
and his company, which at that time were in want and misery.

Use 1. The consideration of this, reproves the great neglect of this duty, in
most people. Many there are whose mouths are open, but their hands are shut,
which speak much and do little, and yet would feign be counted truly
hospitable; they will wish well to them that are in misery, but effect little
for them; be as free of their kind speeches, Ab Stem. in fabulis.
as that Popish Prelate was of his blessings: who being asked a penny by a
poor man, he would not give it, but offered to bless him; which the poor
man refused, because he thought that if it had been worth a penny, he would
not have given it unto him. Much unlike that noble and charitable act of
Ptolomeus the Thebane Captain, who beholding one in misery that demanded of
him an alms, and he having at that present nothing to b^stow upon him, pulled
off his shoes and gave them him, saying, That he had rather go barefoot than
see him suffer so much. But alas, its wonderful to se^, how the hearts of men
are hardened in this kind; and how that which in old time was highly esteemed
among all Nations, is now little regarded by any: we may truly take up the
Prophets complaint, Esaias 57. Hos. 4.1.
Merciful men are taken away, there is little or no mercy in the Land: or if a
drop of it be got into the hearts of some, its like to Judah's goodness,
which was compared to the morning dew, Cap. 6.4.
quickly dried up: a poor distressed harbourlesse m^n, may now adays wait for
some Samaritane, Luc. 10.33, 34.
to come and prove himself a neighbor, to have compassion on him, and to take
care for him, when his own Countrymen (more barbarous than the Heathens) will
shut the doors against him, and suffer him for to pe^^sh. O^ my beloved, what
is this but to grieve the^ that are in misery? And can God away with such
unmercifulness? such want of pi^ty? Surely no; Oecolamp. in Esa. 47.6.
Magna abominatio coram Deo est, afflicto addere afflictionem; it is a great
abomination before God, to add affliction to the afflicted; and accounted by
the Heathen, Vrgere jacentem est inhumanum. Cic. pro. C. Rab. post.
as a most inhumane part. I beseech God, this sin and great abomination, be not
laid unto the charge of some of you which hear me this day: I doubt me you
have been wanting in your deeds of charity toward those poor distressed
people which suffered shipwreck, even at your home, in the very mouth of your
Haven: I am sure, I cannot say of some (the more is the pity) as S. Paul says
here of those barbarous people, that They kindled a fire, and received them
into their houses. I would to God I could not speak the contrary; or that I
might have been silent in what has been spoken. But my zeal to Gods glory,
and the desire for the salvations of you al, commands me not to flater: should
I not put you in mind of your sins, I should not be a good Minister of Jesus
Christ, 1 Timothy 4.6.
whose Ambassador I now am: and were I before the greatest Emperor in the
world, my resolution should be, as that of Ambrose to Theodosius, Ambros. Ep.
lib. 5.
Neque imperiale est dicendi libertatem negare, neque Sacerdot ale quod sentia^
non discere. Neither becomes it you to forbid free speech, neither beseems
it me, to keep in silence what I should speak.

Use 2. Use 3.
In the second place, therefore suffer the words of exhorta^ion, and be stirred
up to a real performance of this duty, Let your love and hospitality be
without faining, (...). Romans 12.9.
without hypocrisy, that is (as Saint John explicates it) not in word and
tongue, but in deed, 1 John 3.18.
and truth. When you see the distressed, do not only pity them, and mourn
with them, etc. but go to them, sit with them, speak for them, now to God, now
to man, assist them, direct them, comfort them; and (as thy ability will amount
to) relieve them, cloth the naked, feed the hungry, receive the harbourlesse,
etc. As considering;

1 Thou art hereunto commanded: Esa. 6.4. Qui fuerunt propulsi ab hostibus.
Pisc. in
God calls upon Moab to let his outcasts, (that is, his harbourlesse people,
such as were chased by the enemy) to dwell with him; and he would have them be
as a covert to them from the face of the spoiler.

2 They that want it, are made after the same image that thou art framed,
endued with the same shape, live under the same government and providence of
the Creator, and (as thou ought in charity to think) within the compass of
Gods election.

3 Thy profession of Religion, is hereby known to be sincere, for that indeed
is pure Religion and undefiled before God, James 1.27.
when men are truly merciful to such as are miserable, To visit the
fatherless and widows in their affliction, etc.

4 Lastly, it will argue not only a beginning of a spiritual life in thee, but
give thee an assurance of an eternal life laid up for them, which Christ
himself has promised to reward all those with, that commiserate, Mat. 10.42.
and out of commiseration, are careful to supply and relieve the wants and
necessities of any, but especially his distressed ones, as reckoning whatsoever
in this kind is done to them, to be done unto himself, Mat. 18.5.

Oh, let not any objections against the real performance of* this duty
prevail with thee: what may be alleged against the profitable effect and
fruit hereof, Eccles. 1^* 1, 2, 3, 4.5.6.
Solomon in his Ecclesiastes by diverse similitudes has most wisely answered.
Tell me not that thou want objects, whereon to exercise this chiefest work
of charity (as one calls it. Calvin. in Genesis cap. 18.
) The Year is not yet gone about, nor the twelve months fully expired,
wherein you beheld almost (if not altogether) as sad a spectacle upon your
Coasts, as that which happened the other day; and was not there occasion enough
offered for the performance of this duty: but suppose none of these things
should so come to pass; step but into thy neighbors house, and there thou
shall find poverty in the Chimney-corner, want in the Cup-board, never a penny
in the purse, scarce any clothes upon the back, and will thou yet say, thou
want objects? No, but I want means: Means, why tell me; where have thou
withal to fea^t the rich? to drink with thy friend? to spend upon thy
pleasure? to maintain brawls and contentious suits? to go bravely? and with the
rich Glutton to fare sumptuously? to build curiously? Luke 16.19.
(in some desolate place (as Job speaks) for thy self, Job 3.14
that the poor and stranger should not trouble thee,) where have thou I say for
these things? may nothing be spared from hence? have thou wherewith to do all
this, and not a penny for the distressed? a halfe-penny for Christ? do thou
yet want means? No, not for the present: but what shall my Wife and Children
do hereafter? Oh faithless man, dare thou not trust God? is the Lord so
barren of wisdom, or destitute of power, as that he cannot enrich the one, but
that he must empoverish the other? surely no; providence for thy everlasting
estate, does nothing impair thy present estate; and thy liberality does
augment and not diminish thy childrens prosperity: for thou shall assuredly
reap, not only according to the matter, Hos. 10.12.
but also according to the measure of thy mercy. Oh thou can not put thy
stock into a surer hand for safety without any peril of losing, nor meet with
a more commodious bank for gain, as to have the principal doubled and tripled,
and increased, more than ten thousand fold. Content not thy self then with the
inward acts of mercy only, but make a real expression of this duty of
hospitality, by some outward deeds of charity, as these Islanders here did to
S. Paul and his company, who kindled a fire for them, and received them every
one.

Thus much of them truly hospitable.

2 Now S. Paul's thankfulness appears in these words, Hospitalitas Melitensium,
exigit gratitudinem advenarum. Aret. in loc.
They showed us no little kindness: alas, the matter was not so great, to set
open the door, and to suffer poor, naked, cold, and harbourlesse men to come
in, and to throw a few sticks on the fire, to make some warmth for them: yet
this being shown to good S. Paul in his misery, is both commended and
acknowledged by him as a great courtesy. From whence we may learn, Good men
will be thankful for common and mean kindnesses showed to them in their
distresses. Doct. 3


The many acknowledgements which in Scripture are recorded to be made by Gods
people, of the benefits and favors which have been conferred upon them, by
others in their distresses, are as so many demonstrations hereof. Deborah
forgets not what Iael did for her, in slaying of her enemy Sisera; and
therefore to congratulate her kindness, she thus sings in her Song; Judge.
5.24, 25.
Blessed above women shall Iael the wife of Heber the Kenite be: Ruth, the
daughter-in law of Naomi another virtuous woman, being a stranger in the Land
of Moab, and in want, having received but a reasonable courtesy from Boaz,
see, how thankful she was for it; it was but to have leave to gleane, and to
drink water out of the vessel; yet she does not despise nor extenuate this
benefit, by saying, What is this that thou do bid me to gather ears? does
not the law of God grant this to the poor? Lavaterus in lib. Rutha. cap. 2.
What is this that thou do offer me drink when I am a thirst? water is
commonly to be used; wherefore do not thou give me some notable gift, since
I am poor, and thou rich, etc. She does not thus expostulate with him, but in
a most humble manner wondering at his kindness, falls on her face, and bows
herself to the ground, and says unto him, How have I found favor in thine
eyes, Ruth 2.10.
that thou should know me, seeing I am a stranger.

Memorable to this purpose are the examples of David and Elisha; the one, not
once or twice only, bu^ often mentions the good turns by him received, and
studieth to requite them. The story relates what favors he found at the hands
of his trusty Jonathan in the time of his persecution; and it is not silent in
expressing his thankfulness for them; not only in Ionathans life time, but
after his death; he makes Proclamation, 2 Samuel 9.1.3.7.
Is there yet any that is left of the House of Saul, that I may show him
kindness for Ionathans sake: 1 Chronicles. 19.1, 2. Sic Hiero^ scribit in libros
Regum. Pet Mart. in 2. Sam. ca. 10.
the like he proffered to Hanun the son of Naehash, for his fathers sake; for
some kindness that he had showed unto him (as its thought) for receiving of
him when he fled from Saul. And because that near relations should affect our
hearts for benefits bestowed on them to whom we are united, either by kindred
and alliance, by nation or profession* he was not unmindfull to requite the
kindness of the men of Iabish-Gilead, which they showed unto the dead body of
his predecessor and Father-in-law Saul; 2 Samuel 2.5, 6.
yea, so careful was he to have this duty of thankfulness performed, that it
is part of his charge that he gave unto his son Solomon a little before his
death, 1 King. 2 7.
wishing him to show kindness unto the sons of Barzillai, and to let the^ be
of those that eat at his Table: for so They came to me (says he) when I fled
because of Absolon thy brother.

The other, viz. Elisha, studied with himself how to requite the woman of
Shunem, 2 King. 4 13.
Behold thou ha^t been careful for us with all this care; What is to be done
for thee? Would thou be spoken for to the King, or to the Captain of the
Host, etc?

Even so this blessed Apostle S. Paul, not only in our Text, but in diverse
other places commending the duties of courtesy, which were shown unto him,
expresses his thankfulness; as to the the Romans, To. 16.4.
the Galathians, Gal. 4.15
the Philippians, Phil. 4.15, 16. 2 Timothy 1.16.
and so to the house of Onesiphorus, he prays for mercy, because he often
refreshed him, and was not ashamed of his chain, etc.

Thus have GODS people evermore acknowledge^ such kindnesses as have been
showed to them in their distresses.

Reas. 1. Because they are endued with truth and justice, which are the two
principal parts of gratitude: Veritaes agnoscit and sa^e^ut u^de sit acceptu^
beneficium. Iustitia obligat nos ad aequitatem seu ad mutua quaedam officia.
Fabritius in Ps. 40. con. 5.
the one acknowledging from whence, and what it is that is received; and the
other, rendering one good turn for another. Hereupon Zenophon among the praises
which he gave unto Agesilaus, reports it a part of injustice, not only not
to acknowledge a good turn, but also, if more be not rendered than has bin
received. And Socrates was of opinion, That an ungrateful person could not be
of a noble mind, nor yet just.

Reas. 2. Because they are humble and lowly conceited of themselves; and do
rather admire, than any way neglect or contemn the least courtesy that is
done unto them; they see in themselves that which may rather withdraw men's
affections from them; and therefore are ready to say with Mephibosheth, when
David proffered him so much kindness for his father Ionathans sake, as to
restore him to all the lands of Saul his father, and to let him eat bread at his
Table continually; 2 Samuel 9* 8.
What is thy servant, that thou should look upon such a dead Dog as I am?
But especially in expressing their gratitude toward God, they are ready to say
as David does, What is man, Psa. 8.4.
that thou art mindful of him, and the son of man, that thou visitest him? Or
else more particularly of their own persons, with the same Prophet, they are
ready to cry out, Who am I O Lord? 2 Samuel 7.18.
and what is my house, that thou have brought me hitherto? Thus, I say, being
ready always to acknowledge their own unworthiness, Indignitatis agnitio
Ingratitudinis amoliti^.
they secretly insinuate their thankfulness, and put away from them that
hateful vice of ingratitude.

Reas. 3. Reas. 3
Because they look up unto God, from whom these kindnesses showed unto them in
their distresses, originally do come; and so beholding him in the giver, they
are thereby much stirred up to this duty of thanksgiving; not only unto God,
who is the principal author and giver of every good giving, James 1.17.
and every perfect gift, that they enjoy; but also unto the creatures, who are
as Gods hand in bestowing his mercies on them; or (as one calls them) his
Carriers, D. Gouge in Ephesians. cap. 5.20.
whereby his favors are brought unto the^, unto whom in the Lord, and under
him they are not unmindfull to return thanks, for their pains and care in
bringing Gods blessings to them.

Use 1. Use 1.
The consideration of this point stands in opposition to a vice, which is too
too common in our times; and justly reprehends it, for its being in such an
age, wherein we are laden with many kindnesses both from God and man. Ps. 68.19
Many there are, who forget such favors as were shown unto them, in their
misery, and obscurely bury them in the pit of oblivion: Genesis 40.23.
like Pharaohs Butler, who in his prosperity forgot his friend Joseph, and what
pleasure he had done him in the time of his adversity. Or those Lepers which
our Savior healed, Luke 17 18.
scarce one among ten does return to give thanks: the favors which they
receive, in this particular may be likened to wounds, the remembrance whereof
continues (as we are wont to say) but for the space of nine days, no sooner
ripe than rotten. If that be true which the Cynick has said Nothing waxes
sooner old than a good turn or benefit: Diogenes.
and yet there are a worser sort than these, who as David complains, Psalm.
38.20.
reward evil for good; a fearful case: for doubtless, if to return evil
for evil, be a sin in some nature damnable; then to return evil for good
received, is far more inexcusable. The Scripture is full of examples for this
purpose: thus Laban rewarded Jacob: Genesis 31.38.
and Saul David, as appears by the words of Jonathan, 1 Samuel 19.4. compared
with Psalm. 35.12. And thus the men of Keilah; notwithstanding they were
preserved from their enemies by David's means, yet they made but a wicked
retribution hereof, in being forward to deliver him up into the hands of his
enemy Saul: poor David; he was better conceited of them, and could not be
persuaded that they would be so sinful, as to make such an ungrateful return
unto him for his kindness: and therefore twice in the first of Samuel 23. he
demands of the Lord, 1 Samuel 23 11, 12.
O Lord God of Israel, I beseech thee tell thy servant, will the men of Keilah
deliver me and my men, into the hands of Saul? They will deliver thee up, says
the Lord; and so questionless they had, if David had stayed there. It was no
less abominable ingratitude in Ioash King of Judah, who unjustly caused to be
put to death, the son of Iehoida the High Priest, which Iehoida, had saved his
life, and advanced him to the Kingdom, and therefore to his disgrace it is
left upon Record until this day, and shall so remain, as long as the Sun and
Moon endures, That Ioash the King remembered no^ the kindness which Iehoida
had done unto him, 2 Chr. 24.22.
but slew his son. Oh, I would to God, that this age wherein we live, could
not afford us examples for this so hateful a vice: but alas, how do most men
slight, not only Man, but God, who gives unto them life, health, food,
raiment, liberty, peace, plenty, seasonable times, and such like; and in a most
careless dis-respecting manner, pass by all the good turns they receive from
either: how many hundreds have been cherished releeved, and yet have not
returned thanks: where shall a man find a grateful Samaritan? or such an one
as Elisha was, Luke 17.16.
who will study with himself, to requite a good turn? surely the number is
but small, unless it be some good Deborah, some virtuous Ruth, some godly
David, some religious Paul, to whom thou show kindness, its very likely to
be either passed over in silence, or else returned with ungrateful impudence.

Use 2. Use 2.
From hence, let all men learn, who from others have received kindnesses, from
the example here of S. Paul, and other of Gods people mentioned in the
Scripture, to return thankfulness, and you especially among the rest, The
Masters of both ships and some of the company which were then saved, being
present.
whose lives were preserved in this so great a streit, and had your bodies
haled by the strength of men, from the violence of the waves, that you might
not be drowned; take notice of the means; enquire after the men, and
acknowledge it with S. Paul in my text, to be no little kindness; Let your
thankfulness appear, by some reasonable recompense of their labor and
pains; oh, how would this animate and stir them up, to do the like to
others, and in the same times of misery, do the best they can, in the works of
mercy; I doubt not, but that it would prevail with some, if not with all. But
on the contrary, when they shall be slighted, and receive naught for their
labor, but trouble and sorrow; this stoppes the streams of their charity, and
makes it, that in these cases, it flows not so freely as otherwise it would,
for indeed a great part of our men are like the spring Solinus speaks of,
Solin. Poly hist. cap 1.1.
that rises and runs over, while men sing and play to it, but falls and
sinketh again as fast, so soon as they cease. Surely, kind retributions
would move them, and courteous requitalls make you the more worthy of their
pains; whereas indeed the contrary, (not only here with us, but also in other
places) makes many men, as well short handed as close fisted, yea and hard
hearted in these times of distress. Therefore so many Inns and Victualling
houses, (says Calvin) which declare our corruption; Calvin in Genesis cap. 18.2.
and prove, that it comes to pass through our fault, that the principal
duty of humanity among us, is decayed.

Oh then study to be thankful; and thou that gettest any good done to thee by
any man, at the least, meet him with gratitude. It is mervaile (says one) how
a man can lie down without this consideration, Rolloc. in Colos. 3.15
especially (say I) if he remember how that it is a duty by God commended, Si
ingratu^ dixeris, omnia dixeris.
and the neglect thereof by him punished, the contrary being a vice so hateful,
that (as the heathen man says) when thou have called a man by it, thou have
spoken the worst thou can of him. The laws of Athens, See Amb. Marcellin. l.
23. and Seneca de Ben. l. 2. c. 7. and Gualth. in Marc. c. 2. Hom. 18.
Persia, and Macedonia, by the light of nature, strictly condemned it, and made
such persons as were guilty of it, subject to accusation and sharp punishment;
In old time, liberties and franchises, were for it revoked, and a man (says
one) were better never to receive a benefit, than to be unthankful for it.
What should I say more? I beseech you, do your selves that right, as to
consider of it; Be thankful unto God, as the principal agent; to man, as the
Instrument of your safety; oh let not the remembrance of this so great a
deliverance pass from your thoughts; you who are now living to hear this duty
pressed unto you, might have been of the number of those whose bodies your own
eyes beheld, lying dead and naked upon the shore, some pitifully bruised
through the violence of the waves, others miserably torn with beating against
the rocks; well, think upon it; you are some of those which the Psalmist
mentions, that are much indebted unto God for deliverance, you go down to the
Sea in ships, you do business in great waters, Psa. 10 23, 24, 25. etc
you see the works of the Lord and his wonders in the deep, how he commands
and raises the stormy wind: which lifts up the waves thereof, etc. and when
you cry unto the Lord in your trouble, he brings you out of your distresses.
He (often) makes the storm a calm: so that the waves thereof are still, and
he brings you unto your desired haven. Oh, therefore that you would praise the
Lord for his goodness: and for his wonderful works to the children of men,
Verse 31.
and give unto those who are the Instruments of your deliverance, their
deserved dues; forget not the example here of our blessed Apostle, who forgot
not a common courtesy that was showed unto him in his misery, but
acknowledges with much thankfulness, the real performance of a small
kindness, saying, the barbarous people showed us no little kindness, for they
kindled a fire, and received us every one.

Thus much of S. Paul truly thankful.

3 It remains now, Part. 3.
to speak of the last particular of this text, viz. the reason or occasion
which moved these people thus to do, and that was, because of the present
rain, and because of the cold.

It is called in the original, Qui ing^uerat, and nos premebat. Piscat.
(...), a forcing rain, imbrem urgentem, a smoking shower, which mightily
fell upon them, etc.

Doubtless, their case was lementable and much to be pitied, their misery
being not single, but manifold; when as their goods were lost, V^gebat cos
miseria non una^in naufragio ami^erunt omnia bona sua: madidi funt ex marinis
undi^; urgentur nunc etia^ pluvia, quae instat, accidit hiberni temporis
frigus, and ipsi nudi sunt and been madidi. Aret. in loc.
their bodies well washed and be-daggled with the brinish Sea; their joints
benumbed, not only with the waves, but also by means of this violent storm,
and extremity of cold, being in the winter time; insomuch, that (alas poor
men) its likely they were scarce able to stand; besides, they were not yet
freed from their former fear of loosing their lives in this so heavy a
stresse; their being in a strange place, and present want of food and raiment,
etc. All which these barbarous people taking notice of, were thereby moved and
stirred up, to show them kindness; from whose example we may also learn this
lesson. viz.

Then is the fittingest time, Doct. 4
for men to show mercy, when they behold and see others in misery.

These people were here, by the light of nature, instructed in the performance
of this duty, and (as it was the manner of the heathens) conside^ing of that
conjunction of men in humanity, Cic. o^fic. lib. 1. and ^
they observed this law of courtesy, to show mercy to them that were in
misery. There are diverse examples, in the holy book of God, for this purpose;
of some, who were also guided by the law of nature, and bound thereunto by the
bond of common humanity: As that of Thermuthis, Iosephu^ in lib. 2. Antiq. 1.
(as some call her) the daughter of Pharaoh; she being an Egyptian, beholding
the Child Moses in a basket, which she had espied swimming in the River
Nilus, and commanded to be taken up, was by the light of nature moved to
compassion; not only because the Child was fair and well featured, Exo. 2.6
Et fletumota, and etia^ venustate pueri delectata ejus miseretu^.
and therefore did greatly delight her (as Josephus thinks) but also in
regard of the present misery the babe was then in, Simler. in loc.
which wept upon her, and in a manner desired mercy of her; whereupon being
moved with the weeping, and together also delighted with the beauty of the
Child, she had mercy on it, and in so great a streit, did both relieve and
succor it.

Shobi, 2 Sa. 17.27.
Machir and Barzillai beholding the present misery of David and his people;
Calamita^ praesens Davida, in eis mise^^co^diam excitavit Petr. Martyr* in loc.
were hereupon moved and stirred up to show them mercy; They brought (says the
text) beds and basins and earthen vessels and wheat and barlie and flower and
parched corn and beans and lentiles and parched pulse, etc. for David and for
his people that were with him for to eat; now what occasioned them thus for to
do! Why, because they saw the people were hungry, and weary, and thirsty in the
wilderness. 2 Sa. 17.29.


Doubtless the same consideration moved the Princes of Ephraim to have
compassion on the distressed Captives of Judah; 2 Chr. 28 15.
for such as they saw naked, they clothed; those whom they beheld barefoot,
they shod; and such as were hungry and thirsty they gave them to eat and to
drink: in a word, they anointed them and carried all the feeble of them upon
Asses, and brought them to Jericho, the City of palm trees, to their brethren.
What should I speak of Job, that holy man, hear himself speak in his own
words Chapter, Job 31.16. etc.
31.16, 17, 18, 19. verses, and from thence you may observe, that then he
thought it best to show mercy, when he beheld and saw others in misery.

It was a worthy saying of Ebedmelech that noble Courtier, unto his lord and
Master the King, Jeremiah the Prophet whom these men have cast into the
dungeon, Ier. 38.9.
is like to die for hunger in the place where he is, etc. Surely, surely, he
took notice of the Prophets misery, and was thereupon set forward and raised up
to procure him relief; which he did, not only by acquainting the King of his
distress, but was himself also an Instrument of drawing him out of that deep
dungeon, Verse 11.
with cords of old clouts and rotten rags, which he had devised and made for
the same purpose. So the Samaritan, finding the wounded person, (though likely
a Jew, who were because of their religion, so great enemies, that they would
neither eat, nor talk, nor have any familiarity one with another, yet) moved
with natural affection, took this opportunity, and according to his distress,
L^c. 10 30.33, 34.
when he saw him, he had compassion on him, and went to him, and bound up his
wounds, etc. But what need I to multiply examples in this so manifest a truth?
does not God himself expressly command us, that when we see and behold others
in misery, we should thereby be stirred up and moved to mercy? I am sure these
places prove it, Deuteronomy. 15.7, 8. James 2.15, 16. neither is sufficient reason
wanting for the confirmation of it. Then is the fittingest time.

Reas. 1. Reas. 1
Because, then mercy will be right welcome and comfortable unto them, best
apprehended, most accepted; oh how fair a thing is mercy in the time of
anguish and trouble? Ecclus. 35.19.
(says Jesus the son of Syrac) it is like a cloud of rain that comes in the
time of a drought: A morsel of bread to a hungry man, how sweet is it, or a
cup of cold water to one that is athirst, tell me? how welcome do you think
was the kindness which Ruth received from Boaz in the time of her distress,
though for the present it were but mean, in suffering her to gleane amongst
the sheaves of barley, etc. yet does her Mother i^ law say, Ruth. 2 19.
blessed be he that did take knowledge of thee. An^ was not that a joyful
Cave to the hundred Prophets, 1 Kin. 18 4.
wherein Obadia had hid them from the fury of Iezabel? oh how sweet was the
bread and water which he then fed them withal! In like manner, questionless,
the entertainment that these barbarous people gave to S. Paul and his company
in this so great a misery; Nihil optabilius, nihil magis necessarium igne, quo
reficiant corpora. Arct, in loc.
in receiving them into their houses, in making a fire for them, etc. was most
desired of them, best accepted by them.

Reason 2. Reas. 2
Because misery is the true and the proper object of mercy; when God calls upon
us, for the performance of this duty, whom does he nominate, but distressed
people, the needy, the poor and such like; who stretch forth their hands for
help? Levi. 25.35.
Deu. 15.11.
Thou shall open thine hand unto thy brother, to thy needy and to thy poor in
the Land. Our bread must be dealt to the hungry, our doors open to receive the
poor and needy, our garments ready to cloth the naked (as the Prophet
speaks) these, Esaias 58.7.
these are they which call for mercy at our hands, the hungry cry for bread,
the thirsty for drink, the naked for clothing, the harbourles for house
room, the sick for visiting, the troubled for comforting, Humanitatis est ea
part, inprimis succurrere qua labo rat miser. Aret. in loc.
in a word, all that are in misery, crave for mercy; to these, therefore, (as
we are able) should we endeavor to give supply, answerable to their
necessities and wants,

Reas. 3. Reas. 3
Because, we know not what a day, Tempora mutantur and nos mutamur in illis.
or an hour may bring forth; who sees not, but that times alter and change?
and are not men (in like manner) variable in their dispositions? Qui non est
hodie, cras minus apius erit. If we neglect the present time, the future,
perhaps, will be less fitting; either for us to give, or them to receive; our
brother may be dead, swallowed up, with overmuch heaviness; ou^ goods may be
taken from us, that so (when we be willing) we may want opportunity to show
mercy, the which (though the world makes little account of) is an heavy curse,
and no less grief to a pious man, than for an Husbandman, to have much good
seed, and yet want ground and time to sow it. We should therefore take the
present occasion, and then show mercy, when we behold and see others in misery.

1 The consideration of this, Use 1.
meets with the Misanthroposes of our Times, haters of their own shape: who
when they behold others in misery, have no more regard, or humanity in them,
than if the Rocks had fathered them, or the she Wolf brought them forth, or
that they had drawn their milk from Dragons in the Wilderness: instead of
comforting the distressed, Mat. 27.34.48. Psalm. 69 21.
they give them (as the enemies of Christ and David did) Gall for meat, and
Vinegar for drink. We need not go far for instance: I would to God, that the
consciences of some of you, which hear me this day, could not bear witness
with me, that ye are the men, who most barbarously have offended in this kind.
Misery upon your Coast is so common an object, that custom herein has even
extinguished natural affection In mine own hearing, I have heard the
distressed plead with you, cry unto you, entreat you, not only in
consideration of that common bond of humanity, but for your Gods sake, your
Countries sake, that you would forbear, and take pity on them, but ye would
not; besides, your cruelty shown to the dead bodies, of such as have
miscarried in these sad times; your eyes have not only beheld them (how they
have lain massacred and torn, either by beating against the Rocks, or bruised
with the broken timber) but your feet also have gone over them, yea trod upon
them (and which I am ashamed to utter) to this very intent, that you might
dis-robe them of their garments, and so lay open their nakedness to the view
of passengers, leaving their corpse uncovered, for Dogs and Crows, to make a
prey of (did not the better sort amongst you, whose care herein is to be
commended in some reasonable time, take order for their burial) whose bodies,
for ought you know (at least wise of some of them) had they escaped the danger
of the Seas, and died in their own Country, might have been buried in
Censorium Funus, The honorable and solemn manner of burial, as the
Censor-ship was the most honorable office and accomplishment as it were of all
other. See Polybius lib. 6. and Cornelius Tacit hist. lib. 4.18.
Censoriall pomp. Oh, will not the Lord visit for these things? shall not the
God of mercy take notice of such cruelty? Surely yes.

It that be true which the Father says, exagerating the fact of that cruel
Soldier, which with a Spear pierced the side of Christ after he was dead,
viz. That it is far worse to offer any contumely or disgrace to one that is
dead, Illudere mortuo, quam ipsum Crucis supplicium long peju^ est. Chrys^hom.
48. in Ioh.
than is the punishment of the Cross. Then certainly, such as are guilty in
this kind, shall not escape; God has threatened to punish them, and will not
fail to inflict it upon them; either in this life, as he has done upon some,
or else in the life to come, as he will do upon all, that live and dye in this
sin.

Oh, think upon this I beseech you, and let it work remorse and penitency in
you; assure your selves, that if they shall perish eternally who have not done
the works of mercy; then much more shall they be damned, who have acted the
works of cruelty, and especially against such who are in misery. Mathes. in
Mat. 25.42.
Si isti poenas luent, qui proximo suppetias non tulerunt, quid fiet de istis,
qui miserum insuper expilarunt, and despoliarunt? If they who help not their
poor and needy neighbors, shall eternally be burnt in hell fire; much more shall
they be there burnt, who rob and spoil their needy neighbors; thus goes the
sentence, Depart from me, Mat. 25 41.
ye cursed, in to everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his angels. For
I was an hangred, and ye gave me no meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me no
drink; I was a stranger, and ye took me not in; naked, and ye clothed me not;
sick, and in prison, and ye visited me not. If it be so severe against such: oh
how fearful and lamentable shall their case be, against whom the Judge may
thus proceed in sentence, Depart from me ye cursed, etc. For I had meat, and by
force you took it from me: I had drink, and you spoiled me of it; I had a
house, and you thrust me out of it; I had goods, and you violently took them
from me; I had clothes, and you pulled them from my back; I was in health, and
you drove me into sickness; I was at liberty, and you imprisoned me:
doubtless, it will be a heavy sentence, and a voice of much terror unto all
merciless men; who neglecting the present occasion of showing mercy unto the
distressed, have instead thereof, exercised the works of cruelty.

Use 2. Use 2.
This may inform us of the great error and mistake of those, which misguiding
their affairs without judgment, are forward to extend their liberality and
works of bounty, to such as have no need: rich men, and such as are well able
to recompense their cost, shall find entertainment at their houses: but they
are willing to do little or nothing for the distressed, Despiciunt pauperes,
and egenos, and nudos, homines autem locupletes ^n vitant.
for the^ by whom they think to be answered nothing again, these for the most
part are contemned and despised; as Job says, He that is ready to slip with
his feet, Guadalupens. in Hosea 6. Job 12 5 Cap. 6.15, 16, 17 18, 19, 20
that is, which is fallen from prosperity to adversity, is as a Lamp despised,
in the thought of him that is at ease; his company is offensive, unsavory, as
the snuff of a Candle: these men are not unfitly by that holy man compared
unto a Brook, which in Summer, when we need waters, it affords none, its dried
up; in the Winter it is hard frozen; but in the time of rain, when there is no
want, then it overflowes. Surely, these men account all that to be lost, which
man repayeth not, and so by this means they omit the present opportunity, or
poor man's necessity.

Use 3. Use 3.
Lastly therefore, from the consideration of this proposition; let every one
learn, to take notice of the present occasion offered, wherein to exercise the
works of mercy, and make use of it. Oh, how ready are we, to watch our
opportunities in other matters, we are prone to commit sin instantly, and take
advantage from the least occasion to work our own ends* in outward businesses
we observe the fittest seasons; we gather fruit when it is ripest, we cut
down corn when it is hardest, we let blood when it grows rankest; and why
should we not in like manner refresh our distressed brother whilst he is
poorest. Oh my brethren, (if we want not hearts) we have opportunities enough
daily offered us, to the exercising of mercy: Mercy needs not ride abroad to
seek work in these times; we may find objects almost in every place, in every
City, Town, and Country, (if we please but to harken) we may hear the cries
of the distressed, bewailing themselves in their miseries, and beseeching
others to give relief unto them; let us not then put off our good and
charitable duties from time to time: if thy brother be hungry, now feed him;
if thirsty, now give him drink; if naked, now cloth him; if sick, now visit
him; for now is the fittingest time for thee to show mercy, whilst thou do
behold and see him in misery.

The time will not suffer me to enlarge my meditations any further, upon the
discovery of this duty: we have already broken the ordinary wont, and gone
beyond the limits of our appointed hour: but my desire is (if possible) to
move the consciences of some here present, and to bring them to a sight of
their sin, in the neglect of this duty, that so they may labor to break it of
by repentance. Oh that such would consider, how that God himself does
undertake to plead the strangers cause, Exo. 22.21, 23, 24.
hear what he says; If thou vex or trouble such, that is, Strangers, Widows,
and Fatherless children; and so he call and cry unto me, I will surely hear
his cry, and my wrath shall wax hot, and I will kill you with the sword, etc.

You are men, (many of you) of the same profession with those, which unhappily
many times are cast away upon your Coast; you of all others considering your
liablenesse to the same misery, should take pity on them, aid and assist them
for the best, what they may do in such a case, for the preservation of their
goods and safety of their lives; and for the dead bodies of those that have
perished in these heavy times, you should labor to have them committed to the
earth, with as much speed as conveniently you may, and not suffer them to lie,
some four, some five days, tossed to and again, and beaten upon the Rocks:
oh my brethren if the Law commands you to cover the naked while they are
living, how much more ought ye to cover them, when they are dead. What a shame
is it to suffer Figuram and figmentum Dei (as Lactantius calls it) the
work-manship of God, Lactant. Institut. lib. 6.
Gods Image to be exposed and cast out for a prey to wild beasts and birds;
that which has been so worthy an Instrument, should not be irreverently
entreated, though dead; what though Pompeys Exequies do but little profit
deceased bodies; Sense.
Tamen in venta est sepultura, etc. Yet is the grave a means, though not to
keep them from putrification, yet us from infection; and such offices of
Piety, Humanity, and Civility (says Saint Augustine) do please God. Deo
placent etiam talia pietatis officia. lib. 1. de civitate Dei ca. 13.
Oh please him then, in your careful performance of this Christian duty; and
let the remembrance of that, which this day has been delivered in your
hearing, remain and abide with you; be hospitable, not only in outward show,
but in deed and truth, be thankful as well for mean, as great courtesies,
shown unto you in your distresses, and let your works of mercy extend
themselves epecially to such as are in misery, so doing you shall

1 Imitate your heavenly father, whose manner is, Lu. 6.36
to stretch forth his arm of mercy, especially to them that are weary and heavy
laden; therefore the Psalmist describes him to be a helper at opportunities, in
the needful times of trouble, The Lord Lord will be a refuge for the
oppressed; Psa. 9.9.
a refuge in times of trouble. And that proverb, frequent amongst the Hebrews;
witnesses as much of him; In the mountwill the LORD beseene. Genesis 22.14.
Which was occa^ioned by the Lords appearing and showing himself unto Abraham
upon the Mount Moriah, Vide. 1 Classem proverb. Drufii. lib.
Prove. 3.
for the preservation of Isack, when he should have been offered up for a
sacrifice, then, even then, in so great a streit, God in mercy releived him.

2 You shall obtain mercy for your selves; compare, Ier. 38.9. with Chap. 39.
ult. Joshua 6.17, 25. Mat. 25.40. God respects the circumstances of time, ^^d
such actions of all other, are the best plea^ing unto him that be done in their
season: refesh therefore, the poor afflicted and needy in their needs, and God
in mercy will remember thee, in thine. I will not trouble you with any more
instances; The Hospitality of Publius in this place, was not unrewarded, for
the Lord restored his Father to health (by the hand of Paul) who was indeed
sick of a dangerous disease, by which means he would testify (says Calvin)
how greatly that courte^ie, which is shown to men in misery, and to strangers,
does please him; Although those who are helped, be unmindfull and unthankful,
for that benefit which they have received, or they be not able to recompense
those, Si aperueris pauperibus manus tuas, Christus ^ibi aperiet Ianuas suas*
ut paradisi possessor in troeas Aug.
who have done good unto them, yet GOD himself will abundantly restore to men,
whatsoever they have bestowed at his commandment, and if thou will open thy
hand unto the poor, Sermon. 227 de Tempore.
Christ will open his gates unto thee, that thou may enter the possession of
Paradise; the Paradise of Heaven, unto which place, See the Collect on
quinquage sima Sunday.
the Lord of his mercy bring us.

Now gracious Father, which do teach us, that all our doings without Charity
are nothing worth, send thy Holy Ghost, and power into our hearts that most
excellent gift of Charity, grant that we may express the fruits of it in our
conversation, in being ready to help and succor such as are in any want and
misery. Lord we beseech thee for them, whersoever, or howsoever they are
distressed; and amongst others such as travail upon the Seas, in their lawful
vocations, oh be thou unto them a refuge against the stormy wind and the
Tempest, let their lives and goods be precious in thy sight, stand by them,
look upon them, be with them by thy power, to defend them from all dangers,
either of foreign enemies, homebred Pirates, or outrageous Tempests, Lord
give them the fear of thy name, the love of thy mercy, peace in their
consciences, sa^ety in their ships, health in their persons, mutual love
amongst themselves, obedience to their Governors, contentment with their
provisions, success in their business, and safe return to their homes, that
we may all join together in the praise of thy name, through Jesus Christ our
Lord, Amen.

FINIS.

