A TRVE RELATION OF A MIGHTY GIANT, named Theutobocus, sometimes King of the
Theutons and Cimbrians, overthrown by Consul Marius, 1700 years agone.

Buried then by the Castle of Langon, near the Town of Romans in the Province
of Daufine in France; Whose bones were found of by chance, An. 1613. in a
place called to this day, The Giants ground; and upon his Tomb in graven in
old letters Theutobocus Rex.

IN DOMINO CONFIDO printer's device of Edward Allde

LONDON, Printed by Edoward Allde, dwelling near Christ Church. 1615.

A TRVE RELATION OF THE GIANT THEVTOBOCVS.
AMong the many effects which this great mother and worke-mistris Nature has
produced in this vnder-world, the excessive tallnes of Giants has ever held
one of the highest rancks upon the Theater of wonders. Even the holy Scripture
in sundry places dtoh bear them witness; And the historiographers in the
description of their so huge Collosses and other relations, which the Poets in
their Giganto-machies do show the admiration wherein they were had. As also the
very Etimology of their name does infer the same (for Giant signifies a Son
of the Earth) As though it were not of the nature and possibility of men to be
get such creatures. Hence the verse Iuuenal. Sat. 4.

Vnde fit vt malim fraterculus esse gigantum, Seems to infer an uncouth and
extraordinary lineage, as proceeding straungely from the Earth. which is also
the cause that some who for their hie fortunes thought scorn to have so low a
birth, did boldy avouch that their Ancestors were those Angels, which the
Greeks and Latins call Demones and Genii: as if it Lactant. Fir. lib. 10.
cap. 15.
had been impossible to Nature to have brought forth such high blood as they
thought to be. Or that that great worke-mistrisse should not have been able to
have imparted them, both an extreme heat and moisture together, the true
causes of this excessive tallnes; and to bring this sentence to effect,

Operatur natura quantum, and quandiu potest, Ab extremis Picolomin. de
scientia civilly gradu 10. c. 9. Arist. 9 de natura anima.
ed extrema. Natura enim in suis operationibus non facit saltum. It is most
true then, that there have been Giants in this world, and that they have had men
for their fathers, not only before, but also long after the flood. Otherwise
from whence should Goliath have come? from whence Og King of Basan? the first
being 6. cubits and a spanne high, and the bed of the other 9. cubits long; the
cubit according to the Greeks being 2. foot, and to the Latins one foot and
a half, from whence all those Amachins in respect of which the Israelits did
seem but as grasshoppers? And from whence all the rest mentioned all along the
Scriptures?

Do not the fathers also and almost al Historiographers testify with one
consent against all hard believers, that in all ages, since at one time or
other, there have been men of such great and extraordinary height?

S. Austen rehearses that a little before the Goths affliction there was at
Rome a woman-Giant whose Parents did not exceed the common stature. Plutarch
in vita Sertorii. 3.


Plutarch (the life and soul of truth and Antiquity) writes that Sertorius
being entered the Town of Tingis in Africa, and finding there a mighty, long
and huge grave, where then Antheus told him that that famous Antheus of Libia
was buried; a hard believer, as many others, upon mere incredulity caused it
to be opened, where finding indeed a man's body full 30. cubits long, with much
wonder and solemnity did sacrifice unto it peace-offrings, and religiously
caused it to be shutt again.

Pliny, most curious in the inquiry of natural things, says that in old
Creta, now of later years called Candia, a great earthquake having turned up a
whole mountain, there under was found a dead coarse 46. cubits long, which
some did avouch to be the body of Arion.

Philostratus makes mention of 3. others of the same length, one of whose
skulls he could not fill with 72. pints of Candia. Some others have said that
one of them was 30. cubits high, the second 22. and the third 12. But because
he does only describe that which was found in the Island of Cos which he says
was 18. foot long, not otherwise meddling with that of Imbros, nor of Lemnos
found by Menocrates, I am contented with the most verified things.

Finally all historians make report of an infinite number of such other great
bodies as of that of Orestes being 7. cubits long which was dug up by the
commandment of the Oracle; That of whom there are yet some bones to be seen
at Valence; As also of a live woman, which Zonaras says was a long cubit
higher then any of the tallest men of her time. And specially of the Emperor
Maximinus, which (as says Julius Capitolinus in his life, according to Codrus,
did use his wives bracelett as a ring to his finger; pulld and drew whole
coaches and carts laden after him, broke and bruysed to dust powder a Topase
between his fingers, eat at his meals 50. and 60. pound of flesh, drank a
certain measure full, called Amphora Capitolina which is no less then the
eight part of an Hogs-head; and did weary out 20. 25. and 30. soldiers in
wrestling, and beat down to the ground ten of them at once, with many such and
greater deeds that cannot but argue an extraordinary strenght and bigness.

And if we will give credit unto Virgil in that great piece of strength he does
attribute to Turnus in his combat against Aeneas, which yet is not likely he
would have fained to grossly, but that he had either read, heard, or seen the
like, you may see in the following verses, that he alone pulld out of the ground
a huge stone and cast it at his enemy, which hardly 12. other men could have
stirrd or lifted up.

I should never end if I would go from time to time relating every particular
which is found in the stories, about Giants. One only, and the same now in
hand, (belonging to the King of France, which for some special causes he has
most graciously lent to the Printer and bearer hereof) being now in England, is
to be seen, as it has been already thorough most Protestant Countries, for a
present and ready ey-witnes unreprovable of what above we have said.

The same bones Monsieur de Langon, (a worthy Gentleman of Daufine in France)
found in a Tomb which lay in a piece of ground of his, called to this day and
of old Giants-ground, where he had occasion of building, and therefore of
digging, where in by some Tomb was accomplished the Profery of Virgil,

Gradiaque effossis mirabitur ossa sepulchris.

The tomb of these bones, 30. foot long was found some 17 or 18. foot deep
under the ground, hard by an old Castle in times past called Chaumont, now
Langon, near a little hillock; And the bones within were some putrified by
reason of a certain slow spring which was found there, and what bones soever
the water or moisture did touch, became as hard as stone, therefore as heavy.
Some are yet naturally light and worme-eaten as commonly old bones are. Some
altogether perished, and turned to dust. But by the principal pieces that are
here, which are no less then 200. weight (the rest being to heavy to carry
easily up and down) the bones of the thigh and leg set together being full
9. foot long, without neither the foot nor the joint; whereby it may easily be
perceived, that (what soever the others were, either Orion of 46. foot, or
Antheus of 30.) this our Giant could be no less, at the very least then ^6.
foot high; Which yet does suffice over and above to ravish with admiration,
such as shall see those limbs of his.

For his teeth, whereas S. Austen says he saw one upon the sea shore at Vtica,
which was a hundred times greater then any of our common ones; I think I may
concur to double that number in those we have 101. hands, to show, whereupon
every body may imagine what an oven he had for a mouth, what a gulf for his
belly.

And that I may not longer stand upon every piece we have; whereof the
beholders shall be more sure and content to trust their own eyes, then my
describing; I Will tell you but a word of the thicknes of his vertebres, whereby
those that have even any superficial skill in Anatomy may easily judge the
whole dimension of our Giant, (according to the proportion of his leg and
thigh aforesaid) to have been above 25. foot, every one of his vertebres being
almost half a footlong, and the number of them in every man 28. besides those
5. which are called dissimilitudinary, whereupon I durst almost say, he was
very near the whole length of the Tomb it self.

But that which is no less to be noted then his extraordinary height, is his
own name, rank and quality thus found inscribed upon his Tomb, THEVTOBOCVS
REX, for he indeed was a King or at least one of the Kings, of that famous Army
of Theutons, Tigurines, Ambruns and Cimbrians, which Marius defeated upon the
borders of France toward Italy, when they were ready to enter and invade it,
in the year of the foundation of Rome 642 and before the Incarnation of our
Savior 105. For his name, quality and height Florus tells it us in these few
words lib. 3. cap. 3.

Certe Rex ipse Theutobocus quaternos, senosque equos transilire solitus, vix
vnum cum f^geret ascendit, proximoque in sal^^ comprehensus, insigne
spectaculum triumphi fuit, quippe vir proceritatis eximia super ^ropha^
opsa^manebat.

King Theutobocus, who was wont to leap over 5. or 6. horses, did scarce get
up upon one, when he fled away; And so being taken in the next wood, was a
wonderful ornament to the Triumph, for he being a man of an excessive height,
was higher then the very trophies for that war. Orosus lib. 5. cap. 16. does
rehearse it a great deal more at length, and surely with a great deal more
truth then any, saying that these Barbarians came with their huge Army to
assail Marius in his own camp, near the falling of the river Lisere into the
Rosne, with whom having had some light skirmishes diverse days, at last
thinking themselves strong enough, they divided their army in three, and so
went three several ways; whereby Marius took time to dislodge, and set his
Camp in a place of more advantage upon a little hill, commanding the enemies;
from which falling to battle, he did kill 200000. of them and took 8000.
prisoners; among the rest making mention of their king which either by error of
report, or of former scribes, or late Printers, he calls Theutobodus, who
(says he) did make the victory more glorious by his death. As also afterward
the very women, who seeing they could not obtain from Marius, freedom for
their bodies, and liberty to serve their own Gods according to their custom,
after they had killed, first their own children, and then the most part one
another, the rest did hang themselves at their cart-wheeles, some with ropes,
some with their own hayres.

I know some will say with Plutarch and Florus that Marius did overthrow those
Barbariaus in another part of France hard by Aix, and Marseilles in a Province
which is far enough from Daufine; And that the Marsilians did enclose their
vines with the bones of those that were the slain, so great the discomfiture
was.

But the answer is ready, that according to the huge numbers whereof this
flood of men was co^pounded, Marius did not overthrow them all at once, by
reason also that they had divided themselves, as Orosus says; and that those
who were defeated there, we but the third part which went that way rowards
Italy, whom Marius also ouertooke and cut short after he had overthrown these
former. And although Florus make but one of the overthrows at Marseilles and
the death of Theutobocus; yet since he himself does specify the height of
that king, and we find him buried in this place, it must needs follow he was
not killed very far thence. Finally though we had not those strong likelihoods
and proofs we know that the first part of these Barbarians with their king
Theutobocus were defeated not far from the place where we have found his
Tomb, yet the modalls of the stamp hereunder represented, that have been found
therein, marking so clearly Marius, and being so like to those of the
Amphitheator of Oranges, all which is also of Marius, do show howsoever and
prove without any difficulty, that this our Giant was none else then
Theutobocus, a King among these Theutons, and other Barbarians, whom Consul
Marius overthrew upon the borders of France either in Daufine or Prouence,
brought from wheresoever, and upon what soever occasions, to be buried where we
have found him.

A true Relation of the Bones of Giants, which are to be seen at this day, as
well in Germany, Brabant, Flanders, Holland, Frize, as in Italy, Lorraine, and
France.
By, I. B. G.
THe better to verify that which we report, our Theutobocus of an Alma^de
race, we will speak a word of the bones of Giants which are found at this day
in Germany and elsewhere. First in the City of Wornes, which is thought to be
builded by the Giants, there is found the tomb of a Giant called Herusfephery
or Iephem of the Horn, with a certain cloven staff and a stone wherewith he
used to salute himself; the which staff is as bigg as one could well brace in
his arms as long as thirty ordinary paces, and the stone four foot high
large downwards ten paces and upward, before in the fashion of a piramyd. And
under the Town house there are many bones of diverse sorts of diverse Beasts
very huge, as also diverse bones of men, as the broken bones of the arm and
thigh of a Giant, which is of the bigness of a foot round and a foot and a
half in length, and that of the thigh of the like bigness, but two foot and a
half long.

At Openhoin there is the whole bone of the thigh of a Giant three foot and a
half long, and they say he was borne in the same house where the bone
remains, the house is called until this day, the house of the Giant and is
not sold without this bone.

At Saint Troy there was found within the Rhine An. 1612. the bone of the left
thigh of a Giant of the same bigness that this of Theutobocus, four foot
long, the which is now at Cleues in the house of Monsieur Wiss^l, of the bones
there were none but the inward part of the Bocace chapter 68. 4 l. del^genealogie
des Dieux.
skull besides that of one thigh, yet not altogether whole but somewhat rotten.
His teeth were waighed and three of them waighed 100 ounces. The same body was
by skillful men judged to have been 200 cubits. And those teeth hang to this
day with chains in the Church of Drepano.

In the Hage hard by the wood there is a Gentleman who has in his house a
thigh bone 3 foot in hight, and in thicknes one.

At Rotterdam algardener has a leg bone two foot long, which he found in an
Abbey. Holland.


At Greninghen they hold it for true, of a Church there which has been
builded by Giants without any Frize.
ladder. It is 25 foot in height, round above, after the form of a Drum, and
40 foot in breadth; built upon huge foure-square pillars, and did serve for a
kind of house and strong defense to them, 500 year before Christ's coming.

At Francfort there is a iaw tooth or grinder as they term them, as big as
ones fi^t which is in the hands of Monsieur Malepart.

At Darmestat there is in the house of the Prince many bones of Giants.

At Bona upon the Rhine, there is to be seen a thigh bone of a Giant five
foot high.

At Ladebourg fishermen found the bodies of two Giants the one 30 foot high,
the other 22. who took away only the thigh and leg bones of the greatest.

At Manom near Frankendad, has been found a hip bone of the bigness of the
bullet of a battring Cannon.

The Duke of Bartens has a bigg bone of a mighty Giants thigh, which has cost
him very dear; And has been showed of late in Paris at the fair of S.
German; being 3 foot and a half long.

And in the time of Caesar there lived a merueilous Giant called Druon, fifteen
cubits high full of horrible and cruel tyranny, who lived in a very strong
Castle in Brabant situate upon a marishe by the side of the river Schaldis;
the which Giant constrained all that past that river to leave there the moyetie
of their marcha^dizes, and if any did fail all was forfeited, and the Merchant
lost his hand. Wherefore the place was named Hantwerp, which is as much to say;
as cut off the hand, which is now called Anwerp.

With this Giant fought a Knight of Caesar's called Brarius and bravely slew
him, whence it is likely that the word, brave came Those of the town of
Anwerpe show at this day in their townhouse some bones of the said Giant,
which are of marvelous greatness.

At Bruges in the Prison of the town under the gate upon two Irons, there is
a thigh bone bigg in the midst, of a foot in roundnes, and long three foot
and a half, and is said to be of a Giant which builded the prison without a
ladder.

At Stenan in digging the ditches of the Town has been found the whole bones
of a Giant 22 foot high in the time that the Duke of Butkion held it, from the
Duke of Lorraine

Two years since there was found within 3 leagues of Mets the head of a Giant
which was as bigg as the barrel of a drum, which was returned to the said Duke,
saving three teeth which some special Burgesses of that City keep to
themselves.

Bocace affirms that in his time in the bottom of a mountain near the city
of Drepan in Scicily was found the whole Body of a marvelous Giant, in his
full proportion holding a staff club, or rather a t^ee of the form of a mast
of a ship, the which staff being touched, went presently to dust, being
garnished within with lead, which being melted weighed fifteen quintals, every
quintal containing a hundred pound. The Body being likewise touched turned to
dust, except some bones and three of his teeth.

In the Castle of Moulins in the province of Bourthere is the Picture of an
huge bon'd Giant, with a true France*
shoulder bone of his, which might well serve for a table to six men.

All which things are yet, either to be seen to this day, or read in
faithful Authors: therefore without doubt so true, as they that will gain say
them, must needs be even less then Pigmies in any skill, wit, learning, or
judgment, and more then very Giants in ignorance, rudeness and brutishness.

Admire and praise God for his mighty and wondrous works in Heaven and Earth.
FINIS.
depiction of man

