A BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF THE whole world.

WHEREIN ARE PARticularly described all the Monarchies, Empires, and kingdoms
of the same: with their several titles and situations thereunto adjoining.

AT LONDON Printed by T. Iudson, for John Brown, and are to be sold at the
sign of the Bible in Fleete-streete. 1599.

A BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF THE WHOLE WORLD.
THe globe of the earth, does either show the sea, or land. The sea general
is called by the name of the OCEAN, which coasteth all the world, and takes
his name in special, either of the place near which it comes: as Oceanus
Britannicus: Mare Germanicus: Sinus Persicus: Mare Atlanticum, of the hill
Atlas in the West-part of Afric: or of the finder out: as Fretum Magelanicum:
or of some other accident, as the Red sea, because the sand is red: Mare
Mediterraneum: because it runs between the lands of Europe, and Afrike:
Mare Icarium, because Icarus was drowned there, or the like. There be some few
seas which have no intercourse with the OCEAN, as Mare mortuum near Palestina:
Mare Caspium, sieve Hircanum, not far from Armenia, and such a one is said to
be in the North part of America.

The Straites or narrow seas are noted in the Latin, by the name of Fretum:
as, Fretum Britanicum, the English narrow seas, Fretum Herculeum, the
straightes between Barbary and Spain, Fretum Magellanicum. etc.

The earth is either Islands, which are those that are wholly compassed by the
sea, as Britannia, Sicilia, Corsica: or the continent which is called in the
English, the firm land, in the Latin Continent.

The old known firm land was contained only in Asia, Europe, and Africa,
Europe is divided from Africa by the Mediterran sea, and from Asia by the river
Tanais, whereby appears that the North-partes of Asia, and of Europe in old
time were but little known, and discovered.

Africa is divided from Europe by the Mediterran sea, from Asia by the river
Nilus: and so Asia, by Tanais and Nilus, is severed from Europe and Afrike.

De Hispania.
TO say nothing of England and Ireland, the most western country of Europe is
Spain: which is bou^ded on the South with the Mediterran sea, on the West with
the Atlantike, on the North with the Oceanus Cantabricus or the Spanish seas,
on the East, with France, from which it is severed with certain mountains,
called Montes Pyrenei, or the Pyrenei hills.

In this country heretofore there were many kingdoms: as the kingdom of
Portingale toward the West, the kingdom of Granada toward the South, the
kingdom of Navarre and Aragon toward the East, and the kingdom of Castile in
the middle of the land: but the whole dominion is now under the king of Spain.

De Gallia.
THe next country is France: which is bounded on the West with the Pyrenei
hills: on the North with the English seas: on the East with Germany: on the
South-east with the Alpe-hilles: on the South-west with the Mediterran sea.

This was in ancient time divided into three parts: Aquitania which is toward
the West: Celtica toward the North, and West: and Belgica which is toward the
North. Belgica is some times called Gallia inferior, and sometime Germania
inferior: but we call it commonly by the name of the Low countries: the
government where of at this day is not at all under France: but Gallia Celtica
and Aquitania are under the French king.

France has many petie gouernements that do border upon it: as the Duke of
Sauoie, the State of the Switzers, the Dukedom of Loraine, the Burgundians or
Wallons: against all which, the King is forted to keep his frontier towns.

There is nothing more famous in this kingdom then the Salike law: whereby it
is provided; that no woman. nor the heir of her, as in her right, shall enjoy
the crown of France a but it goes always to the heir male.

The Switzers are a people called in old time Heluetij. who have no Noblemen
or Gentlemen among them, but only the citizens of their towns: the yearly
officers whereof, and their council, do govern their State.

De Germania,
THe next country unto France, on the East Side, is Germany, which is bounded
on the West with France, and the Low countries: on the North with Denmark,
and the Danish seas: on the East with Prussia, Polonia, and Hungary: on the
South-east with Istris, and Illyricum: on the South with the Alpe-hilles and
with Italy.

The governor general of this country is balled the Emperor of Germany;
who is chosen by three spiritual princes, the Archbishop of Colen called
Coloniensis; the Archbishop of Ments called Moguntinus; and the Archbishop of
Triers called Treuereusis: and three temporal princes; the Duke of Saxony; the
Marquis of Brandeburg; and the County Palantine of Rhine: which if they cannot
agree, as to make a Mayor part in their election: then the king of Boheme has
also a voice: whereof it comes to to be said, that there be seven Princes
electors of the Empire.

There is not that free liberty of choosing the Emperor out of any country,
as was heretofore. But the election is tied, within one hundred years unto the
house of Austria, and at this day of of them, the king of Bohemia is Emperor,
who is called Rodulphus. 2.

Bohemia is a kingdom in the middle of Germany, which is compassed round
with a mighty wood, called Silua Hirciniae: The chief city thereof is called
Prage.

In Germany all are at a kind of commandment of the Emperor: but most of
the Princes (otherwise) take on them as absolute governors in their dominion.
So that they have liberty of religion, they make laws, they raise soldiers,
they stamp money with their own coin* as absolute princes. So does the Duke
of Saxony, the Archbishop, and the rest.

There are also free States and cities; which have the same authority, as
Argentine, Frankford, and other.

De Italia.
ON the South Side of the Alps (and Germany lies Italy, stretching it self
out in length toward the South, and East. It has on the South Side the Island
Sicilia: on the East, that part of the Med. which is called Mare Adriaticum, or
Mare superum; which seuereth Italy from Graecia: on the West side, that part
of the Med. which is called Mare Tyrrhenum, or Mare inferum: and by some Mare
Ligusticum.

This country for the figure thereof, is by some likened unto a long leaf of
a tree: it has in the middle of it which goes all in length, a mighty
mountain, named Mons Aperminus, which is likened to the Spina or ridge-bone of
the back: out of this hill spring diverse Rivers, which run on both sides of
it, into the Adriatike, and Tyrrhene, or Tuscane seas.

The North part of this Italy is that which in ancient time was called
Gallia Comata, or Gallia Cisalpina, Gallia.
inhabited then by the Frenchmen. It is now called Longobardia, or Lombardie,
wherein stand many rich gouernements: as the Dukedom of Millaine, of Mantua,
of Florence, and others. It is for the pleasantness thereof, in respect of the
soil, air, waters, and great variety of wines, and fruits, likened now by
some to Paradise, or the garden of God.

In this Italy, which was heretofore one entire government in the flourishing
estate of the Romans, are now many absolute States, and princedomes, by the
great policy of the Bishop of Rome: who thought it the best way to make
himself great, to weaken the Empire. So he has not only driven the Emperor
out of all Italy into Germany: but has diminished his Majesty in both: by
making so many petie governments, which hold themselves sovereign rulers,
without relation to any other.

As there are many States in Italy, so one of the chiefest are the Venicians
called Resp. Venetorum, or the State of Venice: because they are not governed
by any one: but by their Senate, and gentlemen, although they have a duke: with
whose stamp their money is coined, and in whose name all their executions of
justice are done. But this duke is every way limited by the State.

This City of Venice stands in an Aestuarium or shallow of earth in the
North-part of the Adriatike sea, so safely, that it is held invincible. There
is in it but one street of firm land: into the other the sea does flow at
every tide. They have been a great and rich State; not only possessing much
in Italy, as Padua their University, and other things which now they do:
but a great part of Illyricum and many rich Islands in the Med. as Candie,
called commonly Creta, Cyprus, Zacynthus, and other.



Medices, from whom came Katherine de Medices, the wife of Henry the 2. King
of France lately so well known by the name of Queen mother.



raising soldiers, and executing justice as a Monarche.

In the South part of Italy lies the kingdom of Naples, which is a country
very rich, and full of all kind of pleasure, abundant in Nobility; whereof
comes to be said that proverb: Naples for Nobility, Rome for religion,
Millaine for beauty, Florence for policy, and Venice for riches.

This was heretofore ruled by a king (...) ^^^^r own, till the time of Ioane
Queen of Naples, who ^y deed of gift, did first grant that kingdom to the
Kings of Aragon in Spain: and afterward by will (with a reuocation of the
former grant,) did bequeath it to the house of Anioy in France. Since which
time the kingdom of Naples has sometimes been in the hand of the Spaniard,
sometimes possessed by the French, and is now under the King of Spain: unto
this is annexed also the Dukedom of Calabria.

There be moreover in Italy many other Prince-domes and States; as the
Dukedom of Ferrara; the Dukedom of Mantua; the Dukedom of Vrbine; the
Dukedom of Parma, and Placentia: the State of Luca: the State of Genua,
commonly called the Genowaies, which are governed by their Senate: but have a
Duke as they have at Venice. There be also some other, by which means, the
glory and strength of Italy is decayed.

De Dania, Suecia, and Noruegia.
AS Italy lies on the Southside of Germany, so Denmark lies on the North,
into the middle of which land the sea breaks in by a place called the Sound.
The Imposte of which passage brings great riches, as an ordinary tribute to
the King of Denmark: this is a kingdom, and ruled by an absolute governor.

On the North and East side of Denmark lies Suecia, commonly called Sweden or
Swethen: which is also a kingdom of it self. Where the King professes
himself to be Rex Suecorum, Gothorum, and Vandalorum. Whereby we may know that
the Goths and Vandales which in times past did waste Italy, and other Nations
of Christendom, did come out of this country.

On the Northside and West of Sweden lies Noruegia or Norway, which is at this
day under the government of the King of Denmark, although heretofore it has
been a free kingdom of it self.

Within the Sound, on the East part of the sea, lies Dantzicke: where are
three towns of Hanse-men, confederates, and allies unto the King of Denmark.

There is no great thing to be noted in these countries: but that from Denmark
comes much come to the supply of other parts of Christendom: and that from
all these countries is brought great furniture for war, or for shipping. As
masts, cables, steel, fadles, armor, gunpowder, and the like. And that in the
seas adjoining to these parts, there are fishes of much more monstrous shape,
then elsewhere are to be found: The people of these countries are by their
profession, Lutherans for religion.

De Russia, sieve Moscouia.
ON the East side of Sweden begins the dominion of the Emperor of Russia
(although Russia, or Moscouia it self does lie some what more into the East)
which is a great and mighty Monarchy, extending it self even from Lapland,
and Finmarke, many a thousand mile in length unto the Caspian sea: so that it
contains in it a great part of Europe, and much of Asia also.

The governor there calls himself Emperor of Russia, great Duke of
Mosconia, with many other titles of Princedomes, and Cities, whose dominion was
very much enlarged by the Emperor not long since dead: whom in Russie they
call I^an VasilIwich, in the Latin Johannes Basilides: who reigning long, and
being fortunate in war, did very much enlarge this mighty dominion.

The people of this country are rude, and unlearned, very superstitious, a
kind of Christians: but rather following the Greek Church. Their buildings is
most of wood, even in their chief City of Mosco: insomuch, that the Tartars
wholly in the North-east of them breaking often into their countries, even unto
the very City of Mosco, do set fire on their Cities, which by reason of their
wooden buildings, are quickly destroyed.

The passage by sea into this country (which was wont to be through the Sound,
and so afterward by land) was first discovered by the English: who with great
danger of the frozen seas, did first adventure to sail so far North, as to
compass Lapland, Finmarke, Scrikfinia, and Biarmia: and so passing to the East
by Noua Zimbla, half the way almost to Cathaio, have entered the river called
Duina: by which they disperse themselves for merchandise both by water and
land, into the most parts of the dominion of the Emperor.

This Empire is at this day one of the greatest dominions in the world: both
for compass of ground, and for multitude of men: saving that it lies far
North, and so yields not pleasure or good trafique, with many other of the
best nations.

De Prusia, and Polonia.
IN Europe, on the East and North corner of Germany lies a country called
Prussia, in Latin most times Borussia, in English Pruthen, or Sprusa: of
whom, little is famous, saving that they be governed by one, in a kind of
order of religion, whom they call the Grand-master: and that they are a means
to keep the Moscouite and the Turk from some other parts of Christendom.

On the East Side of Germany, between Russia and Germany, lies Polonia, or
Poland, which is a kingdom differing from other of Europe: because the king
there is chosen by election by some of the Princes near adjoining, as was
lately Henry the third, King of France. These elections oftentimes do make
great factions there; so that intaking parts, they grow often there into
civil war.

The king of Polonia is almost continually in war, either with the Moscouite,
who lies in the East and North-east of him; or with the Turk, who lies on
the South and South-east; and sometimes also with the Princes of Germany;
whereupon the Poles do commonly desire to choose warriors to their King.

In this country are none but Christians; but so, that liberty of all
religions is permitted, insomuch, that there be Papists, Colleges of Jesuits,
both of Lutherans, and Caluinistes opinions, Anabaptists, Artians, and diverse
others. This is that country, which in times past was called Sarmatia, the
chief city whereof is named Cracouia.

De Hungaria, and Austria.
ON the South Side of Germany lies Hungary, called in the Latin Pannonia;
which have been heretofore divided into Pannonia superior, and Pannonia
inferiore it is an absolute kingdom, and has heretofore been rich and
populous. The Christians that do live there, have among them diverse sorts of
religions, as in Poland. The kingdom has been a great obstacle against the
Tuckes coming into Christendom: but especially in the time of Johannes
Huniades, who did mightily with many great victories repulse the Turk. Here
stands Buda, which was heretofore a great fortress of Christendom. But the
glory of this kingdom is almost utterly decayed, by reason that the Turk, who
partly by policle and partly by force, does now possess the greatest part of
it. So that the people are fled from thence, and the Christians which remain
there are in miserable servitude: Notwithstanding, some part of Pannonia
superior does yet belong to Christendom.

That corner of Germany which lies nearest to Hungary is called Austria,
which is an Archdukedome. From which house are come many of the Princes of
Germany, and of other parts of Europe: so that the Crown imperial of Germany
is now tied to some one of this house.

In this country stands Vienna that noble city, which is now the principal
bulwark of all Christendom against the Turk: from whence Soliman was
repelled by Ferdinandus King of Hungary, in the time of the Emperor Charles
the fifth. It was in this country, that Richard the first, king of England, in
his return from the holy land, was taken prisoner by the Archduke of Austria,
and so put to a grievous ransom. The Archduke that now is, by the King of
Spain, is appointed in the place of the Duke of Parma, as governor of the low
countries. Through both Austria and Hungary does run the mighty river
Danubius, as through Germany does run the Rhene, whereon grows Vinum
Rhen^^um, commonly called Rhenish wine.

De Graecia.
ON the South Side of Hungary, and South-east, lies a country of Europe
called in old time Dacia, which is large and wide, comprehending in it
Transyluania, Valachia, Moldauia, and Seruia. Of which little is famous, save
that the men are warlike, and can hardly be brought to obedience, They have
lately bin under the King of Hungary. The river Danubius does divide this
Dacia from Mysia, commonly called Bulgaria, which lies on the South from
Danubius, and is severed from Graecia by the mountain Hamus.

From Hamus toward the South lies Graecia, bounded on the West by the
Adriatike sea: on the East, by the Thracian s^^, and Mare Aegeum: on the South,
by the maine Mediteran sea. This contained in old time four special parts:
Peloponnesus, Achaia Macedonia, and Epirus.

Peloponnesus, which is now called Morea, is the South part of Graecia, being
Paeninsula, or almost an Island: for that it is joined by a little straight
called Isthmos, unto the rest of Gracia. Herein stood Sparta, and the ancient
state of Lacedaemon. On the Isthmos or straight, stood the famous city of
Corinth, which was in old time called the key of Greece.

On the West side of Graecia, next to Peloponnesus, stood the kingdom of
Macedonia: so famous under Philip for conquering al Graecia: and under
Alexander, for vanquishing almost all the Eastern world: and for taking of the
Monarchy from the Persians: and removing it to the Macedonians.

On the North-side of Macedonia being the North-west from Graecia stood the
little kingdom of Epirus: where reigned Scanderbeg, which was in his time so
great a scourge to the Turk.

The rest of Graecia was called Achaia, having on the North and East part
thereof Thracia, on the North Haemus the hill on the West Macedonia and Epirus,
on the South Peloponnesus, on the East those seas which divide Asia the less
from Graecia. In this part stood Thessalonica, to the which S. Paul wrote his
Epistle; and Athens, and Thebes, and all the Cities of Boetia, and the Cities
of the Achai, Argos, Elis, and many other.

Macedonia is by the best Writers and by ancient description rather sound to
stand on the North-side of Achaia, near to the hill Hamus, and to Thracia,
though some in ignorance have taught the contrary.

In this country of Graecia were in ancient time many Kingdoms and States,
as at this day there are in Italy: as the Macedonians, the kingdom of Epyrus,
the State of Athens, the government of Sparta, the city of Thebes, and very
many other places: in so much that almost every town had a peculiar
government. But now it is all under one Monarchy.

From Graecia, in old time, did almost all famous things come. These were they
that made the war against Troy; that resisted Xerxes the mighty king of
Persia; that had the famous Lawmakers; as Solon in Athens, and Licurgus in
Lacedaemon; that took away the Monarchy from the Persians; that brought forth
the famous Captains, as Themistocles, Miltiades, Alexander, and many other
that were the authors of civility unto the Western nations, and to some in
the East; as Asia the less, that gave to Italy and to the Romans the first
light of learning: because from them arose the first Poets, as Homer, Hesiodus,
Sophocles, and diverse other; the great Philosophers, namely, Socrates, Plato,
Aristotle, and all the Sects of the Academicks, Stoics, Peripateticks,
Epicureans, and almost all their scholars; the great Orators, Demosthenes,
and Eschines, and in one word (the Mathematiks excepted, which came rather
from the Caldeans, and the Egyptians) the whole flower of Arts and good
learning.

On the North east part of Graecia stands Thracia, which though heretofore it
has been distinguished, yet now it is accounted as the chief part of Greece.
Here on the edge of the seacoast, very neete unto Asia, stands the city
called Bizantium: but since Constantinople; because Constantine the great did
new build it, and made it an imperial city. This was the chief residence of
the Emperor of Graecia, sometimes called new Rome, and the glory of the East;
where the generell Council was once assembled: and one of the seas of the
Patriarchs: who was called the Patriarch of Constantinople. But by the great
discord of the Christians, all Graecia, and this City is fallen into the hands
of the Turk: who now makes it his place of imperial abode. It was won in
the time of Constantine the last Emperor: so that by Constantine it obtained
his honor, and by Constantine it lost it. In this city lies resident with
the Turk an Ambassador or Agent for the Queen of England. The Christians that
do live now in Gracia are in miserable servitude unto the Turk. They disagree
in many things from the doctrine of the Church of Rome.

De Mari Europam and Asiam interiacente.
IT is said before, that on the North-part between Asia and Europe the river
Tanais does run as a bound of them both.

This river runs into a Lake called Maeotis palus, which bordereth on the
confines of Scythia, or Tartaria.

This Maeotis does disburden it self into a wide sea called Pontus Euxinus.

At the mouth of this sea, is a very great straight, known by the name of
Thracius Bosphorus, where the breadth of the sea is not above one mile,
seuering Asia and Europe. On the side of Europe stands Constantinople: on the
side of Asia, a City called Pera, which for the nearenesse, is by some
reckoned a part of Constantinople.

After this straight, the sea opens it self more large toward the South:
and is called by the name of Propontus. But then it goo weth again into another
straight, which they write to be in breadth about two miles. This is called
Hellespontus, having on the one side Abidus in Asia, and on the other side
Cestus, on the side of Europe.

This is that place, where Xerxes the great King of Persia did make his bridge
over the sea: so much renowned in ancient hystories, which was not impossible,
by reason of the narrowness: the foundation of his bridge being rested on
ships. Here also may appear the reason of that story of Leander and Hero:
which Leander, is reported for the love of her, to have oftentimes swoom over
the sea, till at last he was drowned.

From this strait Southward, the sea grows more wide, and is called
afterward by the name of Mare aege^^^, and so discendeth unto the full
Mediterran.

De Asia, and primo de Tartaria.
ON the North-side of Asia, joining unto the dominion of the Emperor of
Russia: is Tartaria, in ancient time called Scythia: the bounds whereof did
then extend themselves into a good part of Europe, and thereof was called
Scythia Europhaea; but the greatest part of it lies in Asia; A mighty large
country, extending it self from the North to the uttermost sea. On the East,
to the dominion of the great Cham, or Prince of Cathaio, on the South, down to
the Mare Caspi^m.

The Tartarians which now inhabit it, are men of great stature, rude of
behavior, no Christians, but Gentiles: neither do they acknowledge Mahomet.
They have sewe or no Cities among them: but after the manner of the old
Seythians, do live in wildernesses: lying under their carts, and following
their droaues of cattle, by the milk whereof they do nourish themselves.
They sow no come at all, because they abide not long in any one place: but
taking their direction from the North-pole-starre, they remove from one coast
of their country unto an other.

The country is populous: and the men are great warriors: sighting always on
horseback with their bow and arrows, and a short sword. They have among
them infinite store of horses: whereof they sell many unto the countries
adjoining. Their ordinary food in their wars, is horseflesh, which they use
to eat raw, being chased a little by hanging at their saddle.

They have great wars with the countries adjoining: but especially with the
Moscouite, and sometimes with the Turk. From hence came Tamberlano, who
brought seven hundredth thousands of the Tartarians at once into the field:
wherein he distressed and took prisoner, Bajazet the great Turk; whom he
afterward forced to feed as a dog under his table. They have now among
them, many princes and governors, as those have one, whom they call the Crim
Tartars: and those have another, which are the Tartars of Nagaia, and so diverse
other.

The English have labored to their great expenses, to find out the way by the
North Seas of Tartaria, to go into Cathaio and China. But by reason of the
frozen seas, they have not yet prevailed. Although it be now reported, that the
Flemmings have discovered that passage: which is like to be to the great
benefit of the Northeme parts of Christendom.

De Cathaio, and China.
NExt beyond Tartaria on the North-east part of Asia, lies a great country
called Kathaie, or Kathaia: the bounds whereof extend themselves on the North,
and East, to the uttermost seas, and on the South to China. The people are not
much learned, but more civil then the Tartars, and have good and ordinary
trafique with the countries adjoining. This country has in it many Kings,
which are tributaries, and do owe obedience unto one, whom they call the
great Cham or Cane of Kathaia: who is the chief governor of all the land: and
esteemed for multitude of people, and largeness of Dominion, to be one of the
great Princes of the world: but his name is the less famous: for that he lies
so far distant from the best nations: and the passage unto his country is so
dangerous, either for the perils of the seas, or for the long space by land:
his chief imperial City is called Cambalu.

On the South Side of Kathaie, and East part of Asia next to the sea, lies
China. The people whereof, Osorius describes by the name of Sine: and calls
their country Sinarunt regio. This is a fruitful country and yields great
store of rich commodities as almost any country in the world. It contains
in it very many several kingdoms, which are absolute Princes in their States.
The chief city in this country is called Quinsay, and is described to be of
incredible greatness, Such a city as were wont to be in anntient time in the
East: as Babylon, Nilus, and other. This country was first discovered by the
late navigations of the Portugals into the East Indies.

The people of China are learned almost in all Arts, very skillful workmen in
curious fine works of all sorts: so that no country yields more precious
merchandise then the workmanship of them.

They are great soldiers, very politic and crafty, and in respect thereof,
contemning the wits of other using a Proverb, that all Nations do see but
with one eye: but that themselves have two.

Petrus Mathaeus historiographer to the King of Spain for the Eastern Indies,
does report of them: that they have had from very ancient time among them:
these two things, which we hold to be the miracles of Christendom, and but
lately invented. The one is the use of guns for their wars, and the other is
printing: which they use not as we do, writing from the left hand unto the
right: or as the Hebrews, and Sirians; from the right hand unto the left: but
downward directly: and so their lines at the top to begin again.

De India orientali.
ON the South Side of China, toward the Molucco Islands, and the Indian sea,
lies the great country of India: extending it self from the South-east part
of the continent, by the space of many thousand miles westward unto the river
Indus, which is the greatest river in all that country, except Ganges, one of
the greatest rivers in the world, which lies in the East-part of the same
Indies. This is that country, so famous in ancient time for the great riches
thereof, for the multitude of people, for the conquest of Bacchus over it, for
the passage thither of Alexander the great through all the length of Asia: for
his aduenturing to go into the South Ocean with so mighty a Navy, which few
or none had ever attempted before him.

This country had in ancient time, many absolute kingdoms and princes; as in
the time of Alexander, Porus, Taxiles, and diverse others. In it were many
Philosophers, and men of great learning: whom they called Gymnesophistae, of
whom was Calanus, who burnt himself before Alexander. The men of the
South-parte of India are black, and therefore are called men of Inde. The
cattle of all sorts that are bred there, are of incredible bigness, in respect
of other countries: as their Elephants, Apes, Munkies, and such like.

The riches hereof has been very great with abundance of gold: insomuch,
that the Promontorie, which is now called Malach^, was in times past named
Aurea Chersonesus. The commodity of spice is exceeding great that comes from
thence. The Portingales were the first, which by their long nauigations beyond
the Equinoctial, and the farthermost part of Africa, have of late years
discovered these countries of India. As heretofore of the King of Portingale:
so now of the King of Spain, who is reputed owner of them.

The Portingales did find diverse small kingdoms at their first arrival in
those parts, as the king of Calicut, from whence comes our Calicut linen:
the king of Cambaia, the king of Cananor, the king of Cochin, and v^ry many
other; with whom, they first entering league for trafique, and having leave
given to build Castles for their defense, they have since by policy, encroched
into their hands a great part of the country which lies near unto the
seacoast, and are mighty now, for the space of many thousand miles together.
The king of Spain has there a viceroy; whose residence, is commonly in the
Imperial city called Goa. They do every year send home great store of rich
commodities into Spain.

The people of the country when the Portingales came first thither, were for
the most part Gentiles: believing no one God. But the Saracens, who reverence
the Prophet Mahomet, from the baies, or gulfes of Persia, and Arabia, did
trafique much thither: so that Mahomet was known among them. But in one town
called Crangarior, they found diverse Christians, diffenting in many things
from the Church of Rome, and rather agreeing with the Protestants: which
Christians had retained by success their religion, from the time of Thomas the
Apostle: by whom it is recorded by the ancient Ecclesiastical history, part
of India was converted

De Persia.
THere be diverse countries between India and Persia: but they are not famous.
Persia is a large country, which lies far West from India, it has on the
North Assyria, and Media: on the West, Syria, and the Holyland: but next unto
it Mesopotamie: on the South, the maine Ocean, which enters in
notwithstanding, by a bay called Sinus Persicus.

This is that country, which in ancient time was so renowned for the great
riches and Empire thereof. These were they, who took from the Assyrians the
Monarchies and did set up in their country, the second great Empire: which
began under Cyrus: and continued unto Darius: who was overthrown by
Alexander the great. In this Country reigned the great Kings: Cyrus,
Canibises, Darius the son of Histaspes, the great Xerxes, Artaxerxes, and
many other: which in profane writings are famous for their wars against the
Scythians, Egyptians, and Graecians, and in the Scripture, for the delivery
of the Jews from Babylon by Cyrus; for building of the second Temple at
Jerusalem: and for many things which are mentioned of them in the Prophecy of
Daniel.

The people of this nation, although they were in former times very riotous, by
reason of their great wealth: yet after that they lost their Monarchy by the
Macedonians, they have grown great soldiers: and therefore as they ever did
strongly defend themselves against the Romans: so in the time of Constantine,
and the other Emperors: they were fearful neighbors to the Roman
government. And of late time, they have strongly opposed then selves against
the Turks, ever making their party good with them. They fight commonly on
horseback and are governed as in times past, by a King: so now, by an
absolute ruler and mighty Prince: whom they term the Shawe, or Sophie of
Persia. He has many countries, and small Kings in Assyria, and Media, and the
countries adjoining tributaries.

The Persians are all at this day Sarazens in religion, believing on Mahomet:
but as Papists and protestants do diffor in opinion concerning the same Christ
so do the Turks and Persians about their Mahomet: the one pursuing the other
as heretics with most deadly hatred. In so much, that there be in this respect
almost continual wars between the Turks, and the Persians.

De Parthia, and Media.
ON the North-east, side of Persia, lies that country, which in old time was
called Paerthia, but now named Arach, of whose great wars with the Medians,
or Armenians, or Romans, in Tacitus, and ancient histories are true. The
country boundeth on Media by the West, which was in ancient time very full of
people, whose fight as it is very much on hors-backe, so the manner of them
continually was for to give an onset, and then to run their ways: but to
return again like to the wild Irish, so that no man was sure when he had
obtained any victory over them.

These were the people that gave the great overthrow to that rich Marcus
Crassus of Rome, who by reason his covetousness, intending more to his getting
of gold, then to the guiding of his army, was slain himself, and many
thousands of the Romanos. The Parthians with exprobration of his thirst after
money, pouring molten gold into his mouth after he was dead. Against these, the
great Lucullus fought many battles: but the Romans were never able to bring
them quite in subjection.

On the West Side of Parthia (the Mare Caspium being on the North. Armenia on
the West, and Persia on the South) Here lies that country which in times past
was called Media, but now Shiruan, or Seruan: which is at this day governed by
many inferior Kings and Princes which are tributaries, and do owe subjection
to the Sophy of Persia. So that he is the sovereign Lord of all Media, as our
English men have found: who passing through the dominion of the Emperor of
Russia, have crossed the Mare Caspium, and m^rchandised with the inhabitants of
this Media.

This Nation in former time was very famous: for the Medes were they that
removed the Empire from the Assirians, unto them: which as in themselves it was
nor great. So when by Cyrus it was loyned by the Persians, it was very
mighty, and called by the name of the Empire of the Medes and Persians. Here
it was that Afryages reigned, the grandfather of Cyrus, and Darius of the
Medes: the chief city of this kingdom, was called Ecbatana, as the chief
city of Persia, is Babylon.

De Armenia and Assyria.
ON the West side of the Mare Caspium, and of Media, lies a country called by
a general name Armenia, which is by some distinctlie divided into three
parts: the North part whereof being but little, is called Georgia: the middle
part Turcomania: and the third part, by the proper, name of Armenia: by which
a man may see the reason of difference in diverse writers. Some saying that the
country whence the Turks first came, was Armenia: some say Turcomania: and
some Georgia: the truth being, that out of one, or all these countries they be
descended. These Turks are supposed to be the issue of them: whom Alexander
the great did shut up within certain mountains near to the Mare Caspium.

There is this one thing Memorable in Armenia: that after the great flood the
Arc of Noah did rest it self on the mountains of Armenia: whereas Josephus
witnesses, it is to be seen yet to this day. The hills whereon it rested are
called by some Noe montes. The people of this Nation have retained among them
the Christian faith, as it is thought, from the time of the Apostles: but at
this day it is spotted with many absurdities.

On the South part of Armenia bending toward the East, lies the country of
Assyria, which is bounded on the West with Mesopotamia. This country was that
land, wherein the first Monarchy war settled, which began under Ninus, which the
Scripture calls Nimrod: living not long after Noah's flood. And it ended in
Sardanapalus: continuing for the space of a thousand and three hundred years.
The King of this country was Senacharib; of whom we read in the book of
Kings: and here reigned Nabuchadnezzer, who took Jerusalem, and led the Jews
away prisoners unto Babylon.

In this country, is the swift river Tygris, near unto the which, was
Paradise: upon this river stood the great city Niniuie, called by profane
writers Ninus: which was almost of incredible bigness, and exceeding populous:
but the nearness of the river, and maruailous fruitfulnes of the soil, which
Herodotus writes: did return their corn sometimes two, sometimes three
hundred fold, and did yield sufficiency for to maintain it. This city for
a long time was the imperial feat of the Monarchy: but being destroyed, as
God foretold it should be by the Chaldeans: the residence of the king, was
afterward removed unto Babylon, a great city in Chaldea, first built by
Semiramis.

De Chaldaea.
Next unto Assyria, lies Chaldaea: having on the East side Assyria, on the
West Syria, or Palestina: on the North Armenia: on the South the desert of
Arabia. This country is often called by the name of Mesopotamia, which name it
has, because it lies in the middle of two great rivers, Tygris, and
Euphrates: it is called also by the name of Babilonia, which word of it self
properly taken, does signify only that part of the country which stands
about Babylon.

The chief city hereof was Babylon, the ruins whereof do remain to this
day. It was a rich and most pleasant city for all kind of delight: and was the
imperial city of the Assyrians: where Nabuchadnessar, and other their great
kings did lie. It was to this city, that the children of Israel were carried
captives: which thereof was called the captivity of Babylon. The kings of
Persia did also keep their residence here: it was built upon the river
Euphrates, some part of it stands on the one side, and some on the other:
having so the foundresse, Semiramis, the wife of Ninus.

It is supposed by Divines, that in this Mesopotamia, between the river Tygris
and Euphrates, Paradise did stand: this was the country wherein Abraham the
Patriarch was borne: unto the which the Romans could very hardly extend their
dominion. For they had much to do to get any such government of any thing
beyond the river Euphrates. From this people it is thought that the wise men
came, which brought presents unto Christ, by the guiding of a star.

For as in India and all the Eastern parts, so especially in this country,
their Noble men and Priests, and very many people, do give themselves to
all Arts of divination: Here were the great Southsayers, Enchaunters, and wise
men, as they call them: here the first Astrologians, which are so descibed and
derided in the Scripture: and against the inhabitants of Babylon and Chaldaea
were the laws of the Romans made, against deuining Mathematicians: who in
Tullie de Diuinatione, and Cornelius Tacitus, as also in the laws of the
Emperors, are ordinary called by the name of Chaldeans: and in deed from
these, and from the Egytians, is supposed to have sprung the first knowledge of
Astronomy.

De Asia minori,
ON the North-west side of Mesopotamia lies that country which is now called
Nitolia: but in times past Asia minor, having on the North-side Pontus Euxinus,
on the West, the Hellespont, and on the South, the maine Mare Mediterraneum. In
the ancient writers, both of the Graecians, and of the Romans, this is
oftentimes called by the single name of Asia, because it was best known unto
them, and they were not so much acquainted with the farther places of Asia the
great.

This country in general, for the fruitfulness of the land standing in so
temperate a Climate, and for the conueniencie of the Sea every way, and so many
good havens, has been reputed always a very commodious and pleasurefull
country. It is wholly at this day under the Turk. The mountain Taurus goes
along from the West, unto the East part of it.

The greatness of it is such, that it has comprehended many kingdoms and
great provinces, beside cities of great fame. On the South-east part thereof,
near Palaestina, lies Cilicia: the chief city thereof is Tarsus, the
country of Saint Paul: the place whither Solomon sent for great store of his
gold, and provision for the Temple, whither Jonas also fled, when he should
have gone to Niniue. In the straites of this Cilicia, near to the mountain
Taurus, did Alexander give the great overthrow in person to Darius, in the
joining of their first battle.

Westward from Cilicia, lies the province called Pamphilia: wherein stands
the city Saeleucia, built by Seleucus, one of the four great successors of
Alexander the great.

On the West of this Pamphilia, extending it self even to the sea, is Lydia,
where reigned sometime Croesus, who was so renowned for his abundant riches.
Herein stands as a sea-towne, Halicarnassus the country of Herodotus, and of
Dionysius, who wrote the Roman History: which city was sometimes a
kingdom, as in the time of Xerxes: to whose aid against the Graecians, did
go Artimisia, the Queen of Halicarnasse, and here reigned Ada another Queen,
in the time of Alexander the great.

Upon the seacoast, Northward from Lydia, stands diverse of those cities,
unto the which, John in his Reuellation did write his seven Epistles, as
Smyrna, Pergamus, Sardis, and Ephesus: but other of them, as Laodicia,
Philadelphia, Thiatira, do stand more in the inland.

Sardis was a city of great pleasure and profit: which is that place, the
winning whereof by the Greeks did so displease one of the kings of Persia;
that he caused it every day at dinner to be remembered unto him, that the
Graecians had taken Sardis: and that he must not cease till he had recovered it
again.

Ephesus was one of the most famous cities of the world, the greatest glory
whereof did arise by reason of the most magnificent Temple of Diana, which was
at Ephesus: to the building whereof all Asia the less did very bountifully
contribute.

It is reported to have been two hundred years in building: and at seven
several times, as otherwise, so especially by lightning, to have bin set on
fire: but the final destruction of it was by a base person named Herostratus:
who of purpose set it on fire, to make himself famous.

More Northward toward the Seacoast lies Phrygia, which was the country from
whence the Goddess called Bona Dea, or Pessinuntia, and Cybile was brought to
Rome. In this country lived Gordius, who knit that knot that Alexander cut:
hoping thereby to obtain (as an oracle had foretold) the whole kingdom of
Asia. In this country stood Troy, the siege whereof by the Graecians, is made
so famous by the Poetry of Homer and of Virgil.

Yet Northwarde from Phrygia lies the Country of Bithynia, which was
sometimes a kingdom where Prusias reigned, that had so much to do with the
Romans. In this country stands the city Nicea, where the first general
Council was held against Arrius the Heretic, by Constantine the great: thereof
called the Nicene Council. Here stands also Chalcedon, where the fourth
general Council was held by the Emperor Martianus, against the heretic
Nestorius.

From Bithynia Eastward, on the North-side of Asia the less, stands the
country of Paphlagonia, where was the city built by Pompey the great, called
of his name Pompeiopolis. From thence Eastward, ioining to Armenia, is the
kingdom of Capadocia, which bordereth on Armenia: and Northward from thence,
near to the sea called Pontus Euxinus, lies the kingdom of Mithridates: which
was called Pontus. This Mithridates had long wars with the Romans, whose
subjects he caused to be slain all in one night throughout Asia the less. He
was afterward overthrown by Pempey the great Roman. By him was invented that
preservative against poison, which of his name is called Mithridate. There were
also in Asia the less some other small countries, as Galatia, Lycia, Caria,
and some other.

De Syria, and Palaestina.
SOuthward from Cilicia, and Asia the less, lies Syria, called Palaestina,
having on the East Mesopotamia, on the South Arabia, on the West Tire and
Sidon, and the end of the Mediterran sea. The people of this Syria, were in
times past called the Aramites. In their language is the translation of the new
Testament, called the Syriacke.

In this country stands Antioch, which was sometimes one of the famous
Patriarks seas, and is a city of reckoning unto this day. Here also stands
now the City of Aleppo, which is a famous Mart town for the Marchandizing of
the Persians, and other of the East, and for the Turks, and such countries as
be adjoining. Here stands also Tripolis.

The South part of Syria, lying down toward Egypt and Arabia, was the place
where the children of Israel did dwell; being a country but of small
quantity, not in length two hundren Italian miles: yet was so fruitful,
flowing with milk and honey (as the scripture calls it) that both it did
maintain above thirty kings and their people, before the coming of the
children of Israel out of Egypt; and also was sufficient afterward to relieve
the incredible number of the twelve tribes of Israel.

It was noted of this country, that whereas by the goodness of the Climate
wherein it stood, and the fertility of the soil (but especially by the
blessing of God) it was the most fruitful land that was in the world: now our
trauailers by experience do find the country, in respect of the
fruitfulness, to be changed; God cursing the land, together with the Jews,
the inhabitants of it. It is observed also for all the Eastern parts, that
they are not so fertile as they have been in former ages. The earth as it were
growing old, which is an argument of the dissolution to come by the day of
judgment.

Through this country does run the river Jordan, which has heretofore been
famous for the fruitfulness of the trees standing thereupon, and for the
mildness of the air, so that (as Josephus writes) when snow has layen in
other places of the land, about the river it has bin so calm that men did go
in single thin linen garments.

In this country stands the Lake called Lacus Asphaltites, because of a
kind of slime, or Bytumen, which daily it does cast up, being of force to
join stones exceeding fast in building.

This Lake is it, which is called Mare mortuum, a Sea, because it is salt and
dead, for that no living thing is therein: the water whereof is so thick, that
few things will sink therein: insomuch, that Josephus says, that an Ox
having all his legs bound, will not sink in that water.

The nature of this lake was turned into this quality, when God did destroy
Sodom and Gomorra, and the cities adjoining with fire and brimstone from
heaven: for Sodom and the other cities did stand near unto Jordan, and to the
Mare mortuum: for the destruction of whom, all that coast to this day is a
witness: the earth smelling of brimstone, being desolate, and yielding no fruit
saving apples, and such, which growing with a fair show to the eye like other
fruit: as soon as they are touched, turn presently to ashes: as besides
Josephus, Solinus does witness.

The land of Palaestina had for inhabitants all the twelve tribes of Israel,
which were under one kingdom, till the time of Rehoboam the son of Solomon.
But then were they divided into two kingdoms: ten tribes being called Israel,
and two being called Judah, whose chief City was called Jerusalem. Then the
tribes after much Idolatry, were carried prisoners into Assyria, and the
kingdom dissolved: other people being placed in their room in Samaria, and
the country adjoining.

The other two tribes were properly called the Jews, and their land Iudaea,
which continued long after in Jerusalem, and thereabout, till the captivity of
Babylon: where they lived for 70. years. They were afterward restored: but
lived without glory till the coming of Christ. But since his time, for a curse
upon them and their children, for putting Christ to death, they are scattered
upon the face of the earth as runnagates, without certain country, King,
Priest, or Prophet.

In their chief City Jerusalem was the Temple of God, first most gloriously
built by Solomon, and afterward destroyed by Nabuchadnezzer. By the
commandment of Cyrus King of Persia, was a second Temple built, much more
base then the former: for besides the poverty, and smalnesse of it, there
wanted five things which were in the former, as the Jews write. First the
Arc of the covenant: Secondly, the pot of Manna: Thirdly, the rod of Aron:
Fourthly, the two tables of the law written by the finger of God: and fifthly,
the fire for the sacrifice which came down from heaven. Herod the great, an
Edomite stranger, having gotten the kingdom, contrary to the law of Moses,
and knowing the people to be offended therewithal, to procure their favor,
did build a third Temple, much more glorious then the second, which was that
Temple wherein our Savior Christ and his Apostles did teach.

The City of Jerusalem was twice taken, and utterly laid desolate: first by
Nabuchadnezzer at the captivity of Babylon: and secondly after the death of
Christ by Vespatian the Roman (who first began the siege) and by his son
Titus, who was afterward Emperor of Rome: who brought such horrible desolation
on that City, and the people thereof by sire, sword, and famine, that the
like has not bin read in any history. He did afterward put thousands of them
on some one day, to be devoured by the beasts, which was a cruel custom of
the Roman magnificence.

After this destruction, the land of Iudaea, and the ruins of Jerusalem, were
possessed by some of the people adjoining, till that about 600. years since,
the Sarazens did invade it: for the expelling of whom from thence, diverse
Frenchmen, and other Christians, under the leading of Godfrey of Bullen, did
assemble themselves: thinking it a great shame, that the Holy land as they
called it, the City of Jerusalem, and the place of the sepulcher of Christ,
should be in the hands of the Infidels.

This Godfrey ruled in Jerusalem by the name of a Duke: but his successors
after him, for the space of six score years, called themselves Kings of
Jerusalem: about which time, Saladine who called himself King of Egypt, and
Asia the less, did win it from the Ch istians: for the recovery whereof,
Richard the first, King of England, together with the French King, and the King
of Cicilia, did go in person with their armies to Jerusalem: but although they
won many things from the infidels, yet the end was, that the Sarazens did
retain the Holy land.

The whole country and city of Jerusalem, are now in the dominion of the
Turk: who notwithstanding for a great tribute, does suffer many Christians to
abide there. There are therefore now two, or more monasteries, and religious
houses where Friars do abide, and make a good commodity by showing of the
sepulcher of Christ, and other monuments unto such Christian pilgrims, as do
use superstitiously to go in pilgrimage to the Holy land. The King of Spain
calls himself at this day, King of Jerusalem.

De Arabia.
NExt unto the Holy land, lies the great country of Arabia, having on the
North-parte Palestina, and Mesepotamia: on the East the gulf of Persia: on the
South the maine Ocean of India or Aethiopia: on the West, Aegipt, and the great
bay called Sinus Arabicus, or the red sea. This country is divided into
three parts: the North part whereof, is called Arabia deserta; the South
part, which is the greatest, is named Arabia Foelix, and in the middle
between both, which for the abundance of Rocks and Stones, is called Arabia
Petrea, or Petrosa. The deserte of Arabia is that place, in which God after the
delivery of the Israelites from Egypt, by passing through the red sea, did
keep his people under Moses for forty years, because of their rebellion;
feeding them in the mean time with Manna from heaven, and sometime with water
miraculously drawn out of dry rocks: for the country has very little
water, almost no trees, and is utterly unfit for tillage or corn. There are no
towns nor inhabitants in all this desert: in Arabia Petrosa are some, but not
many.

Arabia Foelix, for fruitfulnes of the ground, and convenient standing every
way toward the sea, is one of the best countries of the world: but the
principal cause why it is called Foelix, is for that it yields many things
in abundance, which in other parts of the world are not to be had: as
Frankincense, especially the most precious balmes, myrhe, and many other, both
fruits and spices, and it yields withal, store of some precious stones.

This is that country wherein Mahomet was borne, who being of mean parentage,
was brought up in his youth in the trade of merchandise; but afterward joining
himself with thieves and robbers, his life was to rob such merchants as passed
through Arabia; and to this purpose having gotten together many of his own
countrymen, he had afterward a whole legion or more out of the Roman
soldiers: who being offended with Heraclius the Roman Emperor, for want of
their pay, joined themselves to him: so that at length he had a great army,
wherewith he spoiled the country adjoining.

To maintain his credit and authority with his own men, he fained that he
had conference with the holy Ghost, at such time as he was troubled with the
falling sickness, and accordingly, he ordained a new religion, consisting partly
of Jewish ceremonies, and partly of Christian doctrine, and some other things
of his own invention, that he might inueagle both Jews and Christians, and
yet by his own fancy distinguish his followers from both. The book of his
religion is called the Alcoran. The people which were his Sectaries (whereas in
deed they came of Hagar the hand maid of Sara Abraham's wife: and therefore
should of her be called Ismaelites, or Hagarens) because they would not seem
to be come of a bond woman, and from him whom they suppose a bastard: they
term themselves Sarazens, as coming from Sara, they are called by some
writers Arabians in stead of Sarazens, their name being drawn from their
first country.

In the country of Arabia stands a city called Mecha, which is the place
where Mahomet was buried, and in remembrance of him there is built a great
Temple: unto the which, the Turks and Sarazens do yearlie go on pilgrimage,
as some Christians do to the Holy land. For they account Mahomet to be the
greatest Prophet that ever came into the world: saying that there were three
great Prophets Moses, Christ, and Mahomet: and as the doctrine of Moses was
bettered by Christ, so is the doctrine of Christ amended by Mahomet. In this
respect, as we reckon the computation of our years from the incarnation of
Christ, so the Sarazens account theirs from the time of Mahomet. The Turks,
whose fame began now about two hundred years since, have embraced the opinions
and the religion of the Sarazens, concerning Mahomet.

On the West Side of Arabia, between that, and Egypt, lies the gulf called
of the country, Sinus Arabicus, by some Mare Erythreum, but commonly the red
Sea: not of one Erythrus as some suppose; but because the sand and banks
there-about are in color red. This is that sea, through the which, by Moses,
the people of Israel were led, when they fled out of Egypt from Pharao: God
causing by his power, the waters to stand on both sides of them, which they
passed through as on dry land.

This is that sea, through the which, the spices of the East Indies were in
times past brought to Alexandria in Egypt. and from thence dispersed into
Christendom by the Venetians: which spices and Apothicarie drugs are found to
be far worse then before time they were, by reason of the great moisture which
they take on the water, by the long navigations of the Portingales, by the back
part of Africa.

This is that sea, through the which Solomon did send for his gold, and other
precious merchandise unto the East Indies, and not to the West Indies, as some
lately have disputed. Whereout the vanity of that opinion may appear, that
America and the West Indies were known in the time of Solomon: for if he had
sent thither, his course had been along the Med. and through the straights of
Gibraltar, commonly called Fretum Herculeum, between Spain and Barbary. But
the Scripture tells, that the navy which Solomon sent forth, was built at
Eseon Gabar: which there also is said to stand on the red sea: so his course
might be Eastward or Southward, not Westward.

In the desert of Arabia is the Mount Horeb: which by some is supposed to be
the same that is called the Mount Sina: where many think it was, that Abraham
should have offered up his son Isaac: but it is certain, that it was the
place, where God in the Wilderness, did give unto the people of Israel his law
of the ten commandments, with thundering, lightning, and earthquake, in most
fearful manner.

De Africa, and Egypto.
FRom Arabia, and Palastina, toward the West, lies Africa; having on the
North-side, from the one end of it to the other, the Mediter. sea. The greatest
part of which country, although it has been gessed at by writers in former
time, yet because of the great heat of it, lying for the most part under the
Zona Torrida, and for the Wildernesses therein, it was in former times supposed
by many, not to be much inhabited: but of certainty by all, very little
discovered: till the Portingales of late began their navigations on the
backe-side of Africa, to the East Indies. So exact a description is not
therefore to be looked for, as has been of Asia, and Eurupa.

Joined to the Holy land by a little Isthmos is the country of Egypt, which
is a land most fruitful, as any almost in the world, although in these days
it does not answer to the felicity of former time. This is it which in the
time of Joseph did relieve Canaan with corn, and the family of Jacob, which
did so multiply in the land of Egypt, that they were grown to an huge
multitude, when God by Moses did deliver them from thence. This country did
yield exceeding abundance of corn unto the city of Rome, whereupon Egypt,
as well as Cicilia, was commonly called Horreum populi Romani.

It is observed from all antiquity, that almost never any rain did fall in
the land of Egypt: whereupon the raining, with thunder, and lightning, and fire
running on the ground, was so much the more strange: when God plagued Pharao in
the days of Moses. But the flowing of the river Nilus over all the country
(their cities only and some few hills excepted) does so water the earth, that
it brings forth fruit abundantly. The flowing of which river yearly is one
of the greatest miracles of the world, no man being able to yield a sufficient
and assured reason thereof: although in Herodotus, and Diodorus Siculus, many
probable causes and opinions are assigned thereof.

It is noted of this river, if in ordinary places it do flow under the height
of fifteen cubits, that for want of moisture, the year is not fruitful; and
if it do flow above seventeen cubits, that there is like to be a dearth by
reason of the abundance of the moisture, the water lying longer on the land
then the inhabitants do desire.

In Egypt has learning bin very ancient. But especially the knowledge of
Astronomy and Mathematics: whereof before the time of Tullie, their Priests
would report, that they had the descent for 1500. years exactly recorded, with
observation Astrologicall: which as it is a fable, unless they do reckon
their years by the Moon (as some suppose they did every month, for a year)
so it does argue knowledge to have been among them very ancient: their Priests
had among them a kind of writing, and of describing things by picture: which
they did call their Hieroglyphica.

This in times past was a kingdom, and by the Kings thereof were built those
great Pyramides, which were held to be one of the seven wonders of the world,
being mighty huge buildings, erected of exceeding height, for the magnificence
of their founders. There is part of two or three of them remaining unto this
day. In Aegipt did stand the great City Memphis, which is at this day called
Cairo, one of the most famous Cities of the East. Here did Alexander build that
City, which unto this day is of his name called Alexandria, bing now the
greatest City of merchandise in all Aegipt: of which Ammiamus Marcellinus does
observe, that there is never any day, or almost has ever been: but that once
in that day, the Sun has been seen to shine over Alexandria. This City was
one of the four principal seas, and remains so at this time.

This country was governed by a King, as long agone, as almost any in the
world. Here reigned Amasis, who made those good laws spoken of by Herodotus,
and Diodorus Siculus, in whose writings the ancient customs of the Aegiptians
are worthy to be read.

After Alexanders time, Ptolomeus one of his captains had this kingdom, of
whom all his successors were called Ptolomeis, as before time all their Kings
were called Pharao. They continued long friends, and in league with the people
of Rome, till the time of Julius Caesar: but afterward they were as subjects to
the Romans, till the Empire did decay,

When they had withdrawn themselves from the Roman government, they set up
a Prince of their own: whom they termed the Sultan, or Souldan of Aegipt: of
whom, about 400. years sinee, Saladine was one. But when the race of these
was out, the Mamalukes (who were the guard of the Sultan, as the Ianisaries to
the Turk) appointed a Prince at their pleasure, till that now about an 100.
years agone, or less, the Turk possessed himself with sole government of
the country: so that at this day, Aegipt is wholly under the Turk.

There be Christians that now live in Aegipt, for their tribute unto the Turk,
as they do now in Graecia.

De Cyrene and Africa minori.
ON the West Side of Aegipt, lying along the Mediterran, is a country which is
called in old time Cyrene: wherein did stand that Oracle which was so famous
in the time of Alexander the great, called by the name of the Temple or Oracle
of Jupiter Hammon: whither, when Alexander did repair, as to ask counsel of
himself and his success, the Priests being before taught what they should
say, did flatteringly profess him to be the son of a God, and that he was to
be adored: so that as the Oracle of Delphos, and some other were plain
delusions of Satan, who did reign in that dark time of ignorance, so this of
Jupiter Hammon may be well supposed to be nothing else but a cousinage of the
Priests.

In this country and all near about where the Oracle stood, are very great
wildernesses: where did appear to Alexander, for four days journey, neither
Grass, Tree, Water, Man, Bird, nor Beast; but only a deep kind of sand: so
that he was enforced to carry water with him for himself and his company, and
all other provision on Camels backs. At this day this country has lost his
old name, and is reckoned as a part of Aegipt, and lies under the Turk.

Westward from hence, along the Mediterran, lies the country which in
ancient time was called Afried minor: for as in Asia one part above another
was by an excellency called Asia, or Asia the less: so this part of Afrike
was termed by the Romans sometimes Africa simply, sometimes Afica the less.
In this country did stand that place so famous, mentioned by Salust: under the
neme of Phileni Arae, which was the bound in that time, between Africa and
Cyrene.

On the Notth and East part hereof, in the sea near unto the shore, was that
quicke-sand, which in times past did destroy so many ships: and was called
Syrtis Magna: as also, on the North and West part was the other sand, called
Syrtis parua. Some part of this country was heretofore under the Sultane of
Egypt, whose dominion did extend it self so far to the West: and there it was
divided from the kingdom of Tunis: but it is now wholly under the Turk, and is
commonly reputed as a part of Barbary. For now by the general name, from the
confines of Cyrene unto the West, as far as Hercules his pillars, all the
whole space is called Barbary: though it contain in it diverse kingdoms, as
Tunis, Fessa, and Marocco.

De Mauritania Caesariensi.
AParte of that country, which by a general name is called at this day
Barbary, has in old time bin called Mauritania, which was divided into two
parts: the East part whereof next to Africa minor, was called by the Romans
Mauritania Caesariensis, as the other was called Mauritania Tingitana. In
Mauritania Caesariensis was the country of Numidia, the people whereof were
used in the wars of the Carthaginians as light horse men, and for nimble
services very active.

In the East-parte of this country standing in the Sea, was that amous City
of Carthage, supposed to be built by Dido, who came from Tyrus. This City was
it which for the space of some hundredth years contended with Rome for the
Empire of the world. In the Roman histories are recorded three great wars
which the people of Rome had with the City of Carthage.

In the first of the three, their contention was for the Isles of Cicilia,
Corsica, and Sardinia: when the victory fell to the Romans, and the
Carthaginians were glad to redeem their peace with the leaving of those
Islands. The second war was begun by Hannibal, who brake the league, and
after he had taken some part of Spain from the Romans, and sacked Saguntum,
a city of their friends, came first over the Pyrenie hills to France, then
over the Alps to Italy, where he overthrew the Romans in three great
battles: and much endaungered their state: he continued in Italy with his
army sixteen years: till Scipio attempting on Carthage, forced Hannibal to
return to rescue his own country. There was Hannibal overthrown, and his
City put to a great pension by Scipio: who for his victory there, was named
Africanus.

In the third war, because the people of Cartharge still brake their leage,
their City was razed to the very ground, by the earnest and continual sure
of Cato the elder, fearing evermore so dangerous a neighbor, though Scipio
Nasica counseled to the contrary: fearing least if the dread of that enemy
were taken away, the Romans would grow either to idleness, or to civil
dissension, which after they did. It is reported of Cato, that he never spoke
his judgment of any thing in the Senate, but his conclusion was thus: Thus I
think for this matter, and withal, that Carthage is to be razed down. And
Scipio Nasica would reply in his conclusion: Thus I think of this matter, and
withal, that Carthage is not to be razed down.

In this country toward the West not far from Carthage stood Vtica, whereof
the younger Cato was termed Cato Vticensis, because he killed himself there,
in the civil wars between Pompey and Caesar: because he would not come
within the hands of his enemy Caesar. Not far from thence Westwarde
stands Hippon, which was the City where S. Austen was Bishop. This whole
country at this day is called the kingdom of Tunis, the king whereof is a
kind of Stipendarie unto the great Turk. The people that inhabit there are
generally Sarazens, and do profess Mahomets religion.

De Mauritania Tingitana.
THe other part of Barbary that lies along the Mediterran. farthest into the
west was called in old time Manritania Tingitana. The people of which country
were those which almost in all old hystories were called by the name of Mauri.
Those of the other Mauritania being rather termed Namidae.

Into the Northwest part hereof did Hercules come, and there did set up one of
his pillars, which answers to the other in Spain, at the straights of
Gibraltar in times past called Fretum Herculeum. On the South part hereof lay
the kingdom of Bocchus, which in the time of Marius had so much to do with
the Romans. In the Westpart of this Mauritania, stands the hill called Atlas
minor; and on the South part is the great hill called Atlas mayor, whereof the
maine Ocean which lies between Mauritania and America, is called Mare
Atlanticum. This hill is so high, that unto those who stood on the bottom of
it, it seemed to touch heaven with his top: whereupon grew that fable of the
Poets, that Atlas was a giant, who held up heaven with his shoulders.

This country has been long inhabited by the Sarazens, who from thence,
finding it to be but a short passage into Spain, did go over now seven hundred
years agone: and possessed there the kingdom of Granado on the South Side of
Spain: till they were thence expelled by Ferdinandus and Elizabeth, or
Isabell, King and Queen of Castile.

In this country since that time, have the Spaniards taken some cities and
holds: and so also have the Portingales: which by the diverse event of
victory, have often been lost and won by them.

Here it was that the Emperou: Charles the fifth had diverse of his great wars
against the Moors, as well as in the kingdom of Timis. For the assistance of
one, who claimed to be King of a part of this Country, did Sebastian the king
of Portingale go with all his power into Africa, in the year 1578. where
unadvisedly bearing himself, he was slain together with two other, dying
that day, who claymed to be Kings: so that there it was, that the battle was
sought: whereof it is said, that three kings dyed in one day: which battle
was the ruin of the kingdom of Portingale: and the cause of the uniting of a
to the Crown of Spain. Astrolegers did suppose, that the blaging Star which
appeared the year before did signify that ill event.

This whole country does contain in it, besides, some imperial government,
two absolute kingdoms: the one the kingdom of Eezza, or Fes, which lies on
the Northpart toward the Mediter. and Spain: the other is the kingdom of
Marocco, which lies from about the hill Atlas minor, to the South and West
part of Mauritania. These are both Sarazens, as be also their people: holding
true league with the Turk; and with some other Christian Princes, a league
only for trefique or Merchandise.

De reliquis Africae regionbius. maritimis.
FRom beyond the hills Atlas mayor, unto the South of Africa is nothing almost
in antiquity worthy the reading, and those things which are written for the
most part are fables. In the new Writers there are some few things to be
obferued As first, that all the people in general to the South, lying within
the Zona torrida, are not only blackish like the Moors; but are exceedingly
black. And therefore as in old time, by an excellency, some of them were
called Nigrita; so that to this day they are named Negros, as then whom no men
are blacker.

Secondly, that the inhabitants of all these parts which border or the sea
coast, even unto Caput bonae spei, have been Gentiles, adoring Images and
foolish shapes for their gods; neither hearing of Christ, nor believing on
Mahomet, till such time as Portingales coming in among them, have professed
Christ for themselves; but have won few of the people to embrace their
religion. Thirdly, that the Portingales passing along Africa unto the East
Indies, have fetled themselves in many places of those countries, building
Castles and towns for their own safety, and to keep the people in
subjection to their great commodity.

One of the first countries famous beyond Marocco, is Guinea, which we call
Ginnie: within the compass whereof lies the cape called Cape Verde: and the
other, the Cape of the three points, and the town and Castle named Sierra
Liona, at which places commonly all trauailers do touch that do pass that
way for fresh water, and other shippe-prouision. Our English men have found
trafique into the parts of this country: where their greatest commodity as
gold, and Elephants teeth: of both which there is very good store.

Beyond that toward the South, not far from the equinoctial line, lies the
kingdom of Congo, commonly called Manicongo: Where the Portingales at their
first arrival, finding the people to be heathens without God, did induce them
to a profession of Jesus Christ: and to be baptized in great abundance:
allowing of the principles of religion: until such time as the Priests did
teach them to lead their lives according unto their profession: which the most
part of them in no case enduring, they returned back again unto their
Gentilisme.

Beyond Manicongo, so far to the South as almost ten degrees beyond the
tropicke of Capricorn, lies the lands end: which is a promontorie, now
called by the name of Caput bone spei: which Vascus Gama the Portingale did
discover, and so called it: because he had there good hope that the land did
turn to the North: and that following the course thereof, he might be brought
to Arabia, and Persia: but especially to Calicut in India. Which course, when
himself and other of his countrymen after him did follow: they found on the
coast up toward Arabia, the kingdom of Mozambique, Melinde, Magadaxa, and
other: whose people were all Gentiles, and now are in league with the
Portingales: who have built diverse holds for their safety: of which
Countries and manners of the people, he that lists to read, may find much
in the hystories of Osorius, and Petrus Maffeus. But there is no matter of any
great importance.

De Abissina, and imperio Presbyteri Iohannis.
IN the inland of Africa lies a very large Country, extending it self on
the East, to some part of the red sea; on the South, to the kingdom of
Melinde, and a great way farther; on the North, unto Egypt; on the West unto
Manicorgo: the people whereof are called Abissini, and it self, the dominion
of him, whom we commonly call in English Prester John: but in Latin some
term him, Preciosus Johannes, because of his riches; but in the most part
Presbiter Johannes: writing of him, that as he is a prince absolute, so he has
also a Priestlike, or Patriarchall function and jurisdiction among them. This
is a very mighty prince, and reputed to be one of the greatest Emperors of
the world.

What was known of this country in former time was known under the name of
Aethiopia: but the voyages of the Portingales in these late days have best
described it. The people therefore are Christians: as is also their prince: but
differing in many things from the West Church: and in no sort acknowledging
any supreme prerogative of the Bishop of Rome. It is thought that they have
retained christianity, even from the time of our Savior, being supposed to
be converted by the Chamberlain of Candace the Queen of Aethiopia: who was
instructed concerning Christ, by Phillip the Euang. in the Acts of the
Apostes. Eusebius. in his Ecclesiastical story does make mention of this. But
they do to this day retain Circumcision: whereof the reason may be, that the
Eunuch their conuerter not having any further conference with the Apostle, nor
any else for him, did receive the ceremonies of the Church imperfectly,
retaining Circumcision: which among the Jews was not abolished, when he had
conference with Phillip.

Within the dominion of Prester John are the mountains commonly called Lune
montes, where is the first wellspring and arising of the river Nylus: which
river running violently along this country, and sometimes hastily increasing
by the melting of much snow from the mountains, would ouer-run and drown a
great part of Aegipt: but that it is slaked by many ponds, dams, and sluices,
which are within the dominion of Prester John. And in respect hereof, for the
maintenance of these, the Princes of Aegipt have paid unto the governor of
Abissines a great tribute time out of mind: which of late the great Turk
supposing to be a custom needelesse, did deny: till the people of the
Abissines by commandment of their Prince, did break down their dammes, and
drowning Aegipt, did enforce the Turk to continue his pay, and to give much
money for the new making of them very earnestly, to his great charge, desiring
a peace.

There be other Countries in Africa, as Agisimbae, Libiae interior, Nubia, and
other of whom nothing is famous. But this may be said of Africa in general,
that it brings forth store of all sorts of wild beasts, as Elephants,
Lions, Panthers, Tigers, and the like: yea, according to the Proverb, Africa
sempor aliquid apportet noui. Oftentimes new and strange shapes of beasts are
brought forth there. The reason whereof is, that the country being hot and
full of wildernesses which have in them little water, the beasts of all sorts
are enforced to meet at those few warring places that be, where oftentimes
contrary kinds have conjunction the one with the other: so that there arises
new kinds or species, which takes part of both. Such a one is the Leopard
begotten of the Lion, and the beast called Dardus, somewhat resembling either
of them. And thus fat of Africa.

De Insulis septentrionalibus.
THe Islands that do lie in the North, are in number almost infinite the chief
of them only shall be briefly touched. Very far to the North, in the same
clymate almost with Sweden that is under the very circle arctick, lies
Ireland, called in old time Thule, which was then supposed to be the farthest
part of the world Northward, and and therefore is called by Virgill, Vltima
Thule: the country is cold, the people barbarous, and it yields little
commodity saving Hankes: in some part of the year there is no night at all.
Southward from thence lies Frizeland, called in Latin Frizelandia, whereas
the Frizeland joining to Germany, is in Latin called Frizia. On the coast of
Germany, one of the seventeen provinces is called Zeland, which contains in
it diverse Islands, in whom little is famous, saving that in one of them is
Vlishing, or Firshing, a town of war: and at Middleburg, in an other, a
place of good mart. The States of the Lowe-countries do hold this province
united against the King of Spain. These Islands have been much troubled of late
with inundation of waters.

The Island that lies most West of any fanie, is Ireland, which had in it
heretofore many kings of their own; but the whole land is now annexed unto the
crown of England: The people naturally rude and superstitious; the country
good and fruitful: but that for want of tillage in diverse pleces, they suffer
it to grow into bogges, and deserts. That is true of this country (which
Solmus writes of some other) that serpents and adders do not breed here; and
in the Irish timber, of certain experience, no spiders web is ever found.

The most renowned Island in the world is Albion, or Britannia; which has
heretofore contained in it many several kingdoms; but especially in the time
of the Saxons. It has now in it the two kingdoms of England and Scotland:
wherein are forue several languages: that is, the English, which the civil
Scots do barbarously speak; the Welsh tongue, which is the language of the
old Britains; the Cornish, which is the proper speech of Cornwall; and the
Irish, which is spoken by those Scots which live on the West part of Scotland
near unto Ireland. The commodities of England, and pleasures are well known
unto us, and many of them may be expressed in this verse:

Anglia, Mons, Pons, Fons, Ecclesia, foemina, lana. This country, which in
old time was inhabited by the Britains, was entered upon by the Romans,
first under Julius Caesar, and was long by them kept in subjection but it was
an error in them, when they wrote that England would breed nor keep no Wolf.
It was afterward ouerrunne, and possessed by the Saxons: of whom, 7. kings at
once did reign here. After that the Danes out of Denmark did invade it, and
much molest it. And lastly, under the leading of their Duke William, the
Normans did conquer it, and established that government, which to this day
does continue. And from whom, as from the Conqueror our ordinary computation
is derived. The Scots were in times past a most barbarous people, of whom
Saint Jerome reports: that he saw some of them in his time in France to
feed on man's flesh. They were never wholly conquered by the Romans.

There be very many little Islands adjoining unto the great Island Britanie. As
at the very North-point of Scotland the Orchades, which are in number above 30.
The chief whereof, is named Orkney: where the people are barbarous,

On the West Side of Scotland toward Ireland, lie the Islands called
Hebreides: where inhabit the people ordinarily termed the Redshankes. Not
far from thence, is the I Will Mona, commonly called The I Will of Man. The
peculiar jurisdiction of the Earls of Darbie, with homage notwithstanding
reserved unto the crown of England.

On the North-part of Wales, is the Island of Anglesey: which is reputed a
distinct shiere toward France side: on the South part of England, is the I Will
of Wight: in Latin called Vectis: which is a good hold in the narrow seas
against the French. More near France, are the Isles of Garnesey, and Iernesey,
where they speak French, and are under the crown of England. There be also
many other, but of small account.

De Insulis in Mari Mediterraneum.
THere be many Islands in the Mediterran, renowned in the old writers: but the
chief of them only shall be touched. From the pillars of Hercules going
Eastwarde, are two Islands not far from Spain: which in times past were
called Insulae Baleares, for that the people often then did use, both for their
delight and armor, Slings which they continually almost carried about them.
And whereunto, as Pliny writes: they did train up their children from their
yo^^^^st years. Not giving them any meat, till they had from some Post or
Beam cast it down with a sling. Of these were those Funditories, or
Sling-casters, which the Carthaginians, and Spaniards did use in their wars
against the Romans. The lesser of these which lies most West, was called in
old time Minorica: and at this day Minorica. The bigger which lies more East,
was called Maiorica: and now Maiorica. They are both under the dominion of the
King of Spain.

More Eastward in the sea called Mare Inferum, or Tyrrhenum, lies the Island of
Corsica over against Genua, and direct Southward from thence, lies the great
Island Sardinia: Forth quiet possessing of which two, the wars were
oftentimes revived between the old Carthaginians and the Romans. For these
two Islands lie in the middle very fitly. For both these are also at this day
under the King of Spain. And were the same which lately the Cardinal of
Lourain would persuade the old king of Navarre in France, that if he would
leave his religion, and become a Papist, the Spanish king should yield him
either Sardinia, or at the loast Corsica, in recompense of Pampilona, and the
rest of the kingdom of Navarre, which the Spaniards by force did detain from
him.

Farther yet to the East, at the very point of the Southpart of Italy, lies
the great Island of Sicilia, which some have supposed to have been heretofore a
part of the continent: but by an earthquake and inundation of water, to have
bin rent off, and so made an Ileland. The figure of this Country, is Triquetra,
or triangle three-square.

There was also great contention for the Country between the Carthaginians
and the Romans: but the Romans obtained it, and had from thence exceeding
store of corn yearly: whereupon, Cicilie was called Horreum P. Romani. Here
stood the goodly city called Siracusa, which was destroyed and sacked by
Marcellus the Roman.

This was in times past a kingdom, where the two tyrants, the elder and the
younger Dionisius did reign: where Hiero also, that great friend to the Romans
did remain. It was afterward made a province, and governed by a Praetor, or
Deputy of the Romans: whereof, Verres was one so inueighed against by Tullie.
It grew afterward to be a kingdom again: insomuch, that Tancredus was King
of Cicilia, who went to the taking of Jerusalem with Richard the second, king
of England. Here was likewise Phalaris the tyrant so famous, king of Agrigentum.

This Country is now also under the King of Spain: who among other titles,
calls himself king of both the Cicilies, reckoning this Island for one, and
that part of Italy for another, which is now called Calabria: and was in the
Roman hystories named Maegna Graecia. There is nothing more renowned in all
Cicilia, either with the new or old writers, then the mountain Aetna: which
being on the outside often covered with snow, yet by a sulphurie, or
brimstonie water, does continually burn within: yea, so that whereas it was
supposed in the ages last before us, that the matter being consumed, the fire
had ceased: twice in our age it has broke forth again, to the intolerable
loss of all the Country adjoining: the ashes thereof, destroying towns and
fruits which were within the compass of many miles about.

This is that place whither Empedocles threw himself, that he might be
reputed a God. This is it whereof Virgill does make his tract called Aenea,
which the Poets did report to be the shop of Vulcan: where the Cyclops did
frame the thunderbolts for Jupiter: and to conclude, this is it which some of
our gross Papists have not feared to imagine to be the place of Purgatory.

Not far South from Cicilie, lies the little Island called in old time
Melite, whence those dogs come, which were so much desired under the name of
Canes Melitenses. This is the country where S. Paul was cast up, after his
shipwreck in his journey to Rome: where the Viper hanged on his hand, and did
not hurt him.

This Country is now called Malta, and is one of the places most renowned in
the world, for the repelling of the Turks: when Soliman the Emperor of them,
did send against it a most mighty army. It was then defended by those, who
are called the knights of Malta: which by sea, do great spoil to the galleys
of the Turk that pass that way.

Near unto Graecia and Peloponnesus: on the West Side toward Italy, is the
I Will Corcyra, now termed Corfue: and not far South from that, is Cephalonia,
and from thence South is Zant: called by Virgill Nemorisa Zazinthus: all which
Islands have been heretofore under the Venetians: but are now under the Turk.

In Zazinthus, our English merchants have an house of abode for their trafique.
Southeast from Morea, lies the great Island Creta, where Minos sometime did
reign, so famous for his severity. This country was then called
Hecatompolis, as having in it an hundred towns and cities.

The Turks have won this also long since from the Venetians: it is now
called Candie, from whence comes our ordinary sugar of Candie. Between
Creta and Peloponnesus lies Cythera, where was the fine Temple of Venus: who
thereof by the Poets, is called Cytherea.

The Islands are many, which do lie in the sea called Mare Aegeum, from the
bottom of Greece, unto the top of the Hellispont: as all the Cyclades, Euboea,
the great Island Samos, and Chios, so Scyro, where Achilles was borne, and was
king of that country. There was also Lesbos, and Lemnos, Metilene, and Ithaca,
where Ulysses was king, and Andros, whether Themistocles was sent by the
Athenia^s for tribute: of which places, something may be read in the old
history of the Greeks: Diverse of these did strive that Homer was borne in
them: but of certainty, many of those kings which Homer says, came with
Agamemnon to the siege of Troy: were kings but of these small Islands.

Eastward from thence, not far from some part of Natolia, or Asia the less,
is the Island Rhodus: the friendship of the inhabitants whereof, was in ancient
time very much desired by the Princes that had to do that way. So that
Alexander first, and the Romans afterward did embrace their league.

Here was that huge and mighty image of the Sun, which was Cholossus Rhodius,

This country was long defended by those, who were called the Knights of the
Rhodes, against the power of the Turk; and it was a great bulwark, to defend
Christendom: till that in the year one thousand five hundred twenty and two:
Solimon the great Turk did win it from the Christians by force. From thence
Southward, is the I Will of Carpathus: but in the farther end of the East part of
the Mediterraneum is Cyprus, which about 300. years since was a kingdom, and
did afforde great aid to the Christians, that went to conquer the Holy land:
but it is now under the Turk. The chief City thereof is Famagusta, which is
an Archbishoppes sea: for Christians for their tribute do yet live there. In
this country in old time was Venus much honored, and thereof it was called
Cypria, as also Paphia: because she had a Temple in a City there called
Paphos.

Near unto Siria stood the Island Tirus, against the pride whereof, the
Prophets do so much speak. This was a rich city for merchandise and
navigations in old time, and is the place from whence Dido and the builders of
Carthage did come.

The destruction of it is most famous by Alexander the great. Of the rest of
the small Islands, we do say nothing.

De insulis in Mare Indico.
THe Islands are very many that do lie in the seas adjoining to the East
Indies: but the most famous among them shall be touched. Among the old
writers, as especially appears by Solinis, was well known that which was
then called Taprobana, which lies under the Equinoctial line. It was in that
time a Maonarchy, where the Kings reigned, not by succession, but by election:
and if any of them did grow intolerable, he was deposed, and enforced to die,
with withdrawing from him all things necessary. This is now called Sumatra,
and has in it diverse Kings.

Not far from thence lie Eastward the two Islands called Iaua mayor, and Iaua
minor: which were also known to the old writers, they have also in them diverse
Kings, as in general may be noted, that all the East part, either in the
continent, or in the Island, have very many small Kings and kingdoms. From
thence yet more East, lies a great number of Isles, which are now called the
Moluccoes, which are places as rich for their quantity as any in the world.
From these it is, that the Spaniards have yearly so great quantity of all
kinds of spice: neither is there any place of all the East Indies that do more
richly furnish home their caractes then do these Moluccoes.

Some of these Islands, the Spaniards have got into their own possession:
with the Kings of some other they have league: and a third sort utterly detest
them. More Northward over against China, lies a great Island called Iapona or
Iapan: the people whereof, are much of the same nature with the men of China.
This country was first discovered by the Jesuits, who in a blind zeal have
travailed unto the farthest parts of the world, to win men to their
religion; this Island is thought to be very rich. The rest that be either
near unto Asia, or unto Africa, because there is little written of them we
pass over.

De Insulis in Mari Atlantico.
THere be many Islands which lie Westward from Africa, and from Europe, as
those which are called the Gorgades, that lie in the same climate with Guinea,
which are four in number: but not inhabited by men: but they are full of
Goats. Northward from thence in the same clymate with the South-parte of
Marocco, lie those which are called Canariae, or the fortunate Islands, which
are seven in number, being most fruitful and very pleasant: and therefore
called by that name. This is famous in them that it has pleased all
Cosmographers to make their Meridiane to be the first point where they do
begin to reckon the computation of their longitude, and unto them after three
hundred and threescore degrees, to return again. From these Islands it is
that those strong and pleasant sackes which are called Canari wines are
brought, and from thence are fetched those which they call Canarie Birds:
these Islands are under the Crown of Spain.

More Northward from thence, lie these Islands which are called Azotes insulae,
being six or seven in number: of which Tercera is one of the chief: of whom,
the rest by some are called the Terceraes, which are far inferior in
fruitfulness unto the Canaries, these were first under the Crown of
Portugale: and one of them was the last which was kept out from the King of
Spain by the Prior don Antonio: who now calls himself King of Portugale:
but the Spaniard at the last took this Tercera from him, and does possess
all these Islands tagether with the rest of the dominion, which did belong to
the Portingale.

De America sieve Orb nouo.
ALthough some dispute out of Plato, and the old writers that there was not
only a guess, but a kind of knowledge in ancient time, that besides Europia,
Asia, and Africa: there was another large country lying to the West, yet he
that shall advisedly use the conjectures made thereupon, may see that there is
nothing of sufficiency to enforce any such knowledge; but that all antiquity
was utterly ignorant of the new found countries toward the West: whereunto
this one argument most forcible may give credit: that at the first ariuing of
the Spaniards there, they found in those parts nothing showing trafique or
knowledge of any other Nation: but the people naked, uncivil, some of them
deuourers of man's flesh, ignorant of shipping, without all kind of learning,
having no remembrance of history or writing among them, never having heard of
any such religion as in other places of the world is known: but being utterly
ignorant of Scripture, or Christ, or Moses, or any God: neither having among
them any token of cross, Church, Temple, or devotion, agreeing with other
Nations.

God therefore remembering the prophecy of his son, that the Gospel of the
kingdom should before the day of judgment be preached in all coasts and
quarters of the world: and in his mercy intending to free the people, or at
the least some few of them from the bondage of Satan: who did detain them in
blockish ignorance, and from their Idolatrous service, unto certain vile
spirits, whom they called their Zemes, and most obsequiously did adore them:
and raised up the spirit of a man worthy of perpetual memory: one
Christophorus Columbus, borne at Genua in Italy, to set his mind to the
discovery of a new world, Who finding by that compass of the old known
world, that there must needs be a much more mighty space, which the sun by
his daily motion did compass about, then that which was already known and
discovered: and conceiving that this huge quantity, might as well by land as
sea, could never satisfy himself, till that he might attempt to make proof
of the verity thereof.

Being therefore himself a private man, and of more virtue then ability.
After his reasons and demonstrations laid down: whereby he might enduce men,
that it was no vain thing which he went about. He went unto many of the
Princes of Christendom: and among other, unto Henry the seventh, then King of
England: desiring to be furnished with shipping and men fit for such a
navigations. But these men refusing him: parley, because they gave no credit
unto his new narration: and partly, least they should be derided by their
neighbor Princes, if by this Genoway stranger they should be cousoned: but
especially, for that they were unwilling to sustain the charges of shipping.
At last he betaketh himself unto the court of Ferdinandus and Elizabeth King
and Queen of Castile: where also at the first, he sound but cold
entertainment: yet persisting in his purpose without weariness, and with great
importunity: it pleased God to move the mind of Elizabeth the Queen, to
deal with her husband to furnish him forth two ships for the discovery
only, and not for conquest. Whereupon, Columbus in the year 1492. accompanied
with his brother Bartholomeus Columbus, and many Spaniards: sailed far to
the West, for the space of three score days and more, with the great
indignation and often mutinies of his company: fearing that by reason of their
long distance from home, they should never return again. In so much, that the
general, after many persuasions of them to go forward, was at length
enforced to crave but three days: wherein, if they saw not land, he promised
to return; and God did so bless him, to the end that this voyage might not
prove in vain, that in that space, one of his company did epsy fire: which
was a certain arguments that they were near to the land, as it sell out in
deed. The first land whereunto they came was an Island, called by the
enhabitants Haity. But in remembrance of Spain from whence he came: he termed
it Hispaniola, and finding it to be a country full of pleasure, and having in
it abundance of gold and pearl, he proceeded farther, and discovered another
big I Will which is called Cuba, of the which being very glad, with great
treasure, he returned into Spain, bringing joyful news of his happy
success.

The Spaniards who by nature are a people proud, have since the death of
Columbus, labored to obscure his fame, envying that an Italian or stranger
should be reported to be the first discouerer of those parts, and therefore
have in their writings since given forth: that there was a Spaniard which had
first been there, and that Columbus meeting with his cards and descriptions,
did but pursue his enterprise, and assume the glory to himself. But this
fable of theirs does savor of the same spirit, wherewithal many of them in
his life time did reproach him, that it was no matter of importance to find out
these countries: but that if he had not done it, many other might, and would:
which being spoken to Columbus at a solemn dinner, he called for an egg, and
willed all the guests one after another to set it up on end, which when they
could not do, he gently bruising the one end of it, did make it flat, and so
set it up: by imitation whereof, each of the other did the same: whereby he
mildly did reproach their envy toward him, and showed how easy it was to do
that which a man had seen done before him. To go forward therefore, Columbus
being returned to Castile, after his welcome to the Princes, was made great
Admiral of Spain, and with a new fleet of more ships, was sent to search
farther, which he accordingly did, and quickly found the maine land, not far
off from the Tropicke of Cancer, which part of the country, in honor of
Spain, he called Hispania noua, and in respect whereof at this day the King
of Spain does entitle himself Hispaniaram Rex. They found the people both of
the maine land and Islands very exceeding in number: naked without clothes or
armor: sowing no corn, but making their bread of a kind of root which they
call Maies. Men most ignorant of all kind of learning: admiring the Christians
as if they had been sent down from heaven, and thinking them to be immortal:
wondering at their Ships, and the tackeling thereof: for they had no ships
of their own: but big troughes which they call their Canoaes: being made
hollow of the body of one Tree, with the sharp bones of fishes: for iron, or
such like instruments they have none.

The Spaniardes did here find the people to be most simple, without fraud,
giving them kind entertainment according to their best manner, exchanging for
knives, glasses, and such like toys, great abundance of gold and pearl.

The desire whereof, caused the Spaniards to seek farther into the countries:
but the tyranny and covetousness of the Spariards was such, in taking from
them their goods, in deflouring their wives and daughters: but especially, in
forcing them to labor in their gold mines without measure, as if they had
been beasts: that the people detesting them, and the name of Christians for
their sakes, did some of them kill themselves, and the mothers destroyed their
children in their bellies, that they might not be borne to serve so hateful a
Nation: and some of them did in war conspire against them: so that by
slaughter and otherwise, the people of the country are almost all wasted now
within an hundred years, being before many millions: those which remain are
as slaves, and the Spaniards almost only do inhabit those parts.

By reason that the country is exceeding rich and fruitful, the Spaniards
with great desire did spread themselves toward the North, where they found
more resistance: although nothing in comparison of warriors: but the greattest
of their labor was, for to conquer the kingdom of Mexico: which Mexico, is a
City very great and populous, as almost any in the world, standing in the
midst of a great marish or fenne. The conqueror of this, was Ferdinandus
Cortesius, so much renowned in Spain unto this day.

In the sea coasts of all this Noua Hispania the Kings of Spain have built
many towns, and Castles, and therein have erected diverse fornaces and forges,
for the trying and sining of their gold.

De partibus Americae versus Septentrionem.
THe rumor of the discovery of these parts being blown over Christendom:
and the great quantity of the land, together with the fruitfulness thereof,
being reported abroad, some other Nation did enterprise to set foot therein: as
namely the Frenchmen, who sent certain ships unto a part of this counttie,
lying North from Hispania noua, some few degrees without the Tropicke of
Cancer: into which when they had arrived because of the continual greenness of
the ground, and trees, as if it had been a perpetual spring, they called it
Florida; where after some few of them had for a time settled themselves, the
Spaniards took notice of it, and being unwilling to endure any such
neighbors, they came suddenly on them, and most cruelly slew them all,
without taking any ransom, yet the Spaniards for want of men are not able to
inhabit that countries, but leave it to the old people.

The Englishmen also desirous by navigations to add something unto their own
country, as before time they had travailed toward the farthest North part of
America, so lately finding that part which lies between Florida, and Noua
Francia, was not inhabited by any Christians, and was a land very fruitful
and fit to plant in, they sent thither two several times, two several
companies, as Colonies to inhabit that part, which in remembrance of the
virginity of their Queen, they named Virginia. But this voyage being
interprised on the charge of private men: and not thorowlie being followed by
the State: the possession of this Virginia is now discontinued, and the
country at this present left to the old inhabitants.

Northward from thence on the seacoast, lies Norombega, which is the
South-parte of that which the Frenchmen did without disturbance of any
Christian for a time possess.

For the Frenchmen did discover a large part of America, on toward the circle
Arctick, and did build there some towns, and named it of their own country,
Noua Francia.

The Enlish-men about the year 1570. did adventure far, for to open the
North parts of America, and sailed as far as the very circle Arcticke,
hoping for to have found a passage by the North to the Moluccos, and to China,
which hitherto, neither by the North of Asia, nor by the North of America,
could be effected by them, by reason of the very great cold and yse in that
clymate. The rest of the inland being an huge space of earth, has not
hitherto by any Christian to any purpose been discovered: but by those near
the seacoasts it may be gathered, that they all which do there inhabit: are
men rude and uncivil, without knowledge of God. Yet on the North-west part of
America, some of our Englishmen going through the straightes of Magellan, and
passing toward the North by Hispania noua, have touched on a Country where
they found good entertainment: the King thereof yielding himself to the
subjection of the Queen of England: whereupon they termed it Noua Albion.

De Peru and Brasilia.
WHen the Portingales had first begun their navigations by Africa unto the East
Indies; some of them intending to have held their course Eastwarde unto Caput
bone spei, were driven so far Westward by tempest, that they landed in a
large and great country, which by a general name, is called Brasilia: where
they began to enter trafique, and with Towns and Castles to plant themselves,
before that the Spaniardes had discovered Peru, which is the South part of
America. So that at this day, whatsoever the King of Spain has in Brasilia,
it is in right of the crown of Portingale. The country is large, having in it
many people and several kingdoms which are not all possessed by the
Portingals: but so, that other Christians, as namely the Frenchmen, being
driven out of their country for religion, have set footing there: though
afterward again they have abandoned it.

The inhabitants hereof, are men also utterly unlearned, but men more ingenious
then the common sort of the Americans: goodly of body, and straight of
proportion, going always naked, reasonable good warriors after their country
fashion; using to fat such enemies as they take in the wars, that afterward
they may devour them, which they do with great pleasure. For diverse of the
people of these quarters, as the Caribles and the Canibals are all eaters of
man's flesh, In this country grows abundance of that wood, which since is
brought into Europe for to dye red colors, and is of the place whence it
comes, called Brazil-wood, the trees whereof are exceeding great.

After that the Spaniardes had for a time possessed Hispania noua, for the
desire of gold and pearl, some of them traveled toward the South. And as by
water they found that sea Westward from Peru (which is always very calm, and
is by them called the South Sea, as the other wherein Cuba stands, is termed
the North-sea) so by land, they found that huge and mighty country which is
named Peru: wherein the people are for the most part very barbarous, and
without God, men of great stature; yea, some of them far higher then the
ordinary sort of men in France, using to shoot strongly with bows made of
fish bones, and most cruel people to their enemies. Among these, the
Spaniards partly by force, but especially by perfidious treason, did get
infinite sums of gold and pearl: wherein being allured, and hoping for more
(by reason that a great part hereof lies under the Zona Torrida) They have
hear and there scatteringly upon the sea-coastes, set up some Towns and
Castles; but are not able to possess almost any thing of the land: neither
have they as yet discovered the inward parts thereof. Some of these
Spaniardes desirous for to see how far this land of Peru did go toward the
South, traveled down till at length they found the lands end, and a little
straight or narrow sea: which did run from the maine Ocean toward Africa
into the South sea. One magelanus was he that found this straight, and
(although it be dangerous) passed through it: so that of his name, it is called
Fretum Magelanicum, or Magelanes straightes. And this is the way whereby, as
the Spaniards do pass to the backside of Peru, and Hispania noza, so,
whosoever will compass the whole world (as some of our English have done) He
must of necessity, for any thing that is yet known, pass through this
narrow straight.

Magellanus did find on the other side toward the Pole, the maine continent:
which also the Portingales in their voyages to the East Indies have sometimes
been driven unto: whereof nothing is discovered, but that in one place they did
see abundance of Parats, and greater then ordinary: whereof they did call it
Psittacorum regio.

This is thought to be a mighty huge country, containing in compass all the
degrees of longitude, in the continent thereof, and is supposed to go unto the
South pole: By reason that no sea is yet found to break in, or break through
the same.

There be also described by some of our late writers, certain great Lands
toward the North Pole. And our Englishmen in their Nauigations have touched
Gronland: but the nature of them, and whether they be such, and so many as is
reported, is not certainly known.

FINIS.

