illustrated title page (not in McKerrow) Come ye blessed etc. Go ye cursed,
etc.



THE SOVLES Alarum-bell. WHEREIN THE sick Soul (through the horror of
conscience) being awakened from security by the sight of sin, has recourse
to GOD by MEDITATION and PRAYER.

By H. Thompson.

Watch and pray, lest ye fall into temptation. Mat. 26. At London printed by Io.
Beale, 1618.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sir Julius Caesar Knight, one of his Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Counsel, Henry Thompson wishes increase of grace, and all
spiritual gifts by Jesus Christ our Lord.
THe chief and principal thing (Right Honorable) appertaining to every
worthy personage (which thing it is good to see that your Honor does well
consider) is to walk in the Garden of humility, whereto the ^igh (...) direct
way is to pass by (...) of Virtue, whose (...) is anchored and lincked to the
fear and love of GOD. For as by the one (...) covered the multitude of sins,
so by the other is obtained blessedness, wisdom, and knowledge. David that
noble King and Prophet, after he had long traveled and passed through the
Gate of Virtue, entered the fair and pleasant Garden of Humility; and his
walking and continuance therein so much pleased God, that he said of him by
the mouth of his Prophet: I will set up thy seed after thee which shall
proceed out of thy body. And now knowing (most Honorable Knight) the great
love and affection which your Honor ever has and does bear to virtue and
godliness, I was thereby moved the more boldly, after I had gathered together
this small-handfull of flowers (named The Souls Alarum-Bel) to dedicate the
same to your Honor, as the fruit of my labors, nothing doubting but that
they shall be acceptable unto you, and shelter themselves under your
favorable and sure protection. And I thought good to set forth a Treatise of
this nature, the rather because meditation is the key that opens to virtue
and all godliness, for the increase of virtue and godly living, leading all them
that follow it to tread in the right and true pathe, which our Sauiur Christ
has prescribed unto us in his holy Gospel. I most humbly beseech your Honor
to accept it as my good will toward you; a show of thankfulness, but no
satisfaction for the great favors and kindnesses which my friends and I have
received from your Honor.

So craving your honorable patience and pardon herein, if any thing have
escaped me for want of knowledge or learning, I shall (according to my bounden
dutte) call daily with my most humble and hearty prayers to Almighty GOD,
that he will finish that good which he has begun in you; praying also for
the prosperous preservation of your health and posterity long to live in
honor, joy, and felicity in this World, and to send you in the World to come
a joyful Resurrection.

Amen. Your Honors to command in all duty and service, Henry Thompson.

The Preface to the Reader.
REligious Reader, amongst other there be two several causes which have
instigated me to enterprise and publish this work of Meditation: partly
because of mine own exercise and commodity, for the health of my soul in the
World to come, and the good ordering of my body here in this present
troublesome Pilgrimage; and partly for the vtility and profit of my native
Country, the advancement and benefit whereof every Man is bound both by nature
and conscience to study by all means possible to the uttermost of his power,
for the true leading of the soul into the right path of righteousness. And
for that purpose every Man is bound to distribute according to the greatness or
smalnesse of the Talent ministered and lent unto him, be it never so little, if
it may any way profit; and see it do not remain in him as dead and frustrate,
but rather that it be bestowed forth to increase and fructify But (gentle
Reader) the manifold miseries and calamities of this our wretched life, which
are incident to our frail flesh, being duly considered, do enforce us to
seek out the right way of Meditation for the comfort of our weak and
oppressed souls, over grown with the deluge of sin Now if we did rightly
know the abundance of benefits which true Meditation, being poured forth to
GOD in zeal of heart does bring; we would be far more industrious to find
it, and being once found, and surely lodged in the secret chamber of our
hearts, we would be far more des^rous to keep it: the thoghts of our hearts
are as so many spectacles to demonstrate and make apparent unto us the benefit,
necessity, force, and use of holy ^editation, inciting us both to frequency and
feruency therein: without which (besides many other benefits, which thereby we
either obtain or lose) neither can Satan be resisted, nor our faith
manifested, nor GOD daily honored. There be many considerations likewise
thereunto moving, a^ the shortness of our life, (which is but a span) and the
vanity thereof, the suddenness of Christ's coming in a moment, the strict and
fearful account that must be ^^dered at the day of his appearance for (...),
ungodly, uncharitable, and unchristian living and behavior. And because holy
Meditation is a mourning and desire of the Spirit to God for that which is
lacking (even as the sick man sorroweth for his health) whereby being
reconciled to God by faith, he may enjoy the thing he does expect and crave, or
has need of: In what a desperate danger may we be thought to be in, if we
shall show our selves slack or careless in this so auailable a duty? Let us
therefore meditate in all places, and at all times, calling to mind the
largeness of Gods gracious love, and his loving kindness in Christ Jesus our
Savior, who bids us ask, and it shall be given, knock and it shall be
opened: And whenever thou art burdened or oppressed with thy sins, or any
other misery, or calamity in the World, use godly and holy meditation, and be
thou then fully assured, the Lord will offer himself to be reconciled to thee,
if thou thy self be ready and faithful to call for the same at his hands. To
the furthering whereof, and (as it were) the tracing a path thereto, consider
that life it self is but the harbenger of death, and we live to die. GOD that
numbered the hairs of our head, has unmbered our years also, which we cannot
pass, whether in middle age, or in old age, or in Infancy; when, and where,
and how, we know not: for the issue of death is in the hands of God. Our end
and final dissolution is therefore concealed from us, because we should be
always meditating, and prepared for our end, and think every moment upon
death, which is the end of all flesh. David teaches us to look back into
our lives by holy meditation, whereby we may learn to redeem the time by
timely repentance, Psalm. 90. As a Bird guides her ^light with her train, so
the life of man is best directed by a continual meditating recourse unto his
end. Here (good Reader) is both the manner and the method, the form and the
fashion how to meditate, and what to meditate, as time and necessity shall
require, with a requisite regard and serious consideration, that our holy
meditations may be the more gracious in the eyes of God, and successful in
our desires and occasions, that God may bless both them and us with an happy
Earnest in this World, of the eternity in the World to come; whether by his
blessed will so prospering this intended means, that it may be able to bring
us to the blessed Haven of rest and endless joy. The Lord of life and death
(in whose hands is the breath of every living thing) so direct us, that we may
learn to number our days, that we may run out the short race of our sinful
Pilgrimage in godliness of holy meditation, with much patience, looking to
Christ Jesus the Author and finisher of our faith; that when we shall have
finished these days of sin, we may be translated to a better life in the
Kingdom of Glory, which GOD has purchased to us in the bloodshedding of his
beloue^ Son. To whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be rendered all
glory, majesty, power, and dominion, now and ever. Amen.

Thine in the Lord, Henry Thompson.

What the Soul loses by mortal sin.
THe grace of the Holy Ghost: The friendship and familiarity with God. All
mortal virtues infused, and of Gods Spirit. The inheritance of the Kingdom of
Heaven. The portion of Gods children, and patronage of his Fatherly providence
which he has over the just. The peace and quietness of a good and clear
conscience.
What misery the Soul gains by mortal sin.
COndemnation to eternal pain, to be quite cancelled out of the Book of
life. To become of the child of God the thrall of the Devil. To be changed
from the Temple of the Holy Ghost, into a den of thieves, a nest of vipers, a
^inke of corruption.
How a Soul is prepared to Justification by degrees.
Faith sets before our eyes, God is a just Judge, Angry with the bad:
Merciful to the repentant.
Of this Faith by the gift of God Spirit arises a fear by consideration of
Gods Justice, and Our own sins.
This fear is comforted by hope grounded in Gods mercy, and The goodness of
Christ.
Of this hope arises love and charity unto Christ: For loving us without
desert. Rredeeming us with so much love.
Of this love follows sorrow for offending Christ, of whom we have been so
mercifully Created, Redeemed, Sanctified, and called to his Faith.
Of this sorrow arises a firm purpose to avoid all sin, which GOD above
all ^things detesteth? The Devil above all things desires: And above all
things hurts the soul.

THE SOVLES Alarum-Bell.
CHAP. I. That GOD his beginning was without beginning, and is, and shall be
ever without end.
THere was evermore a Thing being, and that Thing that was ever before all
other things, must needs be without be ginning; and must be the first Maker,
and the first Cause of all things, which has no maker, nor no cause out of
whom as out of the very fountain, and will of all causes, every thing takes
his being. So that Thing which was first being, must needs be the Exo. 3. 14.
cause and foundation of all things, and of all beings; and that First cause or
Maker is among all people called Ioh. 8. 58.
God. Then since God is the first cause of every thing, Job. 1. 2. 3. 4.
and the first principal cause of the being of every thing, it requires that
there be in him such a being that it must be the most perfect, most substant
all being, and the most sure being, that is, or can be, which shall never have
end. For if it shall have an end, it is not the most perfect, most
substantial, and most sure being; for it must be such a being, which
excludes every imperfection, that soonest tends to Not being. There is no
time past in which he was not; no time present in which he is not; nor no time
to come, in which he shall not be. So that of necessity it follows, that his
being was ever without beginning, and is, and shall be ever without end;
therefore conveniently God is called Omnipotent, as being of most power and
might. Then since God is the cause of all things, and Genesis 1. 1.
every thing takes his effect by God, and comes of God, as of his first
cause, Pro. 8. 22.
(and every thing that takes any effect has need of the cause for without
the cause the effect could never have John. 1. 1. 2. 3. 4.
been.) Therefore it must follow that every thing has need of God, and that
God has need of nothing. And likewise that thing that Act (...) 14. 24.
has no life, nor never had life, may not by his own Ephesians. 1 11.
power make a thing to have life. But we see in this world man and beast to
have life; which life proceeded and came first from that Creator which is very
life, and in whom first must needs be life. Then since God is first Creator and
causer of every thing which has life: it follows, that in him there was ever
a life. And (as I have said before) because the being of God is the first being
and cause of Genesis 1. 7.
the being of every thing, and the most perfect, most substantial, and most
sure being; and because that thing which has being and life also, is more
worthy then that thing which has but being only; as the trees and herbs
which have a quickness of life whereby they grow and increase, have a more
noble and worthy being, then a dead stock or a dead stone, which grow not: and
as the brute beast which has a life sensitive, and power to move it self, and
memory has a more noble and worthy being, then the Tree, or herb which has
but quickening and growing, without power to move, or memory: and also as the
being of man, which has both life sensitive, power to move, memory and
understanding, has a more worthy being then the brute beast, which has but
life sensitive, power to move and memory, without understanding: so it must
needs follow that understanding is the cause of the most worthy being. And since
that God has the most noble and worthy being that can be, it must needs
follow, that in God there must be knowledge and understanding; and that the
same being of God must be with the same knowledge and understanding. And then
if the being of God (as I have proved before) be without beeginning and ending,
eternal, infinite, without measure; and his being is, and has been ever most
perfect: and as he himself may be himself, so may he himself understand
himself, so that his being cannot be severed from his knowledge and
understanding, nor his knowledge and understanding severed from his being; it
must follow that he understands all, and knows every thing that was, is,
or shall be; and every man's thought, and deed done, or to be done in the world,
is present to his knowledge. For the eternal essence of God, which must excel
all other beings, has in it self such a nobility, that it comprehends all
the whole plenty of life together, and knitteth time past, and time to come
with the time present: and nothing is to God past or to come, but all things
are to him present. For if any thing were to him newly known, then God had not
all perfect knowledge in him as the beginning; and so there should be in God
some mutability and change, and augmentation of knowledge: And because he had
ever most perfect being and most perfect knowledge, and his knowledge cannot
be separated from his being (as I have proved before) it must needs follow
that God knew all things ever, and every thing was ever, is, and shall be to
him present.

CHAP. II. What the Soul is.
THere is a threefold soul; that is to say, a soul Vegetative, Sensitive,
and Intellectiue; a soul vegetative is that life that is in Plants, Trees,
Grass, Herbs or fruits, which do Genesis 2. 9.
grow. A soul sensitive is that life, which is in a brute beast; which
occupies, and uses the five senses, such as are the taste, the smelling, the
hearing, the sight, and touching, but lacks reason and understanding; as is a
horse, a cow, a bird, a fish, and such like. But a soul intelectiue is
aspiritual substance, created invisible, most like to the immortal God, having
no other image or figure, but only of his creator; Genesis 1. ^7 Ephesians. 4. 2.
and has a lively power and understanding to know good from evil, and right
from wrong; and man is that Creature, to whom GOD has given this soul
Intellectiue Now because man has growing, as plants and herbs have he is
therefore called lively: and because he has the use of the five senses as
brute beasts have therefore he is called Sensible, and because he has
reason and understanding, therefore he is called Reasonable. A man then is
nothing else but a lively sensible, and reasonable creature. For the body and
the reasonable soul joined together, do make a man. Therefore there is no
Creature of God in earth, that has any knowledge and reason how to do honor
to God, save only man; so that God will by his goodness and mercy reward man
for Mat. 25.
his good deeds, and by his Justice punish him for his offenses, and evil
deeds. For the soul of man is immortal and shall never dye. For no
incorporeal substance created by God, shall ever have end. Which thus is
proved; the soul must needs be made of somewhat, or else of nothing: but there
can be nothing named, of the which it is made; or if it be made of any other
mean thing, or things then must it be made of part of it self, which so
gathered together makes the whole soul, or else it is made of some matter
with some form and fashion added thereto: but it is not made of parts gathered
together, for the soul has no parts, nor cannot be divided; neither is it
made of any other matter; for every thing that is made of any matter and form,
may be resolved unto the same matter, whereof it was first made, when the
form or fashion is broken or destroyed, as an Image, an house, a cup, and such
like. And therefore since that the soul of man cannot be resolved to any such
matter whereof it is made, because it is a simple substance of it self, ergo
it is made of no matter. Then if it be neither made of part of it self,
neither of any matter, it has no mean cause of it creation and being; and as
it must needs be immediately made Genesis 1. 26.
of God, which is infinite, so consequently it follows, that the soul of man
must needs be infinite, incorruptible, and immortal, and does live after it
is separated from the body, either in joy, or pain. And as touching the being
of the ^oule after it is separated from the body, it is not circumscribed in
any place. For a natural place is the utter and extreme term or part, and
hollow superficies of a body, containing another body within it: and a
superficies is that, which has but length and breadth, and no manner of
thickness: for (...) it have length breadth, and thickness then it is a body.
So that every thing that I see, which is the object of my sight, and whereupon
my sight does rest, not considering the thickness, is called a superficies;
and so the utter part of every bodily thing that I do see, is called the
Superficies, because I do see the length and breadth thereof, but not the
thickness. As by example; a Tun is called by common people the place of the
wine, because it contains the wine within it: and so that hollow superficies
of the tun is the very natural place of the wine; and such a natural place
does contain within it always a corporal substance, and a bodily thing.
Therefore the soul can never be contained in any natura^l place, because it
is no corporal substance, but a spiritual which does occupy no place, no more
then the thought or mind does, which occupies no place. Also understand thou,
that there be two kind of things which have being: the one is a real thing,
and the other is a rational. A real thing is that, which is perceived by the
Organs and Instruments of the five wits; as that thing which may be seen,
heard, tasted, felt, or smelled. But rational things are those, which be not
perceived by the five wits, but only be perceived by reason; and they be
things incorporeall, as love, charity, meekness, abstinence, pride, malice,
sloth, and such other. Furthermore of places, there be three diversities. One
is a place Continentiue, another is a place Limitatiue, and the third a place
Operative. A place Continuentiue is that, wherein real things, as bodies,
images, and figures be contained; as the Tun wherein the wine is contained. A
place Limitatiue is, where things incorporeal be limited to be; as the proper
place limitatiue for love, is that thing which is loved; and that thing which
is so loved is the place limited for that to be, and there the love is in his
place limitatiue: which place limitatiue of love cannot be ever certain, but
mutable: and because love may be at once in diverse things, therefore love may
be in diverse places limitatiue at one time. A place operative is that place
where the operation of the thing is; because we see that the maruailous
operation of God is that maruailous swift moving of the heavenly Spheres and
bodies above, which do appear to us; therefore we say that the place where
God is, is heaven: so that Genesis 1. 8
where so ever the operation of God appears, there is the place operative,
and there is God. And thus to conclude, God has ordained a place of joy, and a
place of pain, where every man's soul shall be rewarded according to his
deserts.

CHAP. III. Of the Body.
A BODY has length, breadth, and thickness; a man is nothing else but a
lively body, sensible, and reasonable; which man has five wits or senses,
hearing, feeling, seeing, smelling, and tasting; and these senses are divided
into Animal, and Rational. The Animal senses be diffused throughout all the
members of man, such as be, seeing, hearing, smelling, etc. And all these are
common to us, with brute beasts. The Rational faculties consiste in reason,
which does make a man a Genesis 1. 28. 29.
reasonable Creature, who by reason may rule unreasonable beasts, and all
things being under his dominion.

CHAP. IIII.
Of earthly pleasurs, and the vanity thereof. Of the comfort and commodity
which man reapes, in and by knowing himself. Of the shortness, frailty, and
miseries of man's life: With a remembrance of death, and meditation thereof.
THE way to balance our selves and our desires is, to know our selves first,
then to know God, and to fix our whole hope, confidence, and desire in him,
who is the true fountain and well spring of all happiness and content; within
the compass of whose mighty Protection we are no longer his, then while we
walk within the bounds of his gracious directions. Miserable are those and
most wretched, that wander and run astray out of the arms, and safeguard of
his omnipotency. If the Lord should forget us, as we forget him; nay, if he
should not remember us sinful Creatures a thousand times ere we remember him
once, and keep us in, we should daily and howrely wander out of the right way,
and perish therein. But his mercy and goodness is above al his works; and his
great benefits are so generally extended, that the wicked have their portion
therein, as well as the godly: his enemies, as well as his friends. If the Lord
should revenge our injuries and ingratitude, which we commit in contemning his
will and Commandments, and deal with us as we deal one with another: what
would, or should become of us then? Nothing but woe, and mere confusion. O let
us therefore learn from him which is the true pattern of all goodness and
consolation, in some poor measure to be like unto our Lord and and Master
Christ Jesus, from whence we derive our name and are called Christians. Let us
whose Image we carry stamped by the fingers of his own hands, let us be not
only shadows but bodies moving after his steps that is our head; let us
walk here on earth as good Christians, whereby we may show the wicked a
pattern of good life, to imitate such humility and sobriety as our Lord Jesus
Christ the true and lively pattern of all goodness and piety has walked
before us: the print of whose blessed feet we daily look on with our eyes,
and consider in our hearts with joy and comfort. If we will be his Disciples,
we must take up his Cross and follow him, making it our glory, that are the
people of his pasture, and the sheep of his hands: who nevertheless in
simple sight grasing on the mountains, are either fleeced of the shearer,
grown into we oll: or snatched up by the bucher, grown into flesh: and the
water of affliction being wrung unto us out of a full cup, we be exposed to
the shame of the world, and the winds still beat on our sails, and our lives
bound up in vexation and sorrow, whilst the wicked like the bramble in
confidence of their shadow, Judge. 9. 15.
dare challenge to be Kings over the forest. And though they sail calmely as
in the Haven: and their breasts are full of milk as IOBE Job 21. 26.
speaks, and their bones of marrow; and though with DAVID in the 73, PSALM
wherein the property of the wicked is lively set forth, (how they come not to
misfortunes like other folk; neither are they plagued like other men; their
eyes swell with fatness, and they do even what they list) yet let us take
comfort to our selves, and stay our souls on the anchor of his providence, as
the same Prophet did; although in the consideration of his chastisement all the
day long, and every morning, yet the prosperity of the wicked, he confessed
and said: My feet had almost slipped, yea and I had said as they, until I went
into the Sanctuary of God: then understood I the end of these men; namely, how
thou set them in slippery places, and castest them down, and destroyest
them; how suddenly they come to a fearful end. So, when death shall make us
both even with the Earth, here is our comfort: The grave shall be to us as a
fold till our Shepherd come, and to them a shambles until the destroyer of
their souls shall receive an endless commission to torment them. Therefore
neither the pleasures of this life, nor health, wealth, or liberty, are at the
best, but candied wormwood that delights the taste, but destroys the
stomach; without a true and sanctified use therein, that makes those happy and
blessed that have them: for with all the goodly branches of delectation and
pleasure they cast (if their Tree answer not with fruit) the leaves will not
protect it from the fire. Cursed is he that is blessed in this world, to be
cursed in the world to come: Here we have the eloquence of the flesh to
persuade us, the inticements of the devil to allure us, the company of the
wicked to associate us: All these, to divert our course from the place whither
we are going and the World with her inticements to train us furthest from what
we seek and the pride of our life to persuade us for trifles to forgo the
interest we have in heaven, and our branched corruption every way ready to set
us forward, being ambitious like Adam; who if he may be as God, there is Gen 3.
5.
no command can restrain him: vainglorious like Esau, who if he may have a
Genesis 33. 1.
train of men at his heels, will soon digest the loss of his birthright:
and so byvsury if our bags may thereby be made fuller; the word of God shall
not restrain us from it. If the sons of men shall take the devil at his
word, which the Son of God did not, when the devil tempted him and showed
him ^ll the Kingdoms of the Earth, and the glory thereof: All these will I
give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me; and for the glory of the
world which he shall show, and cannot give, shall fall down and worship him. If
he show honors, preferment, pleasure, riches, saying, as this, I will give
thee: though the minions and lovers of the world, that seek for their heaven
upon earth, shall be ready to betray their souls, as Judas betrayed Christ,
with his (Hail Master,) shall be ready to embrace him, to serve him, to serve
themselves; yet with the Son of God after his fasting, be thou so strong in
thy strength, as he was in his weakness, to bid him depart, and say him, Nay.
It is Matt. 16. 20.
but a bitter recompense to buy the pleasures at so dear a rate, as at the
price of the soul in everlasting confusion: for our life is short and fading,
and but the length of a shanne; and if thou think it more, take the Counters
into thy hands, and see what reckoning thou can make of it. What is past,
grieves thee with the remembrance thereof, because so much of thy time is
spent; what is present, burdeneth thee with the weight thereof, because in
sweat and soar study and travel, thou do waste thy time: what is to come,
troubles thee with the uncertainty of it, lest the grave do swallow thee
before thou see it. Yea, make thine account as thou ought, and thou shall
find it swifter then the Weauers shuttle, Job 7. 6: and speedier then a post on
the wings of the wind, Job 9. 25. Then in consideration of this, and whatsoever
has been spoken to the vn^lothing of our nakedness, and humbling us before
God, to the pulling off our robes of leuity and lightness, and the preparing
our bodies to the grave, and our souls to this ensuing exercise of holy
meditation, to the daunting of all flesh. All must come, and the hour may be
near, but it cannot be far off; and howsoever we forget it, it will be
sure to remember us. Therefore let us know that here as Pilgrims and strangers
we wander, having no abiding City; but we seek for one to come: But we must
not seek to find it here. nor suffer the vain applause of the world, and the
vainer conceit of our selves to make us forget where we live; remembering that
we are of our selves but as trees turned upwards, having no sap from the
Earth, but refreshed and moistened with the deaw of Heaven. Let us so provide
for our journey, that we miss not the Ci^y we seek for: Let us so run our
race, that we obtain the victory and reward we run for; and therefore if
thou expect in thy labor blessing, in thy peace continuance, in affliction
comfort, in thy death triumph, in thy judgment joy; respect in thy life,
sob^iety in thy calling, honesty in thy pleasures, judgment in thy sorrows,
in thy life religion. If God be not with thee to direct thee that thou stray
not, to correct thee that thou presume not, to sustain thee that thou famish
not, to pardon thee that thou despair not, to support thee that thou stumble
not, to strengthen thee that thou fall not, and to sanctify thee that thou
sin not, and to glorify thee that thou perish not. If the Lord thorowout the
whole course of thy life, and in thy death be not present and powerful to
thee, thou faintest in the one, and failest in the other, and desperation
enuironeth thee on every side: for where the Lord keeps not, watches not,
but turns away his face, all the miseries in the World then will lay their
siege. Therefore to him let us day and night send up our supplications and
prayers unfeignedly without ceasing, like incense into the air; whereby that
merciful and loving Savior of mankind may continue his goodness toward us,
and give us that what we want, to support us by his grace, to direct us by his
Spirit, and so lead us through this exemplarie World of sin and wickedness,
with our eyes so looking forward fixed on him, that we let not temptations in
at their windows; so captiuating our desires unto the omnipotency of his
Majesty's will that with Lot we may be righteous in a City, in a World of
uncleanness; that so we may save our souls at the last, though we lose all
the vain pleasures in the World besides. The loss of (...) soul would more
(...) Satan, then (...) sorroweth for the damnation of his own; but Christ
our loving Savior, he being ou^ only and chief Precursor into Heaven, even
unto his last breath, being not unmindful of his little flock, did as Abraham
unto Isa ack^, as David unto Solomon, as Tobias unto his son, bequeathed unto
his a few small hours before his glorification, his best and principal legacy
being eternal life; confirming it unto them in his last and latest prayer made
for his Apostles: This is life eternal, that we know thee to be the only
very God without beginning or ending, and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ.
That we know him, who he is, and Romans 11.
what he is. 1 Who he is, even the principal and singular essence, from whom,
and by whom, all things were created, all things are preserved, all things
shall be dissolved 2 What he is; great in wisdom, and therefore knows;
powerful in strength, and therefore can; plentiful in love, and therefore
will crown those which he knows; and know those everlastingly which he
loves; and love those most tenderly which know and acknowledge him. By his
knowledge he will rule, by his strength defend, by his love embrace all that
know and acknowledge him; that know him after a long and earnest seeking him,
and acknowledge him by a most gracious and happy finding him: seeking him among
their miseries, finding him in his mercies; seeking him in the crowd and
preasse of their sins, finding him in the top of his Cross; seeking Him in
finding our selves, finding him in seeking our selves. As we desire to know
and find God, so we must endeavor by all means possible to know and seek out
our s^lues, and make a true inquisition about our selves, before we can
attain and reach unto the right knowledge of him that made us.

For God, being (as he is) without beginning and ending, and not subject to
definition or Description, must be shadowed per posteriora, because he has
not priora; he being primum principium, the primary cause and principal ground
of every principle, yea that principium principiorum, that illimited,
wonderful, and unsearchable Alpha must be Apoc. 1.
comprehended and known by his effects. It is mere dotage in Philosophy to
search out causes of Principles: when they are Principles, they have not
precedent causes; and therefore those things that borrow not their proof and
demonstration from fore-running causes, their brightness and luster must
appear by their effects.

Since then God in regard of his being, which is without ending, is
incomprehe^sible and void of all demonstration, man's frailty must labor to
know him by his effects and works. For the invisible wisdom of God is seen by
the creation of the world; and if in any creature the perfect Art of Gods
omnipotency may be comprehended, it is in nothing more then in man, upon whom
he has set the stamp of his own image. Man therefore must know him and give
him that due reverence of honor which pertains to the omnipotency of his
Majesty; for in knowing GOD, man knows himself, as being his workmanship.
Therefore we ought to love and know him as our Ma^er, Creator, and Redeemer.
First know thy self with the eye of experience, and then know God with the eye
of contemplation; first know thy self poor in misery. and then know God rich
in mercy; first know thy self groaning, and back broken under the burden of
sin; and then know God easing and refreshing thee thus laden: first know thy
self Deaths freehold and possession, and then know God the breaker and bruser
of the Serpents head: first know thy self to be the weak subject of all
mortality, and then know God in the donation of his Spirit, the earnest-penny
of man's immortality. Man must know that he is no long living creature, and
that as soon as he is borne he is coupled with famine, with thirst, with heat,
with cold, and many more infirmities. And for his death, he may be compared
to snow, quickly come, and as quickly gone: or like to a rose, at morning
fair, at evening withered. Therefore seeing we are so suddenly gone, here to
day, to morrow vanished; man must first know from whence he is, and then let
him blush for shame; secondly, where he is, and then lament with groans;
thirdly, whither he will, and then tremble with fear At his naked nativity he
laments with crying at his worldly entertainment, and trembles with fear for
his doubtful end, what shall become of him. O let man blush for shame; he is
flesh; and therefore far from God; let him lament with groans that he is in
the world, for therefore is he wide of heaven; let him tremble with fear that
he must die he being obuious to the jaws of hell. To be brief, man must
know himself aright both within and without, behind and before, and on all
sides, before his perverse and overthwart nature will know the right way to
follow God in his steps. But on the contrary, man is prone to evil, and to the
sweet and pleasing remembrance of that which is bad; on this side lack of
patience in adversity, on that side too much pride and haughtiness in
prosperity: nay what vice is it that man wants? on every side wounds, and
nothing but wounds imprinted and stamped in his soul and frail flesh by the
custom of sin: yet upon his repentance he shall find God above him
powerful, beneathe him plentiful, before him watchful, behind him
wonderful; on this side bountiful, on that side careful, and on every side
merciful; merciful in forgetting, merciful in forgiving our sins, and the
only pathway to perfection.

Heraclitus, a Heathen in superstition, a Philosopher in profession, on a time
triumphing as it were with himself how he had spent the day, cried out with a
loud voice, The honor of the well-spent day is this; I have sou^ht my self,
which of al knowledge (next to God) is most necessary: for man in knowing
himself, knows God. It is an hard thing to be tongue-tide in secrecy, to
dispose the time rightly, or to suffer injuries patiently; it is an hard thing
to tolerate adversity with quietness, and as hard a thing it is to be a good
Man. The hardest lesson that a man can learn, is to know himself: what is the
style of Mastership in Arts, if a man perfectly knows not himself? Knowledge
puffs up, but selfe-knowledge pu^leth down. Knowledge is so far wide of true
knowledge, that in ignorance of God it cries with Pharaoh, Exo. 5. But
selfe-knowledge plunged in the depth of its own knowledge, aspireth to know
the true knowledge of God. Exodus 18. Iethro confesses the Lord is greater then
all Gods. Knowledge mounteth upon the wings of pride, boasts with Lucifer; I
will make the stars my foote-^toole: But selfe-knowledge covered with the
veil of humility, falls down with Job, and worshippeth knowledge. But
selfe-knowledge is not hasty in pace, nor multiloquious in words; keeping time
in going, and observing a mean in speaking, and at once breaks up the chest
of his heart unto the Lord for his merciful favor herein. Aristotle by nature
coueted knowledge and that itching desire of Eve as soon as she was out of the
shell, testifies no less: for the hope of much knowledge she lost her self
in ignorance, swallowing as she thought the bait of knowledge, which turned in
the end to the bane of ignorance. Yet if knowledge suffer a difference, and men
bear more then an indifferent mind unto it, there is none more pleasing, none
more profitable then this selfe-knowledge; pleasing in respect of God,
profitable in respect of man. Genesis 28. It is the ladder of Jacob that reaches
from earth to Heaven, that Geometrical square that squareth out Man at a
spanlength; and then measures Psalm. 39.
God the Alpha and Omega, which fills Heaven and Earth: that Arithmeticall
Calendar of Man's age, that first declares his time to be three^^ore years and
ten; and then with Moses ascends the Mount to take a survey of Gods
eternity. The dee^er Man vvadeth into the s^lfe-knovvledge the nearer he shall
arrive to God himself It shall be more then Thomas his Credo, to conceive God
inwardly, Ioh. 20.
then to thrust thy finger into his side; it shall be more then the Centurions
Mat. 27.
testimony to acknowledge him in thy heart, then before the multitude to
confess him with the lips; it shall be more then Simeons Nunc Dimittis, to
take hold of him in a troubled spirit, then to embrace his infancy in the
flesh; it shall be more then Philips sufficit, to view John 14.
him in thy self, then to behold him in the heavens. Look not on the
superficies and outside of thy self, says the Poet; but rather let thy
conscience be thy looking-glass, whereby thou may dress and attire thy
self fit for heaven; that will tell thee how to get the wedding robe by
innocence of life; that will teach thee how to put it on by a lively faith;
that will tell thee what his progenitors have been; that will teach thee what
thy state is now; that will tell the histories of Adam; that will tell the
lessons of thy self; that will tell thee that Adam brought sin into the
world; that will tell thee therefore how thou may study the law of God: we
must study it because it is a school master to bring us unto Christ: and there
like a true Naturalist, shall thou find the causes of thy sin hanging upon
record; and there like a true Historian, read what others have done before
thee, and how thou may study the Law by reading it with a gloss of the
Gospel, is because the Gospel is a true interpretation of salvation: briefly,
that will tell thee how thou wast borne under infestuous Planets; this will
teach thee how thou must be borne again under that Prince of Planets the
Sun of righteousness, Job. 3. Defend thy self from that which will not
teach thee law, and learn true and perfect knowledge of God, whereby thou
may betake thy self wholly unto him, that he may betake himself wholly
unto thee; and that thou may strive to be bathed in the remission of sins,
rather then to be drenched in the sea of desperation. Man and his ways are
sinful, therefore let us call upon God, and still pray unto him being our
Savior and merciful Redeemer: it is no shame to be sorrowful, or to cry to
God for the forgiveness of our sins: it is no reproach to beg Gods mercies;
or hurt to us to pray his Majesty to be merciful in the remission and
forgiveness of our sins: it is no discredit to confess our faults unto God,
and to tell him we are miserable and wretched sinners. This is the means to
quench the extremity of thirsty sin and to obtain a refreshing cup, with a
beaten breast, and broken heart to cry unto God, to be a merciful father unto
us, and to give us remission of all our sins. If lamentable pictures and
woeful tales carry their force with them to enforce tears from the hearers and
beholders eyes; then cannot we but turn prodigal in tears, when we behold
this lively counterfeit of sorrow, where every color has a speaking grief,
every grief a mourning tongue to extort and wring tears from the beholders
eyes. Jacob did Genesis 37.
never rent his garment in so many pieces for the loss of Joseph, as the true
penitent sinner does his soul for the burden of his sins, laying them upon
the ra^ke of repentance and stretching them from earth to heaven, from himself
to God. Agar being turned out of her ma^ters Genesis 21.
house, made her eyes ^^e plaintifes of true contri^^on to her solitary
wan^ring: but the penitent in ^eart being turned out of ^is masters favor,
makes ^is hand his heart, his eyes ^is tongue, and all labor to ^essen the
grief of his dis^ase, with a true sorrowful ^emorse: his hands like the
^ellowes blow the fire of ^ontrition to his heart; his heart like a limbecke
distilleth the sovereign water of repentance into his eyes, who (like full
cesternes) not being able to look upward, return their streams back unto the
heart; that being ouercharged, drives the flood of his affection to his tongue;
his tongue like Aarons censer, conuayes the sweet perfume of his precious
distillation into the presence of God himself. And as the Angels celebrated
the birth of Christ with a joyful hymn, so he welcomes his second birth with
a sad lamentation; much like to Peter when he denied his Master. Mat. 26.
Sick men cannot away with any melancholy; Saul's frenzy could not endure
David's 1 Samuel 18.
Harp; Salomons thousand songs cannot mitigate the smart of the sinners
disease that runs altogether upon the heart-string, not the Harpe-string, the
spaces, falls, and rises of a melancholy ditty; the first note being raised
high to him that is above all; the second with a temperate stop moved to a
mean; the third with a heavy touch fitted to the base. Heavy, O heavy is the
note of man, and therefore it calls for moderation of God: O heavy, too heavy
is the note of sin, and therefore it craves the voice of mercy. We may justly
observe in the penitent sinner, first his invocation to God: secondly, his
humble petitions: thirdly, his condition in his meditation, by virtue whereof
he attaineth to know himself to be the greatest offender, and God his only
Savior and Redeemer. David being in the depth of meditation, his Psalm. 39.
heart was hot, the fire of his zeal was kindled, and he spoke: Lord teach me
to number my days: in the same precinct and streits of meditations is the
penitent sinner; his arms like the Phoenix wings, has set his heart on fire;
by that his zeal is inflamed, by his zeal his tongue is enlarged and calls to
God for his mercies; he speaks as David in his meditation, with judgment and
discretion; he speaks in his meditation what he wants; his prayer directing to
obtain his wants at the hands of his merciful Savior. Lastly, he speaks,
and speaks authorized, with a prouiso and respect to whom he speaks. What is
it he speaks? The first regard is the reverence of the person to whom he
speaks, God. His second consists of a twofold property; one drawn from
himself, being a miserable sinner: the other from a necessity that GOD would
be merciful to our misspent life. The third is couched not so much in
quantity of words, as in quality of affection his prayer is short, but very
sweet in regard of zeal. His last regard aims at the time; for sin like
Noah's flood every day getting strength, was almost Genesis 7. 17.
come to the top of Ararat, and had almost ouerspread the whole earth; so it
was high time to stay the swelling rage and fury of it; and therefore he
strives to bring it back to a low ebb, and with a smooth calm of an humble
petition, speaks in a serious meditation to God to forgive him his sins, and
to be merciful unto him: but helples man cannot help, but only God, in who^
and with whom is al comfort. I will not run unto the wise man with Pharaoh; I
call not upon any Idols with the Priests of Baal; but with Exodus 7.
sorrowful Sara in the gaul of bitterness, with wrinckled Tob. 3.
faced Job smitten on the cheeks with a reproach, I Job. 16.
begin my confession unto the Lord. I pray not for the strength of body with
Samson, with Elisha for my enemies Judge. 16.
blindness, with worldly Balaam for earthly treasures; but with the faithful
2 Pet. 2.
Cananitish woman once and Math. 15.
again rejected, I beg for crummes of thy mercy, that thou will be a
Savior for my sins; even I the son of sorrow present my self unto thee,
and as the Leaper Math. 8.
entreated for his own cleansing even so I pray that God will show his mercy
and compassion upon me, being wea^ed a long time from the Teattes of thy love,
and nourished with the corrupt milk of sin. It is even I that have refused
thy heavenly Manna, and delighted my self with the leaven of Egypt; now at
the length struck with the whip of repentance, retire, and for the ^asing of
my grief, presume to solicit thee in this manner: (O Lord) be merciful unto
me and forgive me the great and heinous crimes which I have committed against
thy omnipotent Majesty. I am not of Simon Peter's mind, that said, Lord go Lu.
5. 8.
from me, for I am a sinful man; but rather. Lord come to me because I am a
wret ^hed and sinful man. Neither do I cry out with the possessed, Jesus
thou Son of God what have I to do Mat. 8.
with thee; but rather, Jesus thou Son of God, I have to do with thee: Oh
let me have some interest in thy love, which like a veil covers the
multitude of sins, and unites the peece-rent heart of the sorrow-beaten
sinner. It is not with me as it was with Cain, to say, my Genesis 4.
sin is greater then can be pardoned; neither am I as yet clasped in that
desperation and distrust, as to equalize and compare thy mercy to my sins: I
know thy piety to exceed man's impiety, and thy mercy to be greater then man's
misery Sins as they cannot choke thy love, so they cannot stand in any degree
of comparison with the infinitene^ of thy mercy: for how much thy greatness
ouerspreads man's weakness, so much the goodness of thy goodness exceeds the
evil of his evil; and therefore it were first high treason to thy omnipotency
and power to say; My sins are greater then thou can pardon, when thy mercy
is (like thy self) great without all quantity, good without all quality.
Secondly, it were a wrong unpardonable to thy will, a trespass dangerous to thy
truth, an injury too desperate in despairing of thy promises, to say; Thou will
not do what thou can, when with thee to do, is as easy as to will, and to
will is ready every hour. It is worse then the stain of hypocrisy to say, I
am no sinner: for none can challenge to himself that privilege: Sin was my
Mother which brought me into the World, and sin is the daughter of my
affection in the World; the World is become a loathsome Cage of unclean
Birds, a troubled Sea divided into many puddles, a dangerous desert, nursing
and nusling up strange and venomous creatures; where covetousness like a
burning Serpent breathes out the fire of unhallowed desires; where lust like
the Scorpion enuenometh the soul, and prouokes it to black attempts; where
pride lies close at the heart like a snaile lurking in the bushes: where, nay,
where else should sin be, when the World is termed the den and covert of
all evil? Here every sin great and little (though every little sin be too
great) ranges and keeps his Court. The trim fashion of the World is out of
fashion, because it is sick of every fashion; it being composed the
vvonderfull check and countermand of all Art, is now become a miserable
Chaos, the ruinous and disordered heap of all disorder; it is the Stage and
Theater of hypocrisy, fair and beautiful without, but full of foul sin
within; like straight growing reeds, satis^ying the eyes with a green and
pleasing sight, but within nothing more vain, nothing more light, nothing
more empty; like unto Nabuchadnezars Idol, glittering with a golden Dan. 3. 1.
head, yet standing upon feet of clay; by striving to excel in beauty, it has
vvashed away all beauty, and there is no sure hold for the souls anchor in so
slippery a station. The effects prove it so: for it is become Murders
slaughterhouse, Thefts refuge, VVhoredomes and Oppressions safety, and for all
sins a sinful Sanctuary. Who can swallow Circes Cup, and not be
transformed? Who can taste deadly poison, and escape infection? Who can live in
Sodom, and not be wicked? Who can breathe in the World, and be no sinner?
The Infant-blush at mine nativity was it not the telltale of my original
sin, how I had tasted of that sovvre fruit which all my ancestors from the
first to the last had eaten? And from the time of my nativity, how I have since
hewn off my age by sin, filling and fulfilling (as Christ says) the measure
of my fathers. My sinne-prest conscience secretly does tell me, there is no way
to hide and smother what I am: for if disguised Adam in his figge-leaued coat,
close and secure (as he thought) among the bushes could not shelter him from
Gods presence, how can I promise to my self security? Well may the blind-folde
World, being as deeply covered in sin as I, either for weakness not see,
or for the thick skin of his own sin still be dazel-eyed, and not behold
the heaps and drifts of iniquity: but God which has intelligence of my secret
thoughts, has an ear to hear my private words, an eye to see my light and
dark actions. God, which is the scrutator of our hearts and reins, enters the
privy chamber of our hearts, and is an eyewitness of our sin, before it be
hatched: He knew all things before they were begun, therefore he must
needs know them when they are done. He saw thee and David intending adultery,
before thou and David committed adultery. If then no running away will serve
turn, no place close enough to smother sin, when every thing is naked and
open to his view; into what an hard obduration is man cast? how is his face
made stiff with oily colors of shameless impudency, that will fear the
presence of the creature, and no way stand-in awe or reverence of the
all-presence of the Creator? There may be a secret room where no man comes, a
secret stage to act sin, where no man sees; but is it possible to keep God
out; is it possible to blind his eyes? O poor runawaies that we are, we hide
not our selves from God, but rather hide God from us. What though the eyes of
thy understanding being darkened, thou can not see him; yet has he made thee
a casement to thy conscience, and beholds thee within and without in the
cogitation, in the action. Wherefore if running from God be but a step to
greater sin, then will I run from sin to God, till I recover strength in
his merciful eyes. As there is no security to hide sin, so there is no
remedy to excuse it, or to post it off, saying, The woman which thou ga^est
me, did cause me to sin, as Adam; Genesis 3.
or as Eve to clear her self, saying, The Serpent begui^ed me; this is
rather an increase then a decrease of sin: the offense was heavier in
examination, then it had been before in commission; for here the blind leads
the blind, and the further they go, the greater is their danger. First they
sin, and then they fly: Secondly they are taken, but they deny: Thirdly, it
being proved, they stand out in their own defense, and dispute the case. Adam
excusing himself by the Woman, the Woman laying the fault on the Serpent, both
of them privily taxing God for placing such and such with them in Paradise: But
alas, this is but a naked shift, and to no purpose to bandy words with God,
neither did he call them for any such discourse; but God as it were lamenting
the first fruits of his labor should utterly perish, therefore questioned with
our first Parents, that the fire of their confession might burn down the wall
which the rancor of sin had builded between them and God. As then hopeful
Israel found means to supplant the usurping Canaanites, by electing Judah their
guide and Captain; Judge. 1.
so many put to flight that great daring Canaanite that musters up whole
legions of temptations against us: when as Judah (which interpreted, signifies
confession) does not only conduct and guide our forces, but also blunts the
edge of our enemies sword, returning his intended poison to his own confusion.
The confession of our sin (says Augustine) bars up the mouth of Hell,
which stands gaping to devour thee, and opens the gates of Heaven that
willingly would receive thee: Therefore let us lance the festered soar with
the knife of true confession, let us complaint to him that is the great
Shepherd of souls; as he is a Physician he will cure thee, as he is a
Shep^eard he will number thee with his flock: sinnes-saluing plaster is to
reveal our wickedness. Well may we confess our offenses, but hide them we
cannot; by such our confession the Devil is prevented of his severe
accusation, which ancient malice would co^mence against us. To anatomize and
exenterate sin, to pour it forth upon the Altar of repentance before God,
will not only take away the occasion of plea from the accuser, but also
reconcile us to the whole favor of that High Commission. Believing Nini^i^
wrapped and confounded in sorrow, was soon turned out of her mourning gown of
sackecloth and ashes, and was girded about with a fair sindon of Gods eternal
savor: but harde-hearted Sodom swelling in the pride of her strength, is
stripped of all her beautiful attire, and nakedly left in the base ashes of ^er
own destruction Therefore I will confess with David against my self my
wic^ednesse Psalm. 32.
unto the Lord. It is ^ot an usurpation to turn judge, to call an Assise, to
ex^mine mine own soul, to ^roduce my thoughts as ac^users of my conscience,
as (...) thousand witnesses to a^erre and confound the gilt ^f sin: but these
shall pre^ent that latter and fearful examination, how we have spent our
time, how we have employed our wealth, how we have ruled our appetites, how we
have mortified our desires, how we have used and bestowed all good gifts and
graces of the holy Spirit. Nay, we shall never have cause to fear that
doleful distaste which Abraham cast in Dives teeth: Son remember Lu. 16.
how thou in thy life time receiuedst pleasure, disporting thy time in wanton
dalliance, solacing thy self in pleasing pastimes, brave in apparel,
glittering in gold, high in honor, delicate in fare, defending pride to be
but a point of gentry, gluttony a part of good fellowship, wantonness a trick
of youth: because thou have enclosed and taken in all pleasures to thy self
upon earth, thou shall now take up thy ^ents, and reap a plentiful harvest in
Hell. Meet with ^he day of Judgment (says Augustine) before it come: ^ooke
about before hand, ^repare thy self to enter an ^ction against thy self: for
^o presumption will serve. ^e that sees his house run (...) ruin, and will
not at the ^^rst or second breach seek (...) reparations, strives to ^ake
rubbish of a good ^^ilding: And he that tra^^ls in a leaking ship, and ^ill
not in the beginning ^oke to empty it, sails for ^ught but to drown him^^fe.
To morrow, to morrow, (...) the voice of presumption: (...) who can tell
whether he (...) live till to morrow. God (says Augustine) has sealed a
pardon to him that truly repents; but none to him that deferres, and says, he
will repent: And he that is not fit for his conversion to day, will be less
ready to morrow; for on the morrow he will be the same man again, and sing
the same song again, languishing still in delay, trifling out the time, till
God in whose hands only are the moments of times, shut and bar him out from
all time, and leave him to pains without time, for so abusing the precious
date of time. To morrow, to morrow, is an uncertain time; though the times be
certain in themselves, ye^ are they most uncertain unto man; as he knew not
hi^ beginning, so he is ignorant of his ending; much like to little birds, who
on their ^earch look about to fly this way or that way, yet before they take
their flight, they are prevented by the shaft. Death is a common ^tate-searcher
both of old and young, striking as well David's young son before he was seven
days old, as 2 Samuel 22.
that ancient of days Methusalem, that lived nine hundred sixty nine years.
Lest the Kingdom of Satan should be established in us by frequency of
sinning, therefore let us break off delay, putting no trust in old age: but
(as Saint Paul says) Heb. 3.
^uen in this very instant, while it is named to day, let us repentantly cry
to God, and call to him to forgive us our leude and misspent time, and let us
give our sins leave to die before us; it is good riddance of a painful
pardon: for it is little better then desperatio^, to give free liberty to thy
youthful will, to range abroad, upon confidence of repentance in thy last and
least part of thy life. For alas what can helpelesse old age help, when all
the strength of the body, all the faculties of the mind, all the parts and
passions are not only daunted, and out-dared with sickness, but also worn
out with a multitude of years; as age-spent David is not able to retain heat
of himself, but Abishai the Shunamite must cherish him. An old man is half
deaths man, destitute of all good means to conversion; unfit to fast, unable
to pray, unapt to watch, or to any other exercise. What voice is there more
lamentable the^ that of Milo, when seeing the young Champions striving each
with other to obtain the Conquest, he cried out with tears, looking on his
withered arms, My blood is dead, my veins wrinckled, my sinews shrunk to
nothing. The counsel of the Wiseman may be a present Memorandum to every man:
Let us remember Eccles. 12.
our Creator in the days of our youth, while the evil days come not: That
is, in our prosperity of strength, in our hopeful youth, in the vigor and
lustiness of our years, before forgetful old age overtake us. Let us betake
our selves to him that took us out of the dust, and created us after his own
likeness; otherwise it were an everlasting blemish of ingratitude, and a most
infamous stamp of injustice, to hope for the receite of eternal glory, to
receive at one instance an Angels inheritance, to enjoy for nothing a place
with Christ, and not to tender the best of thy self to God his Father. If it
were pol^ution to the Altar to offer the lame and sick, with what face then
can thou present that little short and maimed piece of service which limping
old age will afford? He which is the Child of many years, is no doubt the
Father of many sins: for life the longer it is, the more sinful it is. If in
the oblation of burnt offerings and peace offerings the young Lambs without
Leuit. 1.
blemish were elected for the sacrifice: if the chief fat of the Ram made
the Exodus 29.
sweetest savor unto the Lord: then stands it against the rule of decency and
good manners, to serve in Leuit. 3.
Gods mess with the bare, lean, and rotten bones of sins, that have lien
rotting in the pit of corruption as many s^^re years, as did Lazarus days in
the grave. If no man were admitted to stand before Nabuchadnezzar but children
that were Dan. 1. 4.
most beautiful; how dare any man shuffle himself into Gods presence,
disiointed, crooked, old aged, and slothful? There is no reason in the World
that the World should reap that Harvest which God has bought with the sweat
of his blood; no Law for to give him the lees of wine, that has taken pains
to plant the Vineyard, and to tread the Press; no equity to leave him the
gleaning, to whom the whole sheafe belongs; no justice to divide the heart
which he has made one, and to give the sick and feeble part unto him, and the
strong and lusty unto the Devil. Unless you bring your youngest brother,
says Joseph, Genesis 14.
you shall never see my face again: So unless we bring young Benjamin that
is, the first fruits of our youth, and tender them to our everlasting High
Priest, we shall never partake his joyful presence, never enjoy his
comfortable grace, never be comforted with his ^iuine happiness. As young
Samuel and young Obadiah being 1 Samuel 2 2 Reg. 18.
(as it were) in their children colors, ministered unto the Lord; even so I in
the spring and prime of my youth, no way relying upon aged repentance, will
confess my sins wholly unto God, and at the bar of his bounty I will sue
out a pardon. If in David's repentance the fire of his devotion did ascend and
move the Heavens to scabbard up the wrathful Sword in the sheath of his
omnipotent mercy: doubt not, but with the same flame to kindle the like
sacrifice; and with as strong a voice as had Eliah, when he brought food from
Reg. 1. 17
Heaven, to move the same God to compassion. My voice shall be as able to
quench the fire of Gods wrath, as was the voice of the three Children that
overcame the hot burning Furnace: My voice shall be as able to procure life,
as was the voice of Ezechias, that 2 Reg. 20
overcame death. As Jonas out of the belly of the Whale, so I out of the hell
Jonas 2. 3
of sin: As blind Bartimeus for his want of sight, so I in Mar. 20.
the sight of my wants will cry to God for his merciful aid and help. As
young Tobias was not destitute of Tobi. 5.
a guide to conduct him to Rages, so am not I left ignorant of the way to
Heaven. Abraham in his journey to Genesis 12.
Canaan took a Map of the upper Canaan, and left it registered to all
posterities. We like so many Abraham's, must leave our Country behind our
backs, must depart and bid adue to the flesh, and the world, and to our
selves: from pride descending to low humility, leaving anger to shake hands
with patience giving our lust the farewell to welcome chastity, excluding
envy to entertain charity, renouncing cruelty for the exchange of clemency.
We must relinquish and forsake our own kindred, that is, the old custom and
acquaintance we have had with sin, shaking the unclean spirit out of doors,
and being washed, never to return to our old vomit; and being made whole, we
will sin no more. We must turn from the sinister and left hand of this World,
from the Prince of darkness our Father, to the right hand of righteousness,
to the King of Kings our heavenly Father; which dwells in the Land of virtue,
not in the Land of vice; in the Land of peace, not in the Land of pain; in the
Land of joy, not in the Land of sorrow: and be partakers of that desired
benediction wherewith Isaac in the type and figure of Christ blessed his son
Jacob. Behold the sweet smell of my Son, that Genesis 27.
savors not of the Onions and Garlic of Egypt, but the sweet smell of my
Son that has been daintily fed with the choice Milk and Honey of Canaan. No
flight is more commendable then to fly out of the midst of Babylon, to
hasten out of Egypt, where miseries have no period, and to travel to the
promised Land, where is rest without remove, mercy without measure, love
without limit, goodness in all kind of greatness; where every soul may (like
the Dove in Noah's Arc) rest without fear, enjoy plenty without want, take
repast without contempt. But the frailety of our flesh is so prone to fall into
the slipperie vanities of this World, which do so dazell the eyes and dull the
senses, that we can neither see, nor yet remember to tread in the true path of
righteousness. The vanity which reigns in us is so great, that it draws all
our godly desires clean from us by the pleasingnes thereof; and it does so
possess our weak and frail flesh, whereby it draws such toys and
fantasies into our wavering minds, that it makes us clean to forget to labor
and travel to find out the expected promised ^and, wherein remains all rest
and pleasure. O vain. vain that we are! that will be so negligent and
careless to labor and travel for a benefit so commodious for the soul of
man, for the health whereof, neither tongue can express, nor heart think the
comforts it brings. But man's life is always so subject to fall into the laps of
these two vices, Pride and Vanity; which after they have once taken hold,
cleave so fast to the bone, and fasten therein such a deep root of
continuance, as it will be hardly removed; but do so nuzzle us in the sweet
desire thereof, as that they make us live without fear, either to remember, or
yet regard the commandments of God, which will bring us to salvation in
keeping them. On the other side, for want of following them, we run our
selves to utter ruin and destruction, and withal reap unto us such a heavy
curse from his divine and omnipotent Majesty, as the weight thereof will
press us down into the bottomless pit of hell, and there to remain in
darkness with everlasting torment, which never will have end. The misery that
is incident to frail man through the vain and fading pleasures of the World,
is not to be numbered, by reason of our sloth and idleness in not serving him,
that serves us in all our wants and extremities. These things duly considered
and pondered in our minds, would enforce us to leave the devil and his evil
ways, and to follow God and his ways, which are all right and good. O let us
call our selves unto an account with respective remembrance, what a seducing
way is this to them that forget themselves that they are Pilgrims and
Travelers, and stand too much upon those things which are occurrant in their
iourny, with a long delay. The night will ^ome, nay, it will come quickly,
when no man can walk. These men shall not come into that heavenly Jerusalem,
but shall be a prey for the wild Beasts which walk in the night, and for the
infernal Wolves. For which cause our Savior Christ cries in his Gospel;
Walk ye while ye have the light, lest the darkness come John 12.
upon you. It is evidently seen that nothing so much blinds the eyes of man
as the deceits of the world, and the vanity of things present. O let us call to
God, that he out of the riches of his mercy would inspire into our hearts the
due and diligent consideration of the uncertainty, shortness, frailty and
other grievous calamities of man's life. All humane pride, and the whole glory
and abundance of the world, (having man's life for a stay and foundation) can
certainly no longer endure then the same life abides; so that riches,
dignities, honors, offices, and such like, which men here in earth have a great
regard of, they do many times forsake a man, he being yet; and do never
continue longer with them then to the grave. This is a vain, slipperie,
delightful pleasure: for then when the foundation fails, the whole building
must needs fall. Job says, these clay Tabernacles Job. 4.
do daily fail. David compares our life to the fat of Lambs, which wastes
away Psalm. 69.
in the roasting; and to a new coat which soon waxes old, and is eaten with
Moathes: and further, compares man to grass, and to the flowr of the field,
which to day flourishes, and to morrow is cut down, and withered. Job
compares man to the burning of a Candle, which in the end annoyeth, Job. 18.
and then every man cries, Put it out. What thing else is man's life but a
bubble, up with the water, and down with the wind? what is then to be thought
of humane pomp and glory, which is more transitory and frail then life it
self? O that man would know himself whereby he may know God. Job further
says; Man that is borne of a woman is of a short continuance, and full of
miseries; he shoots forth as a flower, and is cut down, he vanishes also
as a shadow, and continues not. This consideration might open our blindness
to see into our selves, and to know our selves, and then know God in this
description of humane calamities, to the end we might want no knowledge
thereof. It seems Jobs purpose was to begin with the very matter it self
of which man was made, that he might express the baseness of the matter, of
which this most proud creature was made. He was created and made of the Earth,
but not of the best of the earth, but of the slime of the earth, (as the
Scripture testifies) being the most filthy and abject part of the Earth; among
all bodies the most vile element, and among all the Elements the basest. Among
all the parts of the Earth, none is more filthy and abject then the slime of
the Earth, whereof man was made; of that matter, then the which there is
nothing more vile and base. And whereas he says that he was borne of a
woman, he has in few words comprehended many miseries of humane condition: Our
very fashioning and original is so impure and unclean, that it is not for
chaste ears to hear, but to be passed over in silence, as a thing most filthy
and horrible to be told. Man's conception is so foul, that our most merciful
and loving Lord taking upon him all our sorrows and calamities for our
redemption, would in no wise bear this, although he vouchsafed to take upon
him our humane nature, and to suffer many reproaches of his enemies; as to be
mocked, blasphemed, spit upon, bound, whipped, and in the end most shamefully
crucified: yet he thought it unseeming his Majesty to be conceived in the
womb of the blessed Virgin Mary, after the same sinful manner that other men
be. After man is once conceived, does he not endure great calamities in his
mothers womb, as it were in a filthy and unclean prison, where every moment
he is in peril of his life? And at the last he is borne naked, weak,
ignorant destitute of all help and counsel, not able to go, to speak, or to
help himself; all that he can do is to cry, and that is to set forth his
miseries: for he is borne to labor, a banished man from his Country, the
enemy of God, in possibility to live but a few days; and the same few days
full of misery, deuoide of all quietness and rest. O let us know our selves,
and then know God. The very beginning, from whence man has his first
original, is sin; the vanity whereof makes him think himself borne to an
inb^ed pride, which pride mingleth and confounds all things, ouerturneth,
troubles, and subdueth Kingdoms. There is another calamity incident to man's
body; the building is scarcely finished, but it is ready to totter and fall,
and sure it is ere long to fall. Man is scarce entered into the world, but he is
admonished to remember his departure: The days of Man (says David) are
threescore years Psalm. 90.
and ten, and though some be so strong that they come to fourscore, yet is
their strength then but labor and sorrow. The sum of our years, whereunto
all do not attain, is threescore years and ten; ^he strongest bodies
some^imes continue till fourscore: from which years if we deduct those
years which infancy and childehood spends, (for all that ^ime we live not
like men, neither are governed with ^eason and counsel, but are ^arried with a
certain vio^ent motion li^e unto brute ^easts, which are deuoide of ^eason and
understanding:) (...) also we take away that ^ime which passes away ^hen we
sleep, (for slee^ing we live not the life of ^easts when they wake, ^^ch
less of men, and that ^^me will rather seem a li^ing death the^ a lively
life:) If we deduct all the time of childhood and sleep, that which remains
will scarcely amount to forty years; and of these forty years we^ have not one
moment o^ time in our power, that we can assuredly say, that we shall not die
therein: for whether we eat, drink, or sleep, whether we be in labor or in
rest, we are in danger of perils. It is not without cause our Savior Christ
cries in his Gospel, Watch, because yet know (...) the day, nor the hour:
which Mar. ^3.
is as much as if he had more plainly said, Because ye know not that day,
watch every day; and because ye know not the month and the year, watch
therefore every month and year. (...) thou should be invited to (...)
Feast, and being set at the Table, seeing before thee many and sundry meats of
^ll sorts, a friend secretly ^omes and admonishes thee, that among so many
dainty ^ishes there is one poyso^ed; what in this cause woul^est thou do? which
of them ^arest thou touch or taste (...)? would not thou sus^ect them all? I
think, though ^ou were extremely hun^y, thou would refrain ^om all for
fear of that one ^here the poison is. It is ^ade manifest unto thee al^eady,
that in one of thy for^e years, thy death lies ^idden from thee, and thou ^rt
utterly ignorant which ^at year shall be; how then ^n it be but that thou must
suspect and fear them all: O let us first know our selves, and then know God,
whereby we shall know to understand the shortness of our life. O what a great
profit and commodity should our distressed saint-sicke souls then receive by
the meditations thereof? the comfort and joy whereof is not to be declared,
such is the unmeasurableness thereof, which God powers upon his chosen. As
the Peacocke (a glor^ous Foul in his own show) when he beholds that comely
fan and circle which he makes of the pride of his beautiful feathers,
reioiceth, ietteth, and beholds every part thereof; but when he chances
once to look on his feet, in the very heat of his pride, perceiving them to
be black, foul, and illfauoured, by and by with a great misliking veileth
his top gallant, as though it had never been, and withal seems to show
sorrow: so in like manner many here in this World know by experience, that when
they see themselves abound in riches and honors, then they glory in the height
thereof, and are so deeply conceited of themselves, as that they praise the
pride of their fortune and admire themselves; then pride inforceth their high
ambitious thoughts to make plottes, and appoint much for them selves to perform
in many years to come. This year, say they, will we bear this office, and the
next year that; so afterward we expect to rule in greater authority; then we
study to build a gay Palace of pride, near unto our authority, whereto we
adioine gardens of pleasures. And thus they make a very large reckning
aforehand, who if they did but once behold their feet how slippery they stand,
if they did but think upon the shortness of their life, so transitory and
inconstant: how soon would they let fall their proud feathers, forsake their
arrogancy, and change their purposes therein their lives, and their manners?
For man is scarce conceived when as he is condemned to death; and when he
comes out of the womb, he comes out of prison, not to be free, but to
undergo the Cross: And we do tend and hasten (as it were) to death, some at
one miles end, and some at two, and some at three, and other some when they
have gone further; And thus it comes to pass that some are taken out of this
life sooner, and some tarry longer. First let us know our selves, that we may
then know God the better. Since then the case stands thus, who can
sufficiently wonder at our madness? for we are going as it were to the gybbet,
and yet we dance, we laugh and rejoice in the way, as if we were secure from
all manner of evil. In so doing we run our selves into a very gross error,
because we know not the shortness of our life: O therefore let us know our
selves, and then know God. There be two wonderful and monstrous things: one
is, that Man being scarcely borne, dies, when as notwithstanding he has a
form and show of immortality. Other things how long they retain their form,
so long they remain; a house falls not all the time that his form and
fashion lasts: the brute Beast dies not, except first he forgo his life,
which is his form: but man has a form which is immortal, namely, a mind
endued with reason, and yet he lives a very short time. Therefore let us know
our selves, and then know God. There is another thing to be seen far more
monstrous in this creature, that whereas he is endued with reason and
counsel, and knows that this life is like unto a shadow, to a dream, to a
tale that is told, to a watch in the night, to smoke, to chafe which the wind
scatters, to a water bubble, and such like fading things; and life to come
shall never have end: He yet nevertheless sets his whole mind most
carefully upon this present life, which is to day, and to morrow is not; but of
the life which is everlasting, he does not so much as think. If this be not a
monster, I know not what may be called monstrous. Thus having seen the
shortness and mutabilitie of Man's life, let us now also see the misery
thereof. Man (says holy Job) being borne of a woman, is of a Job 14.
short continuance, and full of miseries; every word has an emphasis: He is
full of misery, even from the sole of the foot to the crown of the head; not
only the body but the mind also, so long as it is captiuated in the prison of
the body: thus no place is left empty and free from miseries. Therefore let us
know our selves, that in knowing our selves, we may know God. Man's miseries are
many and great, there is no member, no sense, no one faculty in man so long as
he is here upon Earth, which suffers not his hell: nay, all the Elements, all
living creatures, all the Devils, yea, the Angels, and God himself bend
themselves against Man for sin To begin with the sense of feeling, with how
many kinds of seuers, impostumes, vleers, sores, and other diseases is it
afflicted? The Volumes of Physicions are full of diseases, and remedies for the
same; and yet for all this, there are daily new diseases and new remedies found
out for them: and among the remedies themselves, it were to be wished, that
there were one to be found that were more vehement to vex the sick, then the
disease it self. Long fasting and extreme hunger, is a better medicine then
the cutting of veins, the incisio^ of wounds and sores, the cutting of members,
the searing of flesh and sinews. The pulling out of teeth are remedies for
griefs and diseases: but yet such that many had rather choose to die then to
use remedies. Furthermore immoderate heat, exceeding cold, one while too much
drought, another while excess of moisture, does offend and hurt the very sense
of ^eeling. As for the sense of tasting, it is most of all troubled with hunger
and thirst; and many times medicines and meats that are bitter, sharp, salt,
and unsavory, do distemper it. As for the sense of smelling, it is compelled
to endure and suffer many times all manner of stinkes, all vapors and fogs, and
things of bad sent. As touching the sense of hearing, what ill tidings, how
many cursed speakings and injuries does it hear, which like sharp swords
pierce the heart? As for the sense of seeing, how many things does it behold
which it would not? and how many things does it not see which it desires? As
for the thought how many horrible and fearful things does it imagine and
feign? As for the understanding, what an innumerable sort of errors is it
subject unto? It seems to be like unto a little child, to whom a tedious and
very hard knot to be dissolved is delivered, and contendeth what he can to
undo it and when the knot begins in one part to be opened, he shows it
and reioiceth, and sees not that the knot in the other part is more fast shut:
so in like manner God has made this generality of all things, and has set
the same before man's mind to be considered, and says; Seek and search out
the reasons and the causes of all these things if thou can: when as indeed
the truth of the thing is more secret and profound, then man's understanding
being placed in the prison of the body can reach unto. This is the cause that
the Philosophers and worldly-wise-men have fallen into so many and sundry
sects, and dissentions about things even of least moment; and and they do so
contend among themselves, until falsehood having put on the habit and vizard
of truth, deceives them all. Hereunto accords the saying of the Preacher,
Chap. 3. God has set the World in their heart, or God has given them the
world to dispute of: yet cannot man find out the work that God has wrought
from the beginning even to the end. Be not curious therefore (says Syrach,
Chap: 3. Verse. 24) in superfluous things: for many things are showed unto thee
above the capacity of men; and yet we see that the most ignorant do many times
soonest offend herein, rushing into those matters whereof they have no
knowledge, and nothing belongs unto them. They will build Tabernacles with
Peter, and lay platformes for the Church, whereof they have no skill. But a
greater misery as yet holds our active and practicing understanding; for how
many means, how many reasons and ways does it devise to climb up higher, and
to grow in the opinion and estimation of men? For which cause the Prophet David
in his ^salmes says; That our whole life is like a Cobweb: for as the Spider
is occupied all his life time in weauing of cobwebs, and draws out of his
own bowels those threads wherewith he knitteth his nets to catch flies; and
often times it comes to pass, that when the Spider suspecteth no ill, a
Servant that goes about to make clean the house, sweepeth down the cobweb
and the Spider, and throws them together into the fire: Even so the greatest
part of Men consume their whole time, spend all their wit and strength, and
labor most painefully to have their nets in a readiness, with which they may
catch the flies of honors and riches, and when they glory in the multitude of
flies which they have taken, and promise unto themselves rest in time to come:
behold Death, Gods handmaide is present with the broom of diverse sicknesses
and griefs, and sweepeth these men away to hell fire, they being fast asleep
in the chair of security; and so they work (together with the Workemaster)
in a moment of time to perish. Neither is the man of meanest capacity and
least understanding free from miseries: Who can number the suspicions, the
hatreds, the iealousies, the enuies, the cares, the desires, the vain hopes,
the griefs and anguishes of man's mind? If he do evil, he fears the
Judges, banishment, whipping, reproaches, and torments. If he do well, he
fears evil tongues. Who is able to express with what insatiable desires all
men are inflamed? In so much that no man living is contented with his estate:
but we are all like unto sick men, which tumble and toss first from one side
of the bed, and then to the other, and yet never find rest. After this let us
behold and consider all ages, how weak is infancy, how ignorant is childhood?
how light and inconstant is adolescency? how rash and confident be young men?
how grievous and irksome is old age? What is a young boy but as a brute beast,
having the form and shape of a man? What is a flourishing younker but as an
untamed horse? What is an old man but the receptacle of all maladies and
sicknesses? And in all these ages, with how great a heap of miseries and
necessities are we overwhelmed? We must daily eat, drink, and sleep; we
are daily compelled to serve many other necessities; and which is much more
miserable and unhappy, we must of necessity purchase unto our selves these
occupations with infinite labors and sweatings. Now who is not astonished, if
he consider how all the creatures which compass us round about do bend their
whole force and fight against mankind, as if the things which have been
already repeated, were not sufficient to fill the bosom of man's heart with
miseries? That same most clear brightness which we call the Sun, which is
as a certain general Father to all living things, does sometimes so scorch
with his beams, that all things are parched and burnt up with the heat
thereof; at another time he takes his course so far from us, that all things
die with cold. The Earth also which is the Mother of us all how many men does
she swallow up with her downfals, gulfes and quakings? And what do the Seas?
How many do they devour? Verily they have so many rocks, so many slattes and
sands, so many Syrtes, so many Charybdes, and so many perilous places; that it
is a most hard thing of all other to escape the danger of shipwreck; and they
which are most safe in the ship, have but the thickenesse of a planke
between them and death. What shall we say of our air? Is it not many times
corrupted? and does it not engender and gather clouds, thick mists,
pestilences, and sicknesses? As for the brute beasts they yield no reverence to
Man their Prince: and not only the Lions, Bears, Tigers, Dragons, and other
greater wild Beasts, but the very flies also, gnats, fleas, and other of the
most small sort of living Creatures, do wonderfully and very vehemently
trouble, vex, afflict, and disquiet Man. It were to be wished, that we had no
worse enemies then the brute beasts, and that we had no cause to stand in
fear of men themselves. But these also are full of frauds, deceits, injuries,
evil practices; then the which what can be more intolerable? And what means
so much armor, pikes, bows, bills, swords, and gunnes, with diverse other
instruments of Man's malice? Do not these destroy and consume more men, then do
sicknesses and diseases? Histories report that by one only Julius Caesar,
which is said to have been a most courteous and gentle Emperor, there were
slain in several battles eleven hundred thousand men: if a man of mildness
and meek spirit did this, what shall we look for at the hands of most cruel
Men? Neither Lands, nor Seas, nor desert places, nor private houses, nor open
streets, are safe from ambushments, conspira^ies, hatreds, emulations,
thieves, and pirates. Are there not vexations innumerable, persecutions
infinite, spoiling of fields, sacking of Cities, preying upon men's goods,
firing of houses, imprisonments, captiuities, gally slaueries, renegations of
Christianity, by torments enforced, beside death it self, which men daily
suffer at the hands of men? And yet this is that civil and sociable Creature
which is called humane, borne without claws and horns in token of peace and
love, which he ought to embrace. Moreover, not only enemies, but also friends,
and the maintainers of peace and Justice, are fierce and cruel against men. O
Man the very storehouse of calamity, and yet thou can not be humbled, but
art proud still! Neither have we only those foresaid corporal enemies which
we may see and shun, but (which is more perilous) we have also ghostly
enemies which see us, and we not them: for the devils which are most craf^y,
cruel, and most mighty (...) number and strength, do practice nothing, think
upon nothing else then how they may tempt, deceive, hurt, and cast men down
headlong into hell fire. The holy and blessed Angels also do many times fight
against sinful men: for who burnt Sod^me and (...) with the inhabitants
thereof with fire and brimstone? the Angels. Who slew the fourscore and five
thousand men in the Host of Senacharib? The Angels. Who afflicted the
Egyptians with those plagues mentioned in Exodus? The Angels. Who assisted
Joshua against the Cananites and Iebusites? Gods Angels. Not only the Angels,
but God himself also sometimes shows himself, toward man as toward an
enemy^ which causes holy Job to say; Why do thou hide away thy face, and
take me for thine enemy: What means this O Lord God? Thou also which was
w^nt to be my Father and Keeper, have now bidden a battle against me. And
beside all these things, there is yet a civil and internal war which man
has with in his own bowels continually: for what man is he which feels not
the striuings and contentions of his affections, will, sense, and reason? in so
much that man himself does afflict himself, and understands it not; and is
a greater enemy to himself, then any other man can be. For who does greater
harm to thee, then thou do to thy self? Who more then thy self lets
thee, and turns thee away from thy felicity? Who then sees not how truly it
is said; Man that is borne of a Woman is of short continuance, and full of
miseries? Who sees not that Man is set in the very center of the sphere, that
miseries may fall upon him from every part; or as the white in a but, that the
arrows, and darts of all miseries may be directed unto him. But let us see
what follows: He shoots forth like a flower, and is cut down: whereby he
teaches that man's life is frail and transitory. A flower verily is a comely
and beautiful thing, and yet for all that, it is nothing, because there is
nothing found more fading and vanishing: even so man during the time of his
childhood and ^lourishing youth, seems to be of a wonderful comeliness, but
his beauty is of small price, because it is more brittle then the glass,
seeing that (...) carries always the cause of death in his veins and bowels.
Man's fading away is such, and so sudden oftentimes, (...) be no reason given
of his death: for many have gone to bed well in the evening, that in the
morning are found dead; and many very suddenly have drouped down in the high
ways and streets, as they have walked about their affairs. And this is no
wonder, if we consider the substance of man's body, which being a building
compact of green clay, is easily overthrown with a small puff of wind. How
comes it to pass that Clockes are so easily stopped from their course? Is it
not because they are made by art and skill with so many wheels, that if one
be stayed all the rest be let? If this befall Clockes that have wheels of
iron and steel, how much more easily may it come to pass in the humane
Clock of life? the wheels and engines whereof are not of iron, but of clay.
Therefore let us not wonder at the frailety of man's body, but at the
foolishness of man's mind, which upon so frail a foundation is wont to erect
and build such lofty Towers. Yet there is another misery, which is signified to
us by the comparison of a flower, namely, the deceitfulness of man's life,
which indeed is the greatest misery: for as feined virtue is double iniquity,
so counterset felicity is a twofold misery and calamity. If this present life
would show it self to be such as it is indeed, the misery thereof should
not greatly hurt us: but it does now greatly damnifie us, because it is false
and deceitful; and being foul it makes a very fair and glorious show; being
ever mutable, it will seem to be stable and constant; being most short, it
bears us in hand that it is continual; that so men being deceived, may
believe that they shall have time to fulfill all their lusts, and yet time and
space enough to repent them. Holy Job concludes this sentence thus: He
vanishes also as a shadow, and never continues in one stay. To make this more
plain, behold and consider the ages of man, and thou shall evidently perceive
the alterations of humane life. Childhood is weak as well in mind as body:
flourishing youth is weak in mind, but strong in body; ripe and manly age
both in mind and body; old age strong in mind, but weak in body: crooked old
age is in this twice a child, weak both in mind and body; therefore he
flies as it were a shadow, and never continues in one stay. Moreover there is
another thing to be considered in man: He is now wise, now foolish; now merry,
now sad; now in health, now sick; now strong, now weak; now rich, now poor;
now he loves, anon he hates; now he hops, by and by he fears; one
while he laughes, another while he weeps; now he will anon ^e will not. To
conclude, the Moon nor any other thing that is mutable shows not so many
changes to ^s, as do the daily and almost sudden alterations of men; yet for
all this they live as men in a f^enzie, which know not their miseries. Although
they know they must not ^epose their hope and assurance in the present things
of this life; yet do they not remove the thoughts of their mind, their
counsels, their works and endeavors unto the happiness of the life to come;
and if it were possible, they would make the place of their (...) and
banishment their Country and inheritance: but in vain do they desire this;
for death comes and plays the last Pageant, shutting up and finishing the
life of all calamities. But the error of man (for the most part through his
frailety, being endued with only vanity it self,) is such that it makes him
forget the end of his life, which he ought to have always before his ey^^ and
his pride and ambition with his carfulness for the body, in following the
vain lusts thereof, is such, that it makes him forget what he is, and his
end. If he would but duly consider what he shall be after a few days, his
manner of living would be peradventure more humble and temperate: for who
would have a high look and a proud stomach, if he would but with the eyes of
his mind behold what manner of one shortly after he shall be, when he is laid
in his grave? Who would then worship his belly for a god, or yet build his gay
Towers upon the sand, when he truly weighs and ballanceth himself, that the
same must in a shor^ time be wormesmeate? Who will be so in love with the
pride of this World, (being the chiefest downfall of man's joy and felicity in
the World to come,) or yet with money, that he would run after it like a mad
man, by Sea and Land (as it were) through fire and water? If man did but
understand himself aright, and that he must leave all his worldly delights
behind him, saving only his winding-sheete: if this were carefully thought
upon and diligently considered, al our errors would soon be corrected. God
tells us of this vanity in many places of his word, to the end we might the
more earnestly seek a better course and more happy life. The Prophet desires
of God that he may learn to number his days, that he may apply his heart
unto wisdom: for unless we think upon death, we cannot apply and fashion
our selves to a godly life. Yea, we find daily in our selves by experience,
that the forgetfulness of death makes us apply our hearts to all kind of
vanity. The holy men of old time were wont in such wise to keep an account of
their days, that above all things they might apply their hearts to wisdom.
Of all Arithmeticall rules, this is the hardest; To number our days. Men can
number their herds and droues of Cattle, they can reckon the revenues of their
mannours and Farms; they can with a little pains number and tell their Coin,
and yet they are persuaded that their days are infinite and innumerable: and
therefore do never begin to number them. One says upon the view of another;
Surely yonder man looks by his countenance as if he would not live long; or
yonder woman is old, her days cannot be many. Thus we can number other men's
days and years, and utterly forget our own. It is therefore true wisdom to
number our own days, and like skillful Geometricians to measure all our
actions, all our studies, all our thoughts, all our desires, and all our
counsels, by the departure of others out of this life, as the end whereto we
must all come; and so direct the course of our life which God has given us,
that at the last we may come to the Haven of rest. We cannot, nor ought not to
doubt but that the devil, a most cruel enemy of mankind, labors all that
he can to take away from us the wholesome remembrance of our death, which by a
most evident demonstration sets before our eyes the breuity of our life the
misery of our flesh, the deceits of the world, the vanity of things present,
and whereunto all humane beauty, and the universal glory of the World shall
come at the last. How then is it possible that we should at any time forget
death, a thing which by no manner of means we can shun and avoid? If a light
suspicion of some loss either of our goods, or of honor, does prevail so
greatly with us, that many times it takes from us our sleep* what might the
meditation of most assured d^^th (...), which to flesh and blood is more
terrible then all other terrors beside? Therefore as they which in open games
of actiuitie, as of shooting, wrestling, and such like, do long before the day
come, think upon the same, and do exercise their hand and bow, spending and
consuming many arrows at the mark, that in the day of trial for the best
game they may shoot nearest the mark: and as Fencers which are to play their
prizes of trial, do daily try their strength, and exercise themselves,
bending the whole course of their minds how they may best foil their enemies,
that when the day comes they may have honor and triumph: even so ought w^e
to do, for whom a greater reward without all comparison is set, if we die
well; and if otherwise it come to pass, we shall be punished with unspeakable
shame and reproach, to the downfall and unrecoverable ruin of our souls. As
they who are to run a horse race; do often lead the Horses up and down the
running place, that they may see and be acquainted with all the stones, uneven
places, and other impediments in the same; that when the day comes they may
finish the race without stay or stop; even so we, who (whether we will or no)
must measure and pass the race of death, shall do very well, if now in our
mind and memory we frame this race, and do diligently consider all those
things which are in the same; especially seeing the way is most obscure, full
of sundry impediments, and so perilous, that there are very few which finish
the same happily: they who slip and stumble in it, shall never more find any
hope of salvation. Therefore that we may begin where this most bloody battle
has his original, we ought diligently to consider the same; namely, that
then death does especially come, when men do least think of it. Hereupon the
Apostle Paul says; The day of the Lord shall come as a thief in the night;
and in the Apocalypse, Behold I come as a thief. Now thieves have this
property, that they break open houses to steal, when men are most fast
asleep, and when they least suspect any such thing. Hereupon the Prophet Amos
^ath these words: In that ^ay will I cause the Sun to (...) down at noone,
and I will ^arken the Earth in the clear ^ay. That is to say, when men think
it to be the high ^^one of their age, when ^hey think that they have ^et many
years to live, when their mind is occupied about their gain, about their
affairs, about their ho^ours, buildings, marriages, and pleasures; when they
say unto their soul; Soul, thou ^ast much goods laid up in ^tore for thee
for many years; ^ate, drink rest, and be mercy: then it shall suddenly be
said to them, Behold death is at the door. Thou fool, this night shall thy
life be taken away from thee, and whose are then those things which thou have
gotten? Then death unlooked for frustrateth all our counsels, cutting off the
webs of our devices, and with one stroke he casts down, and lays flat on
the ground all those Towers which are builded in the air. What a wound does
the heart of the sinner which loves this present life receive, when the
Physician says unto him, Thou must from henceforth think no more of lif^, but
of death. First of all, those things which he loved in time past, offer
themselves unto him, from the which he shall be pulled away, and separated by
death whether he will or no. The body shall die but once, but the heart shall
die so often as the things be in number which he loved. Then in very deed
shall the most clear light be turned into darkness, because those things
which were aforetime occasions of great joy, shall be now horrible vexations
and torments. It is a most sweet and pleasant thing to them which live, to see
their loving and faithful friends, to remember their honors, to think upon
the pleasures past and to come: but all these things in the time of death shall
be as swords, as forments, and most bitte^ (...) be a hard matter to be passed
away from those things which do not so nearly touch man, how bitter I pray
you will the separation be of soul and body, two such kind loving familiars,
who have always lived sweetly together even from the mothers womb? surely
they cannot be separated without great grief. If the Ox do commonly low
and mourn, when his yokefellow which was wont to draw with him is taken away:
how will every one of us mourn, when the soul shall be separated from the
body? Then will they with tears repeat their sins again and again, and
cry out: O death, bitter death, do thou (...) separate us? And when the
cogitation of so sharp* a separation is deeply settled in our minds, then
grief follows grief, and sorrow comes upon sorrow: for then it comes
presently to mind, what a miserable condition the body and soul shall be in
after the separation. When a man begins to recount with himself, that his
body after a few hours shall be buried in a grave, or dark tomb; he cannot
cease from wondering at so abject and miserable a condition. What, the body
that now lives, which sees hears, speaks, shall ^it be made after one
hour, in a moment, blind, deaf, dumb, without spirit, without life? It
shall have then in stead of a large Palace, a base Sepulcher, in stead of a
soft bed, the hard ground; for delights, rottenness; for sweet smells,
stinkes; and in stead of servants and familiar friends, worms. And thus this
cogitation of the grave will very sore trouble and terrify a man in these
extremities; yet notwithstanding every man fears much more when he begins
to consider what condition remains for the soul. When Man beholds that
eternity, and that new Region unknown to al men living, which he then alone
naked is to enter; and when he understands that there is to be found in the
same both everlasting glory, and perpetual pain and misery, and knows not
of which he shall take his part; it cannot be told with how great fear, with
what carfulness; and with what exceeding sorrow he shall be tormented, when
he perceives plainly that after two hours, he shall be either in eternal
joys, or in everlasting pains. Is not this a cross very heavy, surpassing
all other crosses; this uncertainty of a blessed, or cursed estate, which after
a small time the sinner expects? the remembrance of his sins and fear of the
just judgment of God, without hope of remission, or faith in Christ, is a hell
to the mind, not to be expressed. For by how much the Kingdom which he
desires is of largeness, and by how much the fiery furnace which he fears is
terrible, by so much the greater shall this perturbation be; considering also
that Angels shall come to carry the faithful up into Heaven, and infernal
spirits to carry the wicked and infidels into hell. But there is yet a far
greater perturbation then this; namely, that he shall call to mind the account
which he is to make to God, of all his words, deeds and thoughts; for of it
self (...) is a horrible thing to think upon the day of judgment, the which
horror will wonderfully and extremely vex and disquiet the Devils themselves:
for as, so long as we live, they set forth unto us the mercy of God, and do
also commend the same, and do strive all that they can to keep us from
meditating of his justice and judgments; even so now on the contrary, they
extenuate and make his mercy insufficient, and do set before our eyes the
greatness, and severity of the Lords justice. Then will the sinner begin to
tremble, and fall into desperation, and will begin to reason thus with
himself: If God for the sins of others spared not his only Son, will he
spare me which am guilty of so many sins? If this be done in the green tree,
what shall befall that which is sear and dry? If the Prophets, if the
Apostles, if the Martyrs, after they lived godly so many years, entered not
into the Kingdom of Heaven without tribulations; what other place can be left
for me but that of hell fire, which know no good that I have done? If the
Scripture be true, which says; He will render to every man according to his
works: what should I which have done so many horrible and great wickednesses
look for, but eternal torments? If that of the Apostle be true (as in deed
it is) when he says; That which a man sows, that shall he reap: what shall
he reap but eternal death, which has made so cursed a so wing? I^ no
polluted thing shall enter into the Kingdom of God, how shall I which am
altogether filthy and unclean, have hope to make so happy and blessed an
entrance? Then all his sins which he committed with so greater desire and
facility when he lived, shall violently invade the sinful man, like an host
of enemies; then the fear of punishment will open the eyes, which sleeping
security in sin before had shut: then ambition, pride, thefts, murders,
adulteries, fornications, gluttonies, drunkenness lying, perjury, idle words,
unclean thoughts, negligent slacknesse, and all that naughty is will come to
remembrance O how heavy and grievous will they then seem to be, which now seem
so light, and are done with so much sweetness and pleasure? How greatly will
they then torment the mind of the sinner? Who is able to express that last
agony, wherein the soul fights with sore and painful sickness, with the
temptations of devils, with fear of the judgment to come; and all this at one
instant. Then comes that last perturbation, the failing of all the senses, as
the forerunner of death approaching, which vehemently terrifieth. At what time
the breast swells, the speech grows hoarse, faint, and hollow; the eyes
sink, the nose begins to be sharp, the countenance waxes pale, the feet
die, and the arteries send forth a cold sweat. These things which do thus
appear outwardly, are grievous and full of horror; but they are without all
comparison more grievous and horrible, which are felt inward^^: for as Saint
(...) writes of blessed (...), saying; Though he had many years served God,
yet did he fear at the time of his departure: What shall they do who many
years have served the Devil and their execrable wickednesses, and who have
provoked God unto wrath: whither shall they go, whose help shall they crave,
what counsel shall they take? If they look upward, they shall see the drawn
sword of Gods Justice; if downward, they shall see a gulf gaping, and hell
fire there; if the time past, they shall see all things vanished away like a
shadow; if the time to come, they shall behold the eternity of Worlds, which
shall last without end. Who can be able to resist and abide the assault of the
devils, who will be then busiest in their desire to bestirre them with all
their might and maine? What shall then sinful men do which are left in this
estate? Return they cannot, and longer to abide in this state will not be
permitted them. If we did but understand and know what manner of battle this
is, and what manner of burden is then to be borne by man in this hour, we
would then verily be other manner of persons then heretofore we have been.
All these things Faith teaches, Nature proclaims, Experience testifies, and
it is evident to every one of us, that we shall come unto that state, wherein
we will desire with all our heart, that we had bridled ourselves from all our
wickedness, that we (...) exercised all the works of virtue, that we had
lived (...) al holiness; and not spent our time in vanity. Let us not imitate
foolish men, who look upon present things only; let us wisely ^rouide for
things to come, and so by the grace of God we shall bring to pass by our
godly meditation, and prayers: that the same hour which to others is the
beginning of sorrows to us shall be the beginning of joy and felicity. Thus
far is showed what may befall a man at the point of death until the moment of
his departure: Now let us see, how the body is bestowed after the separation of
the soul from it. After the dissolution the body lies upon the ground, not a
humane body; but a dead carcass, without life, without sense, without
strength, and so fearful to look upon, that the sight thereof may hardly be
endured: to be short, it is little better as touching the substance, then the
body of a horse or a dog which lies dead in the fields, and all that pass
by stop their noses, and make have away, that they be not annoyed with the
sight and ^linke thereof. Such is Man's body now become, though it were the body
of a monarch, Emperor or King. Where is now that majesty, that excellency,
that authority which it had afore-time? when men trembled to behold it, and
might not come in presence thereof without all reverence and obeisance? Where
are all those things become? were they a dream or a shadow? After all those
things the funeral is prepared, which is all they have of all their riches and
possessions; and this also they should not have, if in their life time they did
not appoint it for their dignity and honor. The Prophet David says truly,
Be not thou afraid though one be made rich, or if the glory of his house be
increased; for he shall carry nothing away with him when he dies neither
shall his pomp follow him. A pit is dug seven or eight foot long, and that
must serve even Alexander the Great, whom the World could not contain. In this
pit the dead carcass must dwell alone continually; whereto as soon as it is
come, the worms do welcome it, and the bones of other dead men are
constrained to give place. In this house of perpetual oblivion and silence,
the carcass being wound in a sheet, and bound hands and feet is shut up,
though it need not to have so great labor bestowed upon it; for it would not
run away out of that prison, though the hands and feet were loose. If we do
but consider a little of the Tombs and Sepulchers of Princes and Noble men,
whose glory and majesty we have seen when they lived here on earth; and do
behold the horrible forms and shapes which they now have, shall we not erie
out as men amazed: Is this that glory, is this that highness and excellency?
where now are the degrees of their waiting servants? where are their ornaments
and jewels? where is their pomp, their delicacie and niceness? all these
things are vanished away with the smoke, and there is now nothing left but
dust, horror and stink. Now leaving the Body in the grave, let us consider how
the soul enters into the new World. As soon as the soul of the sinner is
dissolved from the flesh, it begins to pass through a Region unknown,
where there are new Inhabitants, and a new manner of living. What then shall
the miserable and sinful pilgrim do, when he shall see himself alone in
such an unknown Region, being full of fear and horror? how and by what means
shall he defend himself from those most fierce thieves and horrible monsters,
which in those vast Deserts do assail passengers? this verily is a fearful
journey; and yet the judgment is much more fearful, which in that place is
exercised. Who is able to express the uprightness of the Judge, the severity
of the judgment, the diligence of inquisition, and the multitude of witnesses
in this judgment? tears will not prevail, prayers will not be heard,
promises will not be admitted, repentance will be too late; riches, honorable
Titles, Scepters and Diadems, these will profit much less: The inquisition
will be so curious and diligent, that not one light thought, nor one idle word
not repented of in the World past, shall be forgotten. For truth it self has
said, that of every idle word which men have spoken, they shall give an account
in the day of judgment: how many which do now ^in with great delight, ye^,
even with greediness of heart, will be then astonished, ashamed, and silent?
Then shall the days of thy mirth be ended, and thou shall be overwhelmed with
everlasting darkness; and instead of thy pleasures thou shall have everlasting
torments. When Jeremy had remembered all the calamities and sins of the Jews,
at the last he imputed all to this: She remembered not her end. So if we may
judge why natural men care for nothing but their pomp, why great men care for
nothing but their golden gain, why voluptuous Epicures care for nothing but
their pleasure, why the pastor cares not for his flock, nor the people for
their pastor, we may say with Jeremy, They remember not their end. When Solomon
had spoken of all the vanities of men, at last he opposes this against all;
Remember thou shall come to judgment: As if he should have said; Men would
never speak as they speak, think as they think, nor do as they do, if they
were persuaded that their thoughts, words, and deeds, should come to judgment.
What if we had died in the ^aies of our ignorance like Judas that hanged
himself, before he could see the passion, resurrection, or ascension of CHRIST
JESUS? We are therefore to number our days and our sins too: But alas how
many days have we spent, and yet never thought why a^y day was given us? but
as the old year went, and new came, so we thought that a new would follow
that, and that another will follow this; and God knows how soon we may be
deceived: for so they thought that are now in their graves. This is not to
number our days, but to provoke God to shorten our days. Which of us have not
lived twenty years, yea, and some thirty, or forty, and happily some many
more? and yet we have never applied our hearts aright unto wisdom. O if we
had learned but every year one virtue since we were borne, we might by this
time have been like Saints among men; whereas if God at this present time
should call us to judgment, it would appear, that we had applied our hearts,
our minds, our hands, our feet, our tongues, yea, and our whole bodies, to
riches and pleasures, to lying and deceiving, to swearing and forswearing, and
to all kind of sin and wickedness: but to true virtue and wisdom we have
not applied our hearts. God of his mercy give us grace to see our former
sins, truly to repent us of them, and to amend our lives hereafter, that we
may live with him for ever. If Man could persuade himself that this were his
last day, (as it may be, if God so please) he would not deserve his repentance
until to morrow. If he could think that this is his last meat that ever he
shall eat, he would not surfeit. If he could believe that the words which he
does speak to day, should be the last words that ever he shall speak; he
would not offend with his tongue in lying, swearing, and blaspheming If he
could be persuaded that this were the last lesson, the last admonition, that
ever GOD would afford him, to call him to repentance; he would both hear and
read it with more diligence then ever he had done before. Let us remember our
selves while it is to day, lest we repent our selves when it is too late. Who
can assure himself of life till to morrow? or what if we should live three,
four or five years, or what if twenty years? Who would not live here like a
Christian twenty years, to live in Heaven with CHRIST eternally? We can be
content to serve seven years apprentiship with great labor and royle, to be
instructed in some trade, that we may live more easily the rest of our days;
and we must labor notwithstanding afterward: and can we not be content to
labor in the things of God a little while, that we may rest from our labors
ever after? CHRIST says to his Disciples when he found them sleeping; Could
not you watch (...) boure? And can we not pray, can we not first, can we not
suffer a little while* He which is (...) can (...) little further, one step
more to save his life; and therefore GOD would not have Men know when they
shall die; because they should make ready at all times, having no more
certainty of one hour then another. Seeing therefore the case stands thus,
let us look to our selves, and let us take counsel of him which is an
Advocate, before he will be a Judge: for no man knows so well what is
necessary for us against that day, as he that shall be the Judge of our
cause. He therefore cries thus unto us: Walk while ye have the light, lest
the darkness come upon you; take heed, watch, and pray; for ye know not when
the time is: be ye like men waiting the coming of their Lord. They who thus
watch and wait, are sure to make a most joyful departure from this life, and
to be received into the Lords joy. Of which happy dissolution the Scriptures
thus record: I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my departure or
dissolution is at hand: I have fought a good fight, and have finished my
course: I have kept the faith; henceforth there is laid up for me the Crown of
righteousness. (...) Tim. 4 6. 7. 8. As the Heart brayeth for the Rivers of
waters, so pants my Soul after thee O God: my Soul thirsts for God, even
for the living God, when shall I come to appear before the presence of God?
Psalm. 42. 1. The righteous shall live for ever, their reward also is with the
Lord, and the (...) High does (...) for them; therefore shall they receive a
gracious Kingdom and beautiful Crown at the Lords hand for with his right
hand shall he cover them and with his arm shall ^ee defe^^ them: Wis. 5. 26.
Bring my soul out of prison, that I may praise thy name. Psalm. 142. 7. I
desire to (...) and to be with Christ, which is best of all. Phil. 1. 13. For
we know that if our earthly house of this Tabernacle be destroyed, we have a
building given of God; that is, a house not made with hands, but eternal in the
Heaven. 2 Cor. 5. 1. Jesus the son of Syrach, gives us a very profitable
admonition to (...) unto God from sin and wickedness so speedily as
possibly we can, in these words, Chap. 5. Because thy sin is forgiven, ^ee
not without fear to heap sin upon sin; and say not, the mercy of God is
great, he will forgive my manifold sins: for mercy and wrath come from him
and his indignation comes down upon sinners. Make no ^arrying to turn unto
the Lord, and put not off from day to day: for suddenly shall the wrath of the
Lord break forth, and in thy security thou shall be destroyed. Solomon gives
us most excellent counsel, saying; Remember now thy Creator in the days of
thy youth, while the evil lays come not, nor the years approach wherein thou
shall say, I have no pleasure in them. Hereunto agrees the saying of Saint
Augustine, that is, Repent while thou ar^ in health: so doing we are without
danger, because we have repented, at what time we might have sinned. These
divine testimonies might satisfy a Christian man, that their hope is vain and
full of peril, which defer their conversion and repentance, albeit but for
one hour: yet it shall be showed by other reasons, that it may more plainly
appear, how needful a thing it is for man with all speed to repent. There be
diverse causes why a man cannot without great labor and great difficulty
forsake sin, and follow righteousness. The first cause is a custom in
sinning, the which, being now made as it were another nature, can very hardly
be overcome. For as Mithridates used to eat poison so long that nature in the
end could very well brook and digest it: and the people called Cimmerij, are
so well acquainted with darkness, wherein they live continually, that they
cannot well endure the light: even so men that live continually in sin and
wickedness are so in use therewith, as all things contrary unto their custom
greatly offend them; by which custom (as Augustine affirms) dishonest and
filthy things seem unto them honest and pure. And as Houses, and Lands, and
other things by long continuance of time bring to him that holds them a Plea
of Prescription, and being so prescribed, cannot be recovered without a great
privilege had from the Prince; even so sins and vices, when they have a long
time by custom prescribed unto themselves the soul of the sinner, men strive
in vain, except GOD the most mighty King, by a singular privilege of his
Grace, do turn a stony heart into a fleshy heart: for if sin become (as it
were) the wife of our youth, we shall hardly leave it. O how easy (says
Saint Augustine) is the entrance into sin, but the coming out very hard!
Therefore let us kill sin in the beginning, then shall we not sin in
concupiscence, much less in practicing of sin, and delighting in sin. The
other cause is the malice and watchfulness of the Devil, by which he holds
2 Timothy 2. 26.
fast his servants and captives: for he which commits sin is the servant
of sin, and is held in captivity with the snares of the Devil, (as the
Apostle teaches) even at his will. The devil is that strong Luc. 11. 21
armed man, which with great care and diligence stands upon his guard;
whereupon Saint Augustine faith; He is not so strong by his own strength, as
by our own negligence; although his power be very great, yet he takes not so
much by force, as by his subtle suggestions for which cause he did not ask
leave of our Savior Christ, that he might cast him down from the pinnacle of
the Temple, but Mat. 4.
sought rather to persuade Christ to cast himself down headlong. The Serpent
in like manner sought not by force to cramme Eve, but allured her to take it
her self, Genesis 3.
that she might as it were with her own knife cut her own throat. The
Devil will not break open the door upon us, but he must find it open and
empty, swept and garnished; and then he Mat. 12.
will enter: and that he may thus make our selves the instruments of our own
misery and woe, he cease not to tempt us neither day nor night. Saint
Gregory says; he may win us at the leastwise by his tediousness. When he
has thus brought us to his lure, then his care is to hold us still in his
bondage; and for fear that we should make conscience of sin, and so turn to
the Lord by repentance he puts a fair vizard over the ugly face of sin,
and so disguizeth her, that the proud person which exceeds in apparel,
says, that his, or her pride is clenlinesse and decency; the whore-monger and
fornicator takes his filthy life to be but the course of youth; the drunkard
and riotous person persuades himself that his excess is but good fellowship;
the covetous person believes that his covetousness is good husbandry; the
idle person which spends his whole time in Dice, Cards, and such like
pastimes, neglecting his vocation in the true serving of God, flattereth
himself, that his time thus wickedly spent, is honest recreation; whereas if
the Devil had not blinded them, so as they might see sin in her colors, she
would seem such a deformed monster, as they would loath her for ever. Her eyes
are full of adultery, her ears are very large and great, open to hear al
devices and vain delights; her tongue swollen with lying and deceit, her
throat is an open sepulcher, and a swallowing gulf; her lips are inuenomed
with the poison of Aspes her hands are large to receive bribes, her belly has
a timpany of surfeiting and gluttony; her back is laden with idleness, and
yet her seete are swift to shed blood. With her heart she thinks upon
nothing, but how to betray the innocent, and oppress the widow, and the
fatherless; yea, from the very top of the head unto the sole of the foot, she
is full of botches and sores, and has no whole part. What man will be coupled
with this monster; which is the monster of all monsters, who has no other
dowry and portion of her father the Devil, but hell fire? Let him then that
has been enchanted with her adulterous eyes, divorce himself betimes from her
company without delay: for it is very perilous to stay long; her handmaide
security will peradventure flatter us, and say, it is too soon to depart with
this sweet unsavory companion, and so to crave further company. This is the
weakness of frail flesh, which fancy feeds the vain thoughts, who say, all
shall be well: but it is the Devils voice, and if we continue therein, and
withstand not our unbridled thoughts, which the frail flesh does yield unto,
but still hearken to the Devils voice, he will serve us as he served Adam and
Eve; and will lay open our nakedness and shame, to the confusion of body and
soul, if we suddenly do not repent and amend us of our ungodly courses.
Delaied repentance is the cause of the absence of the Holy Ghost from us: for
as the spirit of the Lord dwelling in our hearts makes the way of virtue easy
and sweet, in so much that the Prophet David says; I have as great Psalm. 119.
delight in the way of thy Commandments as in all manner of riches: and I have
ru^ne the way of thy Commandments, when thou have set my heart at liberty:
Even so contrariwise, the absence of the Holy Ghost makes the same way hard
and unpleasant. And as the light of the Sun cheareth up men's spirits to go to
their labors; even so the Sun of righteousness shining in our hearts with
the bright beams of his grace, makes us to have a delight in the way of his
Commandments. The first outward means of Saint Paul's conversion was the great
light which he saw from Heaven; then he was cast down to the ground and
humbled; he hears a voice, and acknowledges it to be Gods voice: and then
arises up and says; What shall I do? It is the celestial illumination that
works our Acts 9. 6. and 26. 12.
conversion unto God, and frames our hearts to his obedience. And therefore
the Lord says by the mouth of the Prophet Osea thus to sinful men; W^e unto
them, when I shall depart away from them; Ose. 6. 12.
and by the Prophet Jeremy: Understand and know what a grievous thing it is,
that the Lord thy God has forsaken thee. The Apple is not so eaten of worms,
nor the garment so eaten with mothes, as the powers of the soul are corrupted
with sin and wickedness; the understanding is darkened, the judgment
dulled, and the will depraved: whereof it comes, that now to live a holy and
godly life, is a very hard and painful matter. Who sees not then in what
peril and error they are, who putting off their repentance and conversion from
day to day, do think that the same which is now hard unto them, they shall
find afterward more easy, when all the causes of difficulty and hardness are
increased; when they have increased the causes of their labor and difficulty,
by adding sins unto sins; and when an evil custom has taken more deep
root, shall not the Devil then more fortify his Castle, which is thy soul?
shall not GOD which is thy light depart further off from thee? shall not the
powers of thy soul then having received many wounds, be made more weak and
insufficient to goodness? Beside this, thou must greatly hazard the loss of
heavenly treasures by a long delay. GOD has thought upon us and loved us from
everlasting, and has prepared for us an eternal reward: with what face then
can thou hold from God a little momentanie service; whereas thou owe unto
God all that thou art able to do for ever? GOD has given unto us the life of
his only begotten Son, the which is of greater price then the life of all
men: and by what right and prerogative dare thou deny unto him the flower of
thy youth, and to spend the same in other things, then in the service of God,
and to offer unto him the dregs and rottenness of old age? Only consider what
the Prophet Malachie says; If he Mal. 1. 8.
offer the blind for sacrifice, is it not evil? If he offer the lame and
sick, is it not evil? Offer it now unto thy Prince, will he be content with
thee, or accept thy person, says the Lord of Hosts? But cursed be the
deceiuer, which has in his flock Verse. 14.
a Male, and voweth, and sacrifices unto the Lord a corrupt thing: Our selves,
and all that whole we have, is not sufficient to serve the Lord. Let our youth
be dedicated to his service, as well as our age: let us serve him, not only in
sickness, but also in health: let us turn unto him not only when we are in
affliction and under the cross, but also in prosperity: for forced holiness
is of no account. Pharaos repentance, Festus trembling, and Judas sorrow,
auailed them nothing Saint Augustine (in his second Book of true, and false
repentance which affliction wringeth from men) says; Will you put the matter
out of doubt? Repent then whilst you are young and in health; otherwise
whether a man do safely depart out of this life, none are sure. The ^ame
Author says thus; Will thou repent thee when thou can ^inne no longer? Thy
sins then have forsaken thee, and not thou thy sins. Sin is common to all
times and ages of man's life, yea, to frail and vain youth, more then to old
age. Which caused King David to say; Remember not O Lord the sins of my
youth. There is then at no time want of matter in us for repentance; and yea
our sins are much more then our sacrifices. Sin is common to all, but timely
and speedy repentanc to few. Let the exhortation of our Savior move us, which
he so oftentime^ repeateth: Watch, watch, because ye know not the Mat. 24.
day, nor the houre^ If it be demanded of you, who assure your selves that
after a few years be past, you will repent; Christ made thee no promise, I
will not say of years, and months, but of the morrow which is but one day.
Nay, who can assure himself one hour? What greater folly or rashness then
can there be devised, then for a worm of the Earth to determine any thing
certain concerning the times and seasons, which the Father has set in his
own power? Thou can not be ignorant, how many this vain confidence has
deceived, even to this day: But man will say; The Lord is full of compassion
and mercy, Object.
he has made large promises to those that trust in him; he sent his Son into
the World for us; and therefore he will not suffer us to perish. O how we
deceive Answ.
our selves: Truth it is, the promises of GOD are greater then frail Man can
or does consider, and his promises appertain not to us, if we can make no
better use of them. Let us think upon that Proverb of Solomon: Have thou
found Honey? eat not too much. Have thou the sweet and most comfortable
promises of God in the Gospel? let us use them to our comfort, and presume not
thereby to live securely in sin. Jacob must change his garments Genesis 27.
before he can obtain a blessing, and Hester must deck Hest. 2.
her self when she comes into the presence of the King: that is to say; We
must put off the garment of sin by speedy repentance, and we must be
clothed with virtue and godliness: otherwise our meditation and prayers
return empty, to our overthrow both of Body and Soul.

CHAP. V. Of the force, the use, and necessity of Prayer, and the benefit
which rises thereof.
O LORD, the consideration hereof duly considered in the heart of a true
Christian, and touched with the least finger of thy Grace, can and will heal
all our infirmities, if we will but suddenly recount our misspent and leude
lives, and withdraw our selves into our retired closet or chamber, where we
may not only unburden our perverse, vile, and festred conscience, but find
ease for our sickeweake souls, by calling heartily to mind the sweet promises
of our good God, who never suffers the true believing Petitioner to go away
unrewarded; his mercy is so great to them that faithfully serve him, by
keeping his Commandments. And again, the largeness of his great and
unspeakable love, the extension of his favor, the inheritance laid up, the
Kingdom prepared, a peace and rest everlasting, (without distractio^, tumult,
or vexation to annoy his chosen; the eager pursuit of our unbridled vain
affections, and self-loue to this world,) are to be meditated upon by every
good Christian. This World and self-loue to this World, is but a Sea of
vanities, which will prove a bitter sea-flowing with all kind of miseries; and
if we pull not down the sails of our lascivious life, we are in danger to
lose the expected promises of our Savior Christ, which he has promised to
all his true believing servants. Lord we beseech thee infuse into our hearts
such abundance of thy grace, that we may be withdrawn from all vice, that
tends to the displeasure of thy omnipotent Majesty; and so being withdrawn,
in a most humble and prostrate humility, we may give thee that true sacrifice
which thou have prescribed and commanded us; that the good thoughts of thy
spirit may draw thy mercy so toward us, as that our petitions may ascend up to
the Throne of thy divine Majesty; like the smoke of Incense into the air.
Grant we lay (as it were) our mouths to the ears of that Heavenly Wisdom
that knows our wants, better then we can understand them ourselves, yea,
even before we can utter them; and that we go to him that calls: Come unto
me all you that travel, and are heavy laden, Mat. 11.
and I will refresh you. O comfortable saying; to him then let us go, nay
fly, that are wearied under the burden of a diseased conscience: for he is
that true refreshing (...) which cures the inwardsore of a distressed and
(...), if we do faithfully ask it at his (...) the sincerity and pureness of
our hearts. Why should we not then ^lie unto this good Lord, who is the Father
of all mercy, and God of all comfort? Let us run to him that is so willing
not only to hear us at our call, but far more willingly to receive and
embrace our godly petitions and desires. He is that sweet comfortable (...)
and true (...) of (...) race, by which all the benefits and gifts in that (...)
Treasurehouse^ are continued and reserved for Christ's chosen. O let us then use
Prayer, which is the key that does open where no Man shuts, and shuts where no
man (...); that enters where no man has passage, and returns where no man can
hinder. The prayer of the faithful is the life of that soul which is sore
wrapped and perplexed with the noisome puddle of a sestered and sinful
conscience where by the heart is so oppres^^ with grief, that neither wine nor
strong drink by the rules of Solomon can comfort. O then what shall we do
but cry to thee (...) GOD, with heart and hand listed up to (...) saying;
(...) that thou would hide (...) in thy Grace, and keep (...) secret until
thy wrath (...) past. Therefore if any (...) afflicted, let him pray; and (...)
us not presume in the height of our prosperity, lest we suddenly see a
change; but let us put our whole confidence in the Lord our God, and pray unto
him, and to none other. Neither let us presume upon our selves, or any earthly
means besides: for there was never contemplation, exercise, or any kind of
study in the World, so acceptable to the Majesty of GOD, so gracious in his
sight, so lincked and true a friend to him, as heavenly meditation; It awaketh
in the night season, it rests not in the day, it forsakes us not by Land or by
Sea, in health, in sickness; in prosperity or adversity, in weal or woe: it
is such a sure and tried friend in all extreamities, such an inseparable
companion in man's greatest distress, as no tongue is able to express the
contentation it yields unto the oppressed. Therefore let us love it, and lodge
it in the bosom of our weak consciences, and embrace it in sincerity of
heart: for it is our last and best friend, always soliciting our Father in
Heaven; whose name is so worthy to be called upon so mighty for deliverance, so
p^^ssant for protection, so gainful for success so compendicus to abridge
unnecessary labors, as the name of LEHOVAH our most merciful and loving
Father? There was never Sanctuary so free for transgressors, in the strongest
privilege never such safety; never holes in the Rock so open for the Fowls
of the field, the arm of my Mother never so open to her child, as the (...) of
Gods merciful compassion to all true and faithful believers. Therefore with
speed let us all (...) faithfully unto this good GOD in all our wants and
extremities, and there shroa^^ our selves under his protection. There was never
Creature living under the Sun, that (...) not affliction in his days;
neither (...) there ever any to whom affliction was not grievous and irkesome^
yet never was there affliction so great, but it has been under the correction
of a loving Lord, whose hand has been aable to master it.

Every affliction as it comes in several kinds for our several sins and
transgressions: so our meditations must be several, and framed and fitted
thereunto, and powered forth both with wisdom and zeal, that they seem not
harsh and undigested to those sacred ears, that can both sift and try the one
and the other.

The delicacy and tenderness both of our meditations and prayers must be so
devoutly and wisely composed, and the favor of his countenance so carefully
sought for, as may appear by the example of him that knew in his soul that a
faint and dissembling Petition would return empty into the bosom of him that
sent it up.

Cursed (...) that does the Ier. 48. 10
work of the Lord negligently, (says the Prophet; (...) But (says David,) A
broken and (...) the Lord will not despise. David never sent up his petitions,
but with the deepest affection and zeal of heart, with the most sincere
integrity and meditated zeal that might be: for every night washed he his
bed, and watered his Couch with tears, which argued his singular contrition
and feruentnesse in his Petitions.

And therefore after his godly example, let us with a sincere and true desire
of contrite hearts, pray to that good GOD, that he will so inspire his heavenly
grace into our sinful hearts, that when we make our Petitions, we may have
the force of two tongues in our (...); whereby we may the better speed, and
avoid the malediction, which otherwise we may receive in stead of (...)
blessing.

We may learn precepts and draw many excellent examples from the lives of the
Heathen Philosophers and Writers as also we may learn a zeal in our
Petitions, even of those wooden Priests, 1 Kings 18: of whom it is written;
That they called upon the name of Baal from morning to noon; and when they had
no answer, they cried aloude, nay, cut themselves with knives, till the
blood flowed; so they prayed not only in tears, but in blood.

And then shall not we being the Children of light be as seruent and zealous
in our Petitions to GOD? The agony and zeal of the Sun of righteousness was
such that in the days of his flesh he offered up Prayers and supplications
with strong cries and tears to him that was able to help him.

O Lord inspite, thy heavenly grace so (...) our hearts, that we may learn to
address ourselves, that in all temptations, necessities, and afflictions, we
may in the true zeal of our heart pray so de^outely unto thy omnipotent
Majesty, that our Petitions may have a gracious acceptance in thy sight.

And as Gods word further declares unto us, not only that he kneeled, (at the
naming of whose name all knees must bow both in Heaven and Earth, and under the
Earth;) but that he fell upon the ground, the footstool of his own Majesty,
and lay upon that face that never Angel beheld without reverence: and when he
had prayed once, he prayed again more earnestly, as his word records: He once
prayed and departed; and a second time, and yet a third prayed and departed,
evermore using the same petitions, his prayer ascending by degrees, like
incense and persume. And not only his lips went, but his agony and contention
within was so great, that an Angel was sent from Heaven to comfort him; and out
of the trouble of his soul the sweat like drops of blood trickled down to
the ground.

Let us not therefore at any time offer up any unworthy sacrifice: but let us
remember in our Prayers this glorious example of this our worthy and blessed
Savior for our imitation, that they may be blessed in their speed, and we in
their success; and not to utter them carelessly, as if our spirits and tongues
were strangers ignorant of eithers purpose, the lips bab^ing without the
heart, but no compu^ction within; honoring God with our mouths, but our
spirits of true devotion being far from him; our hearts not bleeding with the
drops of true sincerity, which would be heard and pitied. Our Altar without
fire, our Petitions without heat, and all that we do without zeal.

If we mean that our Petitions should be heard and accepted at the hands of
GOD, we must frame our supplications with an ardent and true affectionated
zeal, directed to God alone: for it is neither to be done to Angels, nor
Saints, as Mediators or friends, one or other, greater or lesser in Heaven or
Earth; but only to be offered to the Majesty of God, whose ears be open to
all them that seek to him in Faith; for without true Faith all our Petitions
are naught, and turn to our utter confusion. We must not only pray with
zeal and desire, but with fitness of congruitie, and application for his
blessings in our necessities.

The Prophet Hosea makes it plain and says; The Lord at all times will take
away all in^quitie, and receive us graciously, so we render up to him (...)
calu^s of our lips. Nay, what is it that he will not do for them that put
their whole rest upon his omnipotent Majesty in all tribulations and anguish
of mind? If we make our humble supplications unto him, he will stay his furious
hand, and fill his hand full of mercy; he will withdraw his rod of
correction, and send his rod of comfort; he will sheathe up his devouring
sword in the hand of his destroying Angel, who on every side strikes down to
the grave, emptying houses and streets to fill up Church yards.

And upon our true repentance, he will surceasse to send his deue^ring Angel,
and send his Angel of mercy and grace, which is a preservative and the most
soueraign restoratiue under heaven, to make sound again our diseased
conscience, which has been long ^uergrowne with ^inne, which (...) both h^rt
and wound; (...) now we acknowledge with a sorrow from our hearts, that our
sins have procured it at the hand of GOD.

In consideration of the great mercies that GOD does daily and hourly heap
upon us, we must address our Petitions to the LORD in another key, and form
of supplication; meekely kneeling before the LORD our Maker, lowly prostrate at
the foote-stoole of GODS mercy, that his judgments may be diuerted, and turned
away from us.

Thus did that great pattern of wisdom Solomon, whose foote-steps are worthy
our imitation; beseeching the LORD of Lords; that when we shall make our
prayers according to our necessities either in body or in mind that he would
vouchsafe then to hear us, and reach forth his merciful hand unto our
complaints.

But these our Petitions cannot ascend, unless faith and devotion bear them
up, nor can they speed unless they issue from a heart that vows unfeigned
repentance, and that calls to mind our sins and transgressions that have
procured those judgments; that we may truly repent, and so wash them from us,
whereby God may hear us, and show his merciful compassion.

But this repentance is more bitter then can be imagined: for every sorrow is
not repentance, for the^ should worldlings repent. Some think every confession
to be repentance, then had Pharaoh and Saul repented: some think that every
weeping is (...) repentance, then had Esau repented: some take every little
humiliation to be repentance, then had (...) repented: some think that every
good word and promise is repentance; if that were so, then should sick men
repent: some think, to ^rie GOD mercy is repentance, then should every ^oole
repent.

But true repentance in ^^de, and such as is here ^ent, i^ more then hanging
^owne of the head like a ^ull-rush, or towering out a ^^are, to so^ out a sighe,
to ^eare (...), or (...) cloth, or with a verbal sound of the lips, without
the priuity and consent o^ the heart within, to cri^ Lord have mercy on me, an^
so rest.

But it must be the scourging and launcing of the very soul with true
contrition, a downright shower (...) tears from a broken pen^tent bleeding
heart, fille^ with exceeding bitterness^ of sorrow and anguish for some
committed.

Let no man think it to^ early to go, or too early (...) begin to go to
this goo^ School, not of sharpness^ but of sweetness; not (...) pain, but of
pleasure. L^^ us go to it in our youth^ and let Solomon be our T^tor; whereby
we shall (...) ^aught to remember our Creator in the days of our ^outh.

Let it be often remem^red, that no man think it ^o late, lest he omit and
^ose that which he might ^therwise have gained.

What time soever the sin^er shall truly repent him ^^om the very bottom of
(...) heart of his loud and ^isspent life, the Lord will ^orgiue and forget,
and his ^^nnes shall vanish from his ^^ght and presence, even as (...) d^aw
before the Sun.

I say again, he that right^^ repents himself of his ^ickednesse and vain
life; (...) is not the misery of this ^retched life, nor terror of ^onscience,
nor malice of ^oes, (let them be Men or devils (...) be a whole legion to one,)
that shall never hinder the ascensio^ and blessing of his godl^ prayer; and it
shall never hi^der the forgiveness of (...) sin.

Never was the shado^ more faithful to the bodi^ then a blessed forgiuenes^ to
faithful repentance, a^^ the good success whi^^ has been to a faithful a^^
zealous prayer, conceiu^^ in the breast, and lodged (...) the heart, and
powerful^ uttered by the voice of (...) tongue and spirit.

But this great expect^^ success which we look (...) to receive by our
Petitio^^ at the hands of GOD, mu^^ be formed in a more zealo^^ fashion then
our comm^^ ^se is; which use may be ^ompared to an hypoc^ites ^ustome, wanting
these ne^essary adjuncts, these vnde^ayed, vndelaied assistants, that bless
the company wherein they come, and (...) the suite wherein they (...)
Solliciters and Plaintifs, ^ho beat not the air with ^ounds that arise from
the ^ollow and emptiness of them, like Brooks that roar and make a noise, but
show ^^eir empty bottomes that ^ontaine nothing but grauel and filthiness
within; like (...) our desola^e and only fa^^ionable prayers both at ^ome and
abroad, in cham^^r and Church: these are ^ypocrites who pour ^orth (...)
form of words* rather in (...) fashion of custom, then for any great zeal;
neither honoring God, nor yet furthering the Petitions we make for our
expected desires.

These things duly considered, we must needs think in our minds we remain in
a very wretched and desperate case; our affections are so weak, that the least
occasion or blast of vanity, withdrawes us from all godly desires, whereby we
run both soul and body into utter destruction. Very little is the care which
remains in us, to give this good GOD our only Savior that sends to all
things, his due; so our turns be served and that we have received at the
Lords hands our desire, there is all our frail^ flesh looks for, till
extremities come, and then we make a new show of repentance, with a sorrow for
our negligence in the true serving and honoring of his Omnipotent Majesty;
which we rather do of a custom then of zeal: as the Parrot of (...), we
recite the Creed, flattering God with our tongues, but dissembling with him in
our hearts; which is only for want of Faith, by whose absence our minds are
fraught with toies and fancies, which bear away the due reverence we owe unto
God.

For when we have prayed to GOD that he will give ear unto our requests, and
receive our petitions, they are sonegligently done, that we had need pray
again, to desire him that he will out of his bountiful love and great mercy
cast his eye of pity and not of anger upon the great offense which was
committed in the idleness of our prayers and supplications made by us unto his
divine Majesty, and that he will forgive us our sins committed in our,
prayers; because we think then leas^ of him at the time we make our prayer
unto him; never remembering the Majesty of his person to, whom we^ speak, nor
the Excellency of the work we take in hand; never rowsing up the spirit of a
sorrowful repentant heart for our former offenses committed: but if we ^hance
then to stir up ou^ devotion to prayer, we leave them halt and lame, body
without soul, or soul without devotion, sound of lips without the heart; one
part of our selves without the other, or the whole without a whole, clamor
without intention.

But David practiced true repentance, which may not be repented of; and such
were the panges and prickings of Jobs heart unto GOD: My groanings (says he)
come forth before I eat, and my roarings are powered forth. Not only groaning
nor crying, but also roarings, with a continual inundation, as one wave dasheth
forth another.

Now when the soul is thus prepared to speak, the ears of the Lord are ever
open to hear the true penitent sinners cry.

These are wonderful passions. The hungry Lion in the desert oppressed with
extremity of suffering want, never roared so much for his prey, nor the Heart
braying after the water brooks, as the goodness of the Lord in the soul of
the faithful. He is the mighty LORD of Heaven and Earth, whose name be blessed
and hallowed for ever, in Earth as it is in Heaven; and blessed are all those
that are in love with his goodness, and tra^^ nearest unto his steps.

And to give us a further example in his own cause; when his soul was hedged
in and environed round about with vexation even unto death, when anguish and
sorrow encompassed him round about; as also then in his greatest agony, when he
cried with a great voice, (not for particular persons, as before he wept, but
undergoing the burden and punishment of all the sins and sinners in the
World,) My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me: and crying again with a
great voice, gave up the ghost.

Therefore the blessed Apostles mentioning the days of his humanity, and the
exercise of his godly and sacred life, and fruit of his lips, and the passions
of his spirit, thought it not enough to give notice to the World that he prayed
to his Father; that he prayed with tears which trickled down his blessed
cheeks, and watered the ground; nor of a cry alone weakly sent out, but of a
vehement and strong cry, which (if Heaven were brass) were able to pierce
through it, and find way into the Sanctuary, into the ears of the Almighty.

Such a prayer as it ascends lightly up, borne upon the wings of Faith; so it
eue^ comes laden heavily down with a blessing on the head of him that first
gave it flight. This Lantern of our direction and composition of humility
and goodness, this glorious and never enough admired LORD of life, who pressed
and oppressed with the weight and burden thereof, groaned under the affliction
of our sins in a most perfect form of exact obedience, with his bleeding
tears for us, showed us the right form of faithful supplications for our
selves.

Let us then be importunate and fervent in our prayers, that our Petitions may
wrestle with GOD, and overcome him. For if our prayers be powered forth in the
^eruentnesse of zeal without wavering, then let us make no doubt, but he will
graciously receive them into his arms of mercy.

Way h^e thus grieue^ for us, and shall not we grieve for ourselves? groaned
he under the weight of our sin, (being himself without sin) only in
compassion and pity toward us? why then do not we continually groan and
grieve? It is so far from us, that in no way we give his heavenly Majesty
his due, except in committing finne, and drinking it down the throat with
greediness, and a desiring thirsting appetite, even as Behe^^th drinks down
I^rdan without sense, sorrow, or grief for the same.

The true consideration hereof will enforce and procure in us a more perfect
desire to follow the true prescription that our Savior has prescribed for us
in his holy Gospel; which commands us by express words to be importunate
and fervent in our prayers, that our Petitions may ascend up to GOD our Lord
and only Savior and there to be received into his bosom, to pre^rent a
further and greater danger before the dreadful Majesty of the omnipotent LORD
of Heaven and Earth; who with the breath of his nostrels is able to destroy our
bodies and souls, and change the World and the beauty thereof into a Chaos and
^eape of confusion; turn the Sun into darkness, and the Moon into blood,
and alter the property and being of all the Creatures in the World at the
twinkling of an eye.

Considering what we are that speak, that offer up the calves of our lips,
and the fruits of our repentance; poor, naked, impotent, unworthy wretches;
we should be importunate, and with a feruentnesse of zeal, pour out our
supplications unto GOD, that he will mercifully hear us, and gently receive our
supplications, and according to his won^ed goodness satisfy our faithful
requests poured forth unto him in the name of CHRIST JESUS our Lord and only
helper in all distress.

But our wretchedness and mortality, our nakedness in good works toward
him, is such, that if there were any spark of true faith in us, it would make
us ashamed, as it did our first Parents, when they bid themselves from the
presence of their GOD.

The view of our sins is exceedingly sinful, the number, the weight, the
danger thereof hang about our necks like milstones, that we are notable, nor
worthy to cast up our eyes to heaven: for our sins are so exceedingly
miserable, that the Prophet of GOD being astonished to see either man or the
Son of man so kindly visited, bids us be fervent in our Petitions to GOD.
And we must expect an happy success of our supplications, unless we will call
in question or doubt of the promises of God, which are more stable then the
pillars of the Earth, or the basis of the surest foundation: except we will
cast our grain into the earth, and expect no harvest; plant Vines, and not
drink the Wine thereof.

If we mean to receive that at GODS hand we do expect to have, then we must
prepare our selves in another form to pour out our unworthy plaints and
petitions; and think that GOD either hears not, or regards not at all,
(the weakness of our faith is such;) but he is willing to grant as far as
is expedient for our good.

If our dark understanding would give us leave duly to consider, there is
another motive for feruency to be used unto that great GOD, who will not be
mocked with the idleness of ou^ thoughts and lips i^ be pittifulnesse of his
favorable countenance, which is so great to man, as if we do but carefully
ask it in zeal and humility of heart, he is then so ready to hearken to our
requests, that presently he opens his hand of bounty, and powers on us his
benefits plenteously.

All these respects and considerations thereto tending do cry unto us in most
pitiful and lamentable manner, to make out hard and stony hearts to melt, and
cry unto his Omnipotent and Divine Majesty, whereby we may grow to be more
fervent in our Petitions. We must not think that the noise of our lips, as the
ringing of basins, mere sounds and voices, that awake and fly up whilst the
inward man does slumber and keep down, procures audience at the hands of God.

The strongest and most effectual speech in the secret ears of GOD,
proceeds not from bare words, but from intention of heart. He that hears
without ears, can interpret our prayers without our tongues; he that made both
the one and the other, knows the language of both alike. He that saw Nathaniel
under the Fig Tree before he was called, saw and sanctified John Baptist in
his Mothers womb before he came forth; and read the heart of Zachcus before
his conversion: sees and blesses our godly prayers fervently conceived, and
sown in the root of our consciences, before they bring forth any fruit.

But if they be only verbal and vocal sounds without wringing any drop of
contrition from the conscience, blood from the spirit, they may beat the air
with empty sounds, but into the ears of the Almighty shall they not enter; but
their want of devotion shall be answered by him, as the prayers of those
Idolaters, Ezechiel 8. Though they cry in mine ears with a loud voice, yet
will I not hear them. Therefore let us not herein behave our selves
unworthily, nor presume to speak to the Majesty of GOD, but with such a due
respect and reverence to his Omnipotence, that in speaking we know to whom we
do it. Let us stir up both our tongues and spirits, that they may join hand
in hand, the sooner to prevail with GOD.

And further if we do think that our often powered out petitions and plaints
to God do not prevail according as our frail flesh would have it, yet we
must not be discouraged or wax Luc. 18. 1.
faint thereby, but go on still in our suite grounded upon Faith, and so
importune his Majesty evermore and more; solicit his long suffering patient
ears with our faithful clamors, so shall we at last obtain all that we godly
desire.

Peradventure not in the same manner that our frail flesh desires, yet in that
which the LORD out of his great mercies sees most convenient for the help of
the Soul, and for the comfort of the Body.

It were good for us to carry Jobs mind, saying; Though GOD kill me, yet will
I trust in him. Though GOD denies us a while, yet let us not despair in him:
for without his help there is no good to be had, or to be expected either for
the relief of body or soul.

It is said Heaven and Earth shall pass, but not one tittle of his word shall
fall to the ground.

Therefore when we have powered forth our suite, and made our petition known,
then let us begin anew, repeat it, recite it, ingeminate it, and dwell upon
it; be not beaten away by any distrust or temptation from thy hold. Learn
adherence to thy suite, from the Mariners constancy, which is, we beseech thee
O LORD, we beseech thee.

And if we set our he arts truly on work, they will soon find out this
theme. When the affection is fastened, the tongue is easy, and willing to
dwell thereupon.

For example, David when he heard of the death of his ^onne Absolon, he said; O
Absolon, O my son Absolon, o Absolon my son, my son; where his affection
seems only to dwell upon the name and memory of his Son, and his tongue to
have forgotten to pronounce any other speech, save only Absolon.

It manifests likewise what love our SAVIOVR ^are toward that holy Ci^ie, in
that he ingeminated and repeated his sorrows ^uer and over, saying; O
Ie^usalem, Jerusalem: if I forget Jerusalem, let my right hand ^orget ^e^
c^^ning.

Our affections must be in oue with him and his bles^ed name, more then Son
^r City, or any worldly de^ight, that it m^^ be^ ever ^editating in our
hearts, and walking in our tongues, ^aying; My God and my Lord.

And the more we are held off, the nee^e^ let us preasse. Let us attend his
leisure and mer^ifull pleasure with patience, without distrust, without
weariness.

The longer Abraham talked with GOD the more h^ preua^ted; he brought him from
the whole number to fifty, from fifty to ten, before he gave him over. Mar^
the manner of his i^portunitie.

Behold, I have begun t^ speak unto my Lord, and ^ am but dust and ashes. L^
not my Lord be angry. And will speak again once word I have beg^^ne, and
again will speak^. And let not ^^ Lord be angry. So f^rre w^ GOD from anger,
that he^ gave him both a patien^ ^are, and a gracious answer in hi^ most
importunate request; If ^^^ befound there, I will not destroy ^^.

Let us confider and be^olde what is the force of ^raier poured forth in
since^ity from the tongue of a ^ighteous and zealous man. It is so powerful in
the ^ares of his Divine Majesty, that if in the who^e City, ^ City so
exceedingly sinful, that the cry thereof ascen^ed up into Heaven, even in^o
the ears of the Holy of ^oliest, whose wrath and re^olution was of their
overthrow, ^^d his de^^^minate decr^e past thercupon: If, I ^ay, there had
b^^ne but ten ^igh^eous persons to have stood up betwi^t his wrath and their
sins, for their sakes it had not been destroyed. It pleases the eare^ of
his Heavenly Maiesti^ right well to be long in treated; whose blessed
condition and nature is never (...) truly leuelled at, as when (...) persw^de
our selves, th^^ our importunity therein c^^ never be bur^hensome to h^^
Highness^.

Many times h^th his M^iestie unto us ^^nfull and ^^serable wretches in
gemin^ted, recited, and repeated ^^uer the riches of his merci^^ As in these
and the like pl^ces: The Lord is mercif^^ gracious, (...) to anger, ab^^dant in
goodness and (...) (...) for t^^^sands, for giving i^^iq^i^^^ (...) and or
a^sgressions.

What did he mean there by, but that twice and (...) ^imes together we should
^^geminate, recite, and re^eate over again our re^uests and petitions, and cry
or his mercy? and then if he ^eeme deaf for a while, and ^ake as though he
heard ^ot, yet at last the zeal of ^ur importunity w^ll pro^ure his Omnipotent
Maie^^ie to grant audience.

If our words and pray^ers will not prevail, then ^et us join thereto our
^eares; that GOD may say to ^s, as he said to Ezekiah; I ^aue seen thy tears.
They ^re so powerful messengers, ^hiefly if they be done in the ^^nceriti^ and
singleness of ^eart.

No sooner can the thought ^ppeare craving his merci^ull aid, but the eye of
his compassion and goodness ^s upon them.

Then who is it that will not worship and serve thi^ ^ouing Master, being so
ready at our call to receive ou^ Petitions into his hands o^ mercy?

D^^id says, that God ha^ heard the voice of his weeping^ Tears and sorrow
for ou^ sins, do cause the ears o^ GOD to open unto our god^ lie requests.
Therefore let v^ glorify this good GOD with our bodies in true humility, and
serve him in spirit, and lift up our souls with David, and our hands with
Moses; our eyes with Peter, ^^d our voices with D^b^r^.

Thus seeking, we shall find; thus knocking, it shallbee o^ened unto us. ^et
us give our Petitious but the ^^ght voi^e to ask with, and guestionlesse there
is no ^oubt, but GOD will hear ^s in his mercy to our im^easurab^e comfort
and ^oy.

It must not be the dumb and silent which must give ^n eye to seek with; it
must ^ot be the blind and care^esse which gives an hand to ^nocke with; it
must not ^eare to molest and disquiet ^ot only the doors, but all ^he
Treasures and Jewels in ^he Kingdom of Heaven, which will be opened unto
those his chosen: And whi^her our blessed SAVIOVR ^oth h^^^elf i^nuite us; Come
unto ^ee all (...) that labor and are laden.

O this is a love without example, where the King ^imselfe not only comman
de^h, but desire^ our appearance. Who then shall keep^ us back where he comman
death? Open ye gate^ of rightcousnesse and be ye opened ye everlasting doors.

O what a blessed and comfortable saying is this unto sinful man by so great
^ Lord and King! Who the^ shall oppose themselves against us? What need we to
have a Mediator, an Intercessor or friend, when be himself has given his
voice, and freely calls us to himself alone?

Though the frankenesse and bounty of his love has yielded acce^^e unto hi^
heavenly Majesty, this great (...) four good GOD unto ^^, must not e^bolden us
with ^ less respect or reverence in showing our duty in the true serving of
him: which love of his does de^erue more in a far greater degree, then our
vain and ^raile flesh can yield unto ^is Omnipotency and State, that fit^ in
glory at the right ^and of his Father.

And whereas we are poor ^ormes creeping upon the ^oote-stoole of this Earth,
^ray we that his Majesty will be so gracious as to ^ouchsafe we should
spea^^ unto him as it were face to ^^ce, to pour out our petiti^ns with our
own voices ^^to his most blessed and sa^^ed ear^^.

All know by (...) exper^ence, that the Kings of the earth keep themselves wit^
in a strict watch and wa^ r^gard; and their persons a^^ ^ull of Majesty and
terro^ and not spoken unto, b^^ with difficulty and frien^ship: besides the
infinite d^straction of suites and bu^^nesses, more then the cares (...) any
mortal man can receiu^ drive them of necessity (...) the deputation of
subord^nate Ministers.

But in GOD who ride^ upon the Cherubins, a^^ makes his enemies (...) foot
stool, there is neith^^ dange of his person, nor d^fect in his hearing. For h^
that ^lanted the ear, do^ he not hear? He that st^^deth and knocks at (...)
(...) for ^^^rance, when we knock at ^is, will he not grant en^rance?

In earthly Courts among which we live, we may have many impediments; ^ew
will hardly favor us, but many may hinder us before we can deliver our message.

But at these Heavenly Gates at which we must always call, the LORD alone ^s
Porter.

For when the friend knocked in the Parable of Luke ^t midnight, the heauiest
(...) deadest hour of the night; ^e who was nearest the gate first awaked, if
he slept at all, and first answered.

How willing is he to grant, that is so willing to ^e disquieted? Now glad to
hear our knock, that hat^ placed his bed so near th^^ gate? Hew truly may we
say that he was not one^^ n^cre the gate, but the lord himself and the ver^
gate? who when his Chi^ dren were fast asleep, the cares of Angels and Saint
shut up, he first, and at the very first call, n^y, only he among the rest
made answ^^ unto it.

The LORD is alwaie^ ^eerer unto us then we ar^ unto him, Psalm. 10. He ^^^reth
the desire of the poor. H^ first prepares the heart, an^ sets it on work
to pray and when he has so done he bends his care unto ^^ giving unto us
both the cause and the effect, bo^ the blessing, and means ^ ^e blessings. The
true stand ^ost effectual messenger we ^aue to send our Petition^ ^y, is
Prayer, poured forth ^ the zeal and singleness four hearts.

If we send up merits, the ^arres in Heaven will dis^aine it, that we who
dwell ^t the foote-stoole of GOD, are presume so far, when ^e purest
Creatures in Heaven are impure in his fight.

If we send up fear and di^rust, the length of the way ^ill tire them out, and
with ^he weight sink to the ^round, before they come ^alfe way up to the
Throne of salvation.

If we send up blasphenies and curses, all the Creautes in Heaven and Earth
^ill set themselves against us; the Sun and the Moo^ will rain down blood,
the fire hot burning coals, the air thunderbolts upon ou^ heads.

But Prayer is a Messenger freed from all these imperfections, whom neithe^ the
irksomeness of the way or tediousness of the passage can hinder from h^
purpose; quick of speed^ faithful of trust, able ^^ mount above the Eagles ^^
the Sky, into the Heaven (...) Heavens, as a Chariot of fi^^ leading us alost
into the pr^sence of GOD, to seek h^^ assistance and grace.

The least finger of hi^ right hand is of more puissance then the whole ar^^ of
flesh or army of spirit^ yea, then the whole liue^ hole substances of Angels,
Men, of silver, gold silk, ^urple, and all other Crea^^res.

So that Prayer shall walk ^^rough life and death without controllement.

If it find Angel^, Princip^^ties, Powers, things present and things to come,
or any ^ther Creature in the World ^opping her passage, and re^uking her
forwardness, ^^e shall clear her way not^ithstanding, and climb ^^to the
presence of her GOD, and in his ears deli^er her message.

Be we in sickness? To ^im the true Physician that ^nowes both the cause and
^he cure, she comes for ^ealth.

Be we in imprisonment? There she sollicites a relea^^ from him the Lord of
libe^tie. Be we oppressed with p^uertie, or want? The Earth the LORDS, and all
th^^ dwell therein: to him she comes; for the blessing (...) the Lord makes
rich.

Are we afflicted abo^^ measure, beyond the stre^g^^ of man, in so much that
we doubt whether we live (...) no, receiving the sentence (...) death within
our selves, s^ that in our opinion we com^prehend no delivery, no evasion, but
lie open to the direct accomplishment there of: Yet in this exigent an^
extremity, we come to Go^ by these means of Prayer being almost beyond hope
without expectation; and b^ his gracious and merciful^ pleasure we are
delivered.

Therefore let us here in r^^^ue comfort: his Maiestic ^ut of his great
clem^nrie ^ath and does deliver us daiie, not only from the death of our
bodies, when worms and rottenness have made their last and long prey vp^on
them; but from the ^eath of our minds, when the spirit is buried under
^orrowes, and no Greature ^ound in Heaven or Earth to give it comfort.

Be our minds, be our afflictions never so many and great, though in our weak
^magination we can imagine ^o delivery, no release, when all earthly comforts
forsake ^s yet let not us forsake thi^ ^efuge; let us not despair in his
merciful help, ^o more then I^^^ did, who being in the bottom of the Sea,
and within a prison in that bottom, in such an affliction, so great, so
strange, as greater nor stranger could not be to humane reason, or more without
hope; yet said Io^^^ 2. 2. I cried in ^in^ affliction unto the Lord, and he
heardme^; (...) of the be^ty of h^^^ cr^ed I, and thou he^r d^st my voice.

Therefore in our adversity and wants, how great and grievous soever they
oppress our weakness, yet let us neither distrust, or despair of his
merciful help; but let us pray still in hope, in all the anguish of mind,
^^d let our prayers be with such a confidence and zeal of love to GOD, as the
feruencie thereof may ascend up to his Throne, and there rest in his pitiful
eye, and arms of mercy.

In our prosperity, be it never so flourishing, let us pray, nay, pray
continually.

In our health and prosperity, let us pray to continue it.

In our sickness and adversity, let us pray to release us.

For if we consider our estates rightly, we shall perceive many reasons to
the exercise of Prayer, daily to feek his savor and the long continuance
thereof, without whose mighty protection and care over us, we are ready to fall
into a thousand dangers of undoing both the body and soul, and to perish
continually.

And therefore let us well consider, and take heed both in time and season,
with words sutahle in our Petitions to our purp^se and intention, in giving
thanks for his great benefits daily poured upon us; with intrestie in our
Petitions for necessities to be implored by us in the time of sickness, in
the time of our health, in the time of our adversity, in the time of our
prosperity.

Let us come before him, suting our words in the habit of our occasions with
such a fitness and decency, that they fall not harshly, and from the purpose
ascend into the ears of the Almighty LORD, the true pattern of all w^sdome
and goodness; who has given us the first and best form there of himself;
who has both taught us to pray, and taught us how to pray, and who will both
hear our petitions, and grant our requests contained therein, as far as
seems expedient to his un searchable wisdom, that knows our wants before
he hears our complaints, our necessities better then we our selves.

And because meditation is so excellent a thing so ready, so swift, so
powerful, so vnseparated from us, that it cleaues unto us when all other
means fail and forsake us; therefore we should the more earnestly embrace it
more zealously employ it, more dearly esteem it.

It finds us out comfort in our greatest extremities and miseries, our ways
being hedged up as with thorns, that we cannot stir to deliver our selves
therehence. When we are over flowen with the deluge of sin, as with a flood,
and judgments inuiron us on every side: this is the D^ue that brings unto our
Souls the Olive branch of comfort.

But alas, we kill the life thereof through the coldness of our devotion,
and carelessness of our delivery, and unfit preparation thereunto, and find
not the sweetness and success that else we might expect, and obtain at the
hands of GOD thereby.

Let these things be oftentimes our meditation and study, that so despising the
vain things of this transitory life, and passing our steps in the pathway to
fe^icity, we may at the last obtain the reward which our Savior CHRIST has
promised; Come ye blessed of my Father. Even so let us resolve with our selves,
that for as much as we have begun our Pilgrimage in the Spirit, never to end
it in the Flesh; and that if all the World would fall away from GOD, and his
Word; yet we and ours will serve the LORD. So shall we be sure in the end of
this our P^lgrimage, which we have passed with fear, to enter into that
spiritual Canaan, which CHRIST our IEHOVA has promised us which LORD for thy
mercy sake grant us. Amen.

illustrated title page (not in McKerrow) Come ye blessed etc. Go ye cursed,
etc.



THE SOVLES Alarum-bell. The Second Part. Containing diverse godly PRAYERS, most
fit to comfort the wounded consciences of all such penitent sinners, who hope
for salvation through the merits of Christ Jesus.

By H. Thompson.

At London printed by Io. Beale. 1618

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, and my very good Lord, WILLIAM Lord Eurye, Baron of
Ma^lton, Henry Thompson wishes all honor, grace, and spiritual^ gifts by
Jesus Christ our Lord.
BEing willing (Right Honorable, and my very good Lord) in the sight of all
the World to leave some public testimony of my humble d^^ty, and v^f^ined
good will toward your Honor, I thought I could no better way perform it,
then by dedicating these poor labors of mine, to be shrouded and harbored
under your Honors favorable protection; beseeching your Honor to accept this
my humble and bounden duty. And as I dedicate it to your Honor, so I humbly
crave that it may be defended: for GOD has set you in authority to maintain
his Word, and love his Religion, which he has prescribed in his holy Gospel.
He has honored you, that you should honor him; and has set you up, that
you should maintain him, and wholly trust in him, and li^e to him, as a s^ay
that can never fail, neither in this World, nor t^ the World to come. All
other things shall fail (for all flesh is grass, and the glory of man is as
the flower of the field) but GOD is everlasting, his Word is everlasting, and
they that are begotten to him by the i^^^rtall seed of his Word, shall live
for ever: and this life begins, and grows, and increases in the true
knowledge of GOD, to the increasing of our faith, and ^^^king in us as the
seal of our adoption that true sanctification, that makes us to live unto GOD
by righteousness, purely to worship hi^ according to his Word, an^ with
brotherly love deuoi^^ of all ^ypoc^isie, from a pur^ heart to ^oue our
Neighbour^ This (Honorable Lord) i^ true Religion, whereunto ^^ GOD in great
mercy hat^ called you, so g^^ cheerefull^ forward. Beware of thi^ vain World,
and of tha^ ^^ine trust that wiched m^^ are w^^t to put in it; lean^ ^^t upon
it, but stop you^ ears against the e^e^anting and fawning whispering^ of the
hollow^esse thereof and the dissolute Professors for there can be ^^ greater
trespass against the L^^^ the^to ^^^^ upon Assyria, to rest in the strength of
Egypt, to go down into Eth^opia: Cursed is that Man that puts his trust in
Man, and makes flesh his ^^^e; he shall be like the Heath that grows in the
Wilderness: But con(...), He that trusts in the Lord, mercy shall ^mbrace
him on every side, he shall never be confounded, he shall be ^s Mount (...),
and shall never be remo^ed, for the Lord is his secret place, and is with him,
therefore who can ^^ against him? What is a ^^ns ^owe, what are his legs,
what is the swiftness of Horses, (...) the strength of an Hoa^^ or the favor
of all the Princes of the World i^ comparison of God, i^ whom is only the
assurance of that euerlastin^ inheritance? It is the Go^ of Jacob that must be
ou^ defense, our strong Tower and Rock; the Chari^ and Horsemen of Israe^ the
testimony of his pr^sence and favor, th^^ only can make us glad Wherefore
again, and ^gaine, I most humbly beseech your Honor, bewa^^ of vain trust
and cons^den^ in Men, and in things th^^ are less worth then M^^ and as GOD
has in mercy ^estowed upon your Honor ^reat wisdom, so pray that ^ou may
have a discerning spirit, that the deceiuable ^lory of this World make you ^ot
forget your greatest duty, that so you may shine in his ^^erlasting Kingdom.

True Religion (Honou^able Lord) is effected by ^at divine and eternal
wis^^ome, whereby the contem^atiue virtue of man is lif^d up to the happy
know^^dge of the Majesty of God, all other the greatest ver^^e; and wherein
rests the ^^iefest contentment in this (...). For if there be a Pare^e in
this life, it is seated in one of these two, either in Religious Meditations,
or i^ holy studies and godly spec^lation: because whatsoeu^^ is not in one of
these two, (...) full of grief, vexation, bi^ternesse, fearfulness, ca^^ and
sorrow. But as Christi^^ mo^esty (Right Honourabl^^ has moved me to give to
e^^rie thing his due, in not ce^sing from setting forth a^ thing in the praise
of the which of right deserves (...) be commended: so Christi^^ Justice and
equity would (...) suffer me to let that pa^^ without some commenda^^on,
whereunto I am not ab^ sufficiently to give any. B^ considering that slightly
commend a thing, were the next way to dispraise it, ex^ept withal it were
shr^w^ded under the Patronage of ^ome worthy Person; and ^hinking it unmeet to
let that go like an Orphan without a father at home: I have ^resumed to commit
it unto our Honors protection: not bare Laurel, which of it ^lfe for the
greenness (when ^ther be withered) may seem (...) be accepted, but the same
^ecked and adorned with ^ost heavenly Meditations. (...) that (as I think) if
your honor were presented with material Laurel, wherein ^esides natural
greenness) ^ere but this nece^^^ry use, that it could defend you i^ your
Garden from the heat^ of the Sun, you would accept, if not of the gift, yet
o^ the good will of the giver.

So relying my self still upon your Honors wonte^ accustomed favor and
clemency, I doubt not but yo^ will afford me a favorable and friendly
acceptatio^ hereof. For herein is not th^^ greennes which consisting (...)
natural qualities must the^ wither, when all things ha^^ their ending
according t^^ their nature: but the flourishing green promises of the co^enant
of God, which ((...) God himself) last alwaie^ immutable and unchangeable.
Here are not the beautiful leaves of a material tree, which delight only the
outward sight, but a most familiar view and pattern of God himself in Christ,
even to the delight of the soul, and inward comfort of the spirit, which take
pleasure only in Heavenly things.

To conclude, here you are not shrouded from the heat of the Sun, but shall
find most cool shade from the parching heat of sin: from which, (as in
duty I am bound) I will pray, that God in this life shield and defend you, and
in the life to come grant you eu^rlasting rest.

Thus presuming on your Honors wonted favors and courtesies showed unto me,
and craving pardon for this my bold enterprise, I humbly take my leave.

Your Honors to be commanded in all duty and service, HENRY THOMPSON.

An Admonition to the zealous Reader concerning the most godly exercise of
PRAYER.
MAny are the godly and zealous Treatises which are already extant, tending to
the encouragement of those that hunger and thirst for the true service of the
living God: yet (gentle Reader) I crave thy Christian patience friendly to
accept this small travel of mine, and these my simple Admonitions. For among
all our godly and devout Meditations (good Christian Reader) there can be
none better, more acceptable to GOD, more commodious and necessary to Man, or
more fit for us to the attaining of a good and happy life, then at all times to
occupic our selves in the continual remembrance and meditation of the life and
death of our Lord Jesus Christ; the which thing is plainly showed and declared,
not only by the example and doctrine of diverse holy and learned Men, but also
by experience it self. And if thou would fly from sin and shun vice,
then consider with thy self what great things the only Son of God both did
and suffered, to the end thou might delivered from sin.

If thou desire to beautify thy soul with love, humility, gentleness,
patience, obedience, ch^rity, and other virtues; then cast thine eye on the
perfect and lively pattern of all virtue, which is thy LORD CHRIST himself.

If thou be desirous to contemn the world and all worldly vanities, and
nothing to care for the same: then weigh with thy self earnestly what kind of
life CHRIST our Lord led, when he was living here. How full of troubles, how
full of labor and sorrow, and how bitter a death he sustained for Man's
salvation.

Finall^, if thou would st^re up and inflam^ thy mind with the love of GOD,
and give him thanks, what can in such a case be more effectual, then still
to call upon GOD, and to remember Christ his life and p^ssion, and how many and
great benefits we have received thereby' Wher^upon the Apostle said for good
cause: Remember you him, who suffered at the hands of sinners; that Man should
not quail not be dismayed in heart: and Saint Peter says; That CHRIST
suffered, that Man should be also comforted with the remembrance thereof.

But to the intent that th^^ (^ood Christian Reader) may use these
Meditations to thy great profit, thou must observe this order; that at such
time as thou mindest to pray, thou presently read ^uer all these chief points
that are to be thought upon: then pause in contemplation upon that wherein thou
tookest most pleasure in thy Meditation, directing thy thoughts to some
virtuous actions. Seriously consider with thy self how diligently Christ
exercised himself in virtue, who gave us an example earnestly to follow his
steps; then determine with thy self to imitate that virtue which thy Prayer
tre^teth of, and to increase daily in the same labor. Also in the day time
call to mind that which thou did purpose with thy self, and omi^te no
occasion whereby thou may put that virtuous exercise of Prayer in practice
in thy self. The chief point we have to consider of, is, to pray de^o^tly to
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; whereby we may live and lead our life in
his fear, and walk in his ^oly Commandments.

Gentle Reader, I would not have thee think this my simple admonition to be
supersluous, but rather a thing tending to win the weaker sort to more
willingness for the practice of this divine exercise of Prayer; a thing not
new, yet needful: a thing old and ancient, long ago practiced of the
poorest, exercised of the most excellent and godly on the Earth, the Prophets,
the Patriarchs, the Apostles; yea, and of Christ himself the pat^erne of
piety, who ga^e the first platform of perfect Prayer, most plain, pure,
precious, and profound in these words: Our Father which art in Heaven, etc. To
the substance whereof although there can be nothing added, nor from thence any
thing can be taken away without manifest impiety; yet are we not so strictly
tied to the words thereof only, but that we may according to our several
occasions which are infinite, dilate upon the same to our comfort, and without
offense to the Majesty of GOD, if it be done in true zeal, without which eu^n
the most effectual prayer is sin.

I cannot but confess that great is the frailety remaining in me, which in my
travail in this practice has greatly hi^dered me; and many are the vanities
of my mind, which in my chiefest desire have miscarried me: yet such has
been the fa^our of my he^^^^ly Father, that he has hither to assisted me, and
(to my comfort) has pe^formed that which of my own proper power, wisdom and
will, I could not perform.

And these Prayers which are in this little Volu^ne, thou shall fi^de not
alittle comfortable by the faithful exercising thereof, to every estate,
degree, or calling. I presume not to teach, but desire to be taught; and
expect no praise, but even in heart yield all the praise to him that was, and
is the guide and stay of all those that truly seek to serve him: which I
beseech him to grant us faithfully at all times, not in the outward word with
the lips only, and with a show aloue; but with the inward affection of the
heart, with the longing desire of the soul, and the ardent consent of all the
powers thereof: so shall our Prayers please him, and even the groans four
hearts, which p^^sse in silence, shall present our caus^ before the Tribunal
seat of our good God, who is always near at hand and ready to perform what
is most necessary for our estates in this life, which in respect is but a span
l^ng: yea, could we live a thousand years, it wore but as one day. We may not
too much regard the ouer-dainty maintenance of our corporal estates; we may
not ouer-curiously seek the means to become admirable in respect of our
a^^hority, our riches, our fri^nds, and ourcasuall pleasures; wherewith alas
our weak natures, our frail conceits, our carnal desires are often begniled,
and cur poor souls often inda^gered. Wherefore it behooves us carefully first
before all things to s^eke the Kingdom of GOD, the way, the means, and the
guide thereunto; which is not to be sought elsewhere: for it is not in the
outward view, and therefore to be sought from above, and to b^^ inwardly
received and comprebended by faith. It is the Kingdom of the mysteries of God,
it is the keeping of his Commandments, and due obedience unto his will.

The way thereunto is grace, the gift of God which he gives to them that
faithful i^ ask it; the means to help us thereunto is Christ the Sonn^ of
God, who sitting at the right and of God the Father, obtains and sends us
that grace which guides us and gives all things both spiritual and worldly,
that he sees needful for us. And yet notwithstanding the singular benefit
of the Mediation of Christ unto his Father for us, we are not discharged of
this necessary exercise of Prayer, but so much the more enjoined to the
executing thereof, continually, instantly, faithfully, and zealously for the
graces of God; without the which all our Prayers, all our speeches, be they
many or few, be they loud, or silent, be they of what kind or show soever,
avail nothing.

But we must first found all ^^r desires and prayers upon an undoubted faith;
we must pour them from the very bottom of our hear^s, and continue them in a
godly patience, and all in the name of Christ Jesus: in whose name, and for
whose sake all things necessary are promised to be given to those that ask
according to the will of God.

Wherein we must note that we are not per^itt^^ rashly to desire any thing
according to the desire of fleshly imagination, ^ee it in o^ conceits never so
me^t and necessary (for the wisdom of the flesh is foolishness before God
but we must first duly confide^ what direction the Word ^^ GOD gives us in
that b^ half, and there in all h^^ mility r^paire to the fo^^ ^ains, from
whence (...) which we pray for must come. So I rest,

Thine in Christian good will, Henry Thompson.

THE SOVLES Alarm Bell. Wherein the sick Soul (through the horror of con
^ience) being awikened from security by the sight of his sin, has recourse
to God by Prayer. The Second Part.
Watch and pray, lest ye fall into temptation. MATTHEW. 26.
The way how to commend our selves to God in the Morning at our vprising.
IF thou would commend thy self in the morning aright, thou must have
respect of certain things which follow. Awake thy so^^^, exalt thy self on
high, be blin^ no more, but use thy force an^ might; let folly sink, let
painted pleasures die, sh^n darkness, and seek the blessed light* For Earth
yields toil, care, discord, pain, and grief: but Heaven gives rest, peace,
comfort, and relief.

Therefore so soon as thou risest, arm thy self in faith t^ pray; and when
thou have s^ done, think not upon fri^olo^ toys or vain p^a^tafies, b^^ lift
up thy heart to God. A^^ when thou kneelest on the ground, and say thy
prayers^ (for so we ought to pray) th^^ give thanks to God that th^^ have so
safely passed that night, that thou had not died in sin, as many a o^e has
do^e; b^^ art preserved til this day. An^ thou must purpose with thy self to
do nothing that day which may displease God, but meditate in thy mind some
godly meditations, desiring his assistance for the furtherance of the true
serving his omnip^tent Mai^sty.

^ A Prayer before we settle our selves to our De^^tions.
O Most gracious Lord, give me leave to present my self before thy divine
Majesty, and to pour out my unworthy prayers in the sight of thy most mighty
and glorious presence. Behold me O Lord, not in my merits, but in the
multitude of thy mercies. I now com^ to make manifest my necessities, and to
utter my griefe^ unto thee. I come as a poor^ and needy wretch unto ^ God of
infinite glory: I com^ as a worm of the Earth unto my Sovereign Make^ and
Creator. I come as ^ guilty and heinous offende^^ I am not worthy to lift v^
mine eyes to Heaven, mu^^ less to open my mouth in thy glorious presence, o^
presume to talk with ^ Lord and King of so great ^ Majesty, being my self bu^
slime and ashes: but o Father of mercies, and God of all comfort, thou
promisest that who asks shall receive ^ who knocks shall be le^ in; who
seeks shall finde^ Thou inuitest the greatest ^inners, and refusest not to
^eelde thy assistance to any that will use it; grant me therefore grace now to
pray unto thee, as my duty and ^hy desert requires: grant ^e a pureintention,
a fer^ent devotion, and an atten^^ue mind, that it be not car^ed away with
impertinent ^oughts, nor any other di^raction, but with humble ^eart, firm
hope, and per^ct charity, I may effectual^e pray unto thee, and ask ^f thee
that which thou see^t most for thy glory and ^y good: grant Lord I be^ech thee
that thou will ^elpe me to pray worthily, ^at thou may mercifu^ly ^rant my
Petitions; keep ^y thoughts from wandering, r^straine my imaginations, and
preserve my senses from being distracted^ defend O Lord my weak^ heart from
ghostly assaults^ and so fix my mind upon thee, that I be not carrie^ away
from consideration o^ thy presence; grant me distinctly to pronounce my words,
attentively to apply my thoughts, and to be wholly ravished and possessed with
zeal and true devotion: O Lord grant me to ask forgiveness with ^ deep
contrition and ful^ purpose of amendment ^ grant me to crave thy benefits with
hearty thankfulne^^ for those which I have received. Grant me to pray for my
self, with a perfect resignation unto thy will, and ^or all others with true
cha^itie and sincere affection. Afford O Lord such comfort to my soul as thou
^eest fit ^or me, and by the ^ssistance of thy spirit inspire ^hy good motions
into me that I may feel them forci^ly, accept them thankefulie, and fulfill
them effectu^llie. Finally, I humbly be^eech thee of thy mercy and goodness
that I may praise ^hee with a true repentant ^eart, to appease the fury of ^hy
anger against me, where^y I may come to enjoy ^ith thy Majesty eternal ^lorie
without end, Amen.

A Morning Prayer.
O Most gracious LORD and Omnipotent Father, thou which made^^ Heaven and
Earth, the Sea, and all that is therein, together with thy dearly beloved Son
JESUS CHRIST, and with thy holy Spirit; thou have brought us to the beginning
of this day through thy goodness: now we beseech thee that this day we fall
into no sin, bu^ that we may accomplish thy holy will, by directing ou^
words, framing our thoghts and disposing our doing accordingly. Help us, an^
further us O Lord in all ou^ Prayers, that whatsoever w^ do, may always take
beginning from thee; and being so begun, we may proceed in true serving of
thee who art the Fountain (...) light, and most peereless^ spring of Wisdom.
LORD vouchsafe that the beams of thy wonderful glory may beat against my
dark and small understanding, and drive from me two kind of mists, to wit,
sin and ignorance, wherein I was borne. Thou O Lord that make the tongues
of little Infants to be eloquent, teach me to rule my tongue, and let thy grace
and blessing be pou^ed on my lips. Give me sharpness of understanding thy
heavenly word, and ability to retain it; a facility to serve a good kind of
interpretation, a good place to utter my words, and that they may tend to thy
glory: and guide my entrance to the matters I speak of; direct my proceeding
in the same, and make perfect my conclusion.

Come Holy Ghost, fill my heart with thy faith, and kindle in me the fire of
thy love; do thus good Lord, who did bring the Gentiles to the unity of
thy says by all kinds of diverse and strange languages; send out Lord thy holy
Spirit, and all things shall be created, and thou shall make fresh the face of
the Earth: and thou that have taught the Hearts of thy faithful by the
inspiration of the Holy Ghost, give me the same spirit, right understanding,
and always to rejoice in thee; make me forsake Satan, and cleave to thee o
Christ, who art the way, truth, and life. show me thy ways o Lord, and teach
me thy paths; direct my steps according to thy word, that no unrighteousness
reign over me. Ma^e my going perfect in thy ways, that my steps be not
moved: Lord whi heart the Father of grace an^ mercy desend me from my enemies,
and receive me at the hour of my death. Good Lord grant I may depart in a
good hour out of this World, and that I may arise from the death of sin, and
walk in newness of life; that when I shall rise again at the latter day,
when our life shall be seen manisestly of all men, I also may be openly, but
favorably seen of thy glory, who liue^^ and reiguest one GOD World without
end. Amen.

Another Prayer for the Morning.
O Lord God and my heavenly Father, I do here present my self with my morning
sacrifice unto thy Omnipotent Majesty, craving thy merciful aid for the
strengthening of my weak faith, at this present, that thereby I may be made
the more apt and able to serve thy heavenly Majesty, in all holiness and true
sincerity of heart. And now that the time allotted for my feeble senses, is
expired, and that the spring of the morning approaches, I offer up my bounden
duty of praise and thanksgiving to thy ever blessed and glorious Majesty,
upon whom all the hours and moments of life depend, for adding yet more space
unto my days, for granting me a larger time of repentance, for the obtaining
of thy grace, and exercise of virtue, and amendment of my sinful life, O
eternal and everliving God, who art the guardian to all true believers; make me
evermore to magnify and extol thy mercies, and in true token of this my
thankfulness (having nothing more near unto me then my self) I here offer
and present my self body and soul, unto thy hea^enly will and pleasure,
beseeching thee to dispose of me as of thine own, to direct the remainder of
my life to thy Honor and service, to enlighten my mind more and more to the
knowledge of thee and my self; to inflame my heart with true charity, to
preserve my senses in thy holy fear, that by my will I may neither hear,
see, nor touch any thing that is unclean or offensive unto thee. And if in
taking of my natural rest, either through the suggestion of the enemy, or the
rebellion of mine own flesh, I have had any disordered motions, or vn^haste
representations in my slcepe, now I am perfectly awake, and by thy mercy
returned unto the use of my reason, I do utterly disclaim the same, denying
all consent of my will and affections thereunto.

And now my gracious Lord God, for this day being present, I may by thy
heavenly assistance, resolve with my self, so to live in this World, that I
may both avoid all sin, and the occasion thereof, and to leave my accustomed
vices, and those especially to which I am most prone to fall unto; and that I
may refer^e al my actions and endeau^urs to the praise and honor of thy holy
name; so to best^w my time, that this day may not be lost or pass over my
head without some good work tending to the true worshipping of thy holy name:
which laudable determinations and purpose of the amendment of my leude and
loose life, may accordingly take effect, and give thy blessing gracious Lord to
them all: O merciful God I beseech thee according to thy great mercy, that thou
w^lt b^ot out all mine offenses, for I am a wretched and a miserable sinner;
therefore I do heartily desire in all humility to adore and worship thee, and
to render unto thee immortal praise and thanksgiving for all thy blessings, and
especially for that unspeakable goodness wherein thou did send down thy
only begotten Son into this vale of misery for the work of our redemption;
whereby we are cherished and nourished, wherewith we are cleansed and
sanctified, and our souls made partakers of all heavenly grace, and spiritual
blessings; for which I yield unto thee all possible thanks that a poor
sinful creature, being but a handful of dust, can yield unto thy divine
Majesty, being of no value without thy mercy. Also thou have vouchsafed first
to wash me with the lauer of Baptism, to the remission of that original
corruption contracted in my first Parents, and afterward thou have brought me
to the exer^ises and acts of a right faith, not ceasing daily to increase the
same in me by the light of thy grace, and doctrine of thy holy Word. O Lord I
humbly thank thee also, that from my Cradle thou have nourished, clothed, and
cherished me, supplying all things necessary for the relief and maintenance of
this my feeble body, for which evermore I will magnify thy holy name, that in
great mercy thou have hither to spared me; albeit from my youth I have wantonly
ryoted in manifold excesses; patiently expecting till by thy grace I might be
awaked from the sleep of sin, and re^laimed from my vanities and wicked
courses; had thou dealt with me according to my deserts, my soul long ere
this had been oppressed with innumerable sins, and had been plunged in
perdition, yea, the yawning gulf of hell had swallowed me quick. Lord in
respect of all thy mercies, graces, and blessings, which thou have poured upon
me, I desire that my heart may be more and more enlarged to render unto thee a
more ample tribute of praise and thanksgiving. And now for those things
whereof I stand in need, and feign would obtain at thy hands; first, only
Lord God never leave me unto my self, but let the bit of thy chaste fear be
ever in my jaws, to curb and to keep me within the compass of thy Law,
that I may dread nothing in the world, as in the least sort to offend and
displease thee: for which cause let thy holy love so temper all trials and
temptations which happen unto me, that I may profit and not lose by them; thou
(my Creator) know how frail I am of my self, and how my strength is
nothing. Moreover (blessed Lord) ^ beseech thee that thou would keep farte
from me thy servant all pride and haughtiness of mind, all self-love, and
vain glory, all obstinacy and disobedience, all craft and hurtful
dissimulation: cast down and tread under my feet the spirit ^^ gluttony and
letcherie; the spirit of sloth and heaviness, the spirit of malice and envy,
the spirit of hatred and disdain; that I may never despise or contemn any of
thy Creatures, nor prefer my self before others; but ever little in my own
sight, to think the best of my brethren, and to deem and judge the worst of
my self. I^^est me (Holy Father) with the wedding garment of thy beloved son,
^he supernatural virtue of ^ll things, that I may love ^hee my Lord God with
all my heart, with all my soul, and with all my strength; that neither life,
nor death, ^rosperitie, nor adversity, ^or any thing else may fe^arate me
from thy love. Grant that all inordinate af^ection to the transitory things of
this World, may ^ailie decay and die in me, that thou alone may be
^astefull, pleasant, and sauou^ie unto my soul.

O my most gracious God, ^iue unto thy servant an ^umble, contrite, and
obedi^nt heart, an understanding ^lwaies occupied in honest, ^ertuous
cogitations, a will tractable, and ever prone t^ the better; affections stayed
calm, and moderate; a watch full custody of my senses^ that by those windows
n^ sin may enter into my soul^ a perfect government of m^ tongue, that no
corrupt o^ unseemly language man proceed from my lips, the I may never
slander, back^ bite, or speak ill of m^ Neighbor; that I may n^ busy my
self in the faul^ and imperfections of other but rather attend to the ^
mending of my own leu^ life: and finally, so long a^ am detained in this
prison of my body, and exild from my heavenly Country, l^ this be my portion,
and t^^ comfort of my banishmen^ that free from all secul^ ^ares, and carking
solicitude of this present life, wholly devoted to thy service, I may attend
only to thee, ^ may rejoice only in thee, ^ may cleave unto thee, I may
rest my soul in thee; and sitting in silence, I may give way and entertainment
^o the heavenly doctrine, to ^he good motions and in^pirations of thy holy
Spirit.

In these sweet exercises ^et me pass the solitary ^oures of my tedious
pilgrimage, with patience expe^^ing the shutting up of my ^aies, and an happy
end of ^his my miserable life. And ^rant o thou lover of man^ind, my Lord and
my God, that when this my earthly ^abernacle shall be dissol^ed, being found
free from all pollution of sin as afte^ Baptism, I may be r^ckoned in the
number of thos^ blessed souls, who through the merits and passion o^ thy
dear Son, are held^ worthy to reign with thee^ and to enjoy the glorio^^
presence of the blessed Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Chost; to whom of
al^ Creatures i^ Heaven an^ Earth, be rendered praise and thanksgiving Worl^
without e^d, Amen.

Another Morning Prayer.
O Blessed Lord, tho^ have established thy Throne in Heaven, and tho^ gouernest
all things by thir^ imperial power. I will m^g^ifie thee O God and praise thy
name World without and; I will give thee thanks ^lwaies, and make thy name
glorious for evermore Lord ^onfirme in me that which ^hou have wrought, and
fi^ish the work thou have begu^^e in me, to the glory of thy name, and the
saving of ^^y soul at the dreadful day of thy v^sitation: for thy mere^es sake
(O Father of goodness and mercy) let the depth of thy bounty dry up the depth
of my sins, and give me grace to ef^ect thy will, and then command me what
thou plea^est. Lord give me patience, ^onstancy, and perseverance ^n my calling
and duty of ^ife, according to thy will and direction; and then let my course
of life be in what thou will appoint. Good Father be thou my guide and ^ule of
l^^e, and then all my actions shall be squared^ and fitted by the aim of thy
word to my great comfort. Lord let not the world with her smile beguile me,
nor with ^er ^rownes afright me: Arm me with sanctity, strength, and wisdom,
that Satan deceive me not; let not my own conscience betray me to his
malice, let me every day increase my strength in thee, to the welfare of my
soul. And (good Lord) give me grace patiently and thankfully to take all thou
shall lay upon me: good Father, deliver me this day from sin, and all other
mischief that may befall me through my frail^ty, and keep me as the apple of
thy eye; Lord hide me under the ^hadow of thy wings from the ungodly, and them
that go about to trouble me. Mine enemies compaste me ^ound about, Lord be
thou my guard and defense; let not mine enemies have the ^oper hand of me. O
Lord ^leanse me from my secret off^aces, and let my morning tears, and the
sorrow^ull sighing of my heart, ^ome before thy presence, and always be
acceptable in ^hy sight. And I beseech thee (good Father) to cast upon me ^he
eye of thy great clemency, that through the ef^ects of thy spirit I may
ob^aine life everlasting, Amen.

A short Prayer for the Morning.
O Lord God in the multitude of thy mercies I do here present my self unto
thee, beseeching thee to hear me, and to address my heart truly and
zealouslie to call upon thee. O Heavenly Father, who like a diligent watchman
do always attend thy faithful people, whether they awake or sleep, and
mightily defendest them, not only from Satan that old enemy of Mankind, but
also from all other adversaries, so that by thy godly power they be preserved
harmless. I most heartily thank thee, that it has pleased thy Fatherly
goodness to take care of ^^ee thine unprofitable ser^uant this night past,
that thou have both safely kept me from all my enemies, and ^lso given me
sweet sleep, to the great comfort of my ^ody I most entirely beseech ^hee (O
most merciful Father) to show the like kindness toward me this day, in
^reseruing my body and ^oule, that as my enemies may have no power over me, so
I likewise may neither think, breathe, speak, ^r do any thing, that may ^e
displeasant to thy Father^^e goodness, dangerous to ^y self, or hurtful to
my ^eighbour; but that all mine ^nterprises may be agreea^le to thy most
blessed will, which is always good and godly, doing that which may advance thy
glory, answer to my vocation, an^ profit my neighbor, who^^ I ought to love
as my self ^ that whenever thou call me from this vale of misery, I may
be found the Child not of darkness, bu^ of light; and so for eue^raigne with
thee in glory which art the true and everlasting light: to whom, with thy
dearly beloved Son JESUS CHRIST our only Savior, and the Holy Ghost that
most sweet comforter, be all honor and glory, Amen.

A Meditation to be used before thou go^st to bed.
AT night before thou go to bed, examine well thy conscience. It is good
that every man do not only weekelie, but every day and hour examine himself
^^ drive from his soul all negligence and sloth, and enrich his mind with
godliness. Whereupon the Poet writes very well.

Let not thy sluggish sleep close up thy waking eye,
Until with judgment deep thy daily deeds thou try.
It is meet then to examine our consciences of the grievous offenses which we
have committed against GOD, and to call to remembrance, how we have offended
his omnipotent Majesty from the time we did rise, unto this present, by
thought, consent, deed^, sla^kenesse, or omitting that which ^endeth to the
true service and honor of our Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST, by offending of
our Neighbor, b^ passing our time idly in praying after a ^^olde sort with
small devotion, and in neglecting of our duty by such slothfulness, that we
thereby fall into ^rronious sins, which turn^ very i^i^rious to our souls.
Therefore let us with true sorrow and gr^ese, and with a remorse of conscience
duly consider the great offense we commit against so merciful a GOD; then
preparing our selves to prayer, let us give God his d^^ in serving him in
holiness and righteousness, with most humble thanks for his great ^^rci^s
and benefits, which he so liberally bestowed upon us ^^nie ways; as in making
us reasonable Creatures, after his o^ne si^ilitude and likeness, and by his
infinite love in shed^ing his most precious blood, ^^l^^ring v^ ther^by from
the ^^tt^^^lesse pit of hell. M^r^^^^r he h^th pr^mised, and is alw^i^s ready
to give ^^ everlasting life if we i^ faith tr^ly seek it ^t his ^ercifull
^^nds, ^^d walk^ in his La^es, and follow his Comm^nde^ents.

Let us co^sid^r ^is great love, that ^^ bath (...) v^ in the Holy Ghost, when
we were ignorant; and in laying his shining love upon us, with the light of
faith, which h^th preserved us from a gr^^t^^ danger.

For example, through pri^^ his Majesty dro^e out of Heaven th^se which were
so^^t^^es gloriou^ shining Angels, being disobedient to his Law; and chased
Adam out of Paradise for hi^ disobedience, in not obeying his heavenly will.
Further his Justice has cast many a o^e into the deep ^^ngeon of bell, there
to be tormented with perpetual pain and punishment for their sloathfull
negligence in serving of him.

How much then are we bound unto the Lord, in giving us so many examples,
whereby we might serve him aright, as true Christians ought to do^? but his
mercy is infinite, full of patience and long suffering. If we will at any
time seek and call to him for grace, ^ow gently does he lay his r^dd^ of
correction upon us, whereby we may acknowledge our offenses in turning to him
in the sincerity of our hearts, minding never more to offend him? whereas
otherwise it might please ^im to destroy us suddenly: O what a g^^tle and
lo^ing Father is this, that has more care of us then we have of our sel^es?
How often has he spa^ed us when we have fallen into sin? whereas if his
l^^^ ^ad not been great to us, he might easily ^a^^ th^^^ne us down into
perpetual destruction, without giving us ti^^ of repentance. Therefore let us
call to mind how dangerous a thing it is to offend so merciful a Father: let
us call to mind^, why we should put our souls into so great a danger,
considering we see that he strikes many ti^es suddenly, witho^t gi^ing any
repentance ^^ all. If ^^^ ^^^^^ but diligently consider t^^ danger w^^rest in
by our idle and cold serving of GOD, q^estionlesse we should betake our selves
to a better serving of him. Say we should die, and leave this life this present
night, what judgment should we look or expect, or to what place should we be
brought, where should we give and make account for every idle word we speak,
for whatsoever we think or do? Of what a hard and fearful thing is this
unto us, if we would but duly consider, what we lose in not serving God
truly. Let us give over this lazy serving of God, and leave the idle vanities
of the World which luls us asleep in the lap of destruction. It is fit that we
earnestly enforce our thoughts still to be calling to GOD for mercy and
remission of our sins, promising from the bottom of our hearts to be more
careful and to use greater diligence for the amendment of our wicked lives.
And if it please his divine Majesty to take our lives away this night, desire
him according to his infinite mercy, to deal mercifully with us, not
according to our deseruings, which are merely naught, but according to his
righteousness, which is all good: but if it please his omnipotency to prolong
our days any further here in this world, pray that he will so infuse into our
heart: the oil of his grace, that we may magnify him in a better fashion, then
we have usually done heretofore; and pray that he will give us grace ^o live
discreetely, uprightly, and godlily in this life, and in the World to come, to
give us life everlasting. Amen.

A Prayer for the Evening.
O Most worthy redeemer and Savior of Mankind, I avile and a wretched sinn^^,
in hope of pardon and forgiveness of my great offenses, do here humbly
prostrate my self before thy sacred f^ete, this night, confessing unto thee,
and accusing my self of all my faults and heinous transgressions, wherewith
unto this hour I have so offended thee my Lord and Maker; and that I have not
trembled to commit those execrable sins, for which if thy mercies were not
great toward me, I should remain as a lost sheep: I must needs confess my
most great ingratitude, which I have committed unto this hour against thee my
only Lord and Redeemer, so unthankful to thee for all thy love, graces, and
benefits bestowed upon me; and that thou have so patiently spared me so long
a time persisting in evil, and continuing my wicked and ungracious courses,
that in mercy thou have tolerated so great contempt of thy divine will and
Commandments; yea, so exceeding and great has been thy love, that in stead
of casting me into hell fire, thou have kept me under the shadow of thy wings,
(as for these my offenses I had justly deserved) thou contrariwise have spared
me for amendemnt of life, for which cause how often have thou knocked at the
door of my heart by thy heavenly inspirations? how often have thou prevented
^ee with blessings, allured me with comforts, drawn me with favors, yea,
forced me many times by crosses and afflictions to seek unto thee? and yet
neither has my flintie heart been mollified therewith, nor my will reclaimed.
A wonder it is, that now at last, coming to find the foulness of my error,
my very heart does not burst with extremity of contrition. Has Hell it self
sufficient torment to punish such wickedness, and to take vengeance of such
exceeding ingratitude? unworthy I am to be called thy Creature, or whom the
earth should bear, much less affoorde nourishment and things necessary for
preservation of my health; nay, doubtless, had not thy mercy withheld them,
both Heaven and Earth, the Elements and all Creatures had long ere this taken
vengeance of me for such horrible contempt and abuses.

O how many thousands in the World by thy righteous judgments are already
condemned to the never ending torments of hell fire, who never came near the
measure of any mortal transgressions!

Yea, who in comparison of me a sinful caitiffe, might rather be Saints in
Heaven, then damned souls adjudged as they be, unto eternal perdition.

But now O merciful Father, and God of pity and compassion, in unfeigned
sorrow and remorse of conscience for all my misdeeds, I throw my self down at
thy feet this night, humbly beseeching thee to be reconciled unto me, to
pardon all my offenses, both new and old; to look upon me a miserable and a
wretched sinner, with the eye of mercy, as thou did the penitent Publican,
the ^^nner Magdalen, and the Apostle that thrice denied thee.

Be pleased to admit me again into thy grace and favor; Lord I pray thee
work that speedily in me, for which cause thou have so long spared me.

Woe is me, that I should leave so loving and so kind a Father, who has not
ceased to procure my good; that I have refused to bestow upon him my heart,
who would have made an habitation for his own abode therein, which by keeping
from him my self, have defiled it with much filth and corruption.

Yea, made it a vessel of impiety, a stew of unclean thoughts and
cogitations: in a word, I confess my self to be the most vicious Creature
upon the Earth.

Yet the rather will I throw my self into the Sea of thy mercy: for as my
sins be numberless, so be thy mercies endless.

But most loving Father, if thou will, thou can make me clean; Lord heal
the wounds of my soul, for unto thee do I open the sore. Remember thy self,
sweet Lord, of that comfortable speech pronounced by the mouth of one of thy
Prophets.

Thou have committed folli^ with many Lovers, yet turn^ thee again unto me,
and I will receive thee.

Much confidence have I Lord in this thy sweet and comfortable saying, and
with all my heart do I return unto thee, and to none else.

I am that prodigal child, I am that unfaithful servant, who have separated my
self from the Father of lights, from whom all goodness does flow. I have
forsaken the fountain of lluing w^ters, and have dug unto my self
Ci^^^rnes which will hold no water, contenting my self with such barren
comforts, as the Creatures did afford me; such momentanie and sading
pleasures, as to the great detriment of my soul I have ^ried to be lighter
then cha^^e, and more vain then vanity itself.

But what is past gracious God, let it be cancelled and forgotten; and for the
time to come let there be an eternal league of friendship and amity betwixt
us.

Namely, that thou will be my merciful Father, and that again I may be thy
obedient child; Lord thou soest I do not ask of thee riches, honors, or
long life, but only this, even this thing alone, which with all possible
importunity I vrg^, and never will cease to crave, that from this present hour
to my lives end, I may never more offend thy divine Majesty, nor defile my
conscience with any mortal ofsence.

O Lord grant ^ poor sinner this his humble suite, for Christ Jesus his sake,
my alone Savior and Redeemer.

Come holy Spirit, the sweetest comforter of Mankind, (I beseech thee) take
the possession of my soul, purge and cleanse me of all sin, and sanctify me
throughout; wash what is corrupted, water what is dried, heal what is wounded
bow what is ^^iffened, warm what is cooled, call home what is straied; make
me ^rulie humble and resigned, that thou may be pleased ^o stay and abide
with thy servant.

O most blessed light, and glorious lamp, illuminate my mind with the
heauen^ie beams of thy wisdom.

O Paradise of pleasures, ^ Fountain of purest de^ights, my God, give me thy
self.

In flame my soul with ^hy celestial love, teach me. ^ouerne me, direct and
pro^ect me through the whole ^ourse of my life.

Establish my mind against ^ll elusions and inordinate fear; grant me a right
faith and an assured hope, a si^cer^ and perfect charity, and that I may
prefer thy blessed will, and pleasure, before a^^ things in Heaven and Earth.

And now (sweet Jesus) upon the knees of my heart I humbly crave pardon o^
these and all other my trespasses, known, and unknown; yea, so inspire my
heart with thy spirit, that seriously I may resolve of amendment of life for
the time to come.

That I may carefully reform my self of those usual errors, into which this
day past, and so often as heretofore I have been accustomed to fall, that I may
renewall my good purposes and intentions, and accordingly put them in
practice: that so finally after this my short life spent in thy service, I may
at length close up my days in peace, and happily end in thee, who art blessed
for ever. Who with the Father and the Holy Ghost live and raignest ever one
God World without end, Amen.

A Prayer for Night.
O My most Sovereign Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, Lamp of light and truth,
I miserable wretch most humbly beseech thee to withdraw, and keep my mind
from wandering thoughts and distractions this night; Lord hear the gro^nings of
those, who under then of sin and infirmiti^^ cry unto thee; Lord loose ^he
bonds and shackles of iniquity, wherewith I have bound my self, and out of
the dark prison of wickedness, whereinto I have run and captiuated my self,
deliver my sinful soul. O Lord: As thou art my skilful Phisician, and best
know my diseases, take me to thy cure O Soune of God, my Creator, Redeemer,
and Sanctifier; let thy unspeakable love remain in my soul for ever, that I
may enjoy thee, and joy in thy countenance.

Thou that leddest the Israelites thy servants through the red Sea, and
deliueredst them from the bondage of Phar^ah and his cruel Ministers,
discharge me of the grievous weight of my sins, wherewith my soul is so
heavily laden.

Thou that desendedst Daniel in the Lions den, desend me this night and
evermore. Thou that pardonedst David's unspeakable sins, be merciful unto me,
thou Son of God and Savior of the World, in whom (...) lie is my salvation;
by whom I may become an Angel in Heaven, and without whose mercy am a devil
in hell.

Good God, look graciously upon me, wash me O Lord, whose iniquities are as
red as blood, and I shall appear before thy almighty Throne as white as snow.
Lord deliver me now this night, and in the hour of my death, from all the
malicious temptations of the old Serpent my enemy; adopt me here thy son
below, that I may become thy servant above, and live with thee and reign with
thee in those ioies which are ever during; who with the Father and the Holy
Ghost ever live and raignest World without end. Ame^.

O Lord look down from Heaven upon me miserable wr^tch, that lie here
prostrate at thy feet, craving mercy of: thy Omnipotent Majesty, for those
sins which I have committed this day against thee, I humbly beseech thee O
Christ, which a^^ my only Savior and Redee^^er, to extend thy accustomed
goodness to me this night, that I may be defended from the danger of the
enemy, and all evil which may befall me this night: good Lord take me into
thy protection of safeguard, that I may take safe and quiet rest this night, to
the end I may be the better enabled the next day to serve thee in all
godliness and holiness of living, whereby I may have thy blessings powered
down plentifully upon me, to the relief of me and mine; and that after this
painful life ended, I may dwell with thee in life everlasting. Amen.

A Prayer to GOD for grace, and to d^sp^se the vanity of the World.
O Gracious and Omnipotent Father, have mer^ie on me, and forgive me the great
offenses which I have done in the sight o^ thee. Grant me grace for the love of
thee to despise sinne^ and all worldly vanitie^ help me to overcome all
temptations to sin, and the malice o^ my ghostli^ enemies, and to spend my
time in virtue, and labou^ acceptable to thee. Repress^ the motions of my
sinfu^^ flesh, that mine heart may be enamoured of virtue, to live to thine
honor, and to the comfort of my soul. O Father strengthen me in soul and
body, to execute the works of godliness, to the glory of thy blessed name,
and profit of my Christian brethren, whereby I may come to thy everlasting joy
and feli^itie. Grant me a firm purpose most (merciful Lord) to amend my life,
and to make recompense for those years which I have misspent to thy displeasure
in evil thoughts, delectations, consentings, words, works, and evil
customs, whereby I have deserved damnation. Lord make mine heart obedient to
thy will, comfort me, and gi^e me grace to have my most joy and pleasure in
thee; give me heavenly meditations, gostlie sweetness, and zeal of thy
glory. Ravish my soul with a burning desire to the heavenly joy, where I
shall everlastingly dwell with thee.

^rant me (sweet Savior) contempt of all damnable pleasure of sin and
misery; grant me a true remembrance of my salvation, with a fear of
damnation; and (...) remembrance of thy goodness, thy gifts and great
^i^dnesse showed to me from my creation until this present hour. O Lord
reduce into my mind my sins and disobedience, whereby I have offended thee;
Lord grant me a right spirit and perfect contrition to obtain thy grace, and
from filthy sin to purge me. O God make me constant and stable i^ faith,
hope, and charity, with continuance in virtue; direct my will that it may not
offend thee, but grant me perfect patience in all tr^bulations and adversity.
Preserve me from pride, ^re, enu^e, covetousness, and from all offenses
contrary to thy law; suffer no false delight of this deceivable life, by
fleshly temptation and fraud of the ^^end, to blind me at the hour of my
death. I beseech thee (O Lord) grant me such a light of thy ghostly wisdom,
that I may do those things which are most acceptable to thee, and grant me
grace to do hurt to nobodie, but to help those with good counsel which have
offended thee; and make me to proceed in virtue, until such time as I shall
see thy Omnipotent Majesty; and let me not turn to those sins which I have
sorrowed for, and accused my self of. The horrible sentence of endless death,
the terrible judgment of damnation, thy wrath, ire, and indignation,
(merciful Lord) let them never fall upon me, thy mercy and thy merits ever
be between them and me.

Lord grant me grace inwardly to fear and dread thee, and to eschew those
things whereby I might offend thee; give me a contrite heart for that I have
offended thee: good Father remove my sinful dispositions which dull mine
heart, and like lead do suppress me. Let me not forget the riches of thy
goodness, of thy patience, of thy long sufferance, and benignity: let the
threatening of pain and torment which shall fall upon sinners, the loss of thy
love, and of thy heavenly inheritance, ever make me fear to offend thee.
Suffer me not (dear Father) to live and die in sin, but soon call me to
repentance, when I have displeased thee, and grant me grace truly to love
thee; and when I offend thee, smite me not with thy wrathful indignation I
beseech thee, but let it be thy gentle rod of correction. Let the remembrance
of thy kindness and patience conquer the malicious and wretched desire in me,
draw me Lord to thee by thy holy spirit, and do with me according to thy
mercy, and not after my unthankfulness: withdraw t^y sword of vengeance (O
Lord) for thy great mercy sake, and grant me to be the child of salvation,
whereby I may have glorification, clear fight, and fruition of the Deity, and
be ever present to see the glorious Trinity.

O sweet Savior Lord Jesus Christ, grant me grace for to remember perfectly
the danger of death, and the great account which I must then give to thee. Lord
dispose so of me then, that my soul may be acceptable in thy sight: turn
net thy loving face then from me, but be a merciful King and meek Judge at
that dreadful hour of my visitation, that I may not have the ^igour of thy
righteousness, which is;

Goe^e c^rsed into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels; but
to hear that comfortable salvation which thou do give to thy chosen.

Come ye blessed of my Father, and enjoy the Kingdom prepared for you from
the beginning of the World.

Let this hope of thy mercies comfort my sick weak soul, that I never fall
into desperation of thy endless mercy. For the merits of thy Son Christ
Jesus I beseech thee grant me these petitions which I have asked of thee; have
mercy on me awretched sinner.

And I beseech thee bring me to thine everlasting glory, there to rest in
bliss World without end.

A Prayer to GOD to defend us from evil company, and our tongues from uttering
^ll words.
O Lord Jesus, grant me grace to ^lie evil company, and when I come among
them, for thy glorious passion I beseech thee to preserve me, that no occasion
of sin overcome me; and send me comfort from thy omnipotent Majesty, to
withstand al illusions of the flesh, whereby thy blessed name may be
dishonored.

Keep my mouth (good Lord) from slanders, ill speaking, lying, false
witnessebeating, cursing, swearing, uncharitable ch^ding, dissolute laughing,
and words of vanity.

Make me (blessed Lord) with dread to remember, that thou presently hear
me, and that the least of my words shall judge me.

Suffer not my heart to be light of credit, in hearing that which is
detraction, obloquy, rancour and ire.

Repress all inordinate affections of carnalitie; and where I have by evil
fellowship offended thy Majesty, I beseech thee for the help of thy mercies
in so offending thee; let thy power protect me, thy wisdom direct me, thy
fatherly pity correct me; and send me a gracious life and a blessed ending;
and with thy goodness preserve me from everlasting damnation and terror of mine
enemy.

Jn my temptations I beseech thee Lord to help me, and to keep my soul from
consent to sin.

For the tender love thou bear to mankind, repel the power of my
adversaries, which intend the damnation of me. Possess my soul (O Savior)
with all humble sub^ection to thy law, and make me pure in spirit, meek in
speaking, patient in suffering, to hunger after righteousness, and to be
merciful to all them that be in misery.

Make me peaceable in conue^sation, clean in heart unto godly meditation,
and joyful to suffer persecution for thee.

Let all my powers and desires be ruled according to thy will; let all my
petitions be ordered by thy wisdom, to the everlasting profit of my soul.

Lord keep my soul and my body, whereby I may be patient in suffering
injuries and rebukes; let me lead that life which thou know to be most to
thine honor and my eternal felicity.

Fill mine heart with contrition, and mine eyes with tears, that I never be
forsaken of thee. Awake my dull soul from the sleep of sin, and send me
help (Lord) from Heaven, to overcome the old serpent with all his crafts.

Deliver me from the enemy of da^kenesse, and his great cruelty; let thy
obedience recompense for mine obstinacy, thy abstinence for my superfluity,
thy meekness and thy patience for my pride, irefull heart and enmity.

Thy charity for my malice, thy devotion for my dullness, thy loving heart for
mine unkindness, thy holy death for my wretched life.

Lord grant me grace in the time of prayer to fix my mind on thee, and at
that time to remember the perils of body and soul which I have escaped; and
the benefits that I have received through thy great mercy.

And I thank thee most Heavenly Father) for all the Creatures which thou have
made to help man, and that thou have made man after thine own Image in glory
to honor thee.

The motions of my running mind, the desire of mine unstable heart in time of
prayer, stop and stay, Lord I beseech thee; and repress the power of my
ghostly enemy, which then does withdraw my mind from thee and thy true
service to many vain imaginations.

Lord I beseech thee to take me into thy power, and with thy goodness glad me;
Lord let my mind be so occupied in goodness, that my prayers may be
acceptable to thee.

Hear now sweet Savior the voice of a sinner, who would feign love thee, and
with the heart as greatly please thee, as ever he has offended thee.

I beseech thee save my enemies from thy wrath, and forgive them that have
offended thee, like as I would be forgiven in those things whereby I have
offended thee.

Give me grace to order my life (O Lord) and the works of my body and soul
with resolved intent never to offend thee, whereby I may receive the reward of
thy infinite joy and eternal felicity.

O Lord Jesus Christ grant me whatsoever thy divine wisdom knows most
expedient for me, and that this miserable life is not worthy to obtain.

Grant at the hour of my death I never fall from thee, when as I shall be
accused for my heinous offenses and sins committed against thy omnipotent
Majesty.

I beseech thee break my froward heart, and make it obedient unto thee.

Lord keep me from sudden death, and preserve me so by thine almighty hand,
and grant me sweet Father to have a contempt of this World, that I may with a
i^yfull heart come into thy blessed presence.

Let the remembrance of thy death make me ioifull, whereby I may endure
temptations and tribulations; and make me so to love thee, that I may come to
inherit that ioifull, immortal, and glorious life, most excellent bliss* and
endless felicity, which is ordained in thy heavenly Kingdom, and for thy
servants prepared.

Lord grant me these supplications which I have made to thee at this present;
grant me here in this Pilgrimage a gracious life, and ^ blessed ending, free
from debt and deadly sin; and after my death bring me to everlasting life,
there to have an endless bliss and felicity. Amen.

A Prayer to GOD for hi^ great goodness unto Man.
O My Sovereign Lord Jesus, the very true Son of Almighty God, that sufferedst
death for my sake, I beseech thee Lord have mercy on me that am a wretched
sinner, but yet thy creature.

For thy tender passion keep me from all perils bodily and ghostly, and
especially from all things that may turn to thy displeasure.

And with all my heart I thank thee (most merciful Lord) for the great
mercies which thou have showed me in the great dangers which I have been in,
as well in soul as in body; and that thy grace and endless mercy has always
kept and saved me since the hour of my birth unto this day.

Lord I beseech thee let thy mercy be continued toward me, and for my great
offenses; unkindness, wretched and sinful life, Lord, ^ humbly ask pardon
for the same at thy Almighti^ hands.

And I thank thee (mo^^ gracious Lord) for thy gre^^ benefits and graces which
thou have so largely bestowed on me, before many other Creatures, who have
bette^ deserved then I.

Lord I do here meekeli^ prostrate my self in heart a^ it becomes thy
servant promising never to offen^ thee more; tendering all honor and praise to
thy holi^ name, who live and reign one God World without end. Amen.

A Prayer to GOD to deli^er us from our ghostly Enemies.
MOst dear Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, I beseech thee of thy benign
goodness and mercy, to protect, save, keep, and defend me against the
assaults of my ghostly enemies: for I have no other trust, hope, nor succor,
but thee alone.

Grant me therefore most gracious Father to dread and love thee above all
things in this present life; and after this life ended, to enjoy the Kingdom
prepared for all true believers.

Further I beseech thee that thou will vouchsafe out of thy great mercy and
clemency to show thy bountiful goodness upon me, an^ to forgive me all my
sins and grant that I may persevere everlastingly in al^ goodness and serve
thee aright, that after this life ^ may reign with thee in everlasting glory,
Worl^ without end. Amen.

A Prayer to GOD da^lie to be said.
O My most blessed Lord the well spring of pity and Fountain of endless
mercy; I humbly beseech thee to give me grace so to spend this my transitory
life in virtuous and godly exercises, that when the day of my death shall come,
though I feel pain in my body, yet I may feel comfort in my soul, and with
a faithful hope of thy mercy embrace thy messenger so contentedlie, that I
may w^llingly through thy grace and strength depart out of this vale of mis^ri^,
in love toward thee, and charity toward the World; that I may hasten me to
that glorious Coun^rey, wherein thou have purchased me an inheritance for
ever, with thy most precious blood

O my sweet Savior and Lord Jesus Christ, I beseech thee while thou do
suffer me to live in this World, be so gracious a Father, as to give unto me a
contrite and clean heart, quiet and patient; a body chaste, humble, and
obedient to follow thy will, and always ready to do thee service.

To thee O God be al^ praise, which have ^ermitte^ me to accomplish thi^
work; grant (O ^ord^ i^ may be to thee ac^eptable, to my soul healthf^l, and
to others profitable, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer to be used at all times.
O Heavenly Lord and Omnipotent Father, the pattern of all goodness, and
follower of all virtues, most stout ouerthrower of all wickedness and
sharpest rooter up of vices, mercifully behold my frailety and pronenesse to
evil.

Help me with thy super^al power, that I may learn ^o despise all earthly
plea^^res, and the vanities there^^; and love all celestial and ^eauenly
things.

Make me resist all sin which stands between thy ^aiesty and my weak
spi^^t) ready to overthrow me ^^ thy mercies were not assi^^ant to my poor
soul.

Make me to withstand all ^^mptations, firmly to im^race virtue, to eschew all
^orldlie honors, and car^all delights, and to bewail ^^ine offenses committed
in ^y sight.

I beseech thee restrain my ^^bridled desires with thy ^^uing hand, whereby I
may ^^staine from a leude and ^ose life; and accustom my self with goodness
to the end; that by thy benefit an^ gift of grace, by the true wo^shipping and
serving of the Omnipotent Majesty, I man possess the Crown of eue^lasting
life in thy Kingdome^ prepared for thine ^le^ World without end. Amen.

A Prayer to be daily said unto our Lord Jesus Christ.
O Maker of Heaven an^ Earth, King of King^ Lord of Lords, which of nothing
did make me t^ thine Image and likeness^ and did redeem me wit^ thine
own blood, when I sinner was not worthy t^ name, to call, or with he^ to
think upon thee.

Humbly I desire and meek^ie pray thee that thou gent^ie wilt behold me thy
sin^ull and wre^ched servant: O have mercy on me thou which ^adst mercy on
the woman of Canaan, upon Mary Magdalen, upon the ^ublican, and upon the thief
^anging on the Cross.

Unto thee I confess Lord ^y sins, which if I would, cannot hide from thee.

Have mercy Lord on me, or I am a wretched sinner, which have sore offended ^ee
in pride, couetousnsse, ^luttony, letchery, vainglo^^e, hatred, envy,
adultery, ^^est, lying, backbiting, ^orting, dissolute and wan^^n laughing,
idle words, ^aring, tasting, sleeping, ^orking, and many more ways I frail
man and most wretched sinner have offended thee. Therefore I most humbly pray
and beseech thy gentleness, who for my health and salvation descendedst from
Heaven, and did hold up David that he should not fall into sin.

Have mercy upon me (O Christ) who did forgive Peter, that did forsake thee.
Thou art my Creator, my Helper and Maker, my Redeemer, my Governor, my
Father, my Lord, my God, my King: thou art my help, my trust, my strength, my
defense, my redemption, my life, my health, and my resurrection; thou art my
steadfastness, my refuge, and succor, my light, and my help.

I most humbly and heartily desire and pray thee, help and defend me. Make
me ^^rong and comfort me, make me steadfast, make me sober^y merry, give me the
light of thy spirit, and visit me; revive me again who am dead, for I am thy
making and thy work.

O Lord despise me not; I am thy servant, thy bondsman, although evil,
unworthy, and a sinner. But whatsoever I am, whether I be good or bad, I am
ever thine. Therefore to whom shall I fly, except I fly unto thee? If thou
cast me off, who shall or will receive me? If thou despise me, and turn thy
face from me* who shall look upon me, and recognize and acknowledge me?

Although I be unworthy to come to thee, although I be vile and unclean, thou
can make me clean. If I be dead, thou can r^uiuemee, for thy mercy is much
morethen mine iniquity; thou can forgive me more then I can offend.
Therefore (O Lord) do not consider, nor have respect to the number of my
sins; but according to the greatness of thy mercy look on me a most
wretched sinner.

Lord say unto my soul, I am thy health, who saidest I will not the death of
any sinner, but rather that he live and be converted. Turn me O Lord to thee,
and be not angry with me. I pray thee most meek Father for thy great mercy,
bring me unto that bliss that never shall c^^sse: so be it. A^en.

A Prayer for the r^miss^^ of sins.
O Lord God, if we wretched sinners had, not ^y thy tender mercies and ^ouing
promises in Holy Scripture the comfort of our weak consciences and sorrowful
hearts, we see no other remedy (so great and ^infinite are our sins) but that
we must needs despair.

But for as much as whatsoever things are written are written for our learning,
that through patience and the comfort of Scriptures we may have hope; though
our sins be never so many, never so abominable, yet they do not so much
make us sad, as thy loving kindness and ^ender mercie^ make us glad.

Our sins (we consesse) are innumerable, but thy mercies are also infinite;
tho^ art that most gentle Lord, which wilt not the death of a sinner, but
rather that he turn and live. Thou for repentance sake wilt not see the
sin^es of men; thou confessest that thou came into this World to save
sinners, to call not the righteous, but sinners to repentance, and to seek
that which was lost. Thou call unto thee all those that are diseased and
laden with the heavy burden of sin, and promise^t that thou will case them;
yea by thy Prophet thou say; If we will wash, and make clean^ our sel^^s;
put away our evil thoughts out of thy sight, cease from doing eui^^ and
violence, learn to do right apply our selves to equity, deliver the
oppressed, help the fatherless to his right, and hear the widows complaint;
though our sins were as ^ed as scarlet, ^et shall they be made whi^^^ then
snow; and though they were like purple, yet they shall be made like white (...)

Yea, thou say moreover, that for thine own sake, even for thy mercy and
names sake thou will be good unto us, favor vs^ and so cast away all our
sins behind thy back tha^ thou will never remember them more.

O Lord, thou art the God which cannot lie; thou art the souls truth, thou art
faithful in thy words, and holy in all thy works.

For according to these thy loving promises have thou ever dealt with the
chi^dren of men, whenever they repented and turned unto thee; when they
forsook their sinful living, and called upon thy holy name, thou forgauest all
their s^ns and healedst all their infirmities; thou also sauedst their life
from destruction, and crownedst them with mercy and loving kindness.

For thou (O Lord God) a^^full of compassion and mercy, long suffering, and of
great goodness; thou wi^^ not always be chiding, neither will thou keep thine
anger for ever, neither will thou deal with us after our sins, nor yet
reward us according to our wickedness.

For look how high the Heaven is in comparison of the Earth, so great is thy
mercy toward them that fear thee.

Look how wide the East is from the West, so far^e do thou set our sins
from us; yea, like as a Father pittieth his own children, even so art thou
merciful unto them that fear thee.

For thou know whereof we be made, thou remembrest that we are but dust,
that a man in his time is but gras^e, and flourishes as a flower of the fi^ld,
and as soon as the wind goes over it is gone, and the place thereof knows
it no more: but thy merciful goodness (O Lord) endures for ever, and ever
upon them that fear thee.

Of these thy loving kindnesses and tender mercies, who has not tasted, if he
sought it with all his heart? Thou did forgive David both his whoredom and
manslaughter, when he repented and confessed his sin.

How often did thou call back the plagues of thy vengeance, when the Children
of Israel lamented their sins and turned unto thee? How merciful did thou
show thy self to the N^n^^ites, when they repented and humbled themselves in
thy sight? How lovingly spakest thou to that sinful Woman in the Gospel, and
forgauest her all her sins, because she repented and believed?

Peter thy Disciple, although most cowardly denying thee, after that he had
bitterly wept and lamented his sins, thou did behold with thy merciful
eye, and favorably receive him again into the number of thy holy Apostles.

One of them that died with thee, being a thief, after he had called unto thee
for grace thou did place in Paradise, and make him partaker of thine eternal
felicity.

Many other notable examples of thy great mercies find we in Holy Scripture,
which will not suffer us to despair of thy clemency and goodness, be our
sins and wickedness never so ma^y; but they rather encourage ^s boldly to
come unto the Throne of thy Grace, that we may receive mercy, and find grace
to help in ^ime of need.

O most gentle Savior, thou art that most loving Shepherd, who did
diligent^y seek the wandering sheep, lovingly laid it upon thy shoulder^,
and tenderly brought it home again; seek us who have so long run astray, lay
us upon thy merciful shoulders, and bring us home again unto the company of
thy faithful.

Thou art that merciful Sama^^tane, who beholding the miserable estate of the
wounded man, with thy pit^ifull eye, came unto him, made clean his wounds,
pouredst in wine and oileboundest them up, set him upon his beast, and
car^ied him into the Inn, and never leftest him, till he was perfectly whole.

O most loving Savior, vouchsa^e with thy merciful eye to look upon my
wretched estate, which without thy help must needs perish; my wounds are
deadly, and not able to be healed of any, ^ither in Heaven or in Earth, but of
thee alone, wh^ art the true Phisician, and hea^est those that are contrite in
heart; my whole head is sick, and the ^eart is very h^a^ie, from the sole of
the foot unto the crown of the head there is no whole part in all our body,
but all are wounds, botches, soars, and stripes, which can never be healed,
bound up, mollified, nor eased with any ointment, except thou put to thy
helping hand. Let it therefore please thee of thy great goodness to cleanse my
wounds, to pour in the wine and oil of spiritual gladness, to bind them
up, and never to leave me till thou have made me perfectly whole, and brought
me into thy Heavenly Kingdom.

Heal thou me O Lord, and I shall be healed; save thou me, and I shall be
saved.

Thou art that most tender Father, who receiuedst home again with embracing
arms that lost Son, which had wasted all his goods with riotous living: so
soon as he returned unto thee, and did repent him of his disorder, confessed
his sin, and humbled himself in thy fight, thou had compassion on him;
thou did fall on his neck, and kissed him; thou did command thy servants
to bring forth that best garment, and put it on thy Son, and to put a ring on
his finger, and shoes on his feet; thou gave commandment to fetch the fat
Calfe to kill, saying; Let us eat and be merry, for this my Son was dead, and
is alive again; he was lost, and now is found. Show this thy favor, O most
gentle Father to me thy Child, who have ungodly bestowed those good and
gracious gifts, which thou both lovingly and liberally gave unto me.

This my prodigal and licentious living sore grieueth me, and I am heartily
sorry that I have so grievously offended thy Fatherly goodness;
notwithstanding according to thy old wonted goodness, I most humbly beseech
thee for thy name sake to have mercy on me, to forgive me my sins, and to
receive me again into thy savor; take away from me all my old beggarlie rags
of sin, and put on me that new garment of innocence, that precious ring of
faith, wherewith I am maned unto thee, and those most godly shoes of that
Evangelical peace, that I may walk from henceforth in the ways of thy holy
Commandments, and do that which is pleasant in thy sight.

Give me grace unfeignedly to repent, and to amend my life, that the Angels in
Heaven may rejoice at my conversion; and so wash me from my sins more and
more, that at the last I may be clean, and appear beau^^full in my Heavenly
Fathers sight, through thee my only Savior, who with the Father and the Holy
Ghost ^iuest and raignest one true and everlasting GOD world without end. Amen.

A general Prayer for all kind of sins.
AH Lord, the most puissant GOD, we in Baptism giving over our selue^ unto
thee, and unto thy holy Religion, protesting openl^ in the face of thy holy
Congregation to forsake Satan with all his pompes an^ works, to renounce the
World and all the vainpleasures thereof, to mortify the flesh and all the
lusts of it and from henceforth to di^ unto sin, and live unto
righteousness, and to lead ^ new life.

Ah Lord this our cou^nant and bargain made unto thee we keep not, b^^ too
much wretchedly we break, in transgressing thy holy Commandments. In stead of
performing our service due unto thee, we serve Satan; leaving the fulfilling
of thy Commandments, we obey our own will. The World and the flesh, so rage
and reign in us, that we can ^carcely breathe forth any godliness.

By mouth we profess thee, but with our deeds we deny thee; we promise to
work in thy Vineyard, but we loiter and work not.

In name we are Christi^ns, but in deed we are Sa^hans bondmen, the Worlds
^laues, and most vile servants and drudges to the flesh.

Oh Lord, too too wret^hed is our state, and except ^hou shortly helpest, we
are like utterly to perish; the ragi^g slouds of all kind of sin have so
prevailed, and almost overwhelmed us. O most gentle Savior, we ^aue a will
(such as it is) to do good; but we find no power, nor strength in our souls
to ^e^forme it. That good thing which we would, we do not, but the evil do
we, which we would not do. For we know that in us, that is, in our flesh
dwells no good thing: And no marvel, for we are by nature the Children of
wrath; we are begotten, conceived, and borne in sin, our senses, wits and
devices, are evil even from our young age upward. Our heart is unclean,
wicked, froward, leude, and unsearchable; we are not able to think a good
thought of our selves; we a^e unprofitable servants, by o^rites, fleshly, and
all that naught is; yea w^e are the very b^nd-slaue of sin: for every one that
commits sin, is the servant of sin.

O most sweet Savior help us for the glory of thy name. Thou came down
from the right hand of thy Father into this vale of misery to save that which
was lost: save me therefore (good Lord) which wander abroad like a sheep
destitute of a shepherd: suffer not thy blessed body to be broken, and thy
precious blood to be shed for us in vain. Thou by thy death valiantly
conqueredst him that had power of death: deliver me therefore from his raging
tyranny, and make me thy faithful and obedient servant. Suffer me not to
love the World, neither the things that are in the World; seeing that all that
is in the World, (as the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and pride of
life) is not of thee (O Father) but of the World: and the World vanishes away
and the lusts thereof; but he that fulfilleth the will of God abides for ever.

Suffer me not to be overcome with the boiling concupiscence of the Flesh;
which ever lusts against the Spirit, and is not obedient to the Law of God,
^e^ther can be: but give th^^ grace to kill and crucify the ^lesh, with the
appetites and ^usts thereof, that I may live and walk in the spirit, and
be^ome a new Creature: let not sin reign in my mortal body, that I should
thereunto o^ey in the lusts of it; neither ^^^^er thou me to give my ^embers
as instruments of vn^ighteousnesse unto sin, but ^o give my members as
instruments of righteousness unto ^^ee.

And as heretofore I gave ^y self unto uncleanness, and ^o iniquity: So let
me now ^^om hence^orth give my self ^^to holiness, that ^ may be ^^ctified.

Kill in me the deeds of ^e flesh, which are these, ^dultery, fornication,
vnclea^^sse, wantonness, idolatry, ^itchcraft, hatred variance, wrath, strife,
sedition, sects, e^uying, murder, drunkenness gluttony, and such like; an^
plant in me the fruits of the Spirit, as love, joy, peace, long suffering,
gentleness, faithfu^nesse, meekness, and temp^rance. As concerning the
conversation in times past, given grace to put off the old m^^ which is corrupt
through t^^ deceiuable lusts; and to be ^^nued in the spirit of my mind^ and to
put on the new man which after the image of Go^ is shapen in righteousness,
an^ true holiness.

Suffer me not to lie, bu^^ speak truth unto my Neig^bour; For as much as we
^^ members one of another. Su^^^^ me not to be angry, that I (...) let not the
Sun go down upon my wrath, neither let (...) give place unto the back-biter.
Grant that he which before has ^^ollen, may from henceforth ^teale no more, but
rather la^or with his hands some good things, that he may have to give unto
him that needs. Let ^o filthy communication pro^eed out of my mouth, but that
which is good to edify with^ll, when need is, that it may ^^ue favor with
the Hearers.

Let all bitterness, fiercenes, and wrath, roaring, and cursed ^peaking, be
put away from ^^e, and all maliciousness. Make ^^ee courteous to all men, and
^ercifull, forgiving, even as God for thy sake forgave me.

As for fornication and all vnleannesse, or covetousness, let ^^ not b^e once
named among ^s, as it becomes Saints; neither filthy things, neither foolish
talking, neither jesting which are not comely, but rather giving of thanks.
Put upon me tender mercy, kindness humbleness of mind, meekness,
long-suffering, forbearing my Neighbor; but about all these things put upon m^
love, which is the bond of perfection, and grant that the peac^ of God may
evermore rule ^^ my heart, and that I may b^ thankful for all thy benefits^

Finally, whatsoever thing are true, whatsoever things a^^ honest, whatsoever
things a^iust, whatsoever things (...) pure, whatsoever things p^^tain to love,
whatsoever things are of honest report; if there b^ any virtuous thing, if
there ^^ any laudable thing, grant th^^ I may have them in my mind and
practice them in my conversation and living; that whatsoever I breathe, think,
speak, ^or do, all things may be done unto the honor, glory, and praise of
thy name, who live and raignest with God the Father, and God the Holy Ghost,
true, living, and everlasting GOD, World without end. A^en.

A Prayer for Faith.
We are taught by thy holy Apostle (O most loving Savior) that whatsoever is
not of Faith, is sin; and that it is impossible to please thee without faith;
and therefore they that come unto thee, must believe that thou art God, yea,
and such a God, as is both able, and also will abundantly reward all them that
with true faith seek thee.

For thy eyes (O Lord) look upon Faith, and thou do appear and show thy
self unto them that have faith in thee; yea, through faith thou (being the
King of glory) art married to the souls of thy faithful, and make them
partakers of thy divine nature, through the wonderful working of thy blessed
Spirit.

Through Faith, so many as believe are justified, made the sons and heirs of
God, and have everlasting life.

By Faith we obtain of God all good things, even whatsoever we do ask in
thy name. Seeing that Faith is so precious a Jewel in thy sight, that without
it nothing is acceptable unto thy divine Majesty; and I of m^ne own nature
cannot have this most singular gift, except thou give it unto me from above,
and do breathe it into my heart by thy holy. Spirit; (for of my self I am
blind, ignorant, foolish, and by no means can perceive the things which
pertain to the Spirit of God:)

I most humbly beseech thee to take away from me all infidelity and
unfaithfulness, which I received of old Adam; and to plant in me true faith
and undoubted belief, that I may be thoroughly persuaded that thou art the
Son of the living God, very God, and very Man, our alone sweet smelling*
sacrifice, our alone Mediator. Advocate, and Interce^^or; ou^ alone wisdom,
righteousn^^^^, ^anctification, and redempti^^^ by whom alone, and for whose
sake only thy Heavenly Father is well pleased with me, whereby my sins are
remitted, grace, and everlasting life is given me.

O Lord God suffer me not to lean to mine own wisdom, nor to believe as
blind flesh fansieth, nor to ^eeke salvation where superstition dreameth; but
let my faith only be grounded on thy Word: And give me grace truly to believe
in thee with all my heart, to put my trust in thee, to look for all good
things of thee, to call upon thy blessed name in adversity, and with a joyful
voice and more merry heart, to praise and magnify it in prosperity. Suffer me
not to doubt neither of God my Heavenly Father, ^or of God his Son, nor of
God the Holy Ghost, but earnestly to believe that they being disti^ct persons,
are notwithstanding one very God, beside whom there is no God neither in Heaven
nor in earth. Grant also that I may assuredly believe whatsoever is contained
in the Holy Scriptures, and by no means suffer my self to be plucked from
the verity thereof, but manfully and steadfastly abide in the same even* unto
the death; rage World, ^oare Devil. And this Faith (O sweet Jesus) increase
thou in me more and more, that at the last through thy goodness I may be made
perfect and strong in thy holy Religion, and show my self both before the^ and
the World truly faithful, by bringing forth plenty of all good works, unto
the glori^ and honor of thy name, which with God the Father, and God the Holy
Ghost, live and raignest true God World with out end. Amen.

A Prayer unto GOD that we^ may live in his fear, and that he will turn his
plagues from us.
O Heavenly Father and most merciful Lord, deal not thou with us after our
sins, neither reward us after our iniquities. Indeed thou in thy holy Law
do thereaten to punish with plagues and noisome diseases, such as neglect
and set at naught thy will and word, and live licentiously according to their
own lusts and appetites, to send upon them great plagues, with many other
innumerable and unknown infirmities, as just punishments for their iniquities.

Yet O Father of mercy, and Lord of all comfort, I beseech thee inspire into my
heart such a regiment of fear to offend thy divine Majesty, that thereby I may
turn unfeignedly unto thee, and serve thee truly, learning to live according to
thy law, loving one another as Christ's true children in deed, and not spoiling
or devouring one another.

For he that loves not his brother, though he live, yet he abides in death;
and he that hates his Brother is a Manslayer, and kills him in his heart:
but love shall cover ^ multitude of sins, and so also God shall be
glorified, and shall pour his benefits plentifully upon us as long as the
World endures.

Lord God, thou have created and made of thine infinite goodness and
unspeakable mercy, for Man's comfort, thy blessed Sunshine, to be a
perpetual bright Lamp and Candle, to be an ingenderer, nourisher, and
comforter of all living things in this inferior World.

This great work and Fatherly providence of God, ought to cause us to praise
and magnify him always, and to make us remember his manifold benefits, that
has so lovingly created all things for man's sake.

O Lord as thy mer^ies abound toward us, so grant that we may be as plentiful
i^ virtuous living and conversation, and that we do not through our wicked
lives and evil behavior pull upon our felues thy wrath and displeafure, in a
busing thy good Creatures, and in hoording up the treasure of this World from
our need^ull and poor Brethren; and so purchase that curse which the wisdom
of God v^tereth by the mouth of Solomon, where he says: Who so hoordeth up his
goods shall be cursed among the people; but blessing shall light upon his
head that is liberal to the poor. Bring it forth therefore ye covetous, that
ye may be partakers of the blessing which is prepared for the righteous.

And as our Savior Christ says; They that are whole, need not the Phisician,
but they that are sick.

You therefore that are sick and have need, seek the help of that good
Physician in time; for there is better remedy to be had in the beginning, then
after a long delay and tarrying for the preservation of our sick souls.

Lord make us earnestly and diligently to seek help of the Heavenly
Physician, which is the pertect curer both of body and soul; and make us to
apply those heavenly medicines, the Precepts of thy most holy Word, to the
great and almost incurable diseases of our infected souls; in seeking whereof
we be all too remiss and slack. But yet spare us good Lord, spare thy people,
and correct us not in thine anger, but in thy merry think upon us; for thou
art the God of mercy, long suffering, slow to continue displeasure, and ready
to forgive.

But alas how should thou cease to punish, and should show mercy, when
we cease not to sin and offend, but continue still in our wi^^ednesse
without repentance? What sufficient excuse can we make or what reasonable let
can we lay that thou ought not to punish us?

Whereas there was never more godly preaching, never more exhortation to
repentance; seldom the like crying out against sin, never more dissuading
from covetousness and usury; there be daily admonitions to forsake swearing,
continual calling from all wickedness; beside the number of godly learned
Books made and set forth: and yet cannot all these move us once to repent, or
to desist and forsake our wonted wicked ways and fil^hy affections.

Defend me Lord by thy right hand, and give a gracious ca^e to my request; for
all man's stays are but vain. Lord cond^^t me in thy ways, (...) I may give
thanks to ^^ee for thy mercy and goodness, who never leauest them destitute
that put their assured trust in thee; who live and raignest one God, World
without end Amen.

A Prayer for Servants, with their duty.
O Christ my Lord and Savior, who being the Son of the living GOD, ^^, GOD
himself from everlasting, did not disdain at the will of thine Heavenly
Father to make thy self of no reputation, to become Man, to take upon thee the
shape of a Servant, and to obey thy Fathers Commandment to the death, yea,
even of the Cross, for our salvation, refusing no service, no travel, no
labor, no pain, that might make unto the comfort of mankind.

We most humbly beseech thee to give all thy Servants grace to practice thy
humility and obedience, that as thou most willingly did serve and obey thy
Heavenly Fathers good pleasure, so they in like manner may with most hearty
affection serve and obey their bodily Masters in all things that are agreeing
with thy blessed Word; not with eyeseruice as Men-pleasers, but in singleness
of heart, fearing God that whatsocuer they do, they may do it heartily even as
to the Lord, and not unto Men.

For as much as they are sure that they shall receive the reward of thy
Heavenly Inheritance of thee O Lord Christ, while truly and faithfully they
serve their bodily Masters: Grant that so many as are under theyoake, may count
their Masters worthy of all honor, that the name of God and his Doctrine be
not evil spoken of; and that they may obey them with all fear, not only if
they be good and courteous; but also though they be sroward; and please them
in all things, not answering them again, not picking ought from them, but show
good faithfulness, that in all things they may bring credit to the doctrine of
thee our GOD and Savior; to whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be all
honor, praise, and glory, for ever and ever. Ameu.

Servants ought to account their Masters worthy of all honor, I T^^. 6. 1: and
to be subject unto them with all fear; not only to the good and courteous, but
also to the froward: 1 Pet. 2. 18: and to please them in all things, not
answering again, and to be no filchers nor deceivers of them in any thing, but
show all good faithfulness: Tit. 2. 9. 10: in singleness of their hearts as
unto Christ; not with service to the eye as Menpleasers, but as the servants of
Christ, doing the will of GOD from their hearts, with good will serving the
Lord, and not Men. Ephe. 6. 5. 6. 7.

A Prayer for Children, and their duty.
AS thou O merciful Father have given commandment unto all Fathers and
Mothers to bring up their Children in thy fear, nurture, and doctrine: so
likewise thy good pleasure is that children should honor, and reverence their
Parents diligently, give care unto their virtuous instructions, and faithfully
obey them.

As thou have promised health, honor, glory, and riches, long life, and all
that good is, unto them that honor, reverence, and humbly obey their Fathers
and Mothers: so have thou threatened unto disobedient Children ignominy, evil
same contempt, shame, dishonor poverty sickness, short life, and such other
plagues.

Yea, in thy holy Law thou do not only pronounce them accursed that
dishonor their Fathers and Mothers, but thou also command that if any
Child be stubborn and disobedient, and will not hear, but rather despise the
commandment of his Father and Mother, the same should be stoned to death
without mercy; so greatly do thou abhor disobedience and rebellion
against all persons, but especially against Parents.

I therefore heartily wishing that the plagues of thy fierce wrath (for thou O
Lord art a consurning fire) may be far from them, most humbly beseech thee
to engraue in the hearts of all Children, of whatsoever age, kind, estate, or
degree they be, true honor, hearty reverence, and unfeigned obedience toward
their Parents. Give them grace (good Lord) that as they profess thy Son
Christ in name, so they may truly represent his manners in their life and
conversation, which willingly was obedient to his Mother Mary and her Husband
Joseph; giving example unto all children of the like subjection and obedience
toward their Parents. Engraft in them such a love toward their Fathers and
Mothers, that they may both reverence them with outward honor, and also to
their power help them, succor them, provide for them, comfort and cherish
them in their need, even as their Pa^ents comforted and nourished them in
their Infancy and tender age.

But above all things give them grace truly to honor thee, which art the
Heavenly Father, yea, our Father and Redeemer, which have made us, and daily
cherishest us, even as a Father or Mother does cherish their most dear and
natural Children. So shall it come to pass that they faithfully honoring
thee, shall also in order heartily honor, and unfeignedly obey their carnal
Parents in thy fear, unto the glory of thy most holy and blessed name, which
is most worthy to be honored World without end. Amen.

Children their d^ty is to acknowledge their Parents next unto God their
Heavenly Father, to be the Authors of their life and being; and also to
acknowledge and rightly to cousider of their charges, cares, troubles, and
pains in bringing them up, and to love the^^ for all that they have done for
them; and in token of love and thankfulness to maintain, relieve, and comfort
them, when need is, as Joseph Genesis 47. 11: and to be as faithful servants unto
them. Mal. 3. 17. To work and take pains for them, as R^th did, though she
was but a daughter in Law, Ruth cha. 2. Their duty is to fear and reverence
their Parents in their hearts, according to Gods Commandment. L^^it. 19. 3.
and also to reverence them in their outward behavior, by standing bare-headed
before them, and putting off their hats, with an humble and lowly countenance
when their Parents speak unto them, or they unto their Parents; and bowing
their bodies when they pass by, or come toward us, ^s Solomon did to his
Mother, I Kings 2. 19: or receiving any thing of their Parents, as Joseph did,
Genesis 48. 12: and by giving them the upper hand, as Solomon did to his Mother,
though ^he was a King. 1 Kings 2. 19. Their duty is to obey their Parents
according to the Word of God. Col. 3. 10. Especially in marriage, as Isa^c did,
Genesis ^4: and Jacob, Genesis 28: and not ^o grieve them by marrying against their
will, as Esan did, Genesis 26. 34: who was a r^pro^ate, and hated of God Romans 9. 13

A Prayer against Whoredom.
O Lord God and Omnipotent Father, the searche^ and trier of the thoughts an^
reins of all Creatures; O ho^ greatly do thou abhom^ whoredom,
fornication, and all uncleanness! O Lord, the drowing of the world with water,
the destruction of Sodom^ and Gomorrah with fire and brimstone from Heaven, and
other like plagues mentioned in holy Scriptures, do evidently declare and
show. Thy Commandment is, that we should commit none Adultery.

And in the Common-weal^ of the Israelites, thou commandedst that there should
be neither whoremonger nor whore if any such were found, that they should be
stoned to death.

Although the lips of an harlot are to the foolish a dropping hony-combe, and
her neck softer then oil; yet at the last she is as bitter as wormwood, and
as sharp as a sword; her feet go down unto death, and her steps haste them
to hell: and he that accompanies himself with an whore, shall go down unto
hell, but he that goes away from her shall be saved: yea, he that maintains
an whore, shall come unto beggary in this World, and after this life shall have
his part in the Lake that burns with fire and brimstone.

O Lord thou have called us not unto uncleanness, but unto holiness and
pureness of life; thou have made us one body, and one spirit with thee: how
unseemly then is it to take the m^mbers of Christ, and to make them the
members of an Harlot?

We therefore most humbly beseech thee to make in us clean hearts, and to
renew right spirits within us, and to turn away all voluptuousness from us.
Take from us the lusts of the body, let not the desites of vncleaunes take
hold upon us; give us not over into an vn^^amefast and obstinate mind: let not
fornication, adultery, or any kind of uncleanness, be once named among us;
let not filthy communication proceed out of our mouths, but that which is good
to edify withal when need is, that it may have favor with the hearers.

And as for as much as neither whoremongers wedlockbreakers, abusers of
themselueswith mankind, shall inherit the Kingdom o^ God.

Grant Lord we heartily pray thee, that such as be unmarried may keep
themselves pure and undefiled, after the example of that godly young man
Ios^^h, and bring with them into honorable wedlock both their bodies and their
minds chaste and honest. Grant also that the married men may beware, and keep
themselves from all whoredom, and use the company of no woman besides their
wives.

Again, grant that all married women may practice the manners of that
virtuous woman Susa^^a; and neither for flattering, nor menacing words at any
time consent to uncleanness; but so keep the body undefiled, that it may be
honorable, that God may bless them, and their godly travels, and make them
joyful Mothers of many Children.

Finally, grant O most merciful Father, that we may so avoid all
uncleanness, that we being pure both in body and soul, may attain to see thy
glorious face in thy Heavenly Kingdom, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer for a Woman with Child.
THou O Lord art wonderful in all thy works, and whatsoever thy good pleasure
is, that do thou easily bring to pass; neither is there any thing
impossible with thee, that thou will perform; and albeit this thine Almighty
power shows it self abundantly in all thy works, yet in the conceiving,
forming, and bringing forth of man, it shines most evidently.

At the beginning O Heavenly Father, when thou made Man and Woman, thou
co^mandedst them to increase, multiply, and replenish the Earth. If through the
subtle inticements of Satan they had not transgressed thy Commandments by
eating the fo^rbidden fruit, the Woman whom thou have appo^nted the Organe,
Instrument, and vessel to couceiue, nourish, and bring forth Man through thy
wonderful wormanship, had without any labor pain, or travel, brought forth
her fruit: but that which thy goodness made easy, sin and disobedience has
made hard, painful, dangerous; and if thy help were not, impossible to be
brought to pass; so that now all Women bring forth their Children in great
sorrow, pains, and troubles.

Notwithstanding thou show thy self unto thy Creatures a Father of mercy,
and God of all consolation; for that which through their own imperfection and
feebleness they are not able of themselves to bring to pass, thou through thy
unspeakable power make easy in them, and bring to a fortunate end.

We therefore being fully persuaded of thy bent and ready goodness, of thy
present help, of thy sweet comfort in all miseries and necessities; knowing
also by the testimony of thy Word, how great and intolerable the pains of
Women are that travel of child, if through thy tender mercies they be not
mittigated and eased: most h^mbly pray thee for Jesus Christ his sake thy Son
our Lord, that thy loving kindness may make that easy and tolerable, which
sin has made hard and painful.

Ease (O LORD) the pains which thou most righteouslie have put upon all
Women, for the sin and disobedience of our Grandmother Eve, in whom all we
have sinned; and give unto all such as have conceived and be with child,
strength to bring forth that Child, which thou wonder^ully have wrought in
them; be present with them in their trouble, help them, and deliver them.

Let thy power be showed no less in the safe bringing forth, then in the
wonderful fashioning of the Child; that that which thou have begun in them,
may come unto good success.

Make them glad and joyful Mothers, that they through thy goodness being
safely delivered, and restored to their old strengths, may live and praise thy
blessed name fo^euer. Amen.

A Thanksgiving unto GOD for their deliverance.
O LORD GOD, among other thy great benefits, (yea, and those innumerable) which
thou daily bestowest upon us thy needy and poor Creatures; this is not the
least (O most merciful Father) that thou of thy tender goodness do
vouchsafe for the conservation of mankind, to preserve the Women that are with
child, and to give them safe deliverance of their burden; by this means
making them glad and joyful Mothers.

For these thy benefits and good will toward us, we so heartily thank thee,
as heart can think; beseeching thee to work such thanke^ulnesse in the hearts
of all Mothers, that they being not unmindful of this high benefit of their
safe deliverance wrought only by the Savior of all mankind, may show
themselves thankeful unto thee for this thy goodness, and never forget that
thy present help, and most sweet comfort, which thou mercifully show upon
them in their great travails, labors, and pains, when they fled unto thy
holy name for succor, as unto a strong bull-warke and holy de^ence. Continue
thy favor toward them (O Lord) by making them joyful Mothers of many
children; and indue them with long life, that they may see their Childrens
Children.

And the Children that thou gave unto them make thou as in age, so likewise
in wisdom, and in the abundance of thy holy Spirit to increase, that they may
have favor both with thee, and with all good men; unto the glory of thy most
blessed name, one GOD World without end. Amen.

A Prayer for a sick Man.
O Almighty GOD, and all full of mercy which art the only Father of help,
and true Physician of our bodies and souls: in thy hands are life and death;
thou bring to the grave, and pullest back again.

We came into this World upon a condition to forsake it whenever thou
would call us; and now the Summoners are come, thy fetters hold me, and
none can loose me, but he which bound me.

I am sick in body with pain, and in soul for fear of condemnation. LORD
thou have stricken me, but in judgment show mercy: I deserved to die so soon
as I came to life, but thou have preserved me till now; and shall this mercy
be in vain, as though we were preserved for nothing?

Who can praise thee in the Grave? I have done thee no service since I was
borne; but my goodness is to come; and shall I die before I begin to live?

But (good Lord) thou know what is best of all, and if thou convert me, I
shall be converted in an hour: and as thou acceptedst the will of David, as
well as the act of Solomon; so thou will accept my desire to serve thee, as
well as if I did live to glorify thee.

The spirit is willing, but the flesh is frail; and as I did live sinfully,
whenever thy Spirit was from me, so I shall die unwillingly, unless thy
Spirit prepare me. Therefore dear Father give me that mind which a sick man
should have, and increase my patience in my pain, and call unto ^y remembrance
all that which I have heard, or read, or felt, or meditated; so strengthen me
in this hour of my travail, that I which never taught any good while I lived,
may now teach others to die, and to bear their sickness patiently. Apply
unto me all the mercies of thy beloved Son, as if he had died for me alone:
be not from me when the enemy comes, but when the Tempter is bustest, let thy
Spirit be busiest too; and if it please thee to loose me out of this prison,
and when I shall leave my earth to earth, let thy Angel carry up my soul as
they did Lazar^^, and place me in one of those mansions, which thy Son is
gone to prepare for me.

This is my Mediator which has reconciled me and thee when thou did
abhor me for my sinne^: and thou did send him from H^auen to us, to show
that thou art bound to hear him for us. Therefore in him I come unto thee, in
him I call upon thee, (O my Redeemer) my Preserver, and my Savior; to thee be
all praise, with thy Father, and the Holy Spirit, for ever and ever Amen.

A Prayer to be said before the receiving of the holy Communion.
THy love toward us O most gentle Father, is so great and vnmcasurable; that
it can by no means be expressed by mouth, nor sufficiently conceived in heart;
and this thy love is without any deserts on our behalse: freely and willingly
O Heavenly Father, thou have sent down thy only Son Christ Jesus, from the
glorious seat of thy diui^^e Majesty, to take our flesh upon him, and to
become per^ect man, of the substance of a pure and undefiled Virgiu Mary,
through the operation of the Holy Gh^st. O thou that art this our Mediator,
thou taughtest the will of thy Heavenly Father, confirming the same with
wonderful mercies, unto the great comfort of many which then lived, and unto
the perfect establishment of our faith, which live at this present; after thou
had traveled in this World certain years, the time before appointed from
everlasting, of thy Heavenly Father, drawing nigh, that thou might give thy
self an oblation and sweet smelling sacrifice to God the Father for the sins
of the whole World, even so many as repent, believe, and amend; willing that so
noble and worthy a benefit of our redemption should not be forgotten, nor fall
out of remembrance, who art the sole Author of our salvation, and the only
comfort of weak consciences: when thou had eaten the Paschall Lamb with thy
Disciples, according to the appointment of the Law, thou tookest bread into thy
hand, gave thanks to thy Heavenly Father brakest it, and gave it to thy
Disciples, saying; Take ye, ^ate ye, this is my body, which is given for you,
do this in remembrance of me. Because the singular and inestimable benefit of
our redemption, brought to pass by the one and only oblation of thy blessed
body broken on the Altar of the Cross, should not be forgotten.

Thou brakest the bread in the sight of the Disciples, and gave unto them,
commanding them to cate it in the remembrance of the breaking of thy body,
which then was betrayed by the traitorous Disci^le Judas that son of
perdi^ion, and the day following was unfeignedly broken on the Cross for our
ransom, deliverance, and salvation; here ^liddest thou appoint the breaking of
the bread among the faithful gathered together for that purpose: a worthy and
blessed memorial of thy body broken.

And because the breaking of thy body should be the better remembered, thou
did innoble the bread with the name of thy body, when notwithstanding it
was only the figure, sign, token, and memorial of thy holy body.

In like manner, when supper was done, thou tookest the cup in thy hands,
gave thanks to thy Heavenly Father and deliueredst it unto thy Disciples,
saying, Drink ye all of this, for this is my blood of the ^ew Testament,
Conenant, or Bargain, which shall be shed for many for the rem^ssion of
sins; this do so often as you drink it, in the remembrance of me. As by
the breaking of thy bl^ssed body our ransom is perfectly paid, so by the
shedding of thy blood are all our sins, even unto the uttermost, washed away.

Therefore as by the breaking of the bread, thou would the breaking of thy
body, and the benefits gotten by it, to be remembered among the faithful; so
to that end, that the shedding of thy blood and the merits thereof should not
be forgotten:

Thou gave them the Cup of Wine to drink, commanding them that so often as
they, or any of the faithsull gathered together for that purpose to drink of
the Cup, they should remember thy death, and the shedding of thy precious
blood: as thy holy Apostle says; As often as ye shall eat this Bread and drink
of this Cup, ye shall show the Lords death till he come. And as thou did
ennoble the Bread with the name of thy body, being but the figure of thy body,
because the breaking of thy body should the better be remembered:

So likewise here do thou garnish, and nobly set forth the wine, naming it
thy blood; when notwithstanding it only represents and preaches unto us the
shedding of thy blood, because it should be the more deeply graven, and the
better retained in our minds.

O most merciful Redeemer and gentle Savior, we are come together at this
present to celebrate the memorial of thy blessed and glorious passion, and to
eat and drink this Bread and wine in the remembrance of thy blessed Body
breaking, and thy precious Bl^od shedding.

Most humbly and from the very heart beseeching thee to give us grace worthily
to eat this Bread, and drink of this Cup, lest by the unworthy receiving of
them, we be guilty of thy body and blood, and so eat and drink out own
damnation; and that we may come the more worthily unto this thy Table.

Grant that we may earnestly be at defiance with all sins, and so inwardly
be ashamed, that we at any time have grievously offended thy divine Majesty,
by attempting any thing that is not agreeable to thy good pleasure, that from
hence forth we may not only loath, detest, and abhor whatsoever is
displeasant unto thee, but also embrace and lay hand on that which is good, and
acceptable in thy sight

Forgive us all our sins, and give us grace even with our whole heart to love
all men, yea, our very enemies, and not only to forgive all such as have
offended us, but also to be ready at all times to do for them whatsoever good
or pleasure we be able.

And that we may be the more welcome unto thee, and be found meet and
worthy guests to sit at this Table, and to eat of these thy blessed gi^ts; and
that our souls may be well comforted, nourished, fed, and made merry, by
the worthy receiving of them; cloth us, we pray thee, with that wedding
garme^^, even true and lively says, wherewith our hearts are purified,
wherewith we are married unto thee, and made one flesh and one blood with thee,
wherewith also we are justified, and counted righteous in thy sight. And grant
that through the same faith we earnestly set the eyes of our mind on these
thy most sweet and loving promises: My Body shall be broken for you, my Blood
shall be shed for you, for remission of sins.

And all this, not for our ^ood deeds and merits, which ^^ this behalf are
none, but for ^he worthiness of thy blessed ^assion, for the dignity of thy
^recious blood, and for the on^e and alone sacrifice of thy ^olie body.

For that (O Lord) is the salve that he^^eth our souls; that is the medicine
that comfort our weak and troubled consciences; that is the living bread,
where^f whosoever cateth, shall never hunger, but live for ever.

That is the Jewel of Joy tha^ makes our sorrowful hearts merry; that is,
the mighty Bulwark, the strong desence, the sure Fortress that preserves and
keeps harmless against Satan, sin, death, Hell, desperation, and all the
infernal Powers: to come to the Table, to beo present at the Supper, to hear
and see what is there done, yea, and to receive the holy mysteries of the body
an^ blood there set forth unto us, profits us nothing at all, if w^
faithfully believe not.

That thy Body was broken and thy blood shed for our sins, and that by the
one oblation thereof done once for all, our sins are forgiven us, our
Heavenly Father is reconciled unto us; his wrath stirred up through sin
against us, is pacified, quietness of conscience, everlasting life is given
us; but it rather turns unto our damnation, because we eat of this bread,
and drink of this cup unworthily, and shall with that hypocrite which
^resumed to come unto the marriage not having the wedding garment, be bound
hand and foot, and cast into utter ^arkenesse, where shall be wee^ing and
gnashing of teeth.

Therefore we humbly be^eech thee to give us grace (ac^ording to thy Apostles
coun^^ll) diligently to prove, try, and examine our selves, whether such
repentance, such faith, such love, such disposition toward all godliness be
sound in us or not, as thou do require in them, which will come worthily and
with fruit unto thy Table.

And for as much as it is thy gift to repent heartily, to believe truly, to
love unfeignedly, to be disposed earnestly to embrace true godliness, and to
go forward in the same from virtue to virtue unto the end* Grant I most
entirely pray thee I may so repent, that the fruits thereof may be found in
me; so believe, that I may acknowledge thee my only Savior: so love thee,
that all mine affections may be set on thee alone, and so embrace true
godliness, that our whole life may be a clear mirror of all virtue and
goodness: so shall we through thy mercy be found worthy guests of this thy
Table and receive these holy mysteries to the salvation of our souls.

Yea, so shall we be well assured of the remission and forgiu^nesse of all our
sins: By the breaking of thy blessed body, and the shedding of thy precious
blood, our consciences shall be quiet, our hearts shall be filled with all
true and spiritual joy, we shall triumph over Satan, sin, death hell, and
desperation; we shall be partakers of all the fruits and merits of thy
blessed passion, be made one body with thee, and fellow-heires in everlasting
glory. O Lord God, let it so come to pass, for the honor of thy name. Amen.

A Thanksgiving after the receiving of the Communion.
We thank thee (O Heavenly Father) for the blessed passion and glorious
death of thy dearly beloved Son our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, by whose
holy wounds we faithfully believe, and are assuredly persuaded, that thy wrath
is not only pacified toward us, bu^ that thou also are now become our most
merciful Father, and have freely forgiven us all our sins.

Restore unto us thy heavenly grace, and make us sons and heirs of thine
eternal glory. And because we should not doubt of thy Fatherly goodness
rewards us, (...) in the death of thy (...), the same Son Christ (...) Lord
has l^^t unto us not only his holy Word, but also a blessed memorial of his
death and passion set forth (...) the holy b^^ad and wine which weat this
present have received, both for a remembrance of the breaking of his blessed
body, and the s^edding of his mo^^ pr^^in^^ blood; (...) also for the
quietn^sse of our ^^onscience, and ^^^ the (...) of the remissi^^ of our ^^^nes
through faith^^^^^

We (...) thee (O Hea^^enly Father) that we be never unmindful of this thy
exceeding great kindness^, not unthankful for thy ma^ifolde blessings and
unspeakable mercies declared unto us in the glorious death of thy well-beloved
Son: but so work thou in us through thy holy Spirit, that we may be made
worthy members of that body, whereof thy Son and our Savior Christ Jesus is
the head.

And that we may so faithfully believe in thee, and so ^eruently love one
another, always living in thy fear, and in the obedience of thy holy law and
blessed will, that we being fruitful in all godly and Christian works, may
train our lives according to thy good pleasure in this transitory World, and
after this frail and short life, obtain the true and immortal life, where
thou with thy dearly beloved S^nne our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and the
Holy Ghost that most sweet Comforter, live and raignest one true God, in all
honor and glory World without end. Amen.

A Prayer to be said at the recei^ing of the mystery of Christ's B^die in the
Communion.
O Heavenly and blessed Father, ^^render unto thoe most hearty thanks for all
thy benefits which thou have showed unto me a most wretched sinner, but
especially for that most sweet smelling sacrifice, which thy only begotten
Son offered unto thee on the Altar of the Cross, by giving his most pure and
undefiled body unto the death for the redemption of Mankind; in remembrance
whereof, according to thy wellbeloued Sons ordinance, I now receive this
holy bread, most entirely beseeching thee, that I may both be partaker of the
merits of thy dear Sons Body-breaking, and also lead a life worthy so
great a benefit, to the glory o^ thy name. Amen.

A Prayer to be said at the receiving of the mystery of Christ's blood in the
holy Communion.
O Blessed and merciful Father, thy love toward me sinful Creature is so
exceeding great and unspeakable, that I cannot but give unto thee most humble
thanks; namely for the shedding of the most precious blood of thy dear Son
Jesus Christ, by the virtue whereof thy wrath stored up against me wretched
sinner is pacified, my ransom is paid, the Law is fulfilled mine enemies are
overcome and put to flight. In remembrance of this so noble a victory, and of
so great a benefit, I am come unto this Table O merciful Father to drink of
this Cup, desiring thee, that as my outward man is comforted by the drinking of
this wine, so likewise my inward man may be comforted and made strong by true
faith in the precious blood of thy most dear Son.

O Lord and my Heavenly Father, give me thy holy Spirit which may so rule and
govern my heart, that I never be unthankful nor forgetful of this thine
exceeding great kindness; but so train my life according to thy blessed will,
that whatsoever I do, speak, or think, may be unto the glory of thy most
blessed name, and the health of my soul, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Morning salutation to GOD for wisdom, for grace, and forgiveness of
sins.
MY Soul (O Lord) has desired thee in the night season, and I have also
waited for thee in spirit and mind all the morning, beseeching thee that thy
presence, which I sore have longed for, may expel from me all my sin.

Lord water the secrets of my heart with thy manifold graces, and mightily
en^^^^e the same with thy love. And now (my most sweet Lord Jesus Christ) I
rise and come early to thee in the morning, and pray thee from the bottom of
my heart that thou will hearken unto my prayers and godly requests, which I
do most humbly in heart offer unto thee: for thou art the wisdom, the
eternal brightness, and very figure of the substance of the Father, who have
created all things of nothing.

And because thou would bring again Man to the pleasure of Paradise, thou
came down from Heaven into this vale of misery, and by thy holy
conversation thou have showed and trod him the path thereunto: and for ransom
of all Mankind thou would be offered to thy Father as a most immaculate
Lamb.

Open by thy Holy Spirit my stony and hard heart, that with the eyes of a
perfect belief ^ may always behold thee, who art King of Kings and Lord of
Lords.

Give m^ wis^dome truly to consider of thy ^eath and passion, that thereby I
may profit in thee only, who art as a Book of charity for me.

Grant me that I be utterly destitute of all vanities, that now I be not he
whom heretofore I have been: but do thou always abide in me, that so linked
unto thee, I never s^verue or decline from thee.

Send down (good Lord) thy wisdom from the seat of thy Majesty, that she
may labor and be with me, that I may know what is acceptable in thy sight;
that my heart and senses may be enlightened, whereby I may understand how to
be a true follower of thy Precepts.

O my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, who art most sweet unto me, most
blissful wisdom, the Word of the Father, the beginning and ending of all
Creatures, cast thine eyes of mercy upon me I pray thee, for I am but flesh
and ashes; and I fully persuade my self that it lies not so much in me,
either to will any thing, or to run, but all power comes from thee, whose
mercy assisteth us all.

Lord consider, I pray thee, my weak and frail flesh, and what of my self I
am not able to perform, by reason of my sinful flesh, I beseech thee to help
and assist me, and graciously to continue such good will as thou have showed
me.

O my merciful Lord forsake me not, o my Refuge depart not from me, o my
deliverer make have to succor me in thy mercies, and mortify me to the World.

Save me from all deceipts of mine enemies, that neither life nor death, nor no
hap or chance sever me from thee, but that my love continue both now and ever,
and be nothing diminished by death it self.

Lord give me that wisdom that attends on thee, and put me not away from
amongst thy children; for I am thy servant and son of thy handmaide: send
down thy wisdom from thy heavenly seat, that she may be with me, and
labor with me, for I am thy servant. Therefore (O Lord) replenish me with
the gifts of wisdom and understanding, for thou art my succor and only
helper in all distress.

I beseech thee for thy mercies sake to pardon those s^nnes which I a most vile
wretched sinner have committed: keep me from all evil acts, and from all
dangers; direct my path to a good end, whilst I am tossed in the waves of this
life, and grant I may come to the possession of eternal glory.

I have loved wisdom more then health or any beauty.

Lord come and teach me the way how to attain to thy wisdom. Hear my prayer
(O God) and let my cri^ come unto thee.

O LORD who by thy wisdom which is eternal (as thou thy self who have
created Man, who before was not; and when he was lost, through thy love did
most mercifully redeem him again): grant I beseech thee through the
inspiration of thy wisdom, that I may love thee with all my soul; and let me
know the way wherein I may walk, for I have life up my heart unto thee. Deliver
me from mine enemies O Lord, ^^flie to thee for succor, teach (...) to do thy
will, for thou art my God.

Wisdom passes wickedness; and spreads from coast to coast, who does
strongly and sweetly place all things in order. Let the brightness of thy
eternal wisdom il^uminate mine heart, that it be not dimmed with the
darkness o^ this World, but that I may come to that Country where is
perpetual light. Lord let thy Holy Spirit bring me to that right light, that
leads to tread the path of righteousness.

Lord bring my sonle out of all misery, and in thy mercy destroy all mine
enemies, and them that trouble my soul; for I am thy servant, and will surely
rejoice in thy name and patiently look for thee.

O Lord, thou art my help and refuge, my heart does rejoice in thee, and I
doeput my trust in thy holy name.

Give ear to me (O merciful God) and infuse the brightness of thy wisdom into
my mind, that I may receive thee, and have fruition of thee, and see the light
of thy wisdom; that I may know thee truly, and ^aithfully love thee. Thou (O
Lord) have sent redemption to thy people; thou have commanded thy Testament not
to be violated, but kept for ever; thy name is holy and terrible, and ought
still to be feared and served in all reverence: for the fear of the Lord is
the beginning of wisdom; understanding is good to all such as do exercise it
in his fear.

All wisdom comes from thee, O Lord, who art the brightness of everlasting
light, the glass of eternal Majesty, who art clear without any spot. O
Orient brightness of the eternal Light, and Sun of Justice, come and
lighten me that sit in darkness and in the shadow of death. Cast me not away
from thy face, and take not from me thy holy Spirit; restore me to the
gladness of thy salvation, strengthen me with thy Spirit, and lighten mine
cles that I never sleep in death, lest mine enemy at any time say I have
prevailed against him.

They that persecute me will rejoice if I be moved, but I trust in thy mercy;
my heart shall rejoice in thy salvation, I will sing unto thee (O Lord) who
have given me good things, and I will sing to the name of the Highest, who
teaches sobriety, right^ousnesse, and virtue, then the which nothing is more
commodious in the life of Man.

O glorious King, who art always praised among thy chosen, and yet no man can
speak so worthily of thee as thy Majesty requires: Thou Lord who art among
us, and whose holy name is called upon by us, forsake us not, but at the
extreme day of judgment vouchsafe to place me among thy chosen servants;
mercifully look upon my frailty, and favorably give me a taste of thy
celestial wisdom; that when I have tasted of the marvelous sweetness
thereof, I may despise all worldly vanity, and continually with a burning
desire cleave unto thee, who art the cheifest goodness that may be, who live
and raignest one GOD, World without end. Amen.

A Prayer for the King.
O Almighty GOD, King of Kings, Lord of Lords, which by thy divine ordinance
have appointed temporal Rulers to govern thy People according to equity and
Justice, and to live among them as a loving Father among natural Children, to
the advancement of the good, and punishment of the evil. We most humbly
beseech thee favorably to behold JAMES thy servant our most gracious King and
Governor, and so breathe into his heart through thy holy Spirit that wisdom
that is ever about the Throne of thy Majesty, whereby he may be provoked,
moved, and stirred to love, fear, and serve thee, to seek thy glory, to
banish idolatry, superstition, and hypocrifie out of this Realm, and
unfeignedly to advance thy holy and pure Religion among us his Subjects, to the
example of other foreign Nations. O Lord defend him from his enemies, send him
a long and pros^erous life among us; and give him grace not only in his own
person godlilie and justly to rule, but also to appoint such Magistrates under
him, as may be like affected both toward thy holy Word, and toward the
Commonwealth; that we his Subjects living vnd^^ his Dominion in all
god^^nesse, peace, and wealth, may pass the time of this our short Pilgrimage
in thy fea^e and service, to the glory of thy blessed name, which alone is
worthy of all honor for ever and ever Amen.

A de^oute Prayer to our LORD.
O Good and gracious Lord, most merciful and blessed Father, O sweet Savior
jesus Christ, I wretched sinner that am vile earth and ashes, do yield thee
most humble and hearty thanks, for that it has pleased thee of thy
marvelous humility, patience, and love toward man kind, to descend from the
high Throne of Heaven, to be incarnate by the Holy Ghost, and borne of the
Virgin Marie, and here to suffer trouble and pain for our sakes.

I do beseech thee for thy bitter death and passion deliver me from all evil,
and from the everlasting pains of hell; and vouchsafe through thy great mercy
and goodness to lead me whither thou did lead the Thief crucified with
thee. And I beseech thee through thy clemency to vouchsafe unto me (O Lord
God, King of Heaven and Earth) the joys prepared for thy chosen, and so
direct, sanctify, and govern my heart, my thoughts, my words and deeds in thy
sacred Law, by keeping thy Commandments, that here and ever through thy help
(O Savior of the World) I may be safe and free, and by thy bitter death and
passion may be brought to the glory of the resurrection, and so remain in
everlasting life. Amen.

A Prayer in temptation*
O Merc^full Lord, and Savior jesus Christ, the only refuge of a desolate and
afflicted soul: O God thou that have made me and redeemed me, in whom ^ll
things are possible unto me, and without whom I am able to do nothing thou
see who I am that here prostrate my prayers, and pour out my heart unto
thee; what I would have, and what is fittest for me thou know. My soul is
buried (...) and blood, and would be ^^^ne dissolved and come unto thee. I am
urged against my will and violently drawn to think that which from my-heart I
detest, and to have in mind the poison and bane of my soul.

O Lord thou know me, for thy hands have framed me, and with flesh and
skin thou have clothed me; and lo this flesh which thou have given me,
draws me to my ruin, and fights against the spirit: if thou helpest not I
am overcome, if thou forsakest me, I must needs faint; why do thou set me
contrary unto thee, and make me grievous and a burden unto my self?

Did thou create me to cast me away? Did thou redeem me to damn me
for ever? It had been good for me never to have been borne, if I were borne
to perish. O my most merciful Father, where is thy old and wonted mercies?
where is thy gracious sweetness and love toward me become? how long shall
mine enemy rejoice over me, and humble my life upon earth, and place me in
darkness like the dead of the World? What am I Lord that thou set me to
fight alone against so mighty, subtle, and cruel enemies, that never cease
to bid me a p^rpetuall battle?

O Lord why do thou show thy might against a leaf, that is tossed with
every wind, and persecutest a dry stubble? will thou therefore cast away the
work of thy hands? will thou banish me from thy face, and take thy holy
Spirit clean from me? Alas O my good Lord, whither shall I go from thy face?
or whither shall fly from thy Spirit? or shall I fly from the incensed, but
to the appeased? whither from thee as just, but unto thee as merciful? Do
with me Lord that which is good in thine eyes, for thou will do all things in
righteous judgment; one^y Lord I desire to remember I am but flesh and blood,
sraile of my self, and impotent to resist; show thy self a Savior unto me,
and either take away mine enemies, or grant me grace that without wound or
fault, by thee and with thee I may overcome them, sweet Lord, Amen.

FINIS.
A Table to find out the principal Prayers contained in this Book.
THe way how to commend our selves to GOD in the (...) a^ our vprising. Page
285. A Prayer before we settle our selves to our Devotions. p 287. A Morning
Prayer p. 291. Another Prayer for the Morning. p. 296. Another Morning Prayer.
p. 308. A short Prayer for the Morning p. 312. A Meditation to be used before
thou go to bed. p. 314. A Prayer for the Evening. p 322. A Prayer for the
Night. p. 333 A Prayer to GOD for grace, and to despise the vanity of the World
p. 338. A Prayer to GOD to defend us from evil company, and to keep ou^
tongues from uttering ill words. p. 346. A Prayer to GOD for b^ great goodness
unto Man p. 354. A Prayer to GOD to deliver us from our ghostly enemies. p.
357. A Prayer to GOD daily to be said. p 358. A Prayer to be used at all
times. p. 360 A Prayer to be daily said unto our Lord Jesus Christ. p. 362. A
prayer for the remission of sins. p. 367. A general pr^yer for all kind of
sin. p. 380. A (...) Faith. p. 3^^. A prayer unto GOD, that we may live in his
(...), and that he will turn his (...) p. 394. A (...) for (...) with their
duty 400. A (...) for children and their duty. p. 404. A prayer against
who^^dome. p. 410. A prayer for a Woman with child. p. 414. A Thanksgiving unto
God (...) deliverance. p. 41^. A prayer for a si^ke Man p. 421. A prayer to be
said before the receiuin^ of the holy Communion. p. ^24. A thanksgiving after
the receiving of ^ holy Communion p. ^38. A prayer to (...) said^ at the
receiving of the mystery of Christ's Body in the Communion. p 441. A prayer to
be said at the receiving of the mystery of Christ's blood in the holy
Communion p. 442. A morning salutation to GOD for wisdom, for grace, and
forgiveness of sins p. ^44. A prayer for the King. p. 454. A (...) prayer to
our Lord. p. (...) A prayer in (...) p. ^59.
FINIS.

