POSITIONS LATELY HELD BY the L. DV PERRON, Bishop of Eureux, against the
sufficiency and perfection of the Scriptures, maintaining the necessity and
authority of unwritten Traditions.

Very learnedly answered and confuted by D. Daniell Tillenus, Professor of
Divinity in the University of Sedan.

With a defense of the sufficiency and perfection of the holy Scriptures by
the same Author.

Faithfully translated.

PROVE. 30.5.6. Every word of God is pure, he is a shield to those that trust
in him: put nothing to his word, least be reprove thee, and thou be found a
liar. Aust. de unit. Eccles. cap. 3 sIn the Scriptures we are to seek the
Church, by them to discuss our controversies. Chrysostom. in 2. These. 2. Hom. 3.
All is clear and plain in holy Scripture, whatsoever is necessary for us is
manifest. Printed at London by L. S. for Nathaniell Butter. 1606.

TO THE READER
WHen our adversaries perceive them selves convinced by the Scripture, they do
as they of whom Irenaeus and Tertullian speak: they set upon the Scripture it
self: accusing it of obscurity, ambiguitie and imperfection, and maintaining
that the truth cannot therein be found, by such as be ignorant of Tradition,
and that the great mysteries of Faith were not by the Apostles committed to his
disciples, but by word of mouth, and not by writing: In a word all that the
ancient Fathers recite of their gainsayers, we see now a days practiced by
ours, who not content, with those old reproaches, do defame the scripture
with many contumelies, calling it the book of heretics, the black Gospel,
Incke-Diuinitie, leaden ruler, nose of wax, Theramenes his buskin, the apple
of discord, Sphynxes riddle, a sword in a mad-mans hand, and other like
terms, full of injuries and blaspemies, wherewith they defame the book of
the covenant and testament of the Son of God, which the ancients called the
mirror of divine grace and man's misery, the touchstone of truth, the
displayer of vanity, the Squire, Rule, and most exact balance of all things,
the treasure of all virtue, a Shop of remedies for all evils, the sacred Anchor
in time of tempest, a strong Army against heretics, a safe retrait against
all dangers, a happy rest after all travails, the sure and only stay in time
of trial, the Pillar and foundation of our faith: the most part of which
titles, and the efficacy of them all, is attributed by our adversaries to
their Traditions, which some of them dare even prefer and oppose unto the
scripture. Lind. lib. 2 panopl. c. 5
Witness he who calls it the true Moly conseruing the Christian faith,
against the Enchauntments of Heretics, because Catholics (says he) would
be soon, poisoned with these Enchauntments (he means the Scriptures) if
they did not use the Moly or antidote of Traditions.

Pigh. de Eccl. Hic. lib. 1. c. 4
Another having affirmed that the authority of Ecclesiastical tradition has
more force and efficacy to assure our faith in every controversy, than the
Scripture; adds further, that if those of his side would remember, that
Heretics ought not to be convinced by the Scripture, their matters would go
a great deal better with them: but having endeavored to overcome Luther by the
Scripture, for to make ostentation of their good wit and great knowledge,
all is come to naught etc.

Truly it is an horrible combustion in Christendom, to see the Scriptures,
which make us know Christ and become christians, used so vnvvorthily. No
nation ever took this liberty unto themselves, to defame the books containing
the laws either of their belief or policy. The books of the Sybills, the
laws of the twelve Tables, and other like vvritings were held sacred among
the Romans. The Greeks, and Pagans did bear all honor, to the laws of their
Legislators, and to their Rituall books, as to this day the Jews do to
their Thalmud, and the Turks to their Alcoran. But among those that would be
called Christians, he that can cast most reproaches against the holy Scripture,
he that can observe or imagine therein most imperfections, will be esteemed
more fine witted, and more zealous in the faith then others: yea, there has
been found one, who of late has dared by vvriting to maintain and publish,
that invocation or calling on the name of Christ Jesus, is no more commanded
in the Scripture, then the calling on the Saints departed, that thereby he
might make the Inno^^^tion on the Author of life, to depend as well on the
Romish tradition, as on the authority of the book of life.

It being my chance of late to meet with the L. of Perro^ Bishop of Eureux, and
to fall into some dispute with him, concerning this matter, he confesses unto
me, that the most part of the articles in controversy betvveene the Romish
Church and ours, have no demonstratiue proof in the Scripture: As the
Sacrifice of the Mass, Invocation on Saints, Prayer for the dead,
worshipping of Images, Auricular confession, unction with the Crisme, the
necessity of satisfactions, the Popes Indulgences, etc. But he alleged, that
from the time of the old Testament, the Jews did believe also many things,
as necessary to salvation, which notvvithsta^ding in their times were not
contained in the Scripture: In which point I found him not to agree with
many great Doctors of his side, who confess that the Scripture of the old
Testament contains all the God knevv to be expedient and sufficient for the
salvation of the Israelites: but that it is not so in the doctrine of the new
testament, which (say they) should not be vvritte^ on paper, but preached by
word of mouth, engraven in the hearts of the hearers, and so comit^^ed unto
posterity without writing, alleging to this (...) that which Jeremy says
cap. 31. and S. Paul. 2. Cor. 3. The sa^^ L. of Perron dissenteth also from his
other Doctors of whom some have written even in the Council of Trent,
touching some points, which he maintained might be proved by the scri^^tures,
though they deny it, namely transubstantiation, the mer^^^ of works, the Popes
supreamacie, Purgatory, etc. And being certain, that these articles have no
more ground in Scripture than the rest, we may well say of them which believe
the^, that which Tertullia^ said of some in his time, they believe without the
scriptures, that they might believe against the scripture.

Now the conference having dured certain days, and finding more illusion on
his part than instruction, I prayed him to continue it by writing, that the
objections of the one, and the solutions of the other appearing on paper,
every man might at leisure consider, the knot of the one and the keen cutting
of the other, showing him that more fruit would come forth of a permanent
writing, than from dazelling and vanishing words, that the one remained subject
to the touch and balance, and that in the other, a subborned flatterer gave,
and the ignorant hearer took oftentimes false Alarmes: But I could never
obtain it at his hands, who well considered that if he should gather
together in paper, what he had scattered in the air, his distinctions would
appear to be more prestigious in the one, than they seem to be specious in
the other, and that it would be as hard a thing for him to vnwrappe himself,
from selfe-contradictions by the pen, as it is easy for him to dazell and
entangle the ignorant by his tongue. He made account also, perhaps, that his
cause being grounded on the Word unwritten, it could not well be defended by
the word written.

Notwithstanding having intelligence since, that he had compiled a little
writing on this subject, in favor of some whom he was desirous to subvert: I
have taken pains to get a Copy of it, to which I have made this answer,
which may serve in st^ade of a Resultate or repetition of our Verbal
Conference: at which were present fevve others than his greatest friends,
who then made such acclamations, and since have sowed such reports thereof
as pleased them.

But here, not being required the applause of men, nor any tickeling conceit
of vanity, I entreat the Readeer to aim with me in this vvriting at the
glory of God only, and the manifestation of his truth, for the teaching
whereof Saint Athanasius witnesses that the Scripture is sufficient. Let us
acknovvledge it then for Judge, Athanas. (...)
and (...) us reverence it as Mistres, vvhilest our adversaries take it for
party, and pursue it as an enemy.

The answer of D. Daniell Tillenus to the Bishop of Eureux his treatice; whereby
he endeauoreth to prove the insufficiency and imperfection of the holy
Scripture and the necessity and authority of unwritten traditions.
The bishop of Eureux.
THE unwritten word of God, The B. ^ on.
which we call Apostolic tradition, is of the same force and authority as the
written word is, and without it, the Scripture alone is not suffieient to
confute all heresies.

The Jews did believe, when the body of the law of Moses was given unto them,
many things, which either were not contained in the five books of Moses, or
did not appear unto them to be therein contained; As the immortality of the
soul, the resurrection of the body, the last judgment, Paradise, Hell, the
Creation and distinction of the orders of Angels, the being and creation of
devils: and many other points, which they could not know by humane science but
it must needs be that they received them by revelation from God; and therefore
that they had another way for to derive and conserve the word of god, besides
that of the Scripture.

D. Tillenus his answer.
To him that would hear none but Fathers speak, it may be answered in a word,
as one of the number says: Hillar. i^ Psalm. 1^
Whatsoever is not contained in the book of the Law, we ought not to know it.
He that speaks so, would not have us seek that elsewhere, which is not found
in the Scripture. We say that all that is necessary to salvation, touching
those and all other points, is contained in the scripture, either in express
terms, or in necessary consequence and true analogue. Genesis 17^ Exodus 6.^ Exodus
20^
In the writings of Moses we find, that God makes a covenant with the
Hebrews, that he promises to be their God, and the God of their seed, to
exercise mercy upon them unto thousand generations, that is to say for ever: to
dwell in the midst of them, (...). 10. (...). 29.
to keep them as the apple of his eye. In them is Israel called happy, for
that it was sa^ed by the lord God. 7.9.
Jacob being ready to depart out of this life, comforted himself in the
expectation of the salvation of the lord, to show that he went to take
possession of a b^tter country; He and his Father called themselves strangers
in the land of Canaan, which notwithstanding was promised them for inheritance;
Therefore they believed the true country, that is to say, Paradise. This
consequent is not only necessary, but also manifest, by the testimony of the
Apostle, who draws it from this place of Scripture, not from any unwritten
Tradition, (...) 1.9.13.
when he says, that they which so speak, show plainly that they seek a
Country, which is the thing that Du Perron can not find in the books of
Moses: although we find in them that the wicked and unfaithful that defended
lies against the truth, (...) ^.11.
did wish it. For what else means that false prophet Balaam, when he says: O
that my soul might dye the death of the righteous, or that my end might be
like theirs? This wish expresses clearly enough, the apprehe^sio^ he had of
the last judgment. (...) ^.1.
When Moses calls the Israelites the children of the Lord their God,
forbidding them to sorrow for the dead as infidells, he speaks no less
manifestly of the resurrection, (...) 4.13.
than S. Paul, when he exhorts the Thessalonians not to lament for the dead,
as they do that have no hope. (...) 3.2.
When Moses says that God holds all his saints in his hands, he says the
same thing that is said by other that have written after him, That the souls
of the righteous are in the hands of the Lord: and that they commit their
souls unto him, (...) ^.1. 19. 2.32. 24.^. Iud. ^.29. ^0.19.
as unto a faithful creator. So when he speaks of the book of life, of the
taking up of Henoch, which Tertullian calls Candidatum aeternitatis: when he
says, that those that fear God and keep his commandments, shall be happy
for ever: when he sets before the Jews, life and death, blessing and
cursing: when he threatens them with the fire of the Lords wrath, Deuteronomy. ^
which shall burn even to the bottom of hell, shall consume the earth with
her increase, and set on fire the foundations of the mountains: When (I say)
he writes all these things, he shows clearly enough the immortality of the
soul, the resurrection of the body, the last judgment, Paradise and He^l,
which points are unseparably linked together.

Jf these testimonies seem not clear enough to the Bishop of Eureux, who
confesses nevertheless that in Daniell, and the other Prophets that have
written since Moses, there is some found; Let him consider, that they which
among the Corinthians denied the resurrection, 1. Cor^ ^
shifted off the one as well as the other: Which shows, that if those that
do err in some point, will not suffer themselves to be vanquished by the
scripture: that comes not through any obscurity and imperfection of which
they falsely accuse it, but from their own malice and blindness.

Moreover, it is to be noted, that it has pleased God orderly to distribute
the revelation of his will, of his promises, and of his covenant, by certain
degrees, increasing always the measure of this revelation, as the age of the
world increased. This economy is clearly observed in the Scripture, if we
mark therein the degrees from Adam to Abraham, from Abraham to Moses, from
Moses to David, from David to the captivity of Babylon, and from the captivity
of Babylon to Jesus Christ, who was the light it self. For this cause the time
of the Jewish Church is called the time of Infancy, ours on the contrary, the
fulness of time. If then the Scripture of the old Testament were a sufficient
light to the Jews, though it was not so clear as ours, how much more ought we
to content our selves, with that light which we have by the addition of the new
Testament?

The B. of Eureux.
For as touching the book of Job, to omit that the most part of the Jews
and Mercerus with them, and the principal Caluinists do deny, that the place
that is there, is to be understood of the Resurrection: there is no assured
testimony, that the book of Job was extant, then when the Law of Moses was
given: contrariwise most men think it was written since the Transmigration of
Babylon; which Ezechiell seems to confirm, saying, Noah, Daniell, Job. As
for Daniell, and the other Prophets it is well enough known, that they were
more then seven or eight hundred years since.

D. Tillenus his answer.
As for the book of Job, in which the resurrection of the body, and by
consequent the immortality of the soul are found in express terms,
whatsoever Du Perron says, who wrongfully attributes unto us, the false
exposition of some Anabaptists: We learn indeed of the Jews, that Moses
having found this book in the country of Madian, where his father Law was,
brought into Egypt, to propound it unto the Jews as an example of patience in
their servitude. But when we say, that this history happened before Moses wrote
the Law, we are grounded on good consequence drawn from the scripture, which
teaches us, that after the publishing of the law, it was not lawful to offer
sacrifice else where than before the Arc or Tabernacle, without special
commandment: So that if Job had lived after the law of Moses neither would
he have transgressed the Law in offering sacrifice, nor God have approved his
sacrifice. The age also that the scripture gives to Job, makes us believe
that he was before Moses, ^ 10.
who witnesses that those of his time lived not so long. Du Perrons
conjecture, who will have him to have lived before the captivity of Babylon, is
frivolous; he groundeth it on this, that Ezechiell names together Daniell and
Job, ^ 14.
whence it would follow also, that Noah should have lived in those times, for
the Prophet names him with the other.

The B. of Eureux.
And as for our savior Christ's argument against the Saduces, it proves
indeed the immortality of the soul, and not the other points: But that
argument till his time was unknown to the Jews, who for this cause did admire
the infiniteness of his wisdom: And therefore it must needs follow that they
had received the belief of it, for to hold it for an article of faith, by
another means than by the reading of the books of Moses: to wit, by
Tradition from Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and other Fathers.

D. Tillenus his answer.
He shows here, that he has as little insight into the books of the
Evangelists, as in those of Moses: he says that this argument proves indeed
the immortality of the soul, but not the other points, that is to say the
Resurrection of the body. And notwithstanding Saint Matthew says in express
terms, that our Lord cited that place of Moses, Math. 22 Exodus 3.^
for to prove the Resurrection of the dead, and that by this only argument he
stopped his enemies mouths, who chose rather to be silent, than to continue to
blaspheme. Jf until then it had been unknown to the Jews, as Du Perron
says, Yet that shows not any insufficiency in the scripture; rather indeed
the ignorance of the Church till those times, and the negligence of those,
that would not vouchsafe to try and sound the depth of the scriptures, Ioh.
5.3^
as our Lord Jesus Christ did therein exhort them.

I know not why he finds so great obscurity in this argument of our Savior:
For so great a Philosopher as he, should have better perceived therein the light
of that Philosophical maxim which says, When the whole is propounded, the
parts of the same are also propounded: Put then, that God is the god of
Abraham, of Isaac and of Jacob, as says Moses; Exodus 3 ^
It follows therefore that he is their god both in soul and Body: which are
the principal parts of every man. But seeing the Saduces could not find, or
would not search the Resurrection of the dead in the books of Moses;
wherefore then did they believe it as little by Tradition? Why did not our
Lord and Savior send them thereunto? Wherefore did he draw so obscure an
argument (as Du Perron will have it) from the Scripture, if there had been any
manifest reasons in Tradition? ^ 22.9.29. 6.29. to ^d.
Wherefore does he attribute the cause of their error to their ignorance of
the Scripture? And truly Abraham referred the brethren of the wicked rich man,
to keep them out of hell, not only to the Prophets, but even to Moses also,
15.1. ^s. 12.3.
where they might see how God had said to Abraham, that he would be his
buckler, and his exceeding great reward: that in his seed should all Nations
be blessed: Which doctrine conteyneth the foundation of the substance of the
doctrine of salvation.

Now put case that the above named points could not be found so manifest in the
books of Moses, yet could not that conclude any thing against the sufficiency
and perfection of the Scriptures, which we have in the Christian church: For,
as god revealed his will to the first Patriarchs by word of mouth, for to
instruct them in his knowledge, before there was any Scripture; so did he
continue the same manner of revelation in Moses time, speaking to him as
familiarly as a man speaks to his friend, instructing him of all matters: yet
never giving him this liberty, to ordain any thing concerning religion of his
own authority: Also Moses very religiously contained himself within the
limits of obedience, not only in the least Ceremonies, but also in the
public administration or government, wherein notwithstanding, it seems he
might have usurped a little more power: but we see he would determine nothing
against him that had broken the Sabbath; but caused him to be put in prison,
till God had declared unto him, 15.34.
with what manner of punishment the Transgressor should be punished.
Contrariwise the Romish Church presumes, to ordain an infinite number of
things, as well in Religion as in Policy, which they are not only unable to
prove by any Scripture, but which also, even their pretended Apostolic
Traditions cannot show; in defense whereof their mayntainers set forth the
aucthority of the Church, which they say cannot err. Now although the Church
of the Jews had Oracles, visions, divine dreams, Vrim and Thummim, and
Prophets extraordinarily sent of God, by which means (now ceased since God
has spoken unto us by his Son) it might be more fully instructed in all
things: Yet notwithstanding the holy Scripture is always recommended unto them
above all. Hebr. 1.
God himself though he spoke to Ioshuah by word of mouth confirming him in his
charge, notwithstanding he commended unto him only the book of the Law, Josh.
1.7
not promising him his assistance and blessing, but on condition that he should
do and observe all that is contained therein. After that, so often as the
reformation of the Church was intended, there was never any other pattern
taken than the scripture, 2. Chro. ^ 2 Chro. ^ 2. Chro. ^ 2. King, ^ 2, King. 2
Nehe, 8.
as appears by the examples of Iosaphat, Ioas, Ezechias, Josias, Ezra,
Nehemias, etc. Contrariwise when Amon and Manasses would divert the people from
the service of god to idolatry, they hid the book of the Law, that it might no
more be read publicly as god by Moses had ordained.

As touching the creation of Angels, the being and creation of devils, which du
Perron very improperly distinguishes, as if devils were not angels at the
beginning, or as if god had created them by themselves, so wicked as they are:
there is revealed in the books of Moses as much of it, as god has judged to be
expedient for the simplicity of that people. To tell what day, or in what order
they were created, we know it no more by Tradition tha^ by the scripture,
though it be augme^ted since Moses; from whom we gather their Creation, when he
says, that the heavens and the earth were finished and all their host. Genesis 2,
^ Genesis 28 Deuteronomy. 3^ Gal, 3.1
In the vision of Jacobs ladder, and elsewhere, we read their apparitions and
mynistery; which the Jews, in the time of Moses knew rather by their
experience, than by Tradition, since the Law was published by them. As for the
supposed distinction of their orders, Areopagita speaks with such assurance,
as if he had been present at it all, though even he that was rapt up into the
third heaven, not only forbeareth to speak of it, (...). 12.4.
but also witnesses that it is not lawful to reveal these secrets. We say
with S. Augustine that when disputation is had of a thing very obscure, without
certain and clear proof of the divine scriptures, the supposition of man is
to be kept in, not leaning more on the one side, ^^st. cont. ^. it.
than the other: He sends us not in this case to unwritten Tradition.

Irenaeus, who should know more of Apostolic tradition, that any of our time,
defied certain Gnostics in his days, swollen with I know not what knowledge
taken out of the scripture, in reckoning up and describing the distinctions,
orders and preheminences of Angels, Archangells, Powers, Thrones, Dominations:
and in a word all those things which the Church of Rome braggeth she knows,
and which this holy Father propounded to his adversaries as impossible to
comprehend.

Touching the devil, Moses teaches the Jews in the scripture, (...) s. 3.
that he was a liar, a tempter and seducer from the beginning. That the seed
of the woman should bruise his head, etc. If there had been need of knowing
more, he could have given them the knowledge of it, by a more authentical and
true Oracle, than that of Rome is. I know not whether du Perron would
maintain, that the nine orders or degrees which the Schoolmen have made among
devils, in imitation of the Angelical Hierarchy, are from Apostolic
tradition.

The B. of Eureux.
They had besides this many other things, whereof the institution is not found
neither in the books of Moses, nor in any other book of the olld Testament: As
the institution of the order of Exorcists, who by a certain authentical
prescript form from God did conjure wicked spirits, as our Lord bears them
witness, saying: (...) 12.27.
If I cast out devils in the name of Beelzebub, in whose name do your children
cast them out? And for this reason they shall be your judges: Which children
Calvin proves, that they were the Exorcists of the Jews, such as those which
are spoken of in the 19. chapter of the Acts.

D. Tillenus his answer.
The knowledge of these things, either is not necessary to Salvation, or is
found in the Scripture by analogy or by consequence. If the Exorcists of whom
Saint Matthew speaks, be such as those of whom speaks saint Luke, Math. ^
Acts 19
(as Du Perron has it from Calvin) there was no divine institution: For they
in the Acts, were certain vagabonds that abused the name of Jesus, for which
they sped very ill. We know that in the beginning of the Christian Church, this
miraculous gift of casting out devils was usual there, but we find not that
they which had it, in the exercising thereof did use any mystical prescript
form: but that they did simply conjure the Ener^^
Possessed in the name of God: whence we gather that such as in the Jewish
Church had this gift, and did use it lawfully, brought thereunto none other
mystery, than the calling on the name of the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob,
which form is found evidently enough in the Scripture.

The B. of Eureux.
They had the miracle of the Poole, the water whereof the Angel troubled,
which was a figure of Baptism, that should heal us of our infirmities, after
that the Angel of the great counsel, which is our Lord Jesus Christ, was
gone down into the water. Now that this was not any illusions of the devil,
and superstition for those that have recourse thereunto, but a true miracle
instituted of god, whereunto credit might be given: it could not be known, but
by tradition.

D. Tillenus his answer.
The miracle of the Poole was visible, as the miracles of Jesus Christ, the
Apostles, and the Prophets before them were: John. 5.^
It tended not to establish or confirm any false doctrine, in which case the
caution that Du Perron requires had been necessary. Nehem: ^
Nehemias says that the gate of this Poole was hallowed, when he City was
reedified, after the return from captivity. Whence we may conjecture, that God
then adorned it with this miracle, in token of his approving the restoring of
the City. And the word Beth-chesda, which was the name of the Poole in the
Syriack tongue, signifies the house of benignity, because God there did
visibly show his goodness, in healing all the diseases of his people.

The B. of Eureux.
The custom also which they had to deliver a man at Easter, which was a figure
of the deliverance of mankind by the Passover of our Savior, was a Tradition.

D. Tillenus his answer.
The custom to deliver a man at Ester, was rather a corruption of Justice,
brought in by infidel Governors, than any necessary point to salvation,
revealed and commanded of god to the faithful.

The B. of Eureux.
The Apostles also ever anon allege Tradition, be it by way of History, or by
way of Argument.

Saint Paul says, that Moses in the act of the solemnity of the covenant,
mingled water in the blood of the Testament, wherewith he sprinkled the
people: which was a figure, that we should be sprinkled with the blood of
Christ, which is the blood of our covenant. Nevertheless this mixture of water
with blood, not set down by Moses, nor by any other author of the olld
Testament.

D. Tillenus his answer.
Moses made not express mention of some ceremonies, which the Apostle
recites; (...): 19:21:
but we learn them better by analogy and consequence of Scripture, than by
unwritten Tradition. It was commanded to use water in all sacrifices: And if
that was requisite in particular men's sacrifices, how much more in the
ratification of the public covenant whereof Moises speaks? (...) ^4:


He names not likewise in express words the he goats, purple wool and
hysope: but he says, that the children of Israel offered burnt offerings, and
then peace offerings, or offerings of thanksgiving. Now the whole burnt
offerings, which were expiatory for sin, could not be but of goats, Leuit:
and 16:8^
as the scripture teaches elsewhere. So we see that god commands they should
offer unto him purple wool: Hysope was commanded before they came out of
Egypt, Leuit ^ Numb
and after was ordained to serve always for an Jnstrument to the sprinklings;
whereunto David alludeth, Psalm. 5
when he prays that god would purge him with hysope, that he might be clean.
Now seeing god would that these things should be ordinary under the Law, it
appears by Analogy, that he had caused them to be as an example of the other
that should com after.

The B. of Eureux.
He sprinkled also the book of the Covenant with the same blood, says saint
Paul, which was a figure that the book of the Law should take his force from
the blood Jesus Christ. And yet nevertheless of this sprinckling of the book,
there is not any mention made in the olld Testament.

D. Tillenus his answer.
Touching the sprinckling of the book, Exodus 2^
we gather by that which is said in the same place, that Moses having
sprinkled the Altar, took the book, which (as appears) was upon the Altar,
with which it was in like manner sprinkled.

The B. of Eureux.
He says that the golden pot of Manna, and the rod of Aaron were put into the
Arc, which we know was the place of adoration: And notwithstanding, not one
book of the olld testament makes any mention of it.

D. Tillenus his answer.
As for the pot of Manna, Moses says, Exodus 1 Numb^ 1. King ^ 2: Chro^
that it was put before the face of the Lord, that is, before the Arc and not
with in it: the same is said of Aarons rod. And elsewhere the scripture says
in express words, that there was nothing in the Ark, (...) 4.
but the two tables of stone. That which is said in the Epistle to the Hebrews
is not against it: For the relative En hi, is not to be referred to the word
Kibotou Arc, though it be nearest to it; but to the word, Scene Tabernacle.
And of such like constructions, there are found many other examples in
Scripture: otherwise there should be a manifest contradiction, which is that du
Perron would fain find if he could, in the Scripture.

The B. of Eureux.
Saint Jude declares the Angels combat with the Devil, about the burial of
Moses, as a thing euidentlye known among the Jews: and thereof frames an
argument against those that blasphemed dignities, reciting the very words of
the Angel. Now this was a tradition, which could not have taken his original
of any humane doctrine, but from the pure revelation and word of God.

D. Tillenus his answer.
The knowledge of the combat of the Angel with the devil, about the body of
the Moses, is not so come by Tradition, but that we learn some thing of it
even from the Scripture: (...) 3:2:
for there is no doubt but that saint Jude aimed at the place of Zachary,
where we read the same words: The Lord rebuke thee o Satan. The Prophet calls
him the Angel of the Lord, whom the Apostle calls Michael the Archangell:
both of them do mean the Prince of angels, that is to say, Jesus Christ, who
has combatted and overcome Satan, and won the body of Moses, that is, has
accomplished the mystery of our redemption, figured by the shadows of Moses,
(...) ^2:17:
whereof Christ is the true body, as the Scriptur says. And in that he durst
not denounce the sentence of curse, it derogateth nothing from his deity and
Majesty. For we must consider him in this place as Mediator, in which quality,
he is subject and obedient to his Father, not exercising his Allmightines.

If the L. of Perron will not admit this exposition, let him know then, that the
reason, the apostle draws from this unwritten history, is found very well
grounded on the Scripture, Exodus, 22.^
which in express words forbids to curse or speak evil of Princes. But
the Church of Rome does profit very ill by this Tradition of saint Jude: For
first it exposes and prostituteth all the bodies and relics of Saints
departed, and suborneth false ones too in their room, to cause the people to
commit Jdolatry, in stead of resisting the devil when he brings forth such
inventions, as the Archangell did; who according to the common exposition of
this place, fought with him, when he would have discovered the sepulcher of
Moses, which God had of purpose hid, that he might take away from his people
all occasion of idolatry: and secondly, Deuteronomy 3.4^
it takes liberty to it self to blaspheme and tread under feet the greatest
dignities of the earth, as the Popes have impiously and arrogantly showed it
even to Kings and Emperors.

The B. of Eureux.
In like manner he makes mention of the prophecy of Enoch touching the last
coming of god in the day of judgment. And this was a word of god, which was
profitable yea necessary to be believed of all those to whom the notification
thereof should com: and notwithstanding that Enoch had ever written any thing,
it is no way manifest by the scripture.

D. Tillenus his answer.
The prophecy of Enoch, which the same Apostle alleges touching the last
judgment, is not only not repugned by the scripture, but is also therein more
clearly expressed, than the profane contemners of God would have it. We
receive most willingly all Traditions, which have like conformity and
approbation in scripture, as this prophecy: We confess that all particular
deeds and sayings are not contained therein; For Singularium nulla est scientia:
but the reason and ground of all these things are found therein; and the
sentence of saint John remains true, though all that our Lord has done be
not written, yet that which is written, John: 20^30:31:
is sufficient for us to believe that Jesus is that Christ, and that in
beleeuinge we might have life in his name. I remember that in the verbal
conference the B. of Eureux accused those of our side of a most wicked
falsifying of this place, for having translated the word, tavta; these things:
in stead of referring it only to miracles, of which alone, he maintained that
S. John meant. And because I could not get from him any clear answer, as then,
on expositio^s of S. Augustine and saint Cyrill, that I alleged, wholly
agreeable unto ours, I will in this place rehearse them. ^t Tract. (...). 45.
The first says, though Jesus had done very many things, yet all were not
written: but that which seemed sufficient for the salvation of believers was
chosen to be written, The other speaks yet more clearly: (...) lib. 2. in
(...) cap. vlt.
All the things (says he) that Jesus did are not written; but only those
things that the writers thought sufficient, as well for doctrine as for manners,
etc.

The B. of Eureux.
The apostles do not only give us examples of the use of traditions, ^s. 2,
15.
but also commandment. Observe, says Saint Paul, the traditions that you
have received of us, be it by word, or by our Epistle. In which place those of
Geneua have taken out of their French Bible, the word Tradition, which is in
the Greek, and in the Latin, and have put insteade thereof Instruction. To
which it cannot be answered, that saint Paul restrains the generality of this
proposition, to the traditions only which have since been written: For it is
in consequence of a tradition, that he had given them concerning the cause,
that hindered the coming of Antichrist, which was never written, that he
frames this general law. And in this sense also do saint Basil, S.
Epiphanius and saint Chrysostom interpret it.

D. Tillenus his answer.
When saint Paul wrote this Epistle, there was scarce any scripture of the new
Testament: For after our adversaries own account, no Evangelists yet had
written, and saint Paul had than written, but his former Epistle to the
Thes^^^nians Seeing then, these two Epistles did not contain all the doctrine of
Christ, necessary to be known, the Apostle fitly exhorts the Thessalonians to
observe, not only what he had before written unto them, but also what he had
taught them by word of mouth. But does it follow therefore that none of that
should afterward be written? Du Perron says, it does, because it is in
consequence of a Tradition, that he had given them, touching the cause that
hindered the coming of Antichrist, which was never written, that he frames
this general Law. But that is altogether false, 2. These. 2.^
we need but look into the text, to know of what Traditions the Apostle
speaks: We ought always, says he, give thanks unto God for you, because he
has chosen you to salvation, through the sanctification of the spirit, and the
faith of truth, whereunto he has called you, by our Gospel, to obtain the
glory of our Lord Jesus Christ. VVhereupon he adds; Wherefore keep the
Traditions, that is to say, these instructions of truth, which you have
learned, and which I have given you, either by word of mouth or by our Epistle.
By the consequence Du Perron draws, it should follow, that, part of this
tradition, touching the hindering of Antichrists coming, should be written:
which was done, and therefore he overthrows his own exposition. Furthermore,
though all he says were of force, as it is of none: yet could he but prove
thereby the traditions of the Apostles, and not an infinite number of others,
which the Church of Rome causes to be observed, as the Laws of god which we
know by their histories, were instituted many ages after the Apostles times.
If because Moses had given some instructions, by word of mouth to the
Israelites, the Cabalists and Jewish Rabins would make us receive the
Traditions of their Thalmud, who would admit them? And if du Perron believe the
Fathers, let him believe then Tertullian, Chrysostom, and saint Hierome, who
say that after the ruin of the Roman Empire, the throne of Antichrist should
be established (...) ^ome. Which therefore, is fulfilled, seeing that the ruin
o^ (...) Empire, is notorious to all the world.

The B. of Eureux.
(...) ^:2:1:
He says also to Timothy: Tu ergo fili confortare in gratia quae est in
Christo Jesus, and quae audisti a me per multos testes, haec commenda fidelibus,
qui idonei crunt and alios docere. Of which deposite there had been no need,
if all the word of god, as our adversaries pretend to prove by this same
Chapter, had been sufficiently written, or should have been from the very time
of the Apostles.

D. Tillenus his answer.
(...): 1:13:
The apostle himself declares, what he means by this deposite, which he
exhorts Timothy to keep, namely the pattern of wholesome words, he had heard
of him, which consists in faith and love: and it follows in this very
verse, that he should communicate it unto faithful men, which should be able
to teach others. But in the third chapter he says most plainly, (...), 3,
15:^.
that by the Scripture, not only Laymen (as they call them) but also the man
of God, that is to say, the Pastor or Doctor of the Church, should and may be
taught and made wise unto salvation, and absolutely instructed and made perfect
unto every good work. Whence it follows, that this deposite or matter
committed of trust unto Timothy is nothing else but the scripture, which is
sufficient even for the salvation of a Bishop, and not of a Lay man only,
which later, du Perron in our conference, was forced to confess, finding no
other distinction to escape.

The B. of Eureux.
Moreover there are fowr points, which our adversary should with us, and
condemn (as we do) of heresy, those that repugne the same. (at least wise
touching the three former) namelye the truth of Baptism of little children,
that of the Baptism of heretics, the proceeding of the holy Ghost from the
Father and the Son, and the translation of the feast from Saturday to
Sunday, which can not be concluded by any demonstra^^^ proof from any place
of Scripture.

D. Tillenus his answer.
In all these articles if we believe him, the Scripture is no fou^datio^ and
pillar of our faith, as Irenaeus said: Irenaeu^ c: 1: Tertul. ^ Hermo^
And they that added them to Scripture, need not fear the woe, by Tertullian
(who reuere^ced the fullness of the scriptures) threatened after S. John to
those which cannot show, that, that which they say, is written: nor the anthema
of S. Augustine against those, August. Ecclesic^ cont: lit. lib: 3 cap Chrysos^
Homil: ^ 20, cap, ^
that cannot read in Scriptures, the doctrine they teach: nor the reproaches
of Chrysostom, who calls them thieves that go up by any other way into the
fold, than by the scripture, which is called the gate, says he, because it
leads us to god, it makes sheep, it hunteth away wolves, and suffers us not
to go astray: Also they of our side, hold not the abouesaid points for articles
of faith, no otherwise, but because they do find them in that gate, which alone
has served the^ for a buckler and sword against the Anabaptists: which
notwithstanding du Perron makes dangerous, as if it were some rock or quicksa^d,
against which shipwreck of faith were to be feared. In like manner, in the
verbal conference, he told me roundly, that S. Cyprian fell into he resy by no
other occasion, than for having folowd the scripture which made him go astray:
quite contrary to that which S. Chrysostom says, who calls it also in
another place, Homil^ 1^ Epist. ad Corinth.
a most certain balla^ce, squire and rule, exhorting eury man, to leave what
this man or that man thinks, and to search al things in the scripture. To
which agrees also S. Augustine, when he says, Aug. Lib cap. 9 de Christ,
among the things which are Openly declared in the scriptures, ar found AL
those, that contein faith and manners, to wit hope and charity By the
testimonies of these fathers, and by infinite others which for breuity sake I
omit, it is evident, that either they esteemed these points in question, to be
contained in the Scripture, yea openly; or else that they thought them not
necessary to faith and charity: But they did hold them necessary as well as we:
Therefore they did believe thee the^ to be comprehended in the scripture, as well
as we.

The B. of Eureux.
First touching the Baptism of little children, that it is true and lawful, they
have but three arguments, that they can with any appearance allege to this
effect. The first is taken from little children that were brought to Jesus
Christ, that he might pray and lay his hands on them. (...) 19.13.
But since he did not baptize them, and also that they were not brought to him
to that end, but only he laid his hands on them and then departed: So far
are the Anabaptists from acknowledging, that from thence may be concluded, that
children are to be baptized, that on the contrary they infer therfrom, that
seeing he did baptize them, they ought not to be baptized.

D. Tillenus his answer.
He might be like reason conclude, from the same place, that seeing Jesus
Christ did not accept the title of Good, he must not be called Good. The
Scripture says, that Jesus commanded, (...) 19:17.
little children should be brought unto him, affirming that to such belongs
the kingdom of heaven. The same scripture says, (...) 3.3.
that none enters into this kingdom, unless he be regenerate or born again:
It says also, that Baptism is the washing of this regeneration: And that
those that are baptized, (...) 3, 5, (...) ^.27.
do put on Christ. Whence we conclude, that seeing they are not deprived of the
thing signified, they ought not be deprived of the sign.

The B. of Eureux.
Their second argument is of circumcision which was given to little children,
and was a figure of Baptism. To which is answered, first that arguments drawn
from figures do not always conclude alike for the truth of the things
figured, if there be not a commandment thereof reiterated. The Paschall
Lamb was a figure of the Eucharist, as Circumcision of Baptism. Now in the
celebration of the Paschall lamb, there was no sacramental drink, therefore
there should be no need of any in the Eucharist: they would not admit of
this argument. Circumcision was given on the eight day: the same therefore must
be observed in Baptism. The reason holds not. Circumcision was not given to
weomen among the Jews, but only among the Egyptians and other profane
people imitators of Circumcision baptism therefore ought not to be conferred
unto them: which is as reasonlesse as the former.

D. Tillenus his answer.
The Scripture teaches us how we must reason of Circumcision in Baptism, when
saint Paul speaks in the same terms, both of the one and the other
Sacrament, Colos. 2^
appropriating the vey name of Circumcision to Baptism: the better to show
that both of them figured but one and the same thing, and that Baptism is to
Christians, the same that Circumcision was to the Jews.

The Paschall Lamb, was properly a figure of Jesus christ: so the Scripture
means it, when it says. Our Passover, 1: Cor. ^
that is, our Paschall Lamb is Christ, sacrificed for us. In this scripture
Jesus Christ commands us to use a sacramental drink in the Eucharist, which
the pretended Apostolic Tradition forbids: to show, what goodly agreement
there is, betwixt the Word of God written, and theirs not written: As in like
sort the Scripture teaches us, that we are no more bound to the observation of
days, and that the Gospel gives us liberty in all these things. The B. of
Eureux may remember, that in the verbal conference, he denied unto me, that it
was commanded in Scripture, not to minister Circumcision, but on the eight day,
which here he confesses. He alleged in favor of the Jewish Traditions, that
Jesus Christ himself did approve them, finding good that the Jews should
administer Circumcision on the Sabbath day, which by the scripture they might
not do, which commands that no work should be done in the same, so that it
must needs be, that this exception or dispensation was given them by Tradition.
To which I answered, seeing the commandment was express in scripture, to
circumcise every male child the eight day, which might as well fall on the
Sabbath day as on any other, they were therefore grounded on the scripture;
Considering also that God in the commandment, forbade only our works, not
his; amongst which, is the administration of the Sacraments. He replied unto
me, that these words ( octauo die, the eight day) did not precisely signify
the eight day: but within the eight day, and would never let go this gloss,
though I alleged unto him the express text, where the reason why circumcision
was deferred till the eight day, 2:
is added; for that the mother is unclean, the first 7. days after her
childbirth.

The consequence that he draws, that women should not be baptized, if the
correspondency of circumcision and Baptism were such as we would have it, is a
mere cavil. For seeing that Circumcision did show forth the sanctification of
the Jsraelits seed, the females that were borne of this seed were as well
sanctified as the males, who alone were capable of the external sign of this
Sacrament, and all the analogy of faith and the necessary consequence of
Scripture teaches us, that we must admit women to the communion of the
Eucharist: so does it teach us also, that they must be baptized, seeing they are
as capable of this Sacrament as the males.

The B. of Eureux.
Secondly, cirtumcision had two uses, the one temporal, which did properly
cleave to the bark of the Jewish law, for to distinguish in like sort those,
which were corporally sprung from Abraham, and to discern them from other
nations: the other spiritual. Imperauit, says Joseph, Ahae, vt genitalia
circu^cideret: voluit enim Deus, vt genus eius no^ permisceretur alijs
gentibus. And for this cause all the time they were in the wilderness, those
that were born were not circumcised, because they were not mingled with other
nations, as S. Hierom and Damascen do observe. Whereas Baptism having but one
only use, which is spiritual, the bare circumstances of circumcision, conclude
nothing, that has any necessary consequence for Baptism.

D. Tillenus his answer.
We do not reason of the bare circumstances of circumcision, but of the
substance. For we leave to the children of the jews, that which it te^porally
figured unto them: but seeing it had also toward them a spiritual use, which
is the very substance of this Sacrament, wherefore should we deprive thereof, the
children of christians: seeing that Jesus christ came not into the world to
diminish the spiritual blessings, but to increase and fulfill them? If du Perron
think the intermission of Circumcision in the wilderness, was not a
transgression of the Law of God, he is deceived: Josh. 5.^
For after that Ioshuah had circumcised the Israelites in Gilgall, he said he
had taken away from them the shame of Egypt; meaning thereby, that through
contempt of gods covenant they were unworthy thereof, having showed by this
their negligence, that their hearts were still in Egypt, whither they would
feign have returned. Number: 1


The B. of Eureux.
Thirdly Circumcision left a perpetual mark in the flesh, which was always a
sensible token, to him that had received it, that he had been circumcised:
whereas Baptism leaves not any sensible mark, saving in the knowledge and
memory of him that was baptized. And therefore Baptism seems to require an
age capable of knowledge and memory.

D. Tillenus his answer.
Seeing Baptism brings the same spiritual fruit to the children of
Christians, that Circumcision brought to the children of the Jews, as has been
showed; this consideration of a corporal mark is frivolous. The circumcised
child can no more know nor remember, how and wherefore his foreskin was cut
off, than the Christian child his baptism, and therefore both the one and the
other, must be instructed, when he is capable thereof. In Abraham, who was
adopted into the covenant in a perfect age, knowledge, instruction and faith
went before the Sacrament: but in Isack born in the covenant the Sacrament went
before knowledge, because according to the promis, he was reputed the child of
God from his mothers womb. So we do not confer Baptism, to the child of a Jew
or a Paga^: and we blame the church of Rome, which commits this abuse,
prostituting the sign of the covenant, to those that are not co^prehe^ded
therein, not staying til they may enter into it by knowledge and faith: which is
as great a mockery, as to set a seal to a paper, wherein there is nothing
written.

The B. of Eureux.
4. In circumcision there was but one material sign, without the word: whereas
in Baptism, as well the eleme^t as the word, are of the essence of the
sacrament. Toll aqua^, says S. Aug: no^ est baptismus: toll verbu^, non est
baptismus. It seems that he that is baptized, and to whom the word of
Baptism is directed, must be capable not only of the elementary sign, but
also of the word: which was not requisite in Circumcision.

D. Tillenus his answer.
His fourth reason is as false, as the former are vain: For if there be not
the word also in Circumcision, then is it not a sacrament. And how should it
have bin instituted of God, without the word? 17.11.
The promise that God adds in the institution of it saying; you shall
circumcise the foreskin of your flesh, and it shall be a sign of the covenant
between me and you: This is a word as expressly written, as that which the
institution of Baptism contains; 8.19.
Baptize all nations in the name of the Father, of the son, and of the holy
ghost. He which said, toll verbum non est Baptismus, take away the word it is
no Baptism; said also, Accedat verbum ad Elementum, and fiat Sacramentum; Add
the word to the element, and it becomes a Sacrament. As in Baptism the
pronunciation of the sacramental words, is grounded on the institution of
Jesus Christ: so Circumcision was not to be administered, without speaking of
the use and efficacy of the same, as appears by the example of Ioshuah above
alleged. And doubtless Abraham, before he circumcised his family, instructed
them in the doctrine thereof: For see the testimony that god gives of him, 19.
I know (says he) that he will teach his children and his household to observe
the way of the Lord. 7.
Moses commands carefully to instruct children, and he speaks ever of the
Law of god, of which Circumcision was a part.

The B. of Eureux.
Fifthly, though all things, which had place in Circumcision, should have their
corresponcy to Baptism, yet would it not be for all that necessary, that it
were a correspondency of Identity, but a correspondency of Analogy would
suffice: As the ceremony of sour herbs, and of the staff they should hold
in their hands in eating the Paschall Lamb, is not literally accomplished in
the Eucharist, but only spiritually: inasmuch as we eat it with contrition
and bitterness for our faults, and as pilgrims and passengers in this world
iourneying into another life. So the temporal infancy, to which Circumcision
was applied, may have his corresponde^cy to Baptism, only in the spiritual
infancy, by which we must become children, for to be baptized, according to
the saying of our Savior, If you become not as little children, you shall not
enter into the kingdom of heaven: And therefore to those that were already
hoarie with olld age, they did not stick in the primitive Church, to give,
honey and milk to eat, Ad significandum infantiam, says S. Hierom. By which
means the argument would hold good to conclude thus. Circumcision was given
to those which were little children of a temporal infancy: therefore Baptism
may be given to those that are little children of a spiritual infancy that is
to say, that are become little children in maliciousness, as says saint Paul.
But to infer, Circumcision was given to little children of temporal infancy,
Baptism therefore is to be conferred to those that are little children after
the same manner, the conclusion does not enforce: And therefore S. Augustine
alleging this argument, makes account only of it as of a conjecture.

D. Tillenus his answer.
If the temporal infancy of the Jewish children, should be referred only to
the spiritual infancy of Christians, the reason of Jesus Christ would be of
no force, when he says, That children of a temporal infancy belong unto him,
and should be brought unto him: Now, we can not bring them, and put them into
his arms visiblye and corporally; Gal: 3:^ Romans 6
and the scripture teaches, that they which are baptized, do put on christ,
and are ingrafted into his body: it follows therefore that it is by this
means, that we should bring them and present them unto him.

And Jesus christ sanctifies and cleanses by water in his word, all those for
whom he gave himself to death: Ephesians. 5
Now he dyed as well for children as for others, seeing that the kingdom of
heaven belongs unto them: It follows therefore that he sanctifies and
cleanses them, by the washing of water in his word. 8:39:
And saint Peter having said, that every one should be baptized for remission
of sins, and they should receive the holy Ghost, adds, This promise is made
to you and to your children.

The similitude of the ceremonies of the Paschall Lamb, whereupon he
groundeth his correspondency of Analogy, persuades us as little, as his reasons
enforce us. For all the ceremonies commanded in the first institution of the
Passover, 2:
were not literally fulfilled among the Jews, especially in their yearly
Passover, As to eat it their loins girt, their shoos on their feet, and a
staff in their hand; (which ceremony Du Perron should not join with that of
the sour herbs, seeing it was not of the number of the ordinary, and belonged
only to the Passover celebrated in Egypt). As also the ceremony of not going
forth of doors till morning. And therefore our savior Christ celebrating the
Passover, transgressed not the law written, in sitting at table, and going
forth into the garden. Besides, the Paschall Lamb, as J said above, was rather
a figure of the only Sacrifice of Jesus Christ, ^.7. 0:4: ^ 0. 2:17:
who is the accomplishment of the Law, and the body of all the shadows and
ceremonies. If there were question made of finding some correspondency between
the ceremonies of Circumcision, and the ceremonies that the Church of Rome has
added to Baptism, the B. of Eureux would be able to find therein as little
Analogy as Identity.

The B. of Eureux.
The third argument is taken from the Acts, where Saint Peter says, that
having seen the holy Ghost come down on them that heard the word in the house
of Cornelius, he could not deny them Baptism, seeing they had received the
same grace: Whereof they conclude, those that are capable of the same grace, are
capable of the same sign. Now little children are capable of the same grace:
they are therefore capable of the same sign. To which without standing to
reply, that in the olld Testament weomen are capable of the same grace, and not
of the same sign, We may answer for the Anabaptists, that those which are
capable of the same grace, and in the same manner or fashion are capable of the
same sign: But those that are capable of the same grace in diverse manners, are
not therefore for all that capable of the same sign. Now little children (will
the Anabaptists say) are capable indeed of the same grace, as those that be of
age, but not in the same manner* for those of age are capable of grace, by
their own personal faith, and little children by their parents faith, which
is imputed unto them. And therefore to the former is requisite a Baptism proper
and personal, and to the others suffices the imputative Baptism of their
parents, it being a thing reasonable, that Baptism do follow the quality of
faith, whereof it is a Sacrament. And this answer serves for all arguments of
like nature, namely, that little children are part of the Church, are capable
of the kingdom of heaven, whereof baptism is the gate and entrance. For after
the same manner as they are capable of it, that is to say, no otherwise then by
an imputed faith and not personal, Baptism (would they say) is communicated
unto them* So that as they believe in the faith of their parents, until they
be capable of a personal faith: so are they Baptized in the Baptism of their
parents, till they be baptized with a personal Baptism; namely, when they
are come to years of discretion and knowledge* To these three reasons they
add a little light conjecture of that which Saint Paul said, that he baptized
the houshoulde of Stephan: out of which they conclude, that little children may
he baptized. Which argument is lame on both sides: For first they must prove
that there were little children in the household of Stephan, which the scripture
does not show: and secondly, that those little children were particularly
baptized For although there had bin little children in that house yet this
witness of S. Paul of having baptized the household of Stephan, could for all that
conclude nothing for them, unless there had bin express mention made, that they
were particularly baptized. For one may always answer, that in that he baptized
the house of Steph: is as much to say, as he baptized all those that were
capable of Baptism in that house. As when it is said, in Saint John of the
Ruler, 53*
Credidit ipse, and domus eius tota: It can not be said that the little
children in the cradle, if there were any, did believe: but those who for their
years were capable of belief. Contrariwise to show, that this objection of
the house of Stephan in which is no testimony that there was any little
children, is far from making anything for them; the Anabaptists reply, that in
the conversion of Samaria by S. Phillip, (in which it cannot be doubted, but
that the converted parents had little children in the cradle) the scripture
evidently specifieth, that Baptisabantur viri ac mulieres, without making
mention of little children.

D. Tillenus his answer.
Our third argument which he alleges, is taken from the 10. of the Acts,
where saint Peter ordains Baptism to them that had received the Holy Ghost:
whence we conclude, that they which are capable of the same grace, are capable
of the same sign. And seeing that children are capable of the same grace of
regeneration, they cannot be incapable of baptism, which is the sign thereof.

The same speculation which his answers contains, if they were of any weight,
might have had place as well against the Circumcision of little children; and
seeing that the different measure of grace did not deprive them of the sign,
in like manner ours ought not to be deprived of it. The Scripture says, 11.12
that the Gentiles, because they were not received into the covenant of
Circumcision, were without Christ, without hope, without God, and strangers
from the Covenants of promise. The same Scripture shows us, that Baptism has
succeeded Circumcision: Shall we then repute our children for strangers from
the couenaunts of promise? Shall we holld them only for children of the first
Adam, that is, for children of wrath, subject to the curse, for flesh and
blood, which cannot possess the kingdom of heaven, without bringing them to
the second Adam, by whom they are sanctified and quickened? If by faith imputed,
the B. of Eureux, means a quality without and forth of children; and if he
say, that they please God, the Holy Ghost not making any real change in them,
He destroys these principles of Scripture, which say: Revel.
That none unclean thing enters into heaven, Romans 1
That the just shall live by his own faith, That none has access to the
kingdom of heaven, unless he be regenerate, That without faith it is impossible
to please God. Now faith and unbelief are things immediately contrary: not that
we would say, that children do believe after the same manner, as they that be
of years, with an actual knowledge: but that the Holy Ghost works in them an
inclination and power to believe, taking away from their heart, that which
naturally repugneth. When saint Augustine says, that children are baptized in
the faith of others, as either of their parents, or of them that present them,
or of the whole Church, he excludes not all operation of the Holy Ghost in the
person of children, which in another place he plainly confesses to be in them:
As when he says, Aug. Ep ad Dar
We say that the holy ghost dwells in little children which are baptized,
though they know him not: For in that they do not know him, it is no
otherwise, the^ as they know not their reasonable soul, yea their life.
Whereof notvvithstanding it does not follow, that they have neither reasonable
soul nor life. This operation is as easy to god, as to us incomprehensible:
And the heart of an old man, before he be changed by regeneration, is no less
deaffe and unable, than the heart of a child, the change whereof is not none,
because it is unknown: likewise the disobedience and rebellion, which is in
them that be of years, is a disposition contrary to faith, which is not in
little ones, who receive oftentimes greater measure of grace, than they that be
of years, who notwithstanding, after our Adversaries themselves, are not
incapable of the external sign, though they ask it but of hypoctisy. For he
that administreth it unto them, can not know their faith and capacity of
grace, seeing the Apostles themselves were therein deceived, Acts 8.1
as appears by the example of Simon Magus. Seeing then that the grace
conferred to children by Baptism, is a thing real in their own persons, and
not imputed only; witness the examples of Jeremy, and S. John Baptist,
sanctified from their mothers womb: an imputed sign is not sufficient, no more
than an imputative Paradise would suffice the possession whereof Jesus Christ
promises unto them so real, 8.3*
as he affirms, that none shall enter therinto, unless he receive him as a
little child.

Whereas he says, reason would that Baptism should follow faith, (...) 1:
whereof it is a Sacrament, that is altogether frivolous: For Circumcision is
also called the seal of the righteousness of faith: and in another place the
sign of repentance. Let him therefore ask the reason of God, why he did not
defer Circumcision from children, till such time as they were capable of such a
faith and repentance, as the Anabaptists require.

To that which he adds, that in the conversion of Samaria men and women ar
only spoken of, who were there baptized, without any mention of little ones,
though it cannot be doubted but that there were some. The answer has bin made
above namely, that those were not born in the covenant, and therefore before
they could be admitted thereunto, by the sign of Baptism, it behooved them to be
instructed in the doctrine. There needed not any special commandment,
touching the Baptism of little children, to those that knew the foundation of
the new covenant by the correspondency of circumcision. Children
notwithstanding are comprehended in the general commandment, of baptising all
that shall be saved.

The B. of Eureux.
There is yet one reason, that is very rife in the mouth of Catholics, being
underpropped by the tradition of the church, and by the interpretation which
has alwais run current among catholics, namely, Nisi quis renatus fuerit ex
aqua and Spiritu sancto, non potest introire in regnum Dei. But this in the
mouth of Calvin and those of this sect is of no force. For he interprets
there Aqua, not for the elementary water, but for the holy ghost: And when it
is replied that, that were a repetition of the same thing, under two diverse
words: he opposes, Baptisabit vos Spiritusancto and igne, where he will have
Ignis and Spiritus sanctus to be one and the same thing: which he does, for to
exclude the necessity of Baptism. But in a word, to all that will have this
place serve their turn, the Anabaptists (who reject the tradition and
interpretation of the church) do answer that this proposition is to be
understood of them, that are capable of Baptism: As when it is said in the same
chapter, He that believes not, is already judged: It is understood (say they)
of them, which are of years to believe.

D. Tillenus his answer.
He would bereave us of the argument taken out of Saint John, Except a man be
borne again of water, etc. Ioh. 3.5
because we take this word Water, for the spirit, as in another place the word
Fire, and spirit, signify one and the same thing; Math. 3
But although from this place cannot be concluded the absolute necessity of
Baptism, yet nevertheless we ought to conclude from thence, the absolute
necessity of regeneration. The Anabaptists understanding this word water, of
outward Baptism, as the Church of Rome does, do reason thus, seeing Baptism is
expressly called regeneration, and seeing that children are not capable of
regeneration, which is done by faith, Baptism is not to be communicated unto
them. To which we answer, For as much as regeneration is absolutely necessary
to salvation, children (unless they will damn them all) are partakers thereof,
and therefore the seal of this grace of regeneration is rightly applied unto
them. The reply, that du Perron makes for them, that this sentence of S. John
is to be understood only of them, that are capable of baptism through years
of knowledge, is nothing curra^t against us, but against the church of Rome,
which interprets this place of the absolute necessity of external baptism,
of which it cannot otherwise choose, but that many children are deprived, and
therefore excluded from salvation, after their doctrine.

The B. of Eureux.
Now against these arguments, which they so easily by their solutions undo,
when they are not constrained with the authority of Tradition and the
interpretation of the Church, they have many other for it in appearance
stronger, as, that Baptism is a dependaunce and a seal of faith, and therefore
that those that are not capable of faith, are not capable of Baptism: That
baptism is called the washing of Regeneration, That Regeneration is made by
the word of God: you are all the children of god through faith, says saint
Paul: And saint Peter, you are horn again, not of a corruptible seed, but of
an incorruptible, by the word of god: that our Lord says, he that shall believe
and be baptized, etc. Saint Paul; One faith, one Baptism: saint Phillip to the
Eunuch that asked him if he might be baptized: If thou believe, thou may.
That the Sacraments are sensible signs, to those to whom they are Sacraments:
that they are sacraments to those to whom they are conferred, that therefore
they are to be sensible in the quality of signs, otherwise they are not
sacraments. That Baptism is not sensible to little children in this quality,
neither can afterward become so, so that they must of necessity rely on the
faith of others that they have been baptized, and therefore it is not a
sacrament unto them. That Jesus Christ did never baptize them, neither himself
nor his Apostles, according to the recital of Scriptures. On the contrary,
that the scripture seems to have excepted them expressing viros and mulieres.
That if the Baptism of little children, be not true and lawful, besides that
those that confer it unto them, profane the seal of the Covenant, and
pollute the blood of the Testament applying it to a matter incapable: they
commit an other sacrilege, in not reiterating it to them which afterward are
capable of it, and to whom it is necessary; if not by necessity of means, at
least (after our adversaries themselves) by necessity of precept. And therefore
Seruet said, that it were an impiety more then Turkish and devilish. And in a
word, if the Baptism of little children be not true and lawful, our
adversaries Church, who have all in their infancy been baptized, has no true
Baptism: And therefore is not the true Church. For saint Paul says, that
Christ has purified his Church by the washing of water in his word, and
themselves say that the true Church is that which has the pure preaching of
the word, and the sincere administration of the sacraments.

And to conclude in a word this point, either they* or the Anabaptists, are
heretics. For it is an article of faith, that there is one Baptism, one
Faith, as says saint Paul: and the symbol of the Church says, I believe one
baptism for remission of sins. Now if Baptism of little children be not true
Baptism, those which baptize them, have no Baptism, and therefore are
heretics, violating this article of says, I believe one Baptism. And if it
be true Baptism, the Anabaptists are heretics, who rebaptize them. For they
redouble Baptism* against that article of faith: I believe one Baptism. It
being then necessary that one of the two sides be heretical, and it not being
possible by the scripture alone to verify which of the two it is: it follows
that all heresy cannot be confuted by the Scripture alone. Out of which I
frame this Syllogism. Whatsoever contains sufficiently the principles of a
science* should also be able to prove all the propositions pertaining to the
said science, and to confute all that repugn the same. Now every heresy
repugneth the science of divinity and religion: And the scripture alone cannot
confute all heresies. Therefore the scripture contains not sufficiently, all
the principles of doctrine necessary to the science of divinity and religion.
And therefore we must employ therein other principles conioyntly with the
scriptures, which cannot have authority in this case, if they be not revealed
by the word of God. It must therefore be granted, that besides the word of
god written, there is yet another part of the same word not written, among which
also saint Augustine against this heresy concerning the Baptism of little
children, says: Co^suetudo matris ecclesiae in baptisandis paruulis non est
spernenda, neque omnino recipienda, nisi Apostolica esset Traditio.

D. Tillenus his answer.
Thus are easily confuted all the other reasons of the Anabaptists, that he
brings forth after ours. For they be but repetitions of the solutions he
gives to ours; That Baptism is a seal of fath; That it is called the washing
of Regeneration; That Regeneration is made by faith and by the incorruptible
seed of Gods word: That saint Phillip said to the Eunuch, If thou believe, thou
may be saved, etc. For it has bin showed, that the children which enter into
the kingdom of heaven, are regenerate, That this Regeneration is don otherwise
in them, that in such as be of years of knowledge; That the sentences of Saint
Peter and S. Phillip, and other like, are necessarily understood of them that
were capable of the hearing of the word, as were all those with whom the
Apostles had to do, when they began to gather the Christian Church. To apply to
children, that which is spoken only to such as be of years, the consequence is
as foolish, as if a man should deprive children of corporal nourishment,
because the Scripture says, (...). 3.10.
he that does not work, should not eat, which is necessarily meant of such as
are of years to work.

How will his Syllogism now stand, which he frames thus: Whatsoever
contains sufficiently the principles of a science should prove all the
propositions belonging to the said science, and to confute all that repugne the
same: But every heresy repugneth the science of Divinity, and the scripture
alone can not confute all heresies: Therefore it conteyneth not sufficiently,
all the principles necessary, etc.

The assumption of this syllogism, is already above confuted, by the
testimonies even of those very same, from whom he pretends, that the most
part, yea all the principles not contained in the Scripture, must be taken. I
could here add a great number of other proofs, and testimonies, but that J
shun prolixity. I will therefore only oppose two other syllogisms.

I. In the divine wisdom, there is perfect knowledge of divinity: (...).
19.7.8.
The holy holy scripture gives this wisdom: therefore it gives the perfect
knowledge of divinity.

II. The principles of a science, are not contrary one unto another: But the
most part of the unwritten principles of the Romish divinity, repugn and
destroy those that are written in the old and new Testament* therefore they
can not be true principles of true Divinity.

The Bishop of Eureux.
The second heresy, which cannot be refuted by the Scripture, is that of the
Rebaptizing of heretics. For there is no one place in the writings of the
Prophets or Apostles, that witnesses, that the Baptism which is among
heretics, is true Baptism. Contrariwise there are infinite places which seem
to repugne the same: As the words of our Lord, he which shall believe and be
baptized. etc, And that of saint Paul, one faith, one Baptism: whereof is
concluded, that seeing there is no faith among heretics, and that this unity
of faith of which Saint Paul speaks, is not found among them, there is no
Baptism. So that they which have been Baptized by them, are no more baptized,
then those on whose head by chance some water is cast, seeing they want the
chief and principal condition, which makes a man be a matter and subject
capable of Baptism, namely Faith: That they that are Baptized, as says Saint
Paul, have put on Christ, That Christ cannot be put on out of the Church,
which is called the fullnes of Christ and that therefore Baptism cannot be
among heretics: That every one of you says Saint Peter, be Baptized for
remission of sins, And the Creed of Constantinople: I believe one Baptism
for remission of sins. Now among the haereticks there is no remission of
sins: For the Keys were given to the Church; and by consequent no Baptism,
that when it was told John Baptist, that Christ Baptized, he answered, none
can do it unless it be given him from heaven: that no authority is given from
heaven to the assemblies of heretics, and therefore that they cannot Baptize.
That Baptism is done by the power of the holy Ghost, that the holy Ghost is
not resident out of the Church, neither consequently Baptism.

D. Tillenus his answer.
First I answer, that the hearers of the Scripture learn, that whosoever is
Baptized in the name of the father, of the Son and of the holy Ghost, is well
Baptized. But the followers of the Romish tradition, can never know, whether
they be well baptized, or no: For besides this instituti- of Christ, the Church
of Rome requires the intent of the Priest, without which the Sacrament with
the^ is none: Now there is no man that can be fully assured of another man's
intent. Secondly the scripture teaches us the difference between the outward
sacrament and the inward grace, which is not enclosed within the other, as a
salve in a box, as the Romish Tradition teaches. They that receive the first,
receive not always the latter, in what place soever it be, as we see by the
example of Judas and Symo^ Magus. For as says S. Augustine, (...), 5. de ^ont.
(...), 24*
me^ do put on Christ so^times in participatio^ of the sacrament, sometimes in
sanctification of life: the first is common to good and bad, the other is
peculiar only to the good. Neither heretics nor orthodoxall can minister any
thing, but the outward sacrament; the holy ghost only gives the internal
grace, that is faith, possession of Christ, and remission of sins. All which
is manifest in scripture. But the Holy Ghost says he is resident only in the
true Church, and not among heretics.

2. J answer, the scripture teaches us that the spirit blows where it
lists: if it were allwaies tied to a visible church, as the Pope to his seat
of Rome, ^, 8,
without distributing his graces elsewhere, which is du Perrons meaning; No
infidel nor heretic borne out of the true church, could ever enter thereinto
by regeneration, by which grace the holy ghost brings men thereunto. (...):
17,
Saint Paul persecuted the true Church, so far was he from being a member of
the same, and received notwithstanding the holy ghost out of the visible
church. Therefore it is not, to speak properly, the minister that gives
Baptism, but as the Scripture says, the heavenly father saves us by the
washing of Regeneration, through the renewing of the Holy Ghost; (...), 5. 5,
26, ^, 1, 16.
Jesus Christ cleanses and sanctifies his Church through the washing of water
in his word: And as the word of the Gospel when it is published according to
the revelation of God, to salvation, to all that believe, though he that
preaches it do it of evil will, without sincerity without zeal, of envy and
co^tentio^, as says the Apostle, that is, though he have no good intent. So is
it in the Sacrament, which is a visible word, so that the minister confer it
according to the Lords institution, his heresy or hypocrisy cannot hurt him
that receives it. For the question is not, what is required in a pastor to
approve his Ministry before God: but what is requisite to the efficacy of the
sacrament, according to the truth of god, which the scripture teaches us
cannot be made void by the wickedness of men. To which S, Augustine agrees,
saying, that not only the good, but also the wicked have the ministry to
Baptize, but neither of the^ both have the power of baptism that Christ has
committed the ministry thereof to servants, but reserueth the power thereof to
himself.

Thirdly J say that the scripture shows us the correspondency of circumcision
with Baptism. Ezech, 1 and, 23.
Therefore as the circumcision given by the Apostataes of Samaria was availeable
to the children that God acknowledged for his, there being no need of
reiterating it, so as the Samaritans did reiterate that which had been
administered by the Jews, as Epiphanius witnesses: So by like reason should not
Baptism administered by a heretic be reiterate, provided that he keep the
substance of the institution. The Prophets indeed do exhort the Samaritanes to
repentance, but never call the^ to a second circumcision though the first were
polluted by many abuses and superstitions.

The Bishop of Eureux:
Against these Arguments with great appara^ce of scripture. S. Augustine, who
10 whole years handled this question against the Donatists, could not find any
actual and demonstratine proof in the scripture for the doctrine of the Church
in this point, and could oppose unto them no other thing, that would hold the
place of an infallible proof, but the tradition and authority of the Church:
Hoc, says he, obseruandum est in rebus, quod obseruat Ecclesia Dei: Question
autem inter vos and nos est, vera sit Ecclesia Dei: ergo a capite sumendum
exordiu^, cur schisma feceritis And in another place, (...):
Proinde quamvis huius rei certe de Scripturis Canonicis non proferatur
exemplum, earundem tamen Scripturarum etiam in hac re, a nobis tenetur veritas,
cum hoc facimus, quod vniuersae iam placuit Ecclesiae, quam ipsarum
Scripturarum commendat autoritas: vt quando S. Scriptura fallere non potest,
quisquis falli metuit huius obscuritate quaestionis, eandem ecclesiam de illa
consulat quam sine vlla ambiguitate. S. Scriptura demonstrat: And in another
place. Bap. ^on:
Sed illa consuetudo, quam etiam tunc hominem sursum versum respicientes, non
videbant a posterioribus, restitutam, recte ab Apostolis tradita creditur. Et
talia multa sunt, quae longum esset repetere. Now saint Augustine declares,
that the opinion of the Donatists was heretical, and the whole Church with
him, holds the Donatists for heretics: and our adversaries themselves: As
also it must needs be, that either the Catholics or the Donatists be
heretics. For if Baptism, administered by heretics, be not true Baptism the
Catholics which receive them without Baptizing the^ do violate this article,
One Faith, one Baptism. Also I believe one Baptism for remission of sins.
If on the contrary it be true Baptism, the Donatists in rebaptizing them, and
reiterating and multiplying Baptism do sin against the same article. Whence
I thus conclude: The doctrine of the Donatists which was heretical could not
be confuted by the scripture alone, and without the help of the Apostolic
tradition for to confute all heresies: And by consequent, it conteyneth not
alone sufficiently all the principles of doctrine necessary to divinity and
Christian Religion.

D: Tillenus his answer.
Let us see if Saint Augustine in those ten years, that he handled his
question against the Donatists, could not find any actual proof in the
scripture upon this point, as Du Perron says, lib. 1. ^. co^t. 7.
I think he promises very certain proofs when he says, Ne videar humanis
argumentis agere, ex Euangelio profero certa documenta etc, Least I should seem
to discourse with human reasons, Lib. 2. de bap: cont Don. c. 1
J will allege sure proofs out of the Gospel, etc. And in an other place,
Quid sit perniciosius, vtrum non Baptizari an rebaptizari iudicare difficile
est: verumtamen recurrens ad illam stateram Dominicam, vbi non ex humano sensu,
sed ex authoritate diuina rerum momenta pensantur, inveniode vtraque re Domini
sententiam, Qui lotus est, non habet necessitatem iterum lauandi, etc: It is an
hard thing to judge, whether is more dangerous, not to be Baptized, or to be
baptized again yet having recourse unto that balance of the Lord, where not
of humain sense, but of divine authority the vallews of things are weighed, I
find, of both matters the lords sentence, He that is washed, has no need to
be washed again. etc. And in another place, having said that this custom
came of the Tradition of the Apostles, not meaning that it wants his proofs
in Scripture, he adds, Lic. 5, de cont. Don c. 2
Contra mandatum dei esse quod venientes ab hereticis, si iam illi Baptismum
christi acceperunt, baptizantur, quia scripturarum sanctarum testimoniis non
solum ostenditur, sed PLANE ostenditur: That it is against the commandment of
God, that such as come from heretics should be baptized, if they have already
receued there the Baptism of Christ, because by the testimonies of holy
Scriptures, it is not only showed, but plainly showed. These places and others
of this father, do show the audaciousnes of du Perron in his affirmations, and
his sincerity in his allegations.

As for the places he brings out of the same father, to prove that he
acknowledged the imperfection of the scriptu e concerning this point, he
confou^deth the question of act, example or practice with the question of law
or ordinance: S: Augustine says in this matter, there ca^ be none examples of
scripture alleged, that is, it cannot be found there that it was so practiced:
and therefore he referrd the custo^ or practis hereof to apostolic tradition:
but that it ought so to be practiced he affirms that not only the scripture
shows it, but that it shows it manyfestly. Whence I conclude against the
Bishops conclusion, on this second point; The doctrine that evidently shows
what is to be done in all matters concerning faith and which confuteth the
heresies that repugne the same, is perfect: but the scripture conteyneth this
doctrine: Therefore it is perfect.

The assumption, is proved not only by the scripture, but also by the
testimonies of the fathers, by whom he pretends to prove the doctrine of the
church of Rome. I would earnestly desire of him, clear and direct answer to
that place of Augustine above alleged, out of his second book 9 chapter de
doctrina Christiana* for in the verbal conference he would give no answer
theru^to, but on condition, that I would protest to forsake the scripture, and
not to reason any more but by the authority of the fathers.

The bishop of Eureux.
The third heresy which we have propounded among those that cannot by the
scripture alone be confuted, is that of the Greeks, touching the proceeding
of the holy ghost which our adversaries hold as well as we to proceed from the
father and from the son, a thing notwithstanding which the scripture does no
where express. On the contrary it seems to restrain the original of the
same proceeding from the father alone, saying, ^5.26. 16.
The spirit of truth which proceeds from the father. For when this sentence
of Christ is objected to the Greeks, He shall take of mine, They answerr that
this word of mine has relation not to the Essence nor to the person, but to
the doctrine: so that the intention of Christ in saying, he shall take of mine,
that is of the same treasure of doctrine and wisdom, of which the son has
taken.

And they alleadg for proof of their exposition, that which follows in the
Text which says; And he shall declare it unto you replying that the word
declare, has relation not to the essence nor to the person, but to the
doctrine. In like sort when these places are alleged unto them, if any one
have not have not the spirit of Christ, 8.15. ^.5.6.
he is none of his. And again the spirit of Christ crying Abba Father, they
answer that concludes not that the spirit proceeds from Christ; and that he
is called the spirit of Christ, not by proceeding but by possession for as much
as Christ according to his humanity has received the gift and the full and
whole possession of the same spirit, according to the words of Esaias. The Spirit
of the Lord is upon me, because the Lord has anointed me: And S. Peeter says,
The lord has anointed him with the holy ghost and with power. And that in this
manner it is said that Elizeus received the spirit of Elias. Not that the holy
Ghost did proceed from Helias but because in a certain measure he was
possessed of Heliah, When that is objected unto them which Christ says unto
his Father, That which is thine is mine. They answer that may be expounded of
the possession and outward domination over the creatures, over whom the Father
has given all power to the son, in heaven and in earth, neither can the
se^ce of the words in that place be restrained to the Essence, no more then
when the father of the prodigal Child saitb to his eldest son the same
words Omnia mea tua sunt. But besides this though it should be understood of
the essence, yet the argument concludes nothing. For if because the essence of
the father is one and the same, it shoold therefore follow that the holy ghost
proceeds as well from the one as from the other: you must in like sort
conclude, The essence of the father and the holy ghost is one and the same: the
son is therefore begotten of the holy ghost as well as of the Father. And when
it is added to those other arguments, He will send the comforter. They answer
that he expounds himself, showing his meaning by this word Send namely that
he will pray his father that he will send him. I will pray (says he) unto the
Father, and he shall send you another co^forter. And in the same place where he
says he will send him, he preuenteth (say they) the opinion might be conceived
of his proceeding from him, in that he says he will send from the Father, the
spirit of truth, which proceeds from the father etc: To which they further
add, that there is a great difference between the temporal sending of the
holy ghost, at our Lords request, on the Apostles, and the eternal proceeding
of the said Spirit, which is the point in question.

D. Tillenus his answer.
The proceeding of the Holy Ghost, which is the third point, which he
maynteineth to have no ground in scripture, has his proof in the scripture,
by the schoolmen themselves against the Greeks, who received this article
without any great difficulty in the Council of Florence, in which was present
John Paleologus Emperor of Constantinople: but they received but fainedly, and
by constraynte of their Emperor (who stood in need of the Western Churches)
the Articles of the Popes Supremacy, of Tra^substantiation, of Purgatory, and
other like which are without and against the scripture: Yet there were some
Bishops there that would never consent unto them, but afterward caused all to
be revoked; imputing the loss of the East Empire, which happened shortly after
this council, to that unlucky union, that there was made with the Pope. Now
as the principal questions touching the holy ghost, of his nature, and of his
office, have always been determined by the scripture, against the Arria^s,
Eunomians and Macedonians: so also may therein be showed his proceeding from
the father and from the Son. The place in saint Paul cannot be shifted of by
his distinction of possession and proceeding, (...). 8.9. (...).6,
as if he spoke only of the gift and possession of the spirit that Jesus
Christ receued according to his huma^ity; For the same spirit is there called,
both the spirit of Christ, and the spirit of him that raised up Christ, And
when saint Peter says, that it was the spirit of christ by which the Prophets
have prophesied, (...) 1.11.
he quite cutteth of the bishops answer: For seeing that the prophets have
prophesied before the incarnation of christ, they cannot have prophesied by the
spirit in as much as it was given to the humanity of christ: and on the other
side the Scripture witnesses in infinite places, that this spirit of the
Prophets was the spirit of God the father, which shows as clearly that the
holy ghost proceeds from the father and the son, as the consubsta^tiality
of the son with the Father, by conference of the places in the Prophets that
speak of Iehoua, with the places in the Evangelists and Apostles, which
appropriate them unto Christ.

The example of Heliseus, that received the Spirit of Helias, is as little to
purpose as the former distinction. John. 15
Jesus Christ says that it is he, that well send this spirit, showing his
divine power: Helias answers to Helizeus, when he asked him double portion
of his spirit: Thou ask a hard thing: meaning, that it is not given by the
power of man, Christ says not, that it is an hard thing for him to send the
Comforter, contrariwise, he says all that his father has is his also. He gave
it indeed and in effect to the Apostles, breathing on them and saying, Receive
the Holy ghost, John. 20
And whereas du Perron says, that this may be expounded of the possession,
and domination of the creatures over which the Father has given him all power.
As when the father of the prodigal child says to his eldest son the like
words, All that is mine is thine; J answer as above is already said, that the
spirit is in the son, as in the Father: And as is showed that the Spirit
proceeds from the father, by the places which say, That the Father se^deth
him from the Father, so also may be showed his proceeding from the so^ by the
places, Gal, 4.6 John, 5.1
god se^deth the spirit of his so^, and the so^ does al things that the Father
does etc. It is objected, that it is said, That the Spirit proceeds from the
father. That Christ says he will pray the father to se^d him: to which J
answer, that Christ in those places speaks as Mediator in which he is less
that the father, and so he says, that the father is greater than he. And yet
he says the father will send him in his name, John. 14 John. 15,
which cou^teruayleth that other saying, that he will send him from the father.
As for the difference betwixt the temporal mission of the holy Ghost and his
eternal proceeding: J say that this eternal proceeding is nothing else but
the communication of the Divine essence by which the third person of the
Trinity receives all the same Essence from the Father and from the son, as
being the spirit of them both. And seeing that the Greeks believe with us,
that the holy Ghost is God, that he is equal to the father and to the Son,
against the Arrians and Macedonians: and that he is a distinct person from the
father and from the son against the Sabellians, we are not to hold them for
heretics in this point though they had certain particulare manners of
speaking, for as much as heresy is not in the words, but in the sense, as Saint
Hierome says. Many among the ancient fathers are not held for heretics,
though they speak often improperly of the misteryes of the trinity, of which
number is S. Hillary, 2, de. Tri^c.
who in many places, puts three substances in God, against the sownd manner
of speaking, whereof he excuses himself saying, that these things surpass
al signification of words, all intention of sense, all conceptio^ of sense,
all conception of understanding. But the Church of Rome is rightly holden for
heretical, which in many things does attribute unto it self the office of the
holy ghost, As when it says that one cannot be assured of the truth and
divinity of the Scripture; but only by the testimony that that Church gives
of it.

The Bishop of Eureux,
The fourth point which we have propounded is the translation of the Saboath
to Sunday: Every one knows, how rigorous the commandment of the Sabbath was
in the old law: and how the gretest both thretnings and promises of god, were
made to those that violated or observed his Sabbaths. And notwithstanding this
commandment of God that god had vouchsafed to write with his own hand, in the
10 precepts of the decalogue, and to sequester it as by special privilege
from all precepts of the ceremonial law, for to insert it in the Epitome of
the moral law: Yet the church has changed it with out any written ordinance,
both as touching the end, the form ^^d the matter. First as concerning the
end: Saturday was ordained to commemorate, the Creation of the world, and gods
rest after the finishing of his works, whereas we do not celebrate Sunday for
this purpose but for to honor the memorial of our lords Resurrection, which
was the day of accomplishment, and of rest from his labors he took in this
world, for the restoring and reforming of mankind.

As touching the form, we observe not Sundays the seventh day of the week,
but as the first: so that though it be still an observation of one day of the
seven, yet nevertheless it is no more an observation of the seventh but of
the first of the seven: contrary to that which was observed in the old law,
And therefore the Fathers of the Primitive Church reckoned as well, as we do
now, Wednesday, and Friday for the fourth and sixth feriae or days of
Cessation, beginning at Sunday for the beginning of their supputatio^: So that
instituting Sunday, it is not a changing of Saturday into Sunday, but the
bringing in of a new solemn feast, which has no conformity with feast of the
Sabbath. Also we see that in the primitive Church, wherein they would yet bury
the Synagogue with some honor: for to show that they would not substitute
Sunday in saturdays room, but institute sunday a new, as the particular feast
of Christians they observed them both at once, saturday in commemoration of the
precepte of Moses, and sunday for to celebrate the particular feast of Christ's
resurrection. As for the matter, it is certain, that whosoever will observe the
day comanded by Moses to the children of Israel, must take not a day at
pleasure, by septenary reuolutio^ derived indifferently from some beginning
that we think good of: but that which should be fownd the seventh by
reuolutio^, and beginning at the original of the supputation, that God himself
had established, as the Jews did. For God marked and poynted them out a day,
at which be would have them begin to reckon and account their septenary
revolution, which was that same (as is most probable) which represented by the
order of the revolution thereof, the day of Gods rest, after the Creation of
the world, for a commemoration where of it was ordained: And for this cause he
that propounded unto them for to begin the solemnization of the sabbath, sent
them twice so much Manna as the days before, and commanded them to gather of
it double as much, that so the next day which should be the sabbath; they might
be free and vacant from all corporal labor. And notwithstanding this absolute
suppression of the sabbath, in which the end, the form and the matter of the
commandment are abolished, and this new bringing in of sunday, is not
grounded upon any written ordinance, neither of Christ nor his Apostles:
Contrariwise it seeemeth that our Lord exhorting them to pray that there flight
might not be on the sabbath day, when the desolation foretold of by Daniell
should come to pass: It is thought his intent was, that the sabbath should
still be observed of Christians, after the suppression of the other legal
ceremonies For as for that which is written in the Apocalypse that S. John was
ravished in spirit on the Lords day: To omit that this word may be taken
for the manner of speaking of Saint. Paul, The day of the lord shall reveal
That is the judgment of the Lord. And again, I pass very little to be
judged of man's day, that is of man's judgment, If men would not play the
sophisters too much on this word Day, What other light, the light of the
perpetual tradition of the Church excepted, can teach us that sunday and not
saturday is this Lords day? seeing saturday was still in the law and among the
Jews acknowledged for the Lords day. As also from the other place that Saint
Paul commands, that the first day of the week, every man should lay
apart, what he would give for the Collects, there cannot any thing begathered;
For if the text had said,, Every one carries to the Church that day what he
would give, there were some appearance to conclude that the first day in the
week was apppoynted for the meetings of the Church from the Apostles tymes^:
But saying only that on the first day of the week, every man laid apart,
what he would give a week, that when he came he might find it ready: there can
of necessity no other sense be gathered, but that saint Paul in the beginning
of the week would have every one lay apart by it self of that which was for
his expense the week following, what he was willing to reserve for the poor,
least he spend it with the rest.

D: Tillenus his answer.
There remains to show, that the translation of the Sabbath day to sunday,
has not been done without the written ordinance of God: du Perron does very
much exaggerate the rigor of the commandment, touching the observation of
the Sabbath; going about to persuade, that it was merely and simply moral,
whereof he concludes, that the Church, which has abolished it, has power to
change and establish the express law of god, which the scripture witnesses
shall abide for ever. Now not to exasperate this blasphemy, I will briefly show,
that this commandment was partly Moral, and partly ceremonial: that the
ceremonial part concerns not Christians, we learn from the Scriptures, that
ceremonies are abolished by the coming of Christ, that there is expres
ordinance in scripture, tuching the particular abolishme^t of this ceremony,
which co^prehe^deth not the moral part of that commandment. For the first If
the observation of the Sabbath were altogether moral, God would never have
detested it. For he takes pleasure in all that is moral, Isay. 1.11, 14.
Now the Scripture teaches us that he sometimes does detest it, and that he
reckons it with the sacrifices and other feasts, which none will deny to be
ceremonial: It follows therefore that this observation was not wholly
moral. And Jesus Christ, who has perfectly fulfilled the Law: Math. 12.
excused and defended his disciples against the Jews, when they had
transgressed the ceremony of the Sabbath: And in another place he says, Mark.
2.2
That the Sabbath is made for man, and not man for the sabbath: Osc. 6.6.
Also when he alleges the scripture to this purpose, which says I will have
mercy and not sacrifice, he plainly places the sabbath among the ceremonies.

After Jesus Christ, the Apostles have left this ordinance written in so
express words, that I am abashed at the boldness of du Perron, to deny a thing
so manifest.

Saint Paul says, Let no man conde^n you in meat and drink, or in respect of
an holyday, or of the new moon, or of the sabbath: Adding, which are but shadows
of things to come but the body is Christ, Will he contend, whether shadows be
ceremonies? Will he maintain that the forbiddings of meats, of the hollidayes
and new Moons of the Jews, were moral commandments? If he will not believe the
Apostles, let him then hearken to the Fathers, ^ul. aduers (...). and ad^
of whom the most ancient among the Latins distinguishes in expres terms the
te^porall Sabbath from the eternal sabbath; (...). lib. 4.
showing by the History of the ruin of Jericho (where all the people, and the
Priests themselves labored 7 days one after another, and therefore the Sabbath
was there in comprised) that this commandment was ceremonial and te^porall.
^tat. de ^tem Rab ^n tractat ^^b. c. 1. and, ^ractat de ^umcis. c. 1
Yea the Jews themselves, as superstitious obseruers as they be of the outward
ceremony of the Sabbath nevertheless do hold that in danger of life the law of
the sabbath may be broken: And these words ar found in their Thalmud, Danger of
life breaks the Sabbath. But every one knows and confesses, that there is
no danger can excuse the transgression of the moral law: for the observation
whereof the true faithful hold their life very well bestowed.

Seeing the^ the sabbath is taken two ways, either for interior which is a
rest from our evil works, and an exercise and meditation of the works of God:
or for the exterior, which consists in rest and cessation, from the labors
and business which co^cern this life, in which it was a figure of interior
sabbath, the promises or thretnings which god made to such as kept or violated
his sabbaths (which is our Bishops grownd) are me^t more of the first, (...).
5.8,
the^ of the 2, to which notwithstanding the Jews were bound, as to all the
other Leuiticall ceremonies: from which yoke Christians are wholly freed their
sabbath being interior, spiritual, and perpetual (as the feast of passover or
Easter) which neither ought nor can ever be abolished in respect of the matter,
being a cessatio^ from sins, and a meditation on (...) Gods works nor in
respect of the form which is to perform this meditation with true repe^ta^ce of
all our evil works with true faith toward God, and unfeigned charity toward
our neighbors: nor in respect of the end: which is the glorifiing of the name
of God, and the salvation of our souls in that great and everlasting sabbath
which his sonnne Jesus Christ has prepared for us in his Kingdom: Behold the
principal matter, form and end of the sabbath, to the which are to be
referred, all the other ends, touching the determining of days for the
asse^blies of the church; which is in the liberty of the Church, which the
Scripture gives it in express terms. And though the places in the
Revelation, Col. 2. Revel. 1.10 1. Cor. 16.
and in the first to the Corinthians were not clear and evident enough, to show
that the Apostles have instituted (the Lords day) on sunday: yet cannot that
prejudice us any thing at all, seeing there are other formal places, that
prove the liberty of the church in such things, and it suffices that we are
able to decide by the scripture, the question of law or ordinance.
Notwithstanding so that our Bishop do not draw him self back, from his own
interpretation, 1. Cor. 16.2
the very act or example of practice will be fownd therein. He says, if the
apostle had said, Every man brings to the church that day, what he would
give, that then there had been some appearance for to conclude, that the first
day of the week, was particularly appointed to the meetings of the church in
the very time of the Apostles. Now we find in that the disciples were assembled
the first day of the week (which is as himself denies not, Act, 20.7.
Sunday) for to break bread, that is; to celebrate the lords supper, and that
in this assembly Saint Paul made a sermon which lasted till midnight: See
here then the question found and proved in the scripture; as well by example
of practice, as otherwise. A special commandment touching this observation
of sunday, neither the scripture gives any, seeing it testifies that it is a
thing indifferent; neither can du Perron show it by Apostolic Tradition, for
all his brags.

The Ecclesiastical history is directly against him, when it says: Socr. lib
5. Cap 22.
That the intention of the Apostles was not to make laws or commandments
touching feast days or holy days, but to be authorrs of good life and true
godliness. Our adversaries on the contrary do constitute their principal
godliness and virtue in observation of the holy days by the^ instituted, and
make a moral commandment of the Jewish observation of the sabbath; rejecting
into the number of the ceremonialls, that (...) commandment, which forbids
Images though it be one of the cheifest among the moral. But commanding thus
what god forbids, and forbidding what god commands, they show in what
schole they have studied. Surely their manner of reasoning, is altogether
conformable to the Tropic of that old Sophister, from whose instruction,
ensued the destruction of mankind, when our first parents suffered themselves
to be persuaded by this goodly argument. Though god has forbidden you to eat
of this tree: yet nevertheless you should eat of it.

(...). 2.8. ^.3, verse.
The Father of lights, who in these last times has begun to chase away the
darkness of Error and superstition, by the brightness of his word, vouchsafe to
enlighten our hearts by the light of his truth, that we be not diuerted from his
ways, through vayn deceyt after the Traditions of me^, but that keeping
faithfully the sacred truth, which he has of trust committed unto us, we may
wait with joy, for the most brighte and glorious coming of the sun of
righteosnnes, to whom be all honor, glory and praise for evermore.

A DEFENSE OF the Sufficiency and perfection of the holy Scripture.

Against the Cauillations of the Lord Du Perron, Bishop of Eureux: By the which
he endeavors to maintain his Treatise of the insufficiency and
imperfection of the holy Scripture.

By D. Daniell Tillenus Professor of Divinity in the University of Sedan.

PROVE. 16.25. There is a way that seems right unto a man, but the issues
thereof are the ways of death. August. de unit. Eccles. cap. 3. Whatsoever is
alleged of either side against the other, should be removed: saving that which
comes out of the Canonical Scriptures. printer's device of Nathaniel Butter

Printed at London by L. S. for Nathanaell Butter. 1606.

THE PREFACE of the Author.
THe Jews, who since the blindness, wherewith God has justly punished their
ingratitude and rebellion, have always showed themselves greedy of
Traditions, and out of taste with the simplicity of the Scripture, using it
but for a basis or foundation whereon to plant their fables, as the Poets do
history: recount, that God being about to give his law to their ancestors,
showed unto Moses a Mass of Saphir, Lyr. in Exo^ c. 34.
made of purpose by his divine power, whereof he commanded him to hew and
square out the tables, in which he vouchsafed to write his law with his own
finger: and because the text has (Hew thee out Tables:) They gather of it,
Exodus 34.1.
that God permitted him to retain and appropriate to himself all the cuttings
and pieces that came of this precious stone in hewing the tables, and that
Moses therewith made himself wonderful rich. etc. This fabulous Tradition,
how unworthy soever it be of the Majesty of God, of the gravity of the
Scripture, of the ministry of Moses, and of the belief of the Church; yet is
it nothing near so detestable, as that wicked exercise of those, which aim
at, and busy themselves now a days in nothing, but in clipping and scraping
out the sufficiency and perfection of the scripture, by the same means taking
away their own salvation, in the blood of Jesus Christ; since that by it we
are redeemed from our vain conversation, ^at. 1.^8
received by Tradition from our Fathers.

Amongst other workmen, which in these times employ themselves in this mystery
or ministry of iniquity, the Lord of Perron, Bishop of Eureux will make known
unto us, that before him none had sufficiently manured and tilled the ground of
this Tradition, which converted Moses from a Prophet, into a Lapidarie; from a
Lawgiuer, into a Goldsmith: and that like as this Minister of God enriched
himself, in hewing the Tables of the Law: So the ministers of the Popes
Gospel, according to the true Anagogicall meaning of this Jewish Tradition,
cannot better enrich themselves, and of Christians become Croesians, or
Crassians, than in converting Divinity into such a Technologie, in cutting of
and clipping the Gospel of Jesus Christ: ^ue. 21 ^^uel. 17.3. etc.
That the more they take away from the luster of the precious stones, wherewith
the heavenly Jerusalem is builded, the more splendor they give to the
countefeite stones of that woman clothed in purple and scarlet, which rules
over the great Babylon.

For, to cover the cunning that they use, they make no difficulty to do some
honor in show to the scripture, even to guild and adore outwardly the books
which contain it, even the^ when the mine it, clip and pare it inwardly: Like
as at one time Jesus Christ was kissed, and betrayed, clothed in purple as a
king, and buffeted as a fool, crucified as a malefactor: Or like as yet to
this day the Jews honor the scripture in show, and by gestures, forbidding to
sit in a place of equal height, to that whereon the Bible is laid: though in
effect, they set it infinitely under their Thalmud, of which they dare with an
execrable impudency say: That God himself studieth therein the three first
hours of the day: Lyr. in Luke. cap 4. Lib. Benedict. c. 1. and 3. Vide
Hieron. a Sancta fide cont. Iud. l. 1. in Biblioth. S. Patrum. tom. 4.
Also that he which shall speak any thing of it sinisterly or in evil part,
shall be damned in hell, whereas he that transgresses the Law of God, shall
receive none other punishment, but to be called a transgressour of the Law.

Now, that none has so deeply sounded the mystical meaning of the Jewish
Tradition above recited, as the Bishop of Eureux has done, it is manifest,
because that not any of the new Besaleels, which of later times have labored
to plaster and to painte the Popes Tabernacle, neither Hosius, nor Peresius,
nor Soto, nor Lindanus, nor Canus, nor Canisius, nor yet that Arch-Rabby
Bellarmine, not any I say, had as yet so mightily clipped this spiritual coin
(as Gerson calls the Scripture) nor observed so much dross, nor so many
defects in the pure Alley of the law of God, written by Moses, as the Lord of
Perron does: who, having learned this secret of Seruetus, and some Anabaptists
(that the honor of this invention be not taken from the true authors of it:)
clippeth and cutteth of from it, not some small things, but the immortality of
the soul, the resurrection of the body, the last judgment, Paradise, and
hell etc. that he might discredit in like sort thereby, and by Analogy, ^ohn.
15.15.
the doctrine of the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, who though he protests
in express terms, to have declared to his Apostles, All things that he had
heard of his father: Yet notwithstanding this Bishop fears not to say: ^ol.
15.8
That the things alone, which he has either done, or declared with his own
mouth to his disciples, are not sufficient to the institution of the Church.
Which is not to make the little mouth, but lively to cou^terfait that mouth,
^euel. 13.5.6
which (as Saint John says) utters great things. Neither is it to be a dumb
dog, but to bark boldly, not against the Moon, but even against the Sun
of righteousness. A certain Sophister at Athens, writing of the gods, ^^og.
Laert. ^ot g.
declared in the beginning of his book, the doubts that he had of their
essence, and the difficulties that he found in this matter: of which the
Athenians had such horror, that they burnt the book, and banished the Author.
The like irresolution and perplexity witnessed a Heathen Philosopher to Saint
Augustine, ^^gust Epi. and 21.
who had enquired of him what opinion he had of Jesus Christ: But our Bishop
who without difficulty, doubt, or scruple whatsoever, peremptorily concludes:
That we are no more to hold Christ for the perfect and sufficient doctor of
the Apostles, than the Scripture for perfect and sufficient doctrine of all the
faithful: triumphs amongst Christians, yet against Christians and the
Christian faith: and finds no matter fitter for his glory, nor more richer
for his purse, than such reproaches of the Scripture, such blasphemies against
Christ.

Cumanus governor of Judea, a heathen and a wicked man caused a soldier to be
be beheaded for tearing a copy of the Book of the law of Moses, which he
had found at the sack of a town: The Bishop of Eureux, Joseph. Antiq lib. 20.
c.
which teareth and destroys not some copy only, but the very original it
self of this law, from which he plucketh away as much as in him lies, the
leaves which contain the principles and grounds of our salvation, leaving
therein nothing whole, nothing perfect, nothing wholesome nor so much as
profitable, without his subsidiarie (as he terms it) or helping tradition,
expects a Cardinals hat, is heaped with spiritual honors and temporal
goods: so that one may say of him, as Apuleius bearing the Idol on the one
side, and many bribes on the other, said of himself: that he went as a Temple,
and a Barn both together. But if a Sinon with his treason, a Simon with his
magic, Horreum ^imu^ and templum i^c^die
do a hundred times more mischief, the one within Troy, the other within the
City of God, than ten thousand enemies, than all the infidels could do
together without, by open force; shall we yet doubt that they, which under
sheep clothing, yea with a shepherds hook, Ephesians. 2.20.
and Bishopps Crosier staff undermining the foundations of the Church, Aduer.
^tul. lib. 3.
builded upon the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles are not more pernicious
and dangerous unto Christendom, than ever was a Celsus, Lact. lib. 5. c. 3.
a Lucian, a Julian, a Porphyrius, which Saint Cyrill calls the Father of
Calumny, and others which openly opposed Plato to Moses, Aristotle to S. Paul;
Apollonius Tyanaeus to Christ? at least wise, if as the camel, he can drink
none but muddie water, because the clear makes him have gripes in his belly;
De mirabil. Scrip. libri. 3 apud August. tom. 3. Annals Tem pli secundi.
if the B. of Eureux cannot relish the pure and sincere word of God, because it
sends Ecebolian vapors into his head, I wish him to content himself to
trouble it for himself only, without spreading abroad this mudde of his
Traditions, on the brinke of the fountain, which waters the sheep of our
Lord, without driving them from it, by this his impious cry and proclamation of
the Insufficiency of the Scripture; when contrariwise the Ancient fathers made
Collections and descriptions of the wonders of the scripture; he makes
collections and descriptions of the defects and imperfections of the same;
making it seem favorable to the most monstrous Heretics, even to the Saduces,
whose doctrine wholly overthrows and abolisheth all Religion. And that they
have heard of the secret Academie, which was instituted, some few years, ago
in a certain place of Normandy, in imitation of that, which Sadoc and Baithos
erected in the mountain Garizim, where was planted the first stock of that
damnable doctrine of the Saduces, which since is so welspread and increased,
they that know the contents of the new Alcoran that was there expounded to
their auditors, which were already there to the number of forty: will easily
judge by the Emblemes, scattered throughout this book of the insufficiency of
the Scripture, what Mahomet was the author of the other, knowing the Lion by
his long nails. Now as it was not without terror and danger of the new
Musilmans, when Feuardent Doctor of Sorbone, preaching then in the said place,
dissolved that Synagogue, being a true colony of the Synagogue of the Saduces
and Libertines: so could I not publish the treatise of the insufficiency of the
scripture without doing displeasure to the author, who chafeth that I found
means to get, or as he says, to filch a copy of it; for he nowaies desired
that his mysteries should be discovered in public, and exposed to the common
view of all, his intention being not to show it but in secret to his young
beginners, having first stipulated or conditionally required of them a
religious silence, as in times past the Priests and Masters of the Isiac
Mithriac, Cleusinian, and Orgian ceremonies used in the exhibition of their
Phalles and Ithyphalles: Tertul. ad^ valentin. Clem. Alex in Protrep Arnob.
Eusebius. The and alii. Plat. in Ser
wherefore seeing the Proper name of his book to be hideous and fearful, he
gives it another name less monstrous, in imitation of that Pope, who having
to name Swines-snout, was the first devised to change that filthy name on the
other side, he lets loose out of his mouth all the winds of his slander,
to see if he can ouerwhelme and swallow me up into the chaos of his injurious
speeches, ^^ing nips, ^iting ^^u.
by force of exclaming against me deceiuer, Sycophant, Parasite, beast,
dru^kard, se^celes falsifyer, impudent, blind, desperate etc. to omit here
his mockeries, and Sa^casmes, which he applies unto me as leuitiues after he
had so stoned and rent me. ^his treatise 10.
As for the fir t, unless he race out the blasphemies out of his book, it is to
no purpose to scrape out the title from the forefront, seting up a new bush to
his Tavern; for they which read this conclusion in his discourse: the
Scripture therefore contains not sufficiently all the Princ ples of doctrine
necessary to Divinity: if they let their eyes be still dazelled by his
prestigious delusions, if they can not believe of him, that he accuses the
Scripture of insufficiency, ^ril. Hieron ^^roch. 6.
one may well believe of them that they are like to Idols, which have eyes and
see not.

As for the other, I verily believe, that the Christian reader will rather have
to pass over his inuectiues, stopping his nose: than stay to sent such
filthiness. Now the q^estion is not, on whether side is the subtlety but the
truth; not where the Eloquence, but the edification; not the science, but the
conscience: He is not envied the quality he attributes to himself, to be the
greatest disputer of the world, whether herein he would imitate Manes, who
taking this name of purpose for to term himself such in the Persian tongue,
made himself a mad man in the Greek: or whether he imitate that Doctor of
Paris, of whom Lodouic. viues speaks, who made himself be called the
Horrible Sophister, De cause. c^ art. lib. 3.
esteeming this title no less honorable, than the surname of Affricanus, or
Asiaticus. Neither can he hinder, whosoever sees a firebrand in the City,
the Gauls on the Capitol, Sacrilege in the Temple from crying against him,
were he a child, yea a goose. Herodo. l. 1
And if in times past a child, dumb by nature, seeing a soldier come for to
murder his father, found suddenly his tongue unloosed for to cry out and
utter words, which stayed the murderer from passing further: If the same
happened to a wrastler, Aul. Gel. l 5, c, 9
when one would have deceived him: why should we not hope, that he, that will
have the mouth of little ones to sound forth his praise, gives sometimes to
the dumb, the faculty of speech, to children strengh to cry, to the ignorant
efficacy to persuade, Psalm. 8.2 Math, 21.17
at least one that is not altogether out of his wits: that he cease to deceive
and to murder the souls that Jesus Christ has redeemed: from discrediting or
calling in the coin wherewith he paid our ransom: and from clipping the
letters, which teach us the value of it.

And since that cannot be done without manifestly accusing and iniuring the
heavenly Father, who having caused this money to be made, and stamped with
these letters, as true Sovereign, ordeyneth it for all subjects, and gives it
to his Children.

If this caller in, or descrediter of it, will be thought to be of the number of
these, let him reverence the almighty, and the Christian people, at least so
far forth as did that wicked son, who accusing his father before Tiberius,
^^cit. an. ^^l l. 4.
was so terrified at the noise of people, which detested that fact, that he
gave over his accusation and fled.

Now my purpose in this writing is, to treat of, and to examine all the points
and instances from whence he forgeth this calumnious accusation of the
scripture, without refuting more amply his falshoodes, which he mingleth in
the recital of our verbal conference, considering how little reason he has,
to believe he has well done, in disguising so the matters: ^^stic. l. 1.
for on the one side he has learned of Cicero, that faith is a truth and
constancy, of that which one says or does: on the other side the Council of
Constance forbids him to keep faith with heretics. Whence he ingeniously
concludes, ^els. 19.
that if he had not kept the truth of that was said and done in our conference;
he had not kept the Decree of the council, but had burst and let out the wind
of that holy and sacred Canon: considering withal that such frauds cannot be
termed wicked, but godly, according to the doctrine of the same Church,
because they are done for a good intent. As for me, since such Canons are not
forged in our Church, nor such distinctions in our schools; I am not permitted
to use the same liberty: wherefore I will add nothing to the bare recital of
that history, where I have imitated neither his disguisements, nor his
inuectiues. But if there be found any word somewhat free: let him attribute
that, either to the necessity of my defense, or to the delicateness of the
days; and let him call to mind, that he which says whatsoever he lists,
shall in the end hear what he likes not, when the sharpenes of the truth
begins to alter the sweetness of the delight. And since he takes a very
great pleasure, when he reproacheth me that I would not continue the
conference, unless it were written and signed on both parts; so far am I
from repenting me of it, or denying it, that here again I confess, that I
insisted upon it with all endeavor; that he may see, that when the truth
permits me, I oppose not my self any whit to his delight: For it suffices
me for my contentation to believe, that the courteous Reader will make none
other judgment of this my just and necessary instance, Epist. 74.
than that which S. Augustine hoped, when Pascentius the Arrian, having refused
to write, and to sign in a disputation that he had with him, nevertheless
vaunted that he had overcome him, knowing well that his falsehood could not be
convinced by any act: For in that are the lurking holes, says S. Augustine,
which they seek, that are more desirous of contention, than of the truth. And
as touching the vanities and lies of Pascentius, he answers: It is easy to
overcome Augustine; but heed is to be taken, whether it be by the truth or by
exclamations. If it has not been easy for the Bishop of Eureux to vanq^ish
me in the one sort, yet has it been most easy for him to do it in the
other, being in the midst of his Satellites, or parasites, who by their
acclamations did reenforce his his cries, and did like the birds of Psaphon
sing his praises. But this Psaphon, proclaimed great god by the chirping of
birds, Cool. Rhod. antiqu. Lact. l. 3. c. 5
was soon after declared great deceiuer by the judgment of me^. For
conclusion I give him the same advertisement that S. Augustine gave to
Pascentius, that he busy not himself in seeking how he may overcome Tillenus,
which is but a man, and the least of men: but that he take heed how he may
overcome the truth, Vbi. sup.
the perfection of the scripture how with his hammer of wind he can spoil,
break, or clippe the tables of the law of God, more pure, more hard, than any
Gold, than any Diamond, the least piece or shiuer of which, is more than
sufficient to pierce and break in pieces the forehead of this Goliath, though
it be of brass, and shamefully to overthrow to the earth all this great
Colossus, which so proudly lifts up himself against heaven, against the
voice which breaks Cedars, Psalm. 29.
and which makes the mountains to quake.

An Advertisement to the Reader.
THou shall understand (Christian Reader) that the Bishop wrote since a reply
c^ncerning only some of the first point^ herein touched, privily passing it
into the hands of some of his frien^s and favorites, and some whom he labored
to pervert: Wherein, though his principal intent was, secretly to disgrace
both the sacred Scripture and this defender of it, yet has it turned wholly to
his own disgrace, by occasioning this learned man largely to answer it, and so
more fully to clear the truth concerning the points touched in his reply.
Which answer of D. Tillenus, I have here also for thy benefit added: only
the Bishops reply I have purposely omitted, partly because the ground, or as
much as is needful for the vnderst^nding of the matter, is already above at
large set down: and partly because (it being not meet to trouble thee with
needless superfluities) each word and matter of any moment, or worth the
answering, is in the answer every where verbatim (for the most part)
expressed.

A DEFENSE OF THE SVFFICIENCIE and perfection of the Holy Scripture: Against
the Cauillations of the Bishop of EVREVX: by which he endeavors to maintain
his Treatise of the Insufficiency and Imperfection of the holy Scripture.
THE first question between the Bishop of Eureux and I, is general; namely,
whether the holy Scripture be perfect, and sufficient, for to instruct us in
the knowledge of salvation; or whether it be not sufficient for that effect.
The other is special; namely, whether these articles, the Immortality of the
soul, the Resurrection of the body, the last Judgment, Paradise, Hell, the
Creation and distinction of the orders of Angels; the Being and Creation of
Devils, are contained in the books of Moses, or no: In these questions I had
attributed the Negative to the Bishop of Eureux, taking the Affirmative for
my self. He calls that Deceiptes, because he says not, that the Scripture
is imperfect or insufficient; but that without Tradition it is not sufficient
to refute all heresies. And for that he says not, that these things are not
contained in the writings of Moses; but either that they were not, or did not
appear to the Jews to be therein contained. Let us treat sincerely, and
leave deceipts to those, who believing none of the foresaid points, have
termed Moses a Deceiuer; perhaps because he spoke too evidently for their
liking. To the first deceit he casts on me, is sufficiently answered by a
discourse of purpose upon the Justification of the Title of his Treatise. As
touching the other we will first see, whether these things be in Moses, or no.
Secondly, we will dispute, whether they do appear to be there or no. If they
be there, to what purpose does he frame Insta^ce from it, to show the
imperfection of the Scripture, which is the only scope of his book? Why
rejects he the places quoted to this purpose, out of the five books of
Moses? Why are all the reasons brought for the affirmative, but vain and cold
conjectures with him? Why shows he not the proper and formal places, whence
I should take them, and in which alone they are contained. But if they be not
contained in the books of Moses, wherefore is he ashamed to confess it? Why
am I a Deceiuer with him, in attributing unto him this opinion? This new
Gnostick has he forgot that first principle. viz. Of every thing either the
affirmative is true or the Negative, the one being immediately opposed to the
other as it must be in matter of disputation? Again, if these points be not
contained in Moses, can his writings be other than insufficient and imperfect,
especially after his own definition, whereby he defines an imperfect and
insufficient thing to be, when it is not sufficient to the end for which it is
destinated, and according to the manner whereby it is ordained thereunto. Tim, 3,
16 ^.
The end and office of the Scripture is, to teach the man of God, that he may
be perfect, and absolutely instructed unto every good work. Now, if the first
principles, and fundamental points of this instruction be wanting therein, and
if we must derive them from some other way (as he says) besides the Scripture;
It follows, either that the man of God, may be perfectly instructed, without
believing the imortality of the soul, the resurrection of the body, Paradise,
hell, etc. (which is the perfection not of a Christian faith, but of a
Pirrhonian belief:) Or else that the books that should teach the^ and yet
co^teine the^ not wholly, are as imperfect, as a humane body would be without a
head, without a heart, yea without a soul; or as a tutour or scool Mr, (for so
S. Paul caleth the law; Gal. 3.24.
) which shows not to his disciple so much as the.1. rudime^ts or principles,
without which notwithstanding he should never be capable to learn or
understand any thing. Also, if none of the foresaid points be contained in
Moses, it follows that S. Augustine did wrongfuly show by so many reasons,
Cont. Cres^ Gram. l. 1. c. 17. and, 18.
that Jesus Christ was a good Logician: it would follow also, that he that put
him in the rank of deceivers, with Moses and Mahomet did him no wrong: for
every Sophister is a deceiuer, and he which alleges for a demonstratiue
proof, that which is but a vain and cold conjecture, is a Sophister: now if
the place of Moses, that Christ alleged to the Saduces, for to prove the
resurrection of the dead, Exodus 3 6. Matthew. 22.32.
be not a demonstratiue proof: it is the trick of a Sophister, to have
alleged it for such. Also it would follow that Christ in approouing the
opinion of the Jews (who thought to have life eternal in the scripture) if it
were erroneous did not the office of a faithful teacher: for, that by this
scripture is understood the books of Moses, it is manifest by the 45, 46. and
47. verses of the same chapter where our Savior says, John. 5.39.
that the Jews trusted in Moses, that Moses accused the^, that Moses wrote of
him; That they could not believe his words, because they believed not Moses
writings. Of necessity then whosoever will not openly blaspheeme Jesus Christ,
and declare himself an unmasked Atheist, must acknowledge that the foresaid
points are contained in the books of Moses.

It remains now to show, how they be there, and whether they do apeare to be
there or no. I say they do so appear to be there, as man is able to se the^
there; but to discern the^, he must have the eye of his soul open and
cleansed; like as for to see the Sun, which is the clerest thing in the world,
the eye of the body must be open and seeing. Now the understanding of the
natural and unregenerate man is obscured with darkness, is but darkness, ye is
dead; that is to say, deprived as well of life as of spiritual sight, 1 Cor. 2.1.
which is the cause he cannot see the things that are of the Spirit of God,
finding but folly in them. And so, not only the Law of Moses, but also the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, notwithstanding the brightness of it, is hid to them
that perish; Cot. 4.3.
of whom the God of this world has blinded the understandings, that the light
of the Gospel of the glory of Christ, should not shine in them. Both the Law
and the Gospel, become clear unto men, when the Spirit of God, by the light
of his grace, expels inwardly the darkenesses of their nature, and the
darnesses that the Prince of darkness has added thereunto: Pet. 119. Cor, 13.12
and when he outwardly shows the light of the Scripture, shining in dark
places, until such time as we see face to face, the things which in this world
cannot be seen but in a glass darkely. Here he will reply; Whence comes
then this diversity of interpretations? Whence comes it that whosoever is
truly enlightened by the Spirit of God finds not straight ways the true
meaning of the Scripture? I answer, that it is one thing to be truly
enlightened, and another thing to be perfectly enlightened in all things. It is
one thing to understand all the points necessary to salvation, and another
thing to be able rightly to expound all the places of the Scripture one by one.
It is one thing to err in the exposition of a particular place; and another
thing to err in a general point of Doctrine; yea though all the points be not
of like importance. It is one thing to say, that the Scripture is perfect in it
self, containing perfectly all that is necessary to salvation; and another
thing to say that men comprehend perfectly this perfection. The Apostle says
that, In this life we know but in part, Cor. 13.9
we prophecy but in part: It belongs unto God alone to know all things, and
in all perfection. Now as there be children of light, which see but by glymse,
as it were, because they receive this light by little and little, and by
degrees, as the blind man whose eyes Christ opened, to whom at first men
seemed like trees; ^ark. 8.24.
and these acknowledge their Imperfection and weakness of sight: Also there are
children of darkness, which presume to know al, to see all, which never feel
their blindness, ^^hn. 9.41.
whose sin, as says our Savior, remains, that is to say, is incurable: For
he gives sight to them that feel their want, and by his just judgment
blinds more and more those, that think they see most clearly, which entitle
themselves, Leaders of the blind, a light to them which are in darkness; Romans
2
which disdainfully reject the light of the Scriptures, which boast themselves
of a greater wisdom, than that which God has in them revealed; which seeing
themselves condemned by the Scripture, refuse it for Judge, take it for an
adversary, and accuse it as guilty of the errors of those, which follow it.
It is the speech of the Bishop of Eureux, that he said unto me in the verbal
conference, upon the error of saint Cyprian, touching the rebaptizing of
heretics. And here he says. That the scripture is so far from being
instituted to serve only for particular instruction, in all the contentious
points of Religion, that on the contrary, the first intention of the Apostles,
was to deliver the doctrines to the Church by tradition of lively voice, and
word unwritten. Also he says, that the Apostles wrote but by incident or
chance, Fol. 35.
and upon secondary occasions. Let us see this Enthymeme or imperfect argument
of the Pirrhonia^ Logic: The Apostles first taught by lively voice, Ergo,
they pretended not to teach by their writings, which succeeded their preaching:
The consequence is as good as who should say; One eats first for to nourish
himself; therefore drink serves nothing to nourishment. A non distributo ad
distributum, etc. If he make an opposition between the commandment of the
spirit of God, and the incide^t, or the occasions which moved the Apostles to
write, he blasphemeth in divinity, denying the places of scripture, 2. Tim.
3.1 2. Pet. 1.20, 21.
where it is called, inspired of God: and doteth in Logic, excluding the
efficient and principal cause, because of the instruments and means that it
uses. Also the Apostle saint Jude says, Jude. 3.
that there was a necessity of writing imposed upon him: And in the Revelation
we read, that saint John is more than ten times commanded to write. We know,
that to preach and to write are things very accordant, and which were
comprehended in one and the same commandment given to the Apostles, ^ath, 28
to teach all nations, which yet to this day they teach by their writings. He
which commanded them the thing, which is, to teach, commanded also the
manners of teaching, which are to preach with lively voice, and to set forth
the doctrine in writing, both of them being fit for teaching, and this latter
most fit for to continue and to transfer doctrines or instructions unto
posterity. ^enaeus li, 3 p, 1,
So Irenaeus understands it, saying: The Apostles after they had preached
with lively voice the Gospel, afterward gave it us in the scriptures, by the
will of God, for to be the foundation and pillar of our faith. So the book
entitled Manuale Curatoru^, shows it, saying, there are three sorts of
preachings: One is by writing, as saint Paul did, writing to the Romans,
Corinthians, etc. Another is by actions: so every action of Jesus Christ is our
instruction: the third is by word and lively voice.

The Bishop of Eureux, for to show that he is not alone in his opinion,
produces four places of four ancient Fathers, that is, by ^^ose of our ^^de.
often propounded and expounded, namely, that they should be understood not of
matters of faith, but of the order and governance of the Church; which things,
being of their own nature ambulatory, and subject to change according to the
diversity of the circumstances, of times, places and persons, could not, or
should not be written. Or if they speak of some doctrine, not contained in the
scripture, they mean it of the formal terms, which are not there; as the
words trinity, coessentiall, sacrament; the sense and matter of which,
notwithstanding, is therein found, and is drawn from thence, either by analogy
of faith, or by necessary consequence. Otherwise it would follow that they had
gainsaid and contradicted themselves; a confess. fid. sum. mor. 72 1. and sum.
80 22. eres.
to wit, S. Basil, when he says: that it is a most manifest mark of
infidelity, and a most certain sign of pride, to reject any thing of that
which is written, or to bring in any thing which is not written: S. Epiphanius,
All things are clear in the scripture, to those which by a holy use of reason,
will draw nere the word of god and which have not conceived an operation of the
devil (such as they conceive, (...) 1. Timoth. ^om.
that accuse the scripture of imperfection:) endeavoring to cast themselves into
the gulf of death. S. Chrysostom makes saint Paul speak to Timothy in
this manner: In stead of me, thou have the scriptures, if thou desire to
learn any thing, thou may do it from thence. Then he adds: De doctrine.
Christ. l. 2. c.
If he wrote so to Timothy, who was full of the holy Ghost; how much more
ought we to think, that it is spoken of us. It is manifest that this Father
thought that the intention of the Apostles was, to leave to the Churches their
writings, in stead of instructions by word of mouth, which they could not
continue after their death. Saint Augustine says: In Psalm, 132
Among the things which are Openly declared in the scripture, are All those
which contain faith and manners, that is, Hope and Charity. There is to
quitte his four places, and in pieces of the same coin. If he will agree
them, let him bestirre himself better than he did in the answer he gives to
the place of saint Hilarie, that has these words: That which is not contained
in the book of the law, we ought not so much as to know it. He says, that
this should be understood, of the Apocrypha books, alleged in quality of
Canonical. What a mockery is this? Is not the sentence of S. Hilarie general?
or if it be not general, is it not unapt and frivolous? But the reply was
ready. That there be many other things to be known, besides them which are
contained in the law, which contains not so much as the principal points,
viz. the immortality of the soul, the resurrection of the body, etc. What
Apocrypha Logic is this, to draw an universal conclusion, from particular
premises? And when the same father says in another place; It is good that we
content our selves with the things which are written: can that plaster cure,
or so much as cover the wound, that this place makes in his unwritten
Traditions? And here let the reader be advertised once for all; That all the
sentences of the Fathers, how general soever they be, what universal mark
soever be set upon them; are ever shifted off, by a restraining them to some
particular deed: As if the Hypothesis were not decided by the Thesis; a
particular case by a general Law: which is to make a laughing stock of the
Fathers, and to deprive them even of common sense, in making them reason so
unaptly, and in occasioning their adversaries to make unto them so easy and
just replies. To return to Hilarie, the Bishop of Eureux, opposes to the
above said place, another of the same Father, taken out of his Commentary on
the second Psalm, where he says, That Moses after he had written the words
of the old Testament, consigned certain more secret mysteries, to the
seventy Elders, etc. which place he says, I have not read; and calls me a
bad scholar, in skipping over the beginning of the book, for to study at the
end: I answer, he shows that he himself has not read the note set upon
the marge^t of this place (non credo) which, Hilar. Paris. ex ^ffici. Carol.
Guillar. anno. 1544.
with the authority of saint Hierome, thinking that these commentaries upon
the Psalms are for the most part taken out of Origin, that is, out of the
original of the most part of his errors, moved me to put this opinion of
saint Hilarie in the rank of others wholly erro^eous, which are found in his
writings, as when he attributes to our Lord Jesus Christ a body incapable of
weariness, of hunger, of thirst and of al dolor; condemning of errors, Lib.
10. de Trin. in Psalm. ^8.
those which by his sufferings, conclude the dolor. When he speaks in such
sort of the Incarnation of Christ, as if the holy Virgin had but borne and
brought him forth, without contributing any thing of her substance, to his
flesh. Lib. 8. de Trin.
When he says that we are one with the father by nature, and not only by
similitude or adoption. When he thinks that Moses is yet alive, atleast by
the judgment of Bellarmine, notwithstanding that the holy Scripture says the
contrary in express terms. Matthew. inc. 17 de Purgat l 2 c. 8. Deu 34.5. etc
Learn here, Bishop, that it is better to skip over such places, impure and
dangerous, than to defile a man's self, and run headlong into danger by abiding
upon them. Epiphanius recites that certain monstrous heretics gathered the
spettle, and other ordures which issued from the bodies of certain women
descended of their arch-hereticke, ^osh. 1.1.2 Haeres. 53.
for to keep them in manner of relics, and to apply them to sick persons. In
like sort do they, who cherish their spiritual maladies, by the
uncleannesses, which they gather from the writings of the ancient Fathers. And
it is good reason, that such to whom the scripture is unsavory, should have no
better than stinking puddles for their best refreshing.

He accuses me of two frauds. 1. In that I summon the adversaries to prove by
the scripture all the points in controversy between us and them, not only
such as be of the Essence of our salvation, but others also less important:
and in the mean while restrain the disputation of things necessary, when it
is showed that the Apostles left certain things to their disciples, without
writing the^. 2. That in stead of proving the points in question, by such
clear and infallible texts of Moses, that every simple Israelite, might have
framed of it a necessary and indubitable consequence, I produce only some
probable and coniecturall apparances or shows. To the first objection I
answer: that we never change our Thesis. We prove by the scripture the
points, that we believe necessary to salvation: and we demand of our
adversaries, the like proof for the points, that they pretend to be such,
whether of necessity absolute or conditional. We reject many things of the
Romish Church, which at first sight seem not to oppugn salvation, but their
consequences dash against it. For example: the forbidding to eat flesh on
certain days, is in it self a light thing, and may be practiced for certain
politic respects, Romans 14
which concern not our salvation, since that the kingdom of God is neither
meat nor drink. But to make of it a law for to bind the conscience, to
declare the transgression thereof, a sin against the holy Ghost: to
constitute therein merit toward God, to attribute unto it an expiatorie power
to do away sins, C. violato^
to make of it works of supererogation, etc. These are consequences which
shake the foundation of Christian liberty, the doctrine of grace, and the
assurance of our salvation, grounded upon grace. Thus acknowledging but one
Lawgiver, who can save and destroy, (...). 4 12.
and desiring to persist in the liberty which Jesus Christ has purchased us,
we will not receive the yoke of bondage. 5.1 8.20. ^.11.28, ^0,
And they that would subject us under their laws, and make us fall under their
insupportable burdens, we bring them to the law of God, to the yoke of Jesus
Christ which is easy, and to his burden which is light. Wherefore, it is
false, that we conclude so, as the Bishop of Eureux says we do: That is not
in the Scripture, it is therefore an impiety and superstition. Our conclusions
are thus: That is not in the scripture, and notwithstanding is commanded us to
be kept, as necessary unto salvation, by him who has no authority to make
laws to the conscience: Therefore it is an impiety, or superstition. We
grant also, that some things touching the order and outward policy of the
Church, things not immovable and unchangeable, as is the doctrine of faith;
have not been written: neither all the particular deeds and sayings of our
Savior, and his Apostles: But it is one thing to say, All the heads of
doctrine are not written; and another thing to say, All the particularities
comprised under every head or kind are not written: We say that the Apostles
have written all the heads of doctrine: genera singuloru^; though not all the
particularities of every head; Non singula generum. For as it is impossible to
comprehend them all, so is it not possible to write them all. And for this
cause we never denied, but that there were things unwritten under both
Testaments; and as we do not merely and flatly reject them, so we receive
them not all without discretion or difference; Neither hold we them that we
receive, in the same degree of authority with the scripture: because the
Apostles themselves, inasmuch as they have not inregistred them with the rest,
have weakened their authority, and manifested, that they were not things
absolutely necessary, and that the doctrine that may be drawn from them, is
sufficiently declared in the things which are written, which are never so
particular, but that we may draw thence instruction, for the general Rule of
faith; And the number of these same, is so ample in their writings, that to
Christians they suffice, whether it be to learn the truth, or to reprove
error. This is that which is principally regarded in matter of Testaments,
namely what is written, and not what the Testator said by word of mouth to any
one, who may vary or forget; which is not to be feared in ^he Scripture. And
how should the right be known? How should the process be ended, which arises
of matters of Testament, if the Instrument be not produced and visited,
especially when it is a long time after the decease of the Testator? And when
the Apostles make mention in their writings of some particular thing, holde^
and received among the Jews, though not expressed in the writings of the Old
Testament: it follows not, either that they would authorize all the
traditions of the Pharisees, or that they esteemed the Scripture imperfect, or
that they set those unwritten particularities that they allege, in the same
degree of necessity or authority, as they do the things written; For if of
such allegations one would infer equal authority with the scripture, it
would follow that the poems of Aratus, Menander, and Epimenides, out of whom
saint Paul cites some verses, should be equal to the scripture, Acts, ^7.2.
1. Cor. 15, Titus, 1, 12 ^o^o, 10
which verses got no authority amongst us, til since the time as they were
sanctified by the Apostle, as Tertullian speaks, though before they contained
truth. The Bishop of Eureux very unfitly confounds these two terms, Truth
and Authority, as if every sentence and history, containing Truth, had as
much authority as a place of holy scripture. And if the Apostles allege
sometimes things not written: it must be noted, that having received the spirit
in such abundance, they discerned better the true traditions from the false,
than their pretended successors could any ways do. Also ordinarily, it is
but upon some circumstance of history, and not for the substance: as the names
of the Magitians of Pharaoh: Jacobs worshipping of God, 2, Tim, 3, 8 Hebr. 11.2
Hebr. 12.2
as he leaned on his staff: certain words of Moses propounded at the
publishing of the Law. The fastening of Iosephes feet in the stocks, in
prison. The prophecy of Henoch alleged by S. Jude, though it be taken from
Tradition, as touching the words, (...). 105, 18,
yet the ground of it appears in Scripture, which teaches us, that the
Patriarchs, were ordained for to teach those of their ages, and to declare
unto them the judgments of God. And since we find in Scripture that Henoch
continually walked wirh God, we gather from thence, that he spared not to
exhort the men of his time, (...). 5, 22.24
to repentance, and to threaten them with the wrath of God: Considering that
the same Scripture teaches us, that God does nothing before he has revealed
his secrets to his servants the Prophets. ^^us. 2.
It is also to be noted, that this prophecy of Henoch, may be more fitly
understood of the universal Judgment that God executed upon the world by the
flood, than of the last Judgment of the world.

And forasmuch as they of whom S. Jude speaks, were contemners of God; It is
to be believed, that they made as little reckoning of the Scripture as of the
authority of Jesus Christ, ^^se, 4.
whom they denied. And therefore the Apostle chooses rather to allege unto
them a history, witnessed, not only by the Scripture, but also by profane
Authors, who make mention of the Deluge, as we learn by Josephus, Eusebius,
and S. Cyrill. But this instance shall be examined more particularly in his
place.

The second fraud, whereof he accuses me, is; That in stead of showing the
points in question by express Texts of Moses, or by necessary consequences
and true analogy; I show them by some probable and coniecturall apparances or
shows. The Reader which has eyes to see, shall judge whether there be
appearance, or substance, whether probability or necessity: mean while I will
advertise him of the method that Du Perron keeps in answering it. 1. He
opposes some maimed exposition of one of our Doctors, as if we did attribute
like authority to them, as the Church of Rome does to their popes; or the
like, as to the ancient fathers; of whom the Gloss of the civil Canon says:
Glos. in did Can Nolim
that all their writings are to be held for authentical, even to the least
Iota or title. Although sometimes he produce some out of the Rabbines, yea even
from some Doctors of the Romish Church.

2 He inuenteth one of his own brain, if he find none in some Interpreter,
that repugneth mine.

3 He reduces the places of Moses, in form of a cornuted syllogism, in
fashion of his miter, to make himself be laughed at.

4 He wresteth my conclusions, for what point he lists; though I allege
the places for proof of another: and this he does that he might make my
arguments be found the more absurd, and give himself subject of exclayming,
that I speak not of all the points proposed.

5 He says in the end, that the places are not so clear, but a conte^tious
spirit may find some defect: And if I confirm my exposition by the
testimony of the Fathers, for to show that others have understood, as I do,
the place in question; and that I wrest it not, to serve mine own turn; His
ordinary answer is; That the question is not whether some Father has
understood it so, or no; but whether that can be verified by the only text of
Moses; which is the heap of all perverseness and Impudency; for if I bring but
the bare text, he says I am alone of my opinion, and that it may be taken
otherwise, at least by a contentious spirit. In a word, not only the places of
Moses, but also those of Job, Daniel, and David, most express, for the
Immortality of the soul, the resurrection of the body, the last judgment, and
life Eternal; are so feeble unto him, that he shows well, that he believes
those points no better than the Saduces, for whom he pleads; And whereas
Cicero said to a certain Advocate pleading faintly; if thou did not
cou^terfeit, thou would not plead so coldly: So, contrariwise, one may say
unto him, that if he feyned, he would not plead so eagerly: for to imagine,
that he believes these points by benefit of the inuentarie of Tradition, is
absurd; since that throughout his whole book, he continually demau^deth
insoluble and inevitable demonstrations, which none in the world, no not the
most contentious spirit that is, can be able to gainesay, protesting that he
will not admit any proof of Scripture, unless it be such. Can he find of
this stamp in the treasorie of Tradition? Is not his speech the speech of a
heathen Atheist, ^^len. de ^ll. differ, l, c, 4,
most execrable? which says: That in the School of Moses and of Christ, there
be hard laws, which are not grounded on any demonstration. Felix Governor of
Judea, a heathen, and a wicked man, when he heard S. Paul speak of the last
Judgment, ^^t. 24.25.
he trembled for fear; and yet the Apostles discourse, was only taken from
Moses, ^^t. 26.22.
and the Prophets, if we believe him, in that which he says afterward, before
Festus and King Agrippa. But our Pyrrhonian Bishop finds, ^^l 11. and 22 25
that all that can be alleged is but matter of mockery; and that by Moses
saying, beasts and fishes are altogether as immortal in their souls, as well
comprised in Gods couena^te, and capable of everlasting life; as the creatures,
which bear the Image of God.

The Saduces, for whom he pleads, found not the Resurrection of the body,
clearly enough expressed in the writings of Moses, for to believe them: but
after that our Savior Christ had proved it by the miraculous raising up of
Lazarus, did they believe it for that? The Pharisees which made profession to
believe it, believed they for that, that Jesus Christ was the Resurrection, and
the life? No more truly the^ an Epicure would have believed the Imortality of
the soul, seeing Calanus ioccu^dly cast himself into the fire: although this
act seemed to othersome, a more pertinent proof, for to show the Immortality of
the soul, then all the demonstratiue Syllogismes of the Philosophers. Now that
it may the better be seen, whether it is I or Moses that Du Perron mocketh at;
I choose rather to produce my arguments, in their form, after the manner of a
simple Israelite, tha^ expose the simple places of Moses to the laughter of a
double Sophister, who though there could be found no place of Moses fit to
reason from; yea though Moses had not written at all; should not for all that
in any fashion whatsoever, advance his desperate cause; as hereafter I shall
make most manifest to the eye and sense of every indifferent reader: In the
mean while I will bring forth the places, according to the order of the five
books of Moses.

Out of Genesis.
The first argument for the Immortality of the Soul, is taken from the
creation of man after the Image and similitude of God; and is thus framed: Genesis
1.26.
That which is made after the Image of a thing, resembles it after a singular
or peculiar manner; But man is made after the Image and similitude of God;
Therefore he resembles him after a singular manner or fashion. Thereupon shall
be showed to a Saducie, thoroughout all the five books of the Law, but
specially by the Text of Deuteronomy. 4. from the 15. verse to the 25. verse, that
this likeness cannot be in man, as touching his body, since that this God,
whose Image he is, has noe body; considering also that it would follow thar
every body might be said to be the image of god, which Moses says only of
man; Therefore of necessity it must be in the reasonable and intellectual
soul; otherwise beasts should be also made after the Image of God; This soul,
if it be mortal and corruptible, it cannot resemble after a singular fashion
or manner, the immortal and incorruptible God. The B. of Eureux replyeth, that
Luther and Calvin say; That the Image of God is defaced or put out by sin, and
that the interpreters themselves of both sides have upon this word almost as
many opinions as heads. I answer that neither Luther, nor Calvin, do at any
time confound the quality of this Image, with the substance of the same. The
quality, which is, in the right and pure understanding and will of the soul,
is defaced or blotted out, but the substance is no more abolished, than man of
whom it is the essential form. But he defaceth and abolisheth here, without
thinking of it, all that goodly Image of his Tradition, and casts it to the
ground, more rudely, than ever the Ass did the Image of Isis: For if even the
Interpreters of his side cannot agree among themselves, and are not able to
expound the Image of God, what serves their Tradition for then? which, as he
says, has a double profit, yea necessity; the one to supply that which is not
written; the other to expound that which is not clearly written, Anchor. ^em.
haer. 70. ^em. in Epist. ^^l Io. Hieros. ^^b Hier. versa
which he calls subsidiarie or helping tradition: and Epiphanius, whom he so
often alleges, as one of the principal depositaries of Apostolic
Tradition, freely confesses; That it cannot be known, a^^ that this knowledge
is reserved to God, who alone knows, in what part of man, he has placed his
Image. He perceives the^ here a Tradition, which says not a word, which
furnishes neither supply nor explication, upon this point so important; much
more defectuous than the Scripture; which at least declares unto us, that man
is made after the Image of God, whence is drawn the argument above propounded.
And therefore, the exposition of these Fathers, which place this Image of God
in the immortality of the soul, cannot be taken from Tradition, so barren in
this behalf; the which also none of them alleges, when they treat of it:
Neither Tertullian, (co^tr. Mar. l 2. c. 9.) Nor Athanasius, (de in carn.
Christ.) Nor S. Ambros. Hexa. l. 6. c. 7.) Nor S. Augustine. de Genes. co^tr.
Manich, l. 1.) Nor Philastrius, Bishop of B^^sse, ( haer. 49.) Nor the Abbot
Dorotheus. (Doctr. 12.) Nor Albicus Flaccus (quaesti. in genes. Interr. 39.
etc.) All which draw it out of the bare text of Moses, as I do. But of what
sincerity and authority is the Romish tradition in this point? ^say. 40, 18,
^5.
which when God demands in the Scripture; To whom will ye liken me, or what
similitude will ye set up unto me? answers by the subsidiarie or helping
mouth of his Interpreters the Bishops: We will make thee like to a piece of
wood or stone, painted or graven, bearing a triple Crown like a Pope, old and
decrepit, and which for a need, will serve for a sign or bush at a tavern.
The disciples of the Tradition, learn of it, that God is made after the image
of a man; in stead of believing with the Disciples of the Scripture, that man
is made after the Image of God.

The Jewish Tradition upon this point, is not so insupportable as the Romish,
neither is it clear, that one may gather more properly from it, the
Immortality of the soul, Vile. Gl. Ord.
than we do from the Text it self: the Rabbis say: that the Image of God is
to be sought in these properties of the soul, Ier, 23, 24
viz. as the soul fills the whole body; so God fills heaven and earth.
Also, as the soul is one only in her body; Exodus 33.
so God is only one in the whole universal world. Also, Psalm, 121
as God sees all, and can not be seen, so the soul sees the exterior
things, without being seen. Also, as God sleeps not; so the soul ever
waketh. All these resemblances, and conformities are found as well in a beast,
as in a man: so that by the Jewish Tradition, we should be true Saduces, that
is to say, such, as Du Perron their Advocate would feign make us be. Gen, 4:1^


From the place, where the blood of Abel, shed by Caine, is said to cry unto
the Lord; I frame this argument: That which cries and demands vengeance, is
not wholly extinguished and brought to nothing: Abel after he was murdered,
cries to the Lord and asks vengeance: therefore he was not wholly
extinguished and brought to nothing. The Bishop of Eureux perhaps will reply
that this is a figurative speech, to attribute a cry to blood, and that one
cannot draw a proper conclusion from it. Let us frame the argument therefore in
this form. They of whom God has care, are not adnihilated or brought to
nothing: but God has care of Abel, after his death: therefore he was not
abolished by that death. If our Carneades demand me here, who has taught me to
argue thus; I answer, Matthew 22.
that it was not a Doctor of Sorbonne, but the Eternal wisdom of God; who
concludes, that God is not the God of the dead, but of the living. And this
example of Abel, is no less evident, than that in the Revelation, where the
souls of them that were killed for the word of God, cried under the Altar; How
long o Lord which art holy and true, do thou not judge and avenge our blood
on them that dwell one the earth: Behold almost the same light, the same style,
in the first and last book of the holy Scripture.

(...) 9.5. etc,
When god says in the same book of Moses; that he will require again the
blood of souls, Resur. c. 28.
he shows us the same thing, and furnishes us matter of a like argument.
Notwithstanding, Tertullian draws thence a consequence, not only for the
Immortality of the soul, but also for the Resurrection of the body; reasoning
thus: That which God requires again, must be restored: but God requires
again the blood shed, as well by the hand of beasts, as by the hand of men:
therefore, it must be restored: for that which is not at all, can not be
avenged. And then he concludes, that what is spoken of the blood, is spoken of
the flesh; ^^p 32,
without which the blood can not be: and that the flesh shall be raised up,
that the blood may be avenged: and in the same book, he says; that Moses in
this place, makes mention of beasts, at whose hands the blood shall be
required; the better to express the resurrection, even of bodies devoured by
them.

The Bishopp of Eureux finds, that this is but an hyperbolicall threatening,
for to terrify men from manslaughter. But they which take the prohibitions of
Murder for hyperboles; they are the very same that hyperbolically give license
to themselves to commit it, following the Tradition, not of the Apostles,
(unless it be of Judas;) but of certain Robbers among the Donatists, which
they called Circumcelliones.

Now since this place cannot be well understood, in his judgment, without
Tradition; he secretly insinuateh, that even the civil Magistrate cannot
punish murder, by virtue of this law of the Scripture; that so he might put
into this false scabbard of his tradition, both the two swords together; the
spiritual, and the Temporal.

From the taking up of Henoch, I make this argument: he which is taken out of
this life, and gathered unto god enjoys an eternal felicity: But Henoch
being no more seen among men, was gathered or taken away unto GOD: therefore,
Henoch enjoys eternal felicity. This argument proves not only the
immortality of the soul; But also Paradise, that is to say, an eternal
felicity. The Sadduces reply, by the mouth of his advocate Du Perron, is: That
it may be granted that this translation was a withdrawing from the
conversation of men, and a delay and staying of death, till a certain time,
unknown to men of the first ages, but that it follows not that the soul,
after the extinction of the body subsisteth and remains for ever.

I answer, that if it be permitted to the Saducie, and his Advocate, to add
to the text of Moses, what they please, they may conclude from thence what they
list, and one day shall find, that which they will like but little. But this
Sadducean or Perronian gloss, is contrary to the Text of Moses, which sets
down unto us the temporal life of Henoch, much shorter than was the ordinary
of that time: So that this taking up, cannot be understood of a delay, or
staying of death. Moreover, this text represents unto us Henoch, as the most
excellent man in piety and love of GOD, which lived in his age; and sets
forth unto us also, without the help of any gloss, his taking up, as a
manifest testimony of the favor of God toward him.

On the other side, all the Law of Moses teaches us; that it was rather the
testimony of a curse, than of a blessing to be soon deprived of this
temporal life, seeing that long life upon earth is promised and propounded as
a special blessing: I^ follows therefore, by necessary and inevitable
consequence, that there is another and more happy life then this earthly life,
Into which Henoch was translated, Revel. 21.
which we call Paradise; that is to say, a place extempt from all evil, and
abounding in all good.

This consequence is drawn from the text it self, not from the word of
Tertullian, who calls Henoch, Candidatum aeternitatis; which I had inserted
by the way. But take away this floorish that he makes upon occasion of this
word, as if I would prove the immortality of the soul, by Tertullian, he
remains lame and benumbed and not able to pass any further: For the rest
that he says is as much to purpose, as if one would ground the original of
the Esseians, or of the Monks o^ Popery, on this withdrawing of Enoch from the
conversation of men: And if our Bishop had not taken in hand to plead the cause
of the Saduces, he might find here a good proof for the Esseians, or for the
Monks.

From the history of the Deluge may be drawn proof for the Universal
judgment, which Du Perron holds not to have been believed among the Jews,
^^n. 7
but by Tradition of the Prophecy of Henoch, cited in the Epistle of saint
Jude: For that which we see foretold in the same prophecy, we find it
accomplished in the seventh chapter of Genesis. The argument may be formed
thus: He which executes judgment against all, and condemns all the wicked,
for the works of their impiety, executes an universal Judgment: But God
executed such a Judgment in the flood, against all the wicked: Therefore, he
executed an universal Judgment. The Bishop of Eureux cannot deny the Mayor,
for it is taken from the foresaid tradition; nor the Minor, without denying
the history of Moses, who teaches us that this Judgment was universal. And
if the Saducie allege the promise that GOD made ( Genes. 9.11. and.15,
Verses.) not to destroy the whole earth any more: we can show him the
restriction, that is there added, namely, that he will not destroy the earth
any more by the waters of the Flood, his judgments not being subject to one
only form. And seeing that the same Justice is always in God; which the
Saducie is constrained to confess; and the same unrighteousness and impiety
reigns amongst men: It follows, that he will execute also the same
judgment, to wit universal, though we can not know the day nor the hour:
Tradition being no less silent here, than the Scripture.

From the Covenant, that God made with Abraham, and the Hebrews; I argue thus:
Genes, 15.17, 2, 4.7.
A covenant that dureth for ever, requires that the parties between whom it
is contracted, do abide for ever: But the covenant that GOD contracteth with
his, dureth for ever: Therefore they must also abide for ever. The only light
of nature shows, as well to the Jews, and to the Heathen; as to Christians,
the truth of the Mayor: For it is most certain, that when one of the
Correlatiues is extinct, the relation which is between them is extinct also:
The Minor is proved to a Sadducie by a good number of places of Moses,
alleged in my former answer, which the Bishop of Eureux calls a
Rhapsodie of conjectures; a name more fit for the matter in question than he
imagines, or intends, if we take it in the sense, that Eustathius Homers
interpreter teaches us; that is to say, for a Laurel Rod, where triumphant
Truth abateth the impudency of a blasphemer, who makes the covenant grounded
on the seed of Abraham, that is to say, on Jesus Christ, common to brute
beasts; under color that GOD promised to Noah, not to drown the earth any
more, by a Deluge: Fol. 11
so that even beasts taste of this favor, not perishing any more all at once,
as they did in the Deluge. To an Hebrewe Sadducie, one may show him by his own
tongue, that the word (Berith) commonly translated, covenant, is taken
sometimes generally, for every declaration, whether of counsel, of
commandment, or of promise: As we see by the examples. Leui. 24.8. Nomb.
18.19. and 25.12: In which places, this word signifies nothing else but
Ordinance, like as it is taken in this place in question, Genes. 9.11.
Sometimes it is particularly understood, for a contract and covenant made
between parties, which do reciprocally or mutually condition and accept: Now
that the covenant made between GOD and Abraham, is such a one; is showed by
the seuenteeth Chapter of Genesis, where we see GOD on the one side,
conditioning; and on the other side, Abraham accepting.

If Du Perron will make his instance of any force, he must show the like
conditioning and acceptance between God, and beasts; Or else let him
confess, that this word (covenant) agrees not in the same sense, or
univocally, to men and to beasts. In the same Chapter 7. verse. God having
said, that this covenant between him and Abraham, is perpetual; shows in
what it consists, to wit, in that he is the God of Abraham: Whence it
follows, either that Abraham is permanent for ever, or that the covenant is
not perpetual or permanent. For how could God be the God of one which is not?
And this consequence was found so necessary in the argument of Jesus Christ
against the Sadducies, that they knew not what to reply thereunto, though
they knew the place of Genesis 9.11. as well as their Advocate Du Perron.

^enes. 12.13 ^.17.26.^8.
From the inheritance of the land of Canaan, promised to the Patriarckes,
Abraham, Isaacke and Iaacob, I frame this argument: If the promises of God made
to the Patriarchs, be understood only of the earthly inheritance, and not of
the heavenly, God is not true of his word: the consequent is blasphemous:
Therefore the Antecedent is false. The consequence is showed, in this, ^en.
13.15 ^ 15.7. and 17 ^8. and 18, 13
that the promises of the inheritance of Canaan, were directed as well to the
Patriarchs themselves, as to their successors; yea they were the principals,
with whom the Covenant was treated; which did bear their name, and in all
prayers; chiefly in that of Moses making intercession for the people, it was
still alleged; GOD was ever prayed, to Remember his Covenant made with
Abraham, Isaacke, and Jacob. Yea Genesis 15.7. god speaks but of Abraham,
saying, I am the Lord that brought thee out of Vr of the Chaldees, to give thee
this Land, to inherit it: Now god gave him never any inheritance in this Land
of Canaan, Act. 7, 5.
no not so much as to set his foot upon, as S. Stephen says, and as the
Sadduces may see in the history set down by Moses: It follows therefore,
either that God has failed of his promise; or that this land was but a figure,
whereof Abraham has obtained the substance and thing. Genesis 17, Heb, 11, 9.1^
13,
This consequence is drawn from the bare text of Moses, without employing the
place of the Epistle to the Hebrews, which I had alleged, for to show a
Christian, not a Saduce, that I wrest not Moses text, from which alone, without
other tradition the Apostle draws his conclusion. Du Perron says, that this
argument of the Apostle was not good, but for those that were brought up in the
tradition of the Synagogue, Fol. 17,
which tends to none other end, but to banish the writings of the Apostles
from the Christian Church, and to confirm them in the Jewish Synagogues, for
to mix and steep them there in Cabalisticall gloses. To the places in which
the promises of the Land of Canaan are directed to the Patriarchs themselves,
and not only to their posterity, he answers, that it must be understood of
their children, who should represent them. Which is a manifest mockery: For to
what purpose should the Scripture conioyne these two terms; To thee and to thy
seed? What part should they have in the Covenant, if in that land they were
strangers, depending on the mercy of those, which then actually possessed it,
and being exposed to their outrages and violences? Wherein should be found the
accomplishment of the promises of God, the truth of the heavenly Oracles?

What comfort would it be for Abraham, that at the end of four hundredth
years, his posterity should possess a certain country, yet after infinite
miseries of a long and cruel bondage, and in the mean while, himself with
whom GOD had principally contracted the covenant, to be subject to so many
evils, plucked out of his own country, driven out of the Land of Canaan by
famine, almost constrained to prostitute (as it were) his wife, for to save his
life in Egypt, having sometimes want even of water? Therefore not only he
knew, but those that read his Story in Moses may see, that this land was but
a sign unto him of a more excellent and heavenly thing; and that he was not
to complain for having been deprived of the one, seeing he was assured of
the other, having God for his reward, as the express Text says (Genesis 15.1.)

From Abraham's intercession unto God, for the cities of Sodom and Gomorah:
Genesis 18, 25.
I draw this argument for to prove the universal Judgment: If there be a
Judge, which iudgeeth all the earth; there is an universal judgment: But
Abraham acknowledges God for such a judge, and calls him by this name, verse
25. Therefore there is an universal judgment.

Gen, 22,
By the history of Abraham's Sacrifizing Isaac, I prove the Resurrection,
showing to a Sadducie that Abraham believed it, and that thus. He which
believes God to be true: believes that he will fulfill his promises: But
Abraham believed God to be true: therefore he believed the fulfilling of his
promises. Now this promise was, that in Isaac should his seed be called.
Therefore of necessity one of these two things must follow; either that he
believed that god would raise up Isaac again, who^ he was about to kill, or
that he believed not the promise that God had made him; for to believe that he
would give him another son, Gen, 21, 12
it were still to fail of the promise, which was made of this Individual: to
wit, Isaacke. This consequence is drawn from the text it self, and the
Apostle who alleges it, neither adds thereunto, nor presupposes therein any
tradition. But such a spirit as our Bishop is of, Heb, 11, 19,
finds more taste in the tradition of S. Siluester, that raised up a dead
Bull, Or in that of S. German, that raised up an ass, and a calfe which they
of his house had eaten.

From the words that God says to Abraham (Genesis 15. Genesis 15.
) I reason thus: He which has God for his reward, has immortality and life
eternal: But Abraham has God for his reward: Therefore he has immortality
and life eternal. Du Perron says: That some of ours understand this reward of
earthly and temporal things: true, but they exclude not heavenly and eternal,
unless he forge himself a God without immortality and without eternity. His
answers and ordinary manners of arguing are, to snatch one part, thereby to
exclude the other, as if he should say: God framed Adam a body, therefore he
gave him not a soul. Let us set him down the argument in this sort: Whosoever
has God for reward, has more than an earthly and temporal thing: But Abraham
has God for reward, therefore he has more than an earthly and temporal
thing. But since the Bishop of Eureux receives the exposition of
Oecolampadius upon this place, who understands, as if God said unto Abraham:
If I be for thee, who shall be against thee? If I be thy buckler and thy
protection, who shall hurt thee? Let him receive also this argument: He whom
nothing can hurt, is immortal; otherwise death should hurt him, yea break
this buckler which is God, and vanquish this protector, which is the same God.
Now nothing may hurt Abraham, therefore he is immortal, and all the calamities
that he suffered, did not hurt him, to speak properly: But if death had
abolished his body and his soul both together, without hope of restitution,
and resurrection, then should the promise of God have been found vain and
frustrate.

From the exclamation that Jacob makes at the point of death, I draw this
argument: Gen 49.^
Whosoever waits for the salvation of God at the hour of his death, when he
is going out of this life, thinks not to die wholly and altogether: but Jacob
at the point of his death waits for the Salvation of God: therefore he
thought not to die wholly and altogether, for it behooves, that some thing of
him should remain for to receive this salvation.

And though it should be understood of some succors for his posterity, yet it
behooves, that he which waits and hops for that, be not wholly
extinguished and brought to nothing. So in the vulgar translation which is
authentic in the Church of Rome, there is in the future tense: I will wait
for thy salvation O Lord. If Du Perron reply, that his Sadducie holds not
that translation for authentical: No more do we that of his pretended Rabbi,
that he alleges unto us.

(...) 14, (...) 49, 29. (...) 15.55. (...), 8, 17,
From this speech, to be gathered to his fathers, or people, many times repeated
in this first book of Moses, I conclude, that if those to whom Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob be gathered, be not at all; Moses speaks unaptly and
falsely: But this consequent is false, therefore also the antecedent is so too.

Out of the second book of Moses, called Exodus.
^^d, 3, 6,
This book furnishes us in the first place, with the argument wherewith our
Savior Christ, stopped the mouths of the Saduces, proouing unto them the
resurrection of the dead, the form of it is this: They of whom God calls
himself the God, are living: Now God calls himself the God of Abraham, the
God of Isaacke, and the God of Jacob: Therefore they are living: And seeing
that according to the body they are not yet raised up from the dead, that must
needs be one day, though in respect of God, to whom all things are present,
they be already raised up, and therefore he calls himself their God,
speaking of a thing which shall infallibly be done, as if it were already done.

The Bishop of Eureux cries as loud as he can, that Jesus Christ cited this
place only for to prove the immortality of the soul, and that it belongs
not to the Resurrection of the body. I say, though he presuppose the
immortality of the soul, yet he means it necessarily of the Resurrection
of the dead, because it is the question that the Sadduces proposed to our
Savior, which of the seven brethren in the resurrection should have the woman
to wife, who had been married to the^ all, one after another: is there any
tradition, that makes marriages between souls without their bodies? such a
marriage would be another manner of mystery, than that is, which the Romish
tradition has made a Sacrament.

Bellarmine himself says: our Lord being about to prove the Resurrection to
the Saduces, alleged this testimony of Scripture, I am the God of Abraham,
the God of Isaak and the God of Jacob: and adds, God is not the God of the
dead, but of the living; whence his intention is to infer: The dead therefore
rise again. Now although the Saduces denied also the Immortality of the soul;
yet the Resurrection of the body, seemed unto them much more absurd; And upon
this point was grounded the most formal dissension, between them and the
Pharisees, as appears, by that which Saint Luke says of the^. ( Act. 23.6.7.)
Also the three Evangelists qualify the Saduces by this mark, as the most
notable, that they believed not the Resurrection. And if our Savior Christ, by
the Resurrection of the dead, meant only of the co^tinua^ce of souls not of the
Resurrection of the flesh: besides, that he had done nothing by his argument
taken out of Moses, that a Heathen Philosopher by natural reasons might not
have done; It would follow, that he had then granted, that the soul dies, or
at the least sleeps, till the day of Judgment; for this term, resurrection
or rising again, can not agree but to that which before is fallen, as it
fares in the body by death: And when it is attributed to the soul it is but
by figure, like as sin is called the death of the soul, in as much as it
depriueth it of the spiritual life, which is in God, yet without abolishing
her substance.

But our Bishopp attributes this opinion to Christ, for to conform it with
that of one of his pretended vicars, Pope John the 22. who was constrained by a
King of France, to retract it, and to unsay himself by sound of Trumpet, as
Gerson witnesses. Now let us see the Spirit of astoniednesse which possesses
him in saying: Though Saint Matthew should say in express terms, that Christ
alleges this Text against the Sadduces, upon the question of the Resurrection
of the body, what can he necessarily infer thereupon? I answer, if Jesus
Christ alleged this text for the Resurrection of the body, it must necessarily
infer, that it is therefore proper for to prove it, or that Christ was not
fit for to reason. Certainly when the resurrection of the body is proved, the
immortality of the soul is proved also; But he which proves but the
immortality of the soul, proves not for that the Resurrection of the body,
which was notwithstanding the question, wherewith the Sadduces had assailed our
lord; who had by no means stopped their mouth, if he had proved but the first
point, that is to say, satisfied but the one half, and, the easiest part. But
this argument, says our Bishop, was till then unknown to the Jews, who for
that cause admired the wisdom of our Savior: And therefore they must needs
have received the belief of it, by another means than by the books of Moses,
namely by the tradition of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and other Fathers. What
use has then here, subsidiarie tradition, which, after our Bishop, (...) 71.
is the Guardian and keeper of the mystical interpretation of the text of the
scripture? (...) 45.
Or if there were none upon this place, as Du Perron seems to grant,
reckoning it among them, that the son of God, who has the key of David,
opened to his Disciples, since he himself expounded the scriptures, It will
follow, that the place was altogether unprofitable before: which is the bishops
mystical exposition, that he might covertly give Saint Paul the lie, who
maintains that The whole scripture is given by inspiration from God, ^^m. 3
and is profitable, etc, or as they of the Church of Rome translate it: Every
Scripture, that is, every place of scripture, meaning it even of the old
Testament, Now it is true that Saint Matthew says, that the multitude were
astonished at the doctrine of Jesus Christ, citing this place: For the confusion
and ignorance was so great, under the Reign of the Pharisaicall Traditions;
that it seemed to the auditors a thing miraculous, to be able to allege the
Law so pertinently and to purpose: Even like as in this last Reformation of
the Church, many of those, that had been all their life time brought up in the
superstitious Traditions of the Church of Rome; have been astonished, when they
have seen them so pertinently confuted by the holy scripture. In the mean
while, the thing has not been so obscure as the bishop will have it:
otherwise some, even among the Scribes, would not have approved this
allegation, saying: Master thou have well said: Luke. 20.39 Mark. 12, 2^
For they were so great enemies to Jesus Christ, that they espied all
occasions, even to the least of his words, for to entrappe him. And must Du
Perron show himself here worse, than were the Scribes and Pharisees; accusing
our Savior Christ's argument of obscurity or impertinencie, which was
approved by his greatest enemies, Math. 22.3
who confessed that he had stopped the mouths of the Sadducies?

Which shows that the thing was so clear and manifest, that there could be
no reply. But what reason or testimony can be clear to him, who finds not
clear enough the place of Daniel, under color, that a Rabbi, and one
Polychroneus, had some particular doting upon it, yet more than sufficiently
confuted by some of ours, without any help of Tradition, which our bishop
holds so necessary therein. The words of Daniell are. Oecolamp. Dan. 12.2
Many of them that sleep in the dust of the Earth, shall awake; some to
everlasting life, and some to confusion and eternal shame: And they that be
wise shall shine, as the brightness of the firmament, and they that turn many
to righteousness, shall shine as the stars, for ever and ever.

Behold the place, wherewith Du Perron says, a contentious spirit cannot be
forced, without the help of tradition that we no more doubt of his intent,
which is not to content himself, to make the scripture insufficient and
imperfect; but also wholly unprofitable, superfluous, and unapt, seeing the
clearest and most formal places, have no force, nor virtue without Tradition:
which if we will believe him, forces all, even the most contentious spirits,
to whom the scripture co^tenteth it self to say: 1. Cor, 11.16
If any man lust to be contentious, we have no such custom, neither the
Churches of God. What remains for him, but to say, that Tradition is God
himself, who alone is able to change the hearts, to tame the rebellious, and
to make light shine out of darkness? Indeed there was a Bishopp in the counsel
of Trent, who without blushing or changing color, attributed to the, Pope,
(who is the principal spring and fountain of the Traditions, at this day in
controversy;) those words, that Saint John had said of the Eternal son of
God, calling him the light come into the world. Orat. Corn. Epis. Bitont. in
Conci. Trid, John. 1.
Now if Jesus Christ had had the same opinion of the scripture, as Du Perron,
would he not also have said the like to the Sadducies, as their Advocate
holds unto us? Namely, that they deceived themselves to think, to find in
the writings of Moses, all that was necessary for them.

And that the five books of the Law, were but a letter of credit, referrring
the rest, to the sufficiency of the bearer of the Tradition? He dare deny,
that our Savior Christ attributed the cause of the Error of the Sadducies to
their ignorance of the Scripture; though two unreprovable witnesses depose
it, and that in so clear and evident terms, that all the smoke of the
bottomless pit, Math. 22.29 Mark. 12.24 25.
cannot darken the light of it, especially that of Saint Mark, in these
words: Are ye not therefore deceived, because ye know not the Scriptures,
neither the power of God? To one that has the boldness to deny such Textes:
I confess I cannot show any thing, neither in the Old, nor in the New
Testament.

In the mean while Du Perron may be judged here by his own mouth, as that
evil servant in the Gospel, being constrained to confess, that one of the
causes of the error of the Sadducies, was the ignorance of the sense of the
Scripture, Luke. 19, 22 Fol. 52.
though he mean it but of the place cyted by themselves; which comes all to
one reckoning: for to be ignorant of the sense of the scripture, is to be
ignorant of the scripture: But the true sense of the same, is discerned and
seen, when the Father of Lights makes it be seen, not when the Synagogue
only, or the Church shows it, which has not any Tradition whatsoever, for
to open the eyes of the mind, and to force the most contentious: otherwise she
should manifest this force upon the Turckes, Jews, and Paganes, if Tradition
contained the true Efficient and Isntrumental cause, both together. Saint
Hierome expounds the place of saint Mark in these words: They err (says
he) because they know not the Scriptures: and because they are ignorant of
them, they know not the power of God: if we follow not the testimonies of
them, darkness will oppress us, and will pass upon our doctrine. After Du
Perron our Savior Christ's reply, must be corrected, by these words: Ye err,
because, ye know not the tradition, neither the power of the Synagogue, or of
the High Priest Caiphas, address your selves to this same, and ye shall know
all the secrets of God.

From the second commandment of the Decalogue, I frame this argument: they
that experiment the mercy of God, even to the thousanth generation, cannot be
abolished by death: now they that love GOD, experiment his mercy even to the
thousanth generation: therefore they cannot be abolished by death. The Bishopp
of Eureux opposes unto me Brentius, who expounds this promise of God, not of
eternal life, but of the multitude of posterity.

He so often alleges unto me this expositour, as if his authority were as
irrefragable, and authentical amongst us, as the authority of an Apostle: If I
should aleadge unto him Eutyches, Nestorius, or some other holde^ for an
heretic, both of him and me; all the Ellebore of Anticyra would not suffice to
purge such an Impertinencie. But because it is himself, that uses it, it must
be admired, as a wisdom extrauagante. Now let us take this place according to
the exposition, be it of Brentius or of the Saduces, and then let their
advocate Du Perron tell us, how a promise can be directed to them, which are
not? how mercy can be exercised upon them, which are wholly destroyed and
brought to nothing? Upon their children, will he say; but Moses says formally,
upon Them, which pronoune can not be understood, but of the Fathers, the
abolishment of whom, abolisheth the subject of Gods mercy. Ethic. l. 1. c, 11
This consequence is no less necessary and evident, then that is which the
Interpreters of Aristotle gather for the Immortality of the soul, from a
place, where he propounds this question; whether it imports to our
felicity, that our friends be happy, and whether the dead also are touched with
the prosperity of their friends: he which speaks thus, intends that the
dead are not wholly extinct; and this is manifest by the only use of reason
and common sense, without begging the help of any Tradition. And if Aristotle
who affected obscurity, may notwithstanding be understood, ^xod. 32 32 ^3.
at least in some places; how much more Moses, who aimed only at the
instruction and edification of the people of God.

^ol. 23.
From Gods book, spoken of in the same book, one may thus reason against a
Saducee, that by his Advocate expounds it of a roll or catalogue of the
living; or of a Register, wherein God writes all things, that he has given
Being unto: Moses was not blotted out of this book of life, and yet has not
enjoyed that happy life promised to the people of god, in the land of Chanaan;
but dyed, before he set foot into it, as well as they, that rebelled against
god: It follows therefore, either that the happy life, is not properly to be
understood of the fruition of the land of Canaan; or that God made no
distinction between his most faithful servant, and greatest obseruer of his
Law, and the most disloyal transgressors of the same, between him that was
wont to appease him, and them that were wont to provoke him. This consequence
is necessary not only in the Germane Logic, which Du Perron mocketh at, but
also in that of all the Synagogue that admits the Text of Moses, Act. 6.
Lib. 1. de Cai^ and A^ c. 2.
were it of Libertines and of Sadduces: the principal of, which, who at this
present is Bishop of Eureux, can reply nothing else thereunto, but that
wherewith the ancient Libertines accused S. Stephen, to wit, blasphemies
against Moses, and against God. If that which S. Ambrose says of Moses, that
he is not dead, be of the Jewish tradition, Deuteronomy. 21. and 34, 5. I 1.2.
which after Du Perron was the true depositarie and Guardian of the sense of the
Scripture, and of the truth of God: than see here a fair piece of it, which
blotteth out and wholly destroys the express text of the Scripture, which
speaks of the death of Moses. Let the Reader note by the way, that the secret
that our Bishop insinuates, touching the mystical interpretation, that is
drawn from the help of Tradition: It is to change the affirmations of the
Scripture into Negations, and the Negations into Affirmations.

From the 34. chapter, verse 7. I draw this proof for the universal
Judgment. He that absolueth none that is guilty, judges al men: but God,
says Moses, absolueth not him that is guilty, therefore he judges all men.

Out of Leuiticus.
From these words; The man that shall do these things shall live in them: may
be made this argument: Leuit. 18.^
If the life that God promises to the obseruers of his Law, be but temporal,
they have nothing more excellent above others; but the consequent is false?
Therefore the antecedent likewise: The consequence is manifest, for many
contemners of God and transgressors of his commandments, as well among the
Israelites as among the Heathen, have lived a longer and happier life in this
world, then many of the children of God have done; ^ Cor. 15. 19
who might as well say then, as S. Paul said since: If in this life only we
hoped in Christ, or in God, we are of all men the most miserable. Therefore
here, either the Sadducie must deny the justice of God, or renounce his
obstinate opinion.

^^uit. 18.5.
From these same words also, is proved the sufficiency of the Scripture of
Moses, in this manner; that which makes to live eternally, is sufficient to
salvation: but the things that Moses writes in his Law, make to live
eternally, therefore they are sufficient to salvation. The minor is proved by
the argument going before, which shows that this life can not be temporal,
and that is the part which the Saducie denies. His Advocate Du Perron will
deny this part which affirms that Moses wrote all the things, that make to
live eternally. To allege unto him S. Paul, who says that Moses, ^^m. 10.5,
describes the righteousness that is by the Law, of which righteousness
perfectly observed, proceeds life; He would mock at it, and would attribute
this understanding to the institution of the Synagogue: but it shall not be
lawful for him, after his own principles, to mock at Moses so, ^^ut. 13.10.
who in another place, restrains all this observation of the commandments
and ordinances of God, to those things that are written in the book of the
Law: without directing the promise of eternal felicity, to the obseruers of
any other more secret commandments, contained in the Tradition of the 70.
^^l. 31.
Elders of the Synagogue, as Du Perron would have it. Considering also that if
this place cannot be understood of eternal life, without the help of
Tradition. S. Paul was greatly to blame, to allege it barely and nakedly with
out this breastplate of Tradition, when he represents the contrariety and
opposition, ^^m. 10,
that there is between the righteousness of the Law, and the righteousness of
faith.

From.19.20. and.21. chapters, where God particularly calls himself the God
of the Israelites, I reason thus: If God did promise and give only earthly
things to the Israelites: he were not more particularly their God, than the God
of other peoples and nations: yea he should rather have been more specially
the God of some Heathen nations, to whom he gave kingdoms and Empires, far
greater and more flourishing, than a little country of Canaan, given to the
Israelites, after so many pains and with so many evils as they had ever
there. Now God calls himself particularly the God of the Israelites, having
discerned and separated them of purpose, from all other nations, for to do
them good: Therefore it must needs follow that these blessings were not only
earthly and transitory.

From the.26.42. verse. where God promises to remember the Covenant he made
with Abraham, Isaak and Jacob; I gather the same Argument, that has been
above produced and treated of at large, from diverse places of Genesis.

From the same Chapter 44. verse, where God promises not to consume them that
be his, because he is their god etc. one may draw this proof for the
Immortality of the soul: If the soul dies with the body, man is wholly
consumed; but the Israelites are promised of God, that they shall not be wholly
consumed: Therefore the soul (at least) remains after the body is consumed.
The B. of Eureux will reply that this must be understood of the total
extermination of the people, as if GOD promised ever to leave a remnant of
some, still amongst them; I answer; that if universal promises, directed to a
people in general may not be applied to every faithful in particular; they
are vain and none at all: For if all the particulars be consumed one after
another; the general, which is composed, and which consists but of
particulars, will be consumed like wise, and so will but shadows remain, to
serve for subject to the fullfilling of Gods promises. And what joy or comfort
could they take, that heard Moses pronounce them, or did read them in his
writings, if none could apply any of them to themselves in particular.

Out of the forth book of Moses, called Numbers.
From the blessing of the Priest, that assured the Israelits of the keeping and
peace of God; I reason thus: They whom God keeps cannot perish, God keeps
them that be his, therefore they cannot perish. Or else in this form: They
that perish are not kept of God; the people of God are kept of God, therefore
they cannot perish. Now it is certain that they should perish if death
destroyed them, and wholly brought them to nothing. The Bishop of Eureux
restrains this keeping to the time the people were in the wilderness, where
God preserved them from hunger, from thirst, from Serpents, and from their
enemies, because some Interpreters expound so the place Deuteronomy. 32. which says,
that god kept his people as the apple of his ey. But the question is not,
whether god kept his people in the wilderness, which none denies, but whether
Moses or any of his expositours, confine the keeping of God only in the
wilderness? and whether ever any Saducie showed himself so impertinent, as to
say, that God kept not his people elsewhere? This form of the Priests blessing,
is it not general and universal? Let us see his goodly Episcopal Enthymema:
God kept his people in the wilderness, therefore he never kept them, nor will
keep them elsewhere: yet would it follow, that at least they that he kept in
the wilderness, are not wholly perished and brought to nothing: or else, that he
kept them no better in the wilderness, than he did elsewhere: and indeed, many of
them dyed there by fire, by pestilence, by serpents and by their enemies: yea
all that came out of Egypt, except two, dyed there, even Aaron and Moses:
whence is manifest, that this keeping in the wilderness was not so singular and
only, that none other is worthy consideration in respect of it.

From the same place also I reason thus: If the anger of God against sin,
has ordained misery and death for to punish it, as appears, ( Gen, 2. and
3.) It follows that the peace and mercy of God takes away this punishment,
and consequenly causes that death cannot hurt, at leastwise them, that are
partakers of this peace and mercy of God, according as is contained in the
blessing: Otherwise the effects of the wrath, and mercy of God, should be
both alike; and his favor and peace should not restore the felicity lost by
the transgression of Adam. Now the Sadducie sees well, that this is not
effected always, nor yet ordinarily in this life, which is fuller of
calamities to the children of God, than to others: Therefore there must be
another life, wherein this accomplishment is found.

From the fourteenth chapter, and eighteenth verse, which sets forth unto us
the mercy and benignity of GOD, is drawn an argument wholly like unto the
former: And another also like to that which above is produced out of Exodus.
34.7. where are read the same words.

From the same Chapter, the twentieth verse, is gathered a proof for eternal
life, where God declares, that he pardoned his people that had provoked him;
and yet nevertheless he says, that they should all die in the wilderness,
and that none of them should see the land of promise, which was accomplished:
And therefore, if there were no other life for them, whereto served the pardon,
that God gave them? If those, whose sins God pardons, are destroyed in
body and in soul; what could he more do to them, that obtained not pardon?

But since the Sadducie with his Advocate, will not see Paradise in Moses, let
us show them Hell there: The sixteenth Chapter of this book recyteth unto us
an History of some, that descended thither alive, and hell is there named
twice; which should suffice him, that makes no reckoning of consequences, how
evident and necessary so ever they be, but dema^deth ever the litterall and
formal text. If he reply that the Hebrew word signifies also, a Sepulcher, or
ordinary grave; let him know that it cannot be so in this place: for when
Corah, Dathan and Abiram were sunk down and swallowed up, it was not an
ordinary burial, nor a grave made of purpose: And the Latin Bible, which is
Authenticke to Du Perron, translateth it (Hell^.)

Numb. 23, 10
In the 23. chapter, is read this memorable sentence of Balaam, so clear and
manifest, as well for the felicity, as for the shame to come; Fol. 20,
that our Balaamite is ashamed to reply thereto himself, choosing rather to
bring in a contentious spirit (as if his own were other;) saying: That Balaam
by a figure, common to Enigmaes and obscurity of Oracles, required length of
days, which God promises to the just, and that his posterity, or his
memorial, or his seed might flourish, and that he might not die of a sudden,
violent, nor hasty death etc. confirmng the exposition of the place of Moses,
by the authority of Horace, a most worthy warrant for such as with this Poet,
may well be called Epicuri de grege por^^, swinish Epicures: Now whilst he
makes his co^parisons of the text of holy scripture, that is, of the word of
god, with the heathen oracles, that is, the word of the devil, and goes to
seek smoke in Horace, for to choke the light of Moses; let us see the argument
contained in the said place: There where there is a total abolishme^t, there is
no place for wishes of any felicity: Balaam in his death wishes the felicity,
that is in the death of the righteous: therefore he believed that death is not a
total abolishment. Again, whosoever wishes to die, like unto the^ that are
singularly beloved and kept of God, believes that there is a singular felicity
and happiness reserved for them especially after their death, whereof the
unrighteous shall not be partakers: but Balaam makes this wish, knowing that
God singularly loved the people of Israel: therefore he believed that there was
a felicity and Happynes reserved for them even after death. To that which Du
Perron says, that this felicity may be meant of a quiet death, in a good age
etc. I answer, that one may show to a Saducie, not only by texts of the
books of holy Scripture that he receives not, Job. 21. Psalm, e. 73 Ierem. 12.
Habac. 1.
but also by a great number of histories that he receives, and by his own
experience; that the life and death of the righteous, is very often more
miserable, than that of the wicked; and therefore the Justice of God requires,
that there be made an other judgment after this life: and the very heathen
themselves, were able, by natural discourse only, to make this conclusion,
which the Saduces, that sometimes held the stern of the Jewish Church, and
their advocate, they have met withal in the Romish Church; cannot draw from
the whole body of the Law of Moses. So Balaams ass, without any spectacles of
Tradition perceived sooner and did more honor to the Angel than that great
Doctor, that false prophet, that was upon him: that none might find strange, if
in times past many simple Israelites, and at this day many simple lay men, see
more clearly, and honor more devoutly the holy scripture, which is the true
Angel or messenger, by which God makes known unto us his will, than did the
Sadduces in times past, and at this day the Bishops and Popes, who change the
sheep of Christ into asses, in lading them with their traditions, wherewith
they more cruelly torment them, than Balaam did his Ass, striking it with his
staff, and that for none other reason, but because they give place and honor
to the Angel. Du Perron alleges Luther in favor of his Sadducie, who
wishes even for temporal respects, to die the death of Abraham; therefore why
might not Balaam, who was not, says he, more spiritual, neither he nor his
Ass, than your great Prophet Luther, have the like wish; I answer, that
although the conformity with Balaa^, is found much greater on our Bishops side,
than on Luthers, whether we consider it in the manner of setting forth his own
praises, as Balaam did: or in the profession of being hired, for to slander
and curse the children of God, and for to bewitch again those, whom Luther
according to the grace received of God, ^umb. 24.19
has vnbewitched; or in giving of pernicious counsels for all sort of
fornication; (there being no difference but that Balaam, though against his
will, pronounced that which God had commanded him; and our Bishop, says, and
writes quite contrary to that which God has commanded him in the Scripture;
yea contrary to the feeling of his own conscience:) yet notwithstanding the
argument that he draws from this comparison holds not. For if Balaam
desired the same that Luther desired, and if Luther desired to die like Abraham,
not for regard only of temporal conditions; but also in the faith of Abraham,
that he might be received into his bosom, as a child of the Father of
believers: then it is plain, that Balaam desired expressly the immortality and
salvation of his soul, that is to say, Paradise: And it is to be feared, that
the Saducie here will say, that his advocate sauoreth of the ass; esspecially
seeing his miter, which looks so like a case for long ears. And that if one
day, when he shall have changed his miter into a hat, and his crosier staff
into a Cardinal mule, he can meet with an ass as wise and well spoken, as
Balaams was; it would speak far otherwise to his Cardinals habit.

Out of Deuteronomie.
From the.5. Chapter.29. verse, I reason thus: that which death abolisheth
wholly; can not be a subject capable of a permanent and perpetual happynes: but
they that keep the commandments of God, do possess a perpetual happynes:
Therefore death does not wholly abolish the^. The Bishop of Eureux replyeth;
that, it is not said, that they shall have the^ selves this happiness for
ever; but them and their posterity successively. Now that is false: the word
Them is formaly expressed; but the word Successively is not expressed: For as
has been above already said; the same happiness that is promised in general,
is applicable to every particular, acco^plishing the co^ditio^ required: now
all obseruers of the commau^deme^ts of god, have promise of the perpetual
happiness: therefore every one of the^ shall have it also in particular. Would
not our Bishop forge here some such monster as that of the Libertines, or of
Auerrhois, Of the understanding universal and perpetual in it self, but
corruptible in the indiuiduals? It may be that in the conclusion, he makes
an allusion to Transubstantiation: For if the accidents subsist without their
subject; Man's felicity may also subsist for ever; though the subjects of the
same, be not for ever.

From the sixth Chapter, 24. verse, I conclude thus: If they that fear the
Lord, have promise to be ever preserved alive; It must follow that there is an
Eternal life: Now the Antecedent is contained in these words of Moses, The
Lord has commanded to do all these ordinances, and to fear the Lord our
God, that it may go ever well with us, and that he may preserve us alive, as
at this present. Therefore, etc.

From the ninth Chapter, 27. verse, of the form of prayer used by Moses,
making intercession for the people, and praying God, that he would remember
his servants, Abraham, Isaacke, and Jacob; we may reason thus: That which is
not at al, cannot have any efficacy: the Patriarchs Abraham, Isaacke, and
Jacob, long time after their death, have some efficacy, namely to appease God,
by the remembrance of his covenant contracted with them: Therefore death has
not wholly abolished them. But this argument taken from Gods covenant with the
fathers, has been already above discoursed of at large.

From the 14. chapter, first verse, is framed this demonstration: children have
part in their fathers inheritance: Moses calls the Israelites the children of
the Lord: therefore they have part in his inheritance. Now this father is
heavenly and eternal: his true inheritance therefore is not only earthly and
temporal. For if it were none other, than the land of Canaan: the Lords
children should have no advantage above others; yea they should be worse
provided for, than the most detestable Idolaters and sworn enemies of the
Lord, who have possessed so great and mighty Empires. Again, they that have
God, who is the author of life, and life it self, for their father; cannot be
destroyed, nor always detayned by death: but Moses in this place teaches the
Israelites, that they have God for their father: Therefore he teaches them
withal that they cannot be destroyed, nor their dead always detained by death.
Herupon it is that he groundeth the forbidding touching the unmeasurable sorrow
that the Heathen used for their dead, not having the same hope, ^^rs. 2,
because they had not the same doctrine.

From the 30. chapter, 15. and 16 verses, where Moses sets before the
Israelites life and death; blessing and cursing, I reason thus: if the life and
blessing, whereof Moses speaks, be but temporal and not eternal: God
himself is not Eternal: The consequent is horrible blasphemy: Therefore the
antecedent is necessarily false. The consequence is proved by the twentieth
verse following of the same Chapter, in which God is called the life and length
of days of that people; whence I conclude: he that has the Lord for life, and
for length of his days; shall live for ever: but the faithful, says Moses,
have the Lord for their life: therefore they shall live for ever. And by
consequent the instance of the Bishop of Eureux is foolish and blasphemous,
when he, says; That since God blesses the fishes of the sea, Gennes. 1. one
might conclude, that fishes are capable of life eternal: Moses says not that
God is the life and length of days of fishes, nor that fishes are children of
the Lord, to possess him as their inheritance, as he says of the Israelites,
in terms as clear and manifest, as Saint Paul says it of the faithful,
^ol. 3.4.
when he calls Christ our life. See how the equivocate or double
signification of the word (bless) may be distinguished, by the only Text of
Moses, without the help of Tradition. But it was not for nothing, that the
Bishop of Eureux makes here fishes capable, at least by Moses text, of life
eternal, it is without doubt ouerthwartly to insinuate, because they make more
capable of it, such as make of them their principal food, as do the
Charterhouse Monks, and some others: For he has learned from the Jewish
Tradition, that God having created two whales, and fearing least if they
engendered others, the sea would be no more nauigable, Lyr. in Ps^ Relation. 7.
c. ad fin^^
he killed the female and salted the flesh of it, which he keeps to give the
righteous to eat in the world to come. Also for to teach us, or to put us in
mind, why the Romish Tradition suffers the use of fish in Lent, forbidding
the use of flesh: Namely, because God has blessed the fishes of the sea, but
he has cursed the earth in the works of man, as says Durand that great
rehearser of Tradition, adding that those creatures that have partly the form
of a beast, and partly the form of a fish, as the O^ter, one may eat the fish
part, that is to say of a creature half blessed and half cursed. Such
mysteries indeed would never be drawn from the only litterall text of Moses,
if Tradition did not le^d help thereunto: But the consequence that it draws
from the curse of the earth, for to forbid flesh meats is so glittering and
sparkling bright, that it dazelleth the eyes that are used but to the light of
the Scripture.

For if it be not lawful to eat flesh, because the earth is cursed in the
works of man; we must by necessary and evident consequence conclude, either
that in like sort bread should not be eaten: or that in the time, when this
prohibition was made, men plowed and sowed in the sea and corn grew there,
that they might eat of it, as partaker of the blessing given to fishes, which
is a Tradition, that has need of another subsidiarie Tradition, to help to
understand it.

From the.31. chapter, 16. verse, where God says to Moses that he shall sleep
with his fathers: is gathered the same argument, that above is produced out of
diverse places of Genesis: yea there may two be gathered, whereof this word
(Sleep) does furnish us the first: for to sleep presupposes some Being. And
that which is abolished, is not capable of sleep: One cannot say that he which
is not yet borne sleeps: No more can one say therefore, with Plynie and the
Sadduces, that after man is dead, it is the same thing, as before he was borne
or conceived. The other argument is taken from this whole speech, to sleep
with his Fathers: Those Fathers therefore must have some Being: or else let
the Bishop of Eureux teach us what difference there is between sleeping all
alone, and sleeping with some that have no being at all.

From the 32. Chapter, 9. verse, I conclude thus: The possession of the Lord is
incorruptible: Israel, says Moses, is the Lords possession, therefore it is
incorruptible.

From the same Chapter, 10, verse; He that is kept of God as the apple of his
eye, cannot be wholly destroyed Israel was so kept: Therefore etc. The Bishops
cauillation upon this argument, is above refuted.

From the same Chapter, 22. verse. He which threatens to destroy and consume
the earth by fire, even to the foundation of the mountains, denounces a
general and universal judgment: but so God threatens in this verse:
therefore he denounces an universal judgment. For that which is said to the
Israelites, is applied by a just and evident analogy to all transgressors. The
bishop of Eureux replieth, that these be metaphorical comparisons, whereby God
compares his anger unto fire. I grant it, for there are certain matters, that
cannot be declared to man's understanding, but by metaphorical and allegorical
locutions. And therefore, even in the new Testament, ^el. 13
the torments of hell are represented unto us by a lake burning with fire and
brimstone. And so far are these figures from engendring obscurity, that on the
contrary they give light to our minds and understanding to our hearts, more than
if they were proposed without figures. And such is S. Augustines judgment of
them. (...) 119,
Moreover, if the Tradition be so clear on this question of Hell fire, whence
comes it that the Fathers and Schoolmen are so busied to determine, whether
it be material, or spiritual?

From the same chapter, 39. verse, one may produce a formal text to a Sadducie
for the resurrection: For God says expressly that he kills, and restores to
life: Whence I conclude, If God makes the dead to live again, they are then
raised up.

And to him that would always have express words; may be alleged Chapter 33.
verse 6. where it is said of Ruben, let him live and not dye: whence one may
conclude; He that dies not is immortal, or raised up again: Ruben (that is,
that whole tribe) dies not; therefore it is immortal or raised up again.

From the same chapter, 29. verse; where Israel is called blessed, because he
is saved by the Lord, who is his buckler; is framed this argument: Whosoever is
saved by the Lord, cannot perish: Israel is saved by the lord, therefore he
cannot perish. Our Bishop replyeth to this place, that God saves as well
beasts, as it is written in 36. Psalm. I answer, that Moses declares Israel
blessed, for that he is saved after a singular and not a common fashion; Who is
like unto thee, says he, O people saved by the Lord? Du Perron answers;
these are beasts: 1. Tim. 4.1^
One might show him the diverse significations of this word (save) in the New
Testament, where God is called Savior, that is to say, preserver of all men,
but especially of the faithful: But since he refuses the authority of this
book, in manner of a Sadducie; he shall better understand it by a more
familiar example. When a murderer is escaped the hands of earthly Justice, men
say, he is saved, but if a Sadducie will change this proposition from it own
proper natue, to infer that he is therefore wholly saved: it shall be
showed him to the contrary in Moses, in the chapter going before, where the
sovereign Judge says: Vengeance is mine and I will repay it. Also, Deu. 32, 3
and 39, verse.
There is none that can deliver out of my hand. Thereupon may be said to a
Saducie that which experience constrains him to confess, that God does not
always execute vengeance in this life: and therefore he must conclude, that it
is executed after this life, else should this text of Moses be false: And
indeed this reason, without any text of Scripture, moved the very heathen to
believe a Judgment to come: ^om. 12.
Also the former of these two places, seemed to Saint Paul so clear and
manifest, that he chose not any other, to prove the judgment of God, which
this Bishop would feign not find at all neither in Moses nor else where.

I said in my writings, that these five points are linked unseparably together:
He maintains, that of the four last, I durst not so much as open my mouth:
The reader shall judge, if there be not particular and distinct proofs, for
every one of them. And then he adds, that the question is not of the
connection that they have in themselves, but of that they have in the mind and
knowledge of vulgar and ordinary men. ^ohn. 6.45.
I answer; that they have the same connection in the minds of them, that are
taught of God (as all the faithful are) as they have in themselves: For true
knowledge, is that which apprehends the true being, and also the true order
of things. Now God gives true knowledge of salvation to them that be his;
therefore he gives it unto them conformably to the true being and order of
things, that is, of the articles necessary to salvation: Yea he gives it more
ordinarily to vulgar and ordinary men, Mat, 11, 25.
than to these high and extraordinary Gnostickes, as the Scripture witnesses,
where Jesus Christ gives thanks to God his father, that he had hid these
things from the wise men of understanding, and revealed them to babes. The
ordinary means he uses for to reuele them, is the scripture, ^. Tim. 3, 16,
^7.
which instructs a man, to the making him absolut and perfect, yea even the
man of god; that is to say the Pastor, who consequently is to teach nothing
else but this doctrine of perfection, contained in the scripture, in which he
may show the connection of the articles in question, as for example, in the
place of Daniell above alleged, the resurrection of the body, which is there
formally; presupposes the immortality of the soul. The everlasting life, and
perpetual ignominy of which there is also there express mention made, are
Paradise and Hell, the property of them both being therein briefly declared,
and that in form of a sentence, which presupposes a Judge, to pronounce it,
and a judgment that he shall execute. Now although there has been found even
among the heathen, that have perceived in their mind, the connection of some of
these things, that this Bishop distructeth and divides as much as in him
lies; witness Plutarch, who finds the coherence between the Immortality of
the soul, and the Judgment of God: yet, I neither said nor thought, that the
connection of all, is found in every Spirit, as he would conclude by my
discourse, for to make himself way to surprise me: For that were to make
faith, which is the gift of God, a natural thing, Ephe. 2.8.
as a certain ancient heretic named Basilides, did, who also denied the
Resurrection; and since, the Pelagians, Clem. Ale^^ Strom. l. 4. Tert. de. pr^^
c. 46.
from whom the Bishopp of Eureux differs not much, demanding ever such
demonstrations, as no contentious Spirit should be able to gainsay, and opening
by this means a liberty, to believe what one lists, yea to believe nothing
at all, of the things controuerted and gainsayed.

I said also, that Abraham referred the rich man's brethren for to preserve them
out of Hell, not only to the prophets, but also to Moses: He answers very
pleasantly; Luke 16.19 21. Fol. 53.
That he referred them not only to Moses, but also to the Prophets, the
knowledge they might have from Moses, not being sufficient, to give them any
perfect assurance of it, without the help and light of the Prophets. Let us
observe here again the uncertainty and Pirrhonian perplexity of our Bishopp.
He dare not deny but that there is something of these articles in Moses (for
otherwise Abraham should have mocked the brethren of the damned rich man,
referring them to a book, where there was nothing that was necessary for
them:) and notwithstanding he is not ashamed, to reject as impertine^t, all the
places produced out of it, without quoting any other, that is fit and proper,
at least in his judgment. Moreover, seeing that the writings of the Prophets
themselves, without excepting that excellent place of Daniell, which conteyneth
in formal terms, the Resurrection, everlasting life, (...) 32. (...) 54.
and perpetual ignominy; as above has been showed, are so obscure and
improper to convince a gainsayer, as he affirms; what shameful contradiction
is this, to call them here a help and light, to understand the books of
Moses? He adds further; That Abraham meant not, that the rich man's brethren
should rely themselves, on that which they might gather thence by their own
particular reading, but that they should hear it from the mouth of the
Pastors of the Jewish Church, ^atth, 23.
who knew by Tradition the mystical and spiritual interpretation thereof, of
whom it is said: they sit in Moses chair; do whatsoever they say unto you: We
answer that by Moses chair is meant the doctrine written by Moses; so S. Paul
understood it, when he says: cursed is every man, that abides not in all the
things, ^al. 3.10.
which are written in the Book of the Law. If our Savior Christ had meant,
that men should obey the Priests, Scribes, and Doctors of the Synagogue, in all
things, because they knew the mysteries of Tradition; it would follow that they
should also believe the Saduces, who were of the number of these Doctors of
the Synagogue, and had sometimes the first places in it; and by conseque^t not
to believe any of the abouesaid points. Also it would follow, that they which
betrayed and crucified Jesus Christ, executed this commandment of Christ, do
whatsoever they say. For the Scribes and Priests said, that he should be
crucified, so excellent was their knowledge of mystical Tradition, by virtue
whereof the Priests of the Romish Church, offer him really, that is to say,
crucify him yet to this day, as much as in them lies; for to show what goodly
Analogy and correspondencie the Romish tradition, has with that of the
Synagogue.

Now let us dispatch the point of the Creation of Angels and devils: an
instance, that the bishop of Eureux has borrowed from Julian the Apostata: And
that he might multiply, with him, the number of the defects of the scripture;
he cuteth it into three, Cyril. Ale^ adu. Iul. ^
and will needs have it three distinct questions, crying ignorance and
impudency against me, because I said, that by this his distinction, that he
makes between the Creation of Angels, and the Creation of Diuills, one might
think, that Devils were not Angels in the beginning, or that God created them
thus wicked as they are now. For to maintain that these three points are
three distinct questions, he forgets, or overthrows the point and state of
the principal question, which is; Whether it can be showed by the writings of
Moses, that there be Angels: In stead of the Saducie, he opposes Aristotle,
who holds, that the inferior Intelligences which move the heavens are
coeternall with the sovereign Intelligence I answer, that if he can obtain so
much of Aristotle, as to admit and submit himself to the writings of Moses as
the Saducie professes to do; it shall be very easily showed him, in
Deuteronomie, that there is but one Eternal, And if he grant me this little
word of Moses; he will very willingly grant me, Deuteronomy. 6.4
that there can not be then any other eternal substances with him, and that by
virtue of his own Maxims, or rather by virtue of the immutable Law of Truth,
and of Nature it self, which cannot suffer that twoe contradictorie
propositions be both true together: So as this Eternal of Moses, being alone,
will not suffer for companions, the coeternalls of Aristotle.

But if any yet doubt, whether our Bishopp is a Sophister, or no; let him
observe here, (I pray) his notable cunning: He sees that this Instance of the
Angels, cannot be linked with the former instances before going, Act. 23.8.
and that the Impudency of the Saduces, who denied not only their creation or
distinction: but also their being; is so openly convinced by the Writings of
Moses, (when he speaks of the Angel that forbad Abraham to sacrifice his
son Isaacke; (...) 22, and. (...) 19, and ^^
of the Angels, that Abraham entertained into his house, that took Lot out of
Sodom, that appeared to Jacob. etc.)

That no advocate, no not himself, (though all causes be alike unto him) can
be able to sustain it: see therefore how he has bethought himself to fit me;
by giving me Aristotle for a party, with the Manichees (...) 64,
, whereof the one knew not, and the others refused the Old Testament. Let us
make the Analysis or resolution of this shameful, and more than ridiculous
Sophistry: Aristotle believed, that the inferior Intelligences, that moved
the heavens, are coeternall with the sovereign Intelligence: the Manichees
hold, that there is a Beginning of evil, coeternall with God, and an evil
God: Neither they nor he received the writings of Moses: Therefore it can not
be showed by the writings of Moses, that there are Angels and and Diuills
created.

If our Bishop had done as Carneades, who before he wrote against Zeno,
purged himself with white Ellebore; (...) l, 17, ^^,
he had better distinguished and discerned the Manichees, and the Saduces, than
he does: yet he should do well to take a dram of black Ellebore, since he
will treat of Angels and Devils, that is to say of white and black Spirits.

The Christian Reader will conclude quite contrary to the Bishopps intention;
Namely, seeing the Saduces denied as well Angels, as the Immortality of the
soul, and the other points abouesaid; though there be made as express and
formal mention of Angels in Moses, as of men, of beasts, of trees and of
stones: they would have believed no more the other points, than this, how
clearly and plainly soever Moses had opened the^: And therefore the true cause
of their Incredulity and misbeleefe, is to be sought in the default of their
own malicious eyes, and not in the defect, that is pretended in the Writing of
Moses.

Now since the creation of Angels, in the judgment of our Bishop cannot be
found in this scripture; let us see a little, what Tradition says of it: The
general Threasorers of the same, should be, in my opinion, those that are
called by a special prerogative, the four Doctors of the Church; which are
Saint Ambrose, Saint Jerome, Saint Augustine, and Saint Gregory. Let us hear
them upon this point: The first says; Ambr. h^ l. 1. c. 5.
Though Angels be created, yet were they already before the world was
created. Which is a tradition rather of Origin, than of the Apostles, holden
also by the Heretic Nouatian, Lib. de T^^ Hier. in (...) ad Tit. (...)
and the most part of the Greeks. The second writes thus: Before the world
was created, how many Eternities there were, in which the Angels served God,
without any vicissitude or measure of time. etc.

Here you see them coeternall with the Sovereign intelligence, as well after
Saint Jerome, as after Aristotle. But the third, namely, Saint Augustine, whom
I alleged for witness, and warrant of my opinion, (which is, that the
creation of Angels may be proved by Moses;) contradicts both the former;
and rejecting their opinion, as most absurd, to say that there was any
creature before the world, he adds: That the holy scripture, which is most
true, says, that God made heaven and earth in the beginning, so that there was
nothing made, nor created before: For if any creature had been before this
point; then it is that, that should have been made in the beginning: by this
means the creation of Angels, is drawn out of Moses, by a necessary and
inevitable consequence. And thus does Thomas Aquinas understand it.

That which the same Father says in the same book, P. 1. q. 6^ art. 1. and ^^
ninth Chapter, upon which the Bishop of Eureux groundeth his reply, does
not contradict it. He says, their creation and their order, is not evidently
described in the constitution or creation of the world: Let our Gnosticke
learn, that a consequence may be evident, though the Text be not evident.
And the evidence of this consequence upon this point, is showed as well in the
place above said, (...) ciuit Dei (...) 1. C, 9
as in the place of the 9 Chapter, which our Sophister maliciously geldeth,
suppressing these words: Now they were not omitted, (to wit Angels) I Judge it
by this, for that it is written that God rested the seventh day from all his
works, that he had made, seeing the book it self heginneth thus: In the
beginning God created Heaven and Earth; so that it is manifest, that before the
Heaven and the Earth, there was not any other thing created. And a little after
Seeing all things were disposed by the creation, which are said to have been
finished in six days, how could the Angels have been omitted, as if they
were not of the works of God, from which he rested the seventh day? These
consequences seem necessary and evident to Saint Augustine, though the
literal text of Moses seemed unto him not evident. He repeateth the very
same also in another place. And ever his ground is; It is written, says he;
tradition teaches so.

The last Doctor of the Rome Church, which is Saint Gregory, ^ob. li, 33 ^4,
speaking of the creation of Angels, chooses rather to draw it from the
consequence of some place of Scripture, than from the pretended Tradition. True
it is, that the Bishop of Eureux would have mocked at it in good earnest, if
it were other than a Pope that had drawn it from that text: But it suffices
us to observe here by the way, (...) 33.
the effect of subsidiarie Tradition, without the weapons whereof, our Bishop
holds, that the Text of the Scripture is laid open and naked to the malicious
interpretation of particular Spirits: for these public and universal Spirits,
though covered from top to toe with the armor of Tradition; behave themselves
sometimes far worse, than simple particular men, who find themselves better
armed with four or five little stones taken out of the Scripture, than with
all the sumptuous armor of Saul, that cumbred David so, 1. Sam. 17.
that he could not go, much less fight. Now to these four principal
Doctors of the Church, I could add many others, which in this point of the
Creation of Angels, derive nothing from Tradition; but content themselves with
the consequences drawn from the Scripture: But I will content my self with
one place of Epiphanius, Haeres. 65. cont. P. Samos.
because he is commonly alleged, as a great defender of Tradition.

If the Angels, says he, had not been created with the Heaven and the Earth,
the word had not said to Job: When the Stars were made, all my Angels
praised me with their voice. Then he brings in one asking this question.
Thou have showed that Angels were before the Stars, and have said, that they
were made with the Heaven and the earth, tell us whence have thou made the
demonstration of it? were they made altogether before Heaven and Earth? For the
Scripture declares no where clearly the time of the Creation of Angels: In
gr. contextu corru^te legitur (...) pro^^ (...).
And thou have showed that they were before the Stars, for if they had not
been, how could they have praised GOD for the creation of the Stars?
Thereupon he answers: We cannot say by our own discourse, the solution of
every question; (...). But by CONSEQVENCE OF THE SCRIPTVRES. For the word of
God (note that he makes no distinction between the word of God and the
Scripture, (...)
but take the one for the other) shows clearly that the Angels were not made
after the Stars, nor before the Heaven and the earth, that which is said
being a thing manifestly unchangeable, that before the Heaven and the earth,
there was nothing created. For in the beginning God created Heaven and Earth:
so that there was the beginning of the Creation, (...).
and there was nothing created before then. By this is manifest on which side is
greatest surety, and more certainty of the truth in this point, whether in
following Tradition with Saint Ambrose, Hierome, and many Greeks, who unawares
let themselves slide into the opinion of Aristotle, in stead of the Apostolic
Tradition; Or in relying on the Scripture, by the necessary and evident
consequences drawn from it, with Saint Augustine, Epiphanius and some others?
Genebrarde, notwithstanding the authority of the Scripture, ^hro. Aetat.
the exposition of these Doctors, and the determination of the Church of Rome,
had rather follow the Greeks and others, which hold that Angels are not of the
number of the works, of the six days: yet he is not so desperate as Du
Perron, who denies that their creation can be showed in Moses: For he
affirms that Moses shows plain enough, that they were created of God, when
he calls them Angels of the Lord, when he makes them his ministers and
servants etc. And it is by this only consequence of Scripture, Cyril. ado. ^ul,
that Saint Cyrill Alex. confuted the impudency of Julian the Apostata, of
whom our Bishop has taken this instance. And thus much be spoken concerning
their Creation. Now for their distinction. The Bishop of Eureux says, that the
Jews knew it by Tradition, either absolute or subsidiarie, as he calls it:
Fol. 70,
And Ignatius, attributes to himself the knowledge of the Orders of Angels,
Epist, ad Tra.
the differences of Archangels, virtues, Dominions, Thrones, Powers, the
Magnificences of principalities, the excellencies of the Cherubins and
Seraphins, the sublimitie of the spirit the reign of the Lord, and the
incomparable Divinity of God the father almighty. But S. Augustine confesses
here freely his ignorance, Euch. ad Lau. c. 85.
mocking at those that presume to know it, without being able to prove it.
And in the Chapter following he sath, that there is no need to affirm or deny
the things with danger, since they may be denied without crime. Whence may be
concluded; either that the Christian Church has not been so faithful a
keeper of the Tradition of the Apostles, Fol, 106.
as Du Perron says, the Synagogue was of the tradition of the Patriarchs and
Prophets, which let not so much as one word of Moses fall to ground: Or that
the knowledge of these distinctions and differences, was not a thing so
necessary as the Bishop of Eureux would have it.

If account is to be made of this Epistle of Ignatius, which we hold
supposed, how comes it to pass, that so many high mysteries are so soon
fallen to the ground, and buried in the grave of forgetfulness, as appears
by the diversity of opinions that the Greek and Latin Doctors have upon this
question, so that some of them deny flatly, that the knowledge thereof can be
attained to, as being a thing exceeding both speech and understanding. Isid.
Pelus. l. 2. ep. 99.


And what new revelation has been showed to Thomas Aquinas for to make these
sharings and divisions among the Angels: when he disposes angels for to
govern particular men; Archangels for the Provinces; Principalities, for whole
mankind; the Virtues for the celestial bodies; the Powers, for to command
wicked Spirits; the Dominations, for to have care of the good Spirits? Is it
because he is called the Angelical Doctor, that he was endowed with this
Angelical knowledge? But why was the universal Church deprived of it in the
time of Saint Augustine, and of so many other good Fathers? What new Paracletus
or comforter had reserved the manifestation of these secrets to the Schoolmen?
Now let us see a little our Bishopps angelical Logic: Saint Paul, speaking
of Angels, names Principalities, Powers, Virtues, Dominations, Thrones:
therefore he sets down these distinctions by the orders and degrees as did
the Doctors of the Romish Church, which doctrine the Jews knew not before, but
by the tradition of the Sinagogue. Ephesians, 2.11.12 Col. 1.21
Again, S. Paul, writing to the Ephesians, and Colossians, who a little before
had been Heathen, strangers from the common wealth of Israel, and from the
promises of the Testament, being without Hope and without God in the world;
makes mention of these names: Therefore it was a doctrine, which was
manifestly known unto them, and by consequent, they knew it, either by an
absolute, or subsidiarie Tradition. Is it not happily, from one of these twoe
Traditions, that Plato and Aristotle held also their Doctrine of the Genii and
Intelligences?

^ol 6 5. Genesis 2.1.
He mocketh, that I gather the creation of Angels, from the place of Moses
where he says; That the heavens and the earth were finished, and all their
host; For that this host, says he, signifies nothing else in Moses, but the
Sun and the Moon, with the Stars; at least wise it can not be gathered by
the litterall text of Moses: his Argument is this, Deuteronomy. 4.
Moses in a certain place understands by the army or host of heaven,
nothing else but the Sun and Moon with the stars; Therefore he never means
any thing else by it, throughout all his writings. To omit that place of
Genesis, where the Angels that met Jacob, at his return from Mesopotamia,
Gen, 32.2.
are called the camp, that is to say, the Army of God, though Moses use
another term; I will only demand him, If this interpretation of the word
host or army, can not be had but by Tradition; why the Cardinal Baronius,
^nnal. Eccles. ^om. 1. an Christ 60.
who is far nearer that spring, than the Bishop of Eureux, chooses rather to
take it out of the Scripture, when speaking of the Idolatry of the Jews that
worshipped the Angels and the stars which they thought to have life, (note
their goodly Platonicall, not Prophetical, Tradition:) he says that Properly
the scripture calls Angels the Host of Heaven; citing three places for this
purpose, whereof one is taken out of Moses himself. Deuteronomy 17.
I alleged a place of Irenaeus, that represseth the vain curiosity of the
Gnostics, who without any light of the Scripture, rashly intrude themselves
into matters, that they have not seen, as the Apostle says, handling this
point of Angels, and condemning the superstition, (at this day crept into
Tradition) of serving them religiously: our Bishop exclaymeth thereupon; what
evening visions? what dreams? what imaginations and fantasies are these?
showing that he has his head so full of them, that (as Irenaeus says of his
Gnostics) all the Ellebore in the world would not suffice to purge him from
it: ^ib. 2. c. 54.
And it is no wonder, if so many smoaky, dark and subtle imaginations, hinder
him from seeing my conclusion, which tends not in any fashion whatsoever, to
abolish the names and distinctions of Angels, as he conceiteth; but to show
first of all, that Irenaeus proved the creation of Angels by the scripture,
when he says, We will show them by the scriptures, that all these things, as
well visible as invisible were created of God: Also, We forsake not Moses, and
the other Prophets, Lib. 2. c 5
who preached the truth, for to believe such, as say nothing soundly, but dote.
etc. Whence is evident that he comprehends the writings of Moses, under the
Scriptures, by which is showed the creation of Angels. Secondly, to condemn
the audacious boldness of this pretended Dionysius Areopagita, and the
Schoolmen; who presume to know all these mysteries; undertake to unfold them,
and by virtue, not of an Apostolic Tradition, but of a Maxim of natural
Philosophy; determine, that it is impossible, that there be two Angels only
of one kind, and such is the Tradition of that prince of the Schoolmen Thomas
Aquinas. 1. P. qu. 5^ Ar. 4.
So that we must have many more names for them, than the Tradition of the
Synagogue, or Saint Paul ever knew, for to furnish specificall differences, to
so many Millions of these blessed Spirits, which stand before the throne of the
Lord, for to execute his commandments. And when Irenaeus says to the
Gnostics Let them declare unto us the number of the Angels, the order of the
Archangells, let them show unto us the Sacraments of the thrones, let them
teach us the diversities of the Dominations, Principalities, powers and
virtues. But they can not so much as tell it. There is no man, that has common
sense, L. 2. c. 47.
but will conclude thence, that Irenaeus propounded these things, as most
difficulte and secret, since that in another place, he proposes the
ouerflowing of Nilus; Birds changing of countries in springtime, and in
harvest; the ebbing and flowing of the sea; rain, snow, thunder, and other
meteors; as things hid from us, and of which, says he, we may well babble, but
God only, who made them, is true.

Let us add a word or two of evil Spirits: That the Serpent that spoke to Eua,
was but an Instrument of a wicked spirit; may be showed a Sadducie, by the
effects, which cannot proceed from a creeping thing, nor from any other beast,
though it should go upright, like a rock, as the Serpent did before the
seducing of Eve, according to the ordinary gloss, which conteyneth as well the
literal expositions, as the mystical Traditions: neither needed Du Perron to
have attributed this opinion to Luther alone. The same gloss reports the
opinion of some others, which held, that this serpent took the pleasant
countenance of a maiden; and condemns it for no other reason, but because the
scripture does not authorize it, Now that these effects, namely, speech, and
perswasiue discourse, soliciting the woman to disobedience, did exceed the
natural faculty of a natural Serpent: there is no Sadducee can deny:
therefore this faculty came to it, either of man, or of God, or from some
other spirit, that has it in it self: This cannot be of man; for man cannot
give speech, reason, and discourse to a beast; besides there was then but two
humane creatures, who had not any knowledge at all of it. Neither was it GOD,
that speak to the woman by the Serpents mouth: for that were to accuse him of
too detestable a fraud and malice, as did the wretched Ophites: Finally, it
was not a good Angel: For Moses declares unto us, in many places, that Angels
do keep and preserve men from evil: And this fact here as Moses describes
it, shows, that it was an enemy of men: not a faithful servant of GOD, that
undertook it, and whose calumny or false accusation, we see in the literal
Text, very clearly, whence he is called devil, that is to say, calumniator
or false accuser, having accused God falsely unto men as envious of their good
and absolute felicity: and this history cannot seem absurd, no not to a
Heathen, who reads in profane histories, that horses, bulls, trees,
statues, or images, and rivers, have spoken; which we reject not as simply and
merely fabulous, though it be contained in fables; knowing, that wicked
spirits have as well been able to speak by one Instrument, as by another. Se
how one may very easily ridd himself from diverse expositions, that have been
given upon this text: as for that of Phalo, which the B. of Eureux brings: he
should judge by it, for what use Tradition was to this Jew; namely, for to
deprave the Text, and to abolish the truth of the history. Moses makes
express mention of Demons or diuills in Leuiticus, and in Deuteronomie, which
suffices for to show a Saducie, that there is some. A Manichee, or other, that
holds that they are substances coeternall with God; may be convinced, by the
same reasons, and consequences from Moses text, that have been above
alleged, in speaking of the Creation.

The words of Calvin which the Bishop of Eureux brings for my purpose, would
serve his better then mine, if he were capable of it: They importe, that the
Lord, by the secret revelation of his Spirit, supplyeth, that which is wanting
in the outward evidence of the words of Moses: which is most true: For where
this light of the Spirit shines not, there is nothing but darkness, what
outward evidence so ever there be in the words: and on the contrary, what
obscurity soever be found in the words, when the spirit speaks inwardly, 1.
Ioh. 2.20* 27.
when the Vnctio^ of that holy one teaches the children of light; they hear
and see as much as is necessary for them to salvation. Cas. Rhod. Cap. 7.
Iliad. 19. Tertul l. d^ Ido. ca 9. d^ habitu. mu^ 2. and alibi, Cypr. de Di^
and hab. Virg^ Lactant. de^ rig. err. l. 2. Just. Mart. Apol. 1. and. 2^
Athenag. in ^pol Cl. Alex^ 3. and 5. Str^ and alii.


Now if the Doctors of the Romish church derive the creation of Devils from
the same tradition, whence they derive their fall; It is needles to have
recourse for that purpose to the Tradition of the Synagogue, or to that of the
Apostles: for it is from Homer, that Cardinal Bessario deriueth it from the
fable of Ate: which is no less receiuable, than that which some of the Fathers
recite, by form of Tradition, of Angels sent from heaven, for the guard and
keeping of mankind, that corrupted themselves, by frequenting of women. Yet
the Jewish Tradition, touching the creation and original of devils must not be
omitted, since that (after our Bishop) it is from it only that the Jews
learned this point of doctrine: that which the Doctors of their Thalmud say, is
^ib. Sanhe. ^. Iudicia ^un. (...), in. 2. (...). 7. ^r. a Sancta (...) con. Iud
(...). C. 1^ Bib, ^atr. C. 4
That during this space of an hundred and thirty years, which is between the
birth of Cain and Abel, and the birth of Seth, Adam ceased not to engender in
Eve, wicked Spirits, and Diuills which she brought forth, and that those are
called the sons of Adam, that stirred up Solomon to sin. If we believe Du
Perron, such deuilish traditions, should be unto us authentical, necessary,
mystical, clear, sufficient and perfect; after that we have declared with him
the Holy Scripture unprofitable, superfluous, obscure, insufficient, and
imperfect. And whereas he directs me to Luther, for to learn of him the
orders and degrees, that are among devils; In my opinion, his Thomas Aquinas,
whom he calls the Prince of schoolmen, instructs far more particularly
his disciples, upon this matter, than, Luther does: For he specifieth the first
sin of the devil, the first moment of time in which it was committed; what
rank or degree that rebellious Spirit to GOD was of: the manner how he induced
his accomplices, to reuolte with him; the number of the good and the bad, namely,
whether is the greater: the punishment of these, and the feeling of their
pains, etc.

The other Schoolmen recounte yet greater particulars, though Du Perron say,
they traffic not in those deuillish countries: yea Bellarmine, after some
others, represents unto us the Buildings of hell, ^^urg. l. 2.
with all their stages or stories, chambers and clossets; not forgetting the
usage and entertainment that is there: all so exactly set down, that one would
say, that these people content not themselves only to traffic into those
quarters, but that they pretend therein the right of burgesie or free denizens,
as if they meant to dwell there indeed, being assured by the revelation of S.
Brigit, that there are there many Popes and Cardinals, and fair matter, for
to re-establish there Hierarchy there.

Now let the Reader judge, whether I have been shameless (as he says) in
alleging these places of Moses, for to prove the points above examined, and
whether the arguments I have drawn from them, be not as clear and sound, as
those that the Romish Doctors, enlightened with the double Tradition, absolute
and subsidiarie, yea and the Popes themselves, who hold all the fullness of
this mystical Treasure, locked in the coffer and casket of their breast, do
draw from the writings of Moses, when by the creation of the world, they prove
the Popes supremacy: By the creation of the Sun and the Moon, the Popes
preheminencie over and above the Emperor: Boni. 8, Ex^ de maiorit^ and o^ ed.
C* 9.6, Can. Eccles.
By the Sodomites rebuke to Lot, the exemption of the Clergy from all
politic Jurisdiction: By Jacobs Testament, Invocation on saints departed: By
the Cherubins of the mercy feate worshipping of Images: By the commandent made
to the Levites, that they should be holy; the single life of Priesstes etc.
These are doctrines of the father of lies; to persuade the world, that no
truth, at lest wise, no light and evidence of truth, touching the fundamental
point of our salvation can be found in the scripture; And that all the errors,
all the horrors, that Divert us from salvation; may be very well proved by the
scripture.

Let us see our Bishops reasons, why the points necessary to salvation, are
not found so openly set down in the scrpture, that manifest and necessary
consequences may be drawn from it, without the help of Tradition: They are
two, the first is: For to contain our minds, within the bounds of humility:
the second, to bind the sheep to the pastors, with a straiter bond of
Charity by the necessity of instruction. The book of the holy Ghost,
attributed to saint Basile, yet falsely, at least wise that part of it, whence
our adversaries take their most favorable testimonies; conteyneth another
reason, which our Bishop, whether for shame, or because he will have his
Tradition by himself; found not fit to add. It has thus: That the Apostles,
and fathers, would by these secrets of silence, preserve in mysteries, their
authority: For what is diuulged to the ears of the people, is not mystery:
for this cause, certain things were delivered by Tradition, without writing,
least the knowledge of the Doctrines or opinions should come in cotenmpt among
the people, by reason of custom. So that the doctrines of the Trinity, the
incarnation of Jesus Christ, of our Election, Vocation, Justification,
Sanctification, Glorification, and many other Articles, shall be no more
mysteries; because they are contained in the scripture, preached to the people,
and committed to the ears of every one: but by this reckoning must be no more
preached to the people, praying to saints departed, worshipping of images, the
Popes supremacy, the sacrifice of the Mass, Purgatory, Indulgences or
Pardons, and many other things, not contained in the scripture, and yet
notwithstanding almost nothing else preached, yea more reco^mended and beaten
into the ears of the people, than the things that are written. Would to God
this reason were perswasiue enough, for to make to be hid and buried in the
depth of an everlasting silence, or to set over and confine to the ears only
of the Popes clergy, all these goodly mysteries, true marks of the Lovers of
the woman in whose forehead is written Mysteries; ^eue. 17.5
that they spoil not the true clergy, that is, the inheritance of Jesus
Christ. The Bishop of Eureux his reasons, seem better in show, but the susta^ce
of them is much worse: For our part we believe, that the reading of the
Scripture, makes every true Christian humble, as well by the things clearly set
down, as by the^ he cannot so well understand, that he might be stirred up to
beg understanding and light, of the Father of lights, as David did, though
he were a great Prophet. ^^al. 119, o^ (...) where.
Now, if God would not, that all that is necessary for us should be written,
or that it should not be clearly written, for to contain (as says Du
Perron) Men's minds, within the bounds of humility, what follows else, but
that they that content not themselves with this measure of revelation, cannot
also contain themselves within the bounds of humility, and therefore become
proud, and invent whatsoever they list, for to establish their Lordshippe and
rule over the Lords flock, employing their ordinances and Traditions for to
bind and torture the consciences, as Tyrants use prisons and gybets to torment
the bodies of men. And if any Chistian think to imitate that praiseworthy
example of the men of Berea, who durst even examine the preachings of S. Paul
by the Scripture, Act. 17.11.
they cry out straight, both against him and the Scripture: the one is called a
giddie headed fool and a heretic; the other insufficient and imperfect, and
that for no other reason, but because it is most sufficient and perfect, to
convince, and rebuke their imperfections, 2. Tim. 3 16* 17.
and to make us perfectly instructed unto every good work.

I said in my former answer, that though the aboue-saide points, should not be
found so clear, in the writings of Moses, yet that would conclude nothing,
against the sufficiency of the Scripture, which we have in the Christian
Church: for that God speaking familiarly to Moses, instructed him always on
every occurrence, without ever giving him liberty or authority to ordain of
matters of Religion. Fol. 57.


Our Bishop mocketh at it, adding that Jesus Christ spoke, as familiarly to
God: And the Apostles in like sort, of whom Christ says, I call you no more
servants, I call you from hence forth my friends, etc. Let us see what reason
he has to mock at mine, which is this: When the Church has teachers and
guiders, that cannot err in their doctrine, immediately received from God, and
that can familiarly inquire of him, on every occurrence and occasion, for to
instruct themselves, and their flocks, then it may more easily be without
Doctrine written. But in the times of the Patriarchs, of Moses and the
Prophets, immediately sent of GOD, the condition of the Church was such:
Therefore it might the more easily be without Doctrine written, etc.

What hurt does his Instance, taken from the Apostles, to this argument? what
good does it do him, unless it be for to show, either his fondness, in as
much as it confirms my argument, for there is the same reason of the
Apostles, as of the Prophets; Or his impudency, if he mean, that the
Christian Church, after the death of the Apostles, is ever furnished with as
excellent men, as they were, speaking as familiarly unto God, as they did,
taking counsel immediately from him on all occasions and occurrences, as they
did. And without doubt, thus he would have his meaning to be taken, though
shame hinder him from expressing it more openly. It is also the style of the
Church or Court of Rome, namely: That the Pope as S. Peter's successor,
represents his person, yea the person of Jesus Christ himself, possesses his
Spirit, and distributeth it as it pleases him: yea he is called God himself,
witness the Canon, Satis euidenter. And these goodly verses, set on the
forefront of the portal or gate of Sixtus the forth. ^ist. 96.


Oraculo vocis mundi moderaris habenas:
Et merito in terris crederis esse Deus.
And seeing our Bishop has spoken as familiarly to this God on earth, as in
old time Moses did to the God of heaven, and the Apostles of Jesus Christ: who
would not receive the grains and gold and silver pictures, which were given
him on mount Vatican, given with greater efficacy, than the tables of the Law,
given to Moses on Mount Sina? I said also, Fol. 57.
that Moses never took the liberty, to ordain any thing of his own head, not
so much as in policy or civil government? He answers that this is false,
obiecting unto me the history of Iethro: and will say that Moses practiced the
counsel that Iethro gave him, touching the establishme^t of Judges over the
people of Israel, without any approbation from God, which is one of the
boldest falshoodes can be made, and such as he is wont falsely to object unto
others. For to convince it, do but see the text, where the common latin
translation says: If thou do this thing, thou shall fulfill the commandment
of God: Exodus 18, 23,
and the Hebrew: If thou do this thing, and if God so command thee, thou
may be able to endure. Now we grant, that if we had always such persons, as
the Apostles were, or as Moses and the Prophets under the Law, were, for to
instruct us in every point, and not such, as may lead millions of souls
together into hell, Did. 4^ si Papa
as the Pope does, and may do, by virtue of his own laws: We should not have
so much occasion, to keep our selves so strictly tied to the Scripture; though
notwithstanding, Act. 17*
the first Christians examined the preaching of the Apostles, by the Scripture
of the old Testament, by which themselves also proved it, though they had an
immediate calling, an infallible certainty, and an incomparable authority: but
these gifts of God being but for a time, for the beginnings and foundation of
the Christian Church, and we being advertised by the Holy Ghost of the coming
of wolves, of false Prophets, that shall rise up in the midst of the Church:
We conclude, that it is most necessary to keep us to their writings, and that
it is more dangerous to say, Act. 20.^ 30. 1 Pet. 2.
that they have not written whatsoever is necessary for us, than to say that
they have not taught all by word of mouth to every particular Church: for
returning often to visit them, that which they had not said at one time, they
might add and supply it at another, for which there would be no more any
remedy after their death, if we found not in their writings, that which is
necessary for our salvation. And therefore, though the points above proved by
Moses, were not contained in his writings; yea though Moses had written nothing
at all, yet could not that any thing at all help the Bishop of Eureux his
cause, unless he show first, that the traditions of the Romish Church are
naturally engraven in the hearts of men, as the immortality of the soul. And
secondly, that in all the Christian Church, spread throughout all the nations of
the world, god had established the same form touching the oeconomie and
government, and the dispensation of his mysteries, as was established among
this people only conducted by Moses, and afterward taught by the Prophets,
extraordinarily raised up, and immediately sent, during the ordinary ministry
of the Leuitical Priesthood. And therefore, since that the curate of every
particular Church, that acknowledges the Pope, (...) ver. 3, ^ in the (...).
represents the catholic Church, as say the Doctors of the Romish Church;
it is to be believed, that the grossest beast, so that he bear the mark of
the beast of Rome, is holden in like estimation, endued with the same gifts, as
was Moses, Isaiah, S. Paul: For (says the B. of Eureux) the Church is so
assisted with the spirit of God, according to the promises of Christ her
spouse, that whether it be for grace, or for interpretation of this word, he
never suffers it to fall into error. And thereupon he reproacheth me, that I
understand not the meaning of this proposition: The Church cannot err in
matters of Salvation. Let the Christian Reader judge how I understand it. If we
take this word (Church) for the universal Church, the body of Christ, whereof
part is tryu^phant in heaven, part still militant on earth; both being united to
their head, by the power of his spirit; that proposition is most true. If on
the contrary the Church be taken but for that part which is scattered on
earth; I say, it is most false: For that which is subject to infirmity, to
imperfection, to error and ignorance in every one of his parts, cannot make a
whole which is perfect. But there is not a man that sins not, (...) ^8, 46.
^2. (...). 13.9 ^4, 7.
says Solomon and Saint James: all of us know but in part, and Prophecy but
in part. Neither is there any one member, which has not need to take every
day grows, according to the measure of the gift of Christ. So that all the
promises of the Spouse to the Church, are to be understood of that which he
daily works and increases in his, not of that which is already perfected
and finished. And Du Perrons conclusion, is no less false and unapt than this:
GOD (says he) has promised us the beginning, the progress and the end:
therefore we have the end at the same instant, as we have the beginning.

The titles of perfection, which are some times attributed to the children of
GOD, sets before them rather the mark, whereat they should aim, than any
ways imprinteth in them an opinion of having already attained it. So we call a
building, a House, though it be not yet finished. If this perfection were wholly
attained to, there would remain no more any thing to be builded, and the power
of God should not be made perfect in our weakness. Jesus Christ washes and
cleanses his Church every day, but it shall not be wholly clean without spot
or wrinkle, till the day of the Lambs marriage, when the Bridegroom shall bring
his Spouse into his celestial chamber. We acknowledge the perpetual
assistance of Gods Spirit to his Church, which is the soul of the Church, and
gives spiritual life thereunto: But life is one thing, and perfect health
without any infirmity, is another thing. It is one thing to have a natural
operation, which is ever done after a fashion, in which there is some
necessity, an other thing to have a-voluntarie operation, which is done at
discretion and with liberty: the holy Ghost assisteth the Church so far forth
as to give it life; which is a thing wholly necessary, for the acco^plishme^t of
the promises of her husband Christ: for if the Spirit did in this sort fail
the Church; the Church would also fail Jesus Christ, but this life, this light
of grace, does not abolish that of nature, which is in every member of the
Church, and which makes it often to faint, to fail and to fall, though never
utterly to fall away. The holy Ghost governs it as well, as reason governs
the will in man: But as the will does often swerve from reason, yet without
loosing it wholly or altogether: 1. Tim. 3.1*
so the Church swarueth often from the spirit, which notwithstanding does not
wholly forsake it for all that. The Church remains also the pillar and ground
of truth, not for the reason Du Perron alleges: because every one resting on
the judgment of it, can not be deceived in faith, nor hazard his Salvation: (he
might say more briefly, and more popularly: In believing in the faith of his
Curate:) But for as much as the word of God, contained in the holy Scripture is
set forth in the true Church, as in old time the laws were fastened to pillars,
that they might not be trodden under feet, and that they might be exposed to
the view of every man: the Church, which is the Palace of our lord Jesus
Christ, is as Salamon* was, all of pillars; every particular Orthodoxall or
right-beleuing Church is a pillar of that Palace, whereon hangs the table
containing the divine truth; But as much resemblance is between this palace
of our spiritual Solomon and the Popes on his Vatican; as is between the
crown of Thorns, and his triple Crown of Gold; between the Bible and his
decretalls. Now let the Bishop of Eureux tell me, how these two propositions
do agree: the church never erreth: and that of the Schoolmen and Canonists, In
the day when our Lord suffered, Faith remained only in the virgin Marie: which
proposition ^ean. de la ^urbruslee.
John Turbrusley maintayneth to be so necessary, that to hold the contrary is
to go against the faith of the universal Church: where was then this Church
that cannot err, then I say when all the Apostles were alive, whom Christ our
Lord reproacheth of incredulity? could the person only of the blessed virgin
make the Church? ^ark. 16.14. ^^llar. de Ec^^es. mil. l. 3. ^7.
Bellarmine denies it, because, says he, The Church is the people and
kingdom of God.

Now have we hitherto showed, the sufficiency and perfection of the
scripture, in regard of the instances proposed by the Bishop of Eureux, as
things absolutely necessary. As for the others that he afterward alleges:
it is to be noted: First, that they concern rather history, than doctrine,
whereof is question, and which he of purpose confounds with history, for to
bleaze the eyes of the simple: For he knows very well, that we willingly
confess, that there is historical Traditions: and himself confesses that
the ordinance of these thing is not absolutely inexcusable: ^ol, 80
That is to say, it is not necessary for all to know them. Secondly, it is to
be remembered, that here again, (as is above said) he confounds with like
malice, these two terms, truth and Authority; dissembling, that every truth
is not of like Authority: Otherwise it would follow, that al profane
histories, truly written, are as authentical and canonical as the histories
of the Bible: And therefore, that which the Apostles alleged, without the
Scripture, is most true; but obtained not Canonical authority, till after it
was written by them: and as touching that from which they draw arguments; I
answer, that they do it, because it was agreed of the truth of those
particulars, whence they draw them: as at this day we reason oftentimes by
things, which not only the Fathers, but also profane and heathen authors have
left in writing, when it is agreed, that they contain truth, yet can not any
infer from thence, that they have equal authority to the word of God.
Thirdly, I say; that among the instances he produces, there be some false and
invented; and of this number is all the first, namely; the Institution of
Exorcists; that no text of the new Testament shows, that it was an order
instituted of God, under the old Testament, yea though it were granted him,
that there were. Exorcists, at the time that Jesus Christ came into the world:
for our Savior Christ's words, contain nothing else, but a confutation of the
opinion of the Pharisees, not a declaration of his own, touching Exorcists,
whether they were ordained of God, or of themselves; as were those of whom S.
Luke makes mention. If the B. of Eureux gra^teth not, that both of the^ were
of the same order; Act, 19,
to what purpose does he alleagde Calvin for to make me confess it? And if he
grant, that they were; how can he deny, but that the one were deceivers as
well as the others? Whence will he show, that the sonns of Sceua, were rather
of the order of the ancient pretended Exorcists; than of the Apes, that would
counterfeit the miracles of the Apostles? Let us se the Logic of our
Carneades. The sons of Sceua after the death of Christ, were not true
Exorcists: Ergo before Christ's death there was an order of the true Exorcists,
grounded on divine right: See how from a negation he draws an affirmation.
But if we receive the exposition of Saint Chrysostom, which he should accept
of, as a subsidiary Tradition: This Instance taken from the order of Exorcists,
shall be yet more ridiculous; for he presupposes as a thing confessed of all,
that our Savior Christ speaking of Exorcists means only his Apostles and
disciples; Fol. 81.
which (says he) had already driven out Devils, by the power they had
received of their Master, the Pharisees not having blamed them for it: For
their malice was but to the person, not to the thing: Therefore that he might
show, that what they said or thought against him, proceeded but of mere envy;
he told them of the Apostles.

Now it is for our Bishop to conclude, that the Apostles were already in the
world, in quality of ordinary Exorcists, when Christ came; from whom
consequently, they received not extraordinarily this power to cast out unclean
Spirits. He says; the hand of the Synagogue was become withered and impotent
in vvorking miracles, ^ol. 85.
after our Savior Christ's death, and that for this cause the sonns of Sceua
had no success. But wherefore then had that Eleazer, of whom Josephus
speaks, such good success, who long after Christ's death, in the presence of
Vespasian, his children and all the Roman Army; ^^seph. An^^g. lib. 8. c. 2.
dispossessed so sufficiently one that had a Devil? the root, to which
Josephus attributes this virtue, and which he says was taught by Solomon, was
it become withered, as well as the hand of the Synagogue, of purpose, that it
might budd again like Aarons rodd, in the hands of that infidel? did the name
Tetragrammaton (by which Epiphanius says, (...). 30.
one Joseph, not believing yet in Christ, cast out a devil;) loose then it
virtue, or did the sons of Sceua, eclipse some letter of it? Now it is manifest
by this place of Josephus, and by that which is written in another place, what
was the foundation and institution of this order of Exorcists, ^oh. de bell.
(...) l. 7. c. 25,
among the Jews: namely, Magic, and enchantments, which our Bishop would
make us receive, for the pure word of God, secretly revealed to the Patriarchs
and Prophets.

I said, that it is not found, that they, which in the beginning of the
Christian Church, had the gift of casting out devils, used certain mystical
forms: but that they simply co^iured the Energumeni or possessed in the name
of god, etc. whence we might gather, that they which among the Jews had this
gift, brought thereunto no other mystery, than the calling on the name of the
God of Abraham, of Isaacke, and of Jacob. Hereupon he terms me a Demoniak,
possessed with the evil spirit of ignorance and presumption, Fol, 89
for not having read the 7. Canon of the 4. Council of Carthage, which makes
mention of a book, wherein Exorcismes were written. Let us leave to him the
evil spirit of knowledge, which so swells him, that it is to be feared, it
will burst him in the end: And let us see his argument: The Council of
Carthage, holden about the year of grace 400. makes mention of a book
containing Exorcismes: Ergo, Annal. Eccle. Tom. 5. ad an. Chr. 398.
in the beginning of the Christian Church there were certain prescript forms,
for to exorcise: Therefore the beginning of the Christian Church, should be put
400. years after the beginning of the Christian Church, or at the least 398.
years, according to the computation of Baronius himself. For although mention
be made of exorcists before that, yet the form which they used in their
Exorcismes, is no where declared; no, Annot in Tert, lib, de Bapt.
not in the acts of the said Council of Carthage; and Pamelius can allege for
it nothing more ancient, than the book called Ordo Romanus, and the
Sacramentarie of Saint Gregory. Justin Mar. in Tryph.
My affirmation was grounded on the testimony of Iustine Martyr, 230. years
auncienter than that council; his words are these; By the name of this same
Son of God, the first borne of every creature etc. all devils are adjured
and subjected: And if ye (Jews) adjure them by whatsoever name of your Kings,
or Patriarchs, or Prophets, no spirit will obey you. But if any man among you
adjure, By the God of Abraham, the God of Isaacke, and the God of Jacob, for
that same is Christ, it may be they would be subjected: But now your
exorcists use in their adiurations, a certain art as the Pagans, and do use
perfumes, and ligatures, etc. Behold Iustine, who knew no other form, which
was in use among the Jews, than the calling on the GOD of Abraham, of Isaacke,
and of Jacob; and no wise restrayneth this gift, to a certain order, among the
Jews; teaching us also in what estimation we should have those, that use
magical and heathenish enchauntments; to wit, not of order, nor ordinance
divine, but devilish.

Also we know, that Jesus Christ in the beginning of the Christian Church,
restrained not this gift, to a certain order, but promised and gave it
indifferently to the faithful: and even a long time after, Tertullian makes
mention of certain soldiers, Mar. 16.17 Do Coro. mil. c. 11, vide Apolog. ca,
32. In Mat, hom, 35
that had it. The Bishop of Eureux, who maintains, that the sons of Sceua
were of the Jewish order of exorcistes, has found this fantasy in Origin, who
affirming that it is not lawful for Christians, according to the Gospel, to
swear; thence concludes; that therefore it is no more lawful to adjure any,
and by consequence holds that these Exorcistes were Jews: But his ground
being false, the conclusion, that he builds upon it, namely, that this was an
order among the Jews, Annal. Eccle. Tom, 1, ad an. Chr. 56
is false also, and condemned as such, by Cardinal Baronius. But our Bishop
makes use of every thing, so that he think it fit to demolish any part of
the Lords work; that is, of the scripture, indicted by his spirit.

His second instance is taken from the miracle of the poole, set down by Saint
John. He says, That it was a needful thing to know, John. 5
whether it was not a sleight of Satan, for to inuit men to superstition, for
to entice them to make Pilgrimages, for to persuade them to put their
confidence therein, and to seek remedies at Creatures, of their infirmities. I
answer, that the Scripture warranted from all these inconveniences, them that
followed it, as the light unto their feet: For it teaches, how superstition
is avoided; namely, in putting confidence in one only GOD, and in transferring
nothing to the creature, of that which belongs to the Creator, who by his law
written, had ordained to the Jews three voyages yearly, for to appear before
him at Jerusalem with offerings. See here their pilgrimages grounded on
scripture. Exodus 34* 23. Deuteronomy. 16.^
If the Angel, who by the troubling of the water, therein manifested this
power of healing every infirmity, had demanded sacrifices, for to be
honored with them, in Gods stead, no faithful being instructed in the law,
would have had recourse to this remedy, how excellent soever it were, or how
great need soever he had had: As at this day, they, Deuteronomy. 13
that have learned by the scripture that only God is to be inuoked or called
upon, do make no voyages or pilgrimages to the places, where the Saints
departed are called upon, what maracle so ever be done there, true or false,
seeing an other besides God is there inuoked; which was not done at the Poole.
For to make this instance of force for his purpose, it behooued him to show,
that such as went down into it, called upon the Angel, or on some Patriarch
or Prophet; that they confessed themselves first, after the Romish manner, made
the vow of nine days, said a certain number of Aue Mary's, that they did
wear beads, told their blessed grains, that they beheld their Agnus Dei,
kissed crosses, and crucifixes, and carried candles to the Image of the Angel,
as our ignorant superstitious people do to Saint Michaell, and by the same
means to the devil, that is at his feet. Saint Augustine, expounding this
miracle, has not recourse, In Johan tract. 17.
neither sends any to Tradition, but unto the Lord who gives understanding,
protesting that he would speak of it as he could, and assuring himself, that
he by whose aid he did what he could, would supply in his auditors that which
he could not: hereupon he handles all this history allegorically, proving his
expositions by texts and consequences of scripture; and not deriuing any thing
at all, from the pretended Tradition. Saint Cyrill says, Johan. 1.2 5.
that the Angels went down in^o it only on the day of the Pentecost, for to
trouble the water; which he likewise draws from the scripture, without
mention of any Tradition: his words are these: The power of this healing was
limited only to one man, which signified that the profit of the law was
bounded only to the people of the Jews, without passing any further: For the
commandments of the Law, showed by Angels on mount Sinai, and afterward
exhibited on the day of Penetcost ordained for that end, were not extended but
from Dan to Beer-sheba.

If this circumstance of time, to wit, of the day of Pentecost, according to
Saint Cyrill and some other, be taken from Tradition; ^^al. tom. 1. Christ, 32
Cardinal Baronius reproouing this opinion of the fathers, reprehendeth also by
the same means, Tradition, that is to say the word of God, after our Bishop:
for Baronius says, that this affimatio^ of the fathers, is without reason. And
must needs be said, that the Tradition, which Saint Chrysostom followed was
directly contrary to that of S. Cyrill: ^oan. hom
For he denies, that the moving of the water was done in certain time.

I told the Bishop of Eureux the occasion and institution of this miraculous
healing, according to the recital of Lyranus and other Doctors of the Romish
Church; for to show with what fables fed are such as are out of taste with the
scripture: but he called that a blind impudency, and said, that he sends us
to no other tradition than to the words of Saint John, which were a tradition
before his Gospel was set forth. But if he were not more impotent of brain,
than he whom Christ healed, was of his arms and legs; he would judge, that the
question that himself propounds is, (...) 88
by what proof it appeared, that this miracle of the Poole, was not a deceit
of the devil, but a true miracle instituted of God. Where is it that the
beginning or institution of it appears in S. John? Is it not for this cause,
that Petrus Comestor has recourse to the Tradition of them that said: That the
Queen of Saba, having seen by the spirit, the wood of the cross of Christ,
in the house of Libanus, advertised Solomon, Histor. Eu^ cap. 81
that on it should one die after whose death, the country and people of the
Jews should perish. Which Solomon fearing, buried it in the ground, in that
place where afterward was made the Poole: And as the time drew near that
Christ our Lord should suffer death and passion, this wood floted or swomme
aloft on the top of the water, etc. Lyran. in Johan. c. 5
But if this tale be no less fabulous than that of Lyranus, why then does not
our bishop, who is ignorant of othing, teach us the true history of this true
Tradition; that we may know, whereon was grounded the faith of the Jews, that
had recourse to this Poole, and that we condemn not of superstition and
idolatry, as well such as used it, as them that suffered it, to wit, the
Priests and Pastors of Jerusalem? In the mean while we content our selves to
know, that almost always, so long as the temple stood, there was some miracle
or other, whereby God testified to this people, that he had a particular care
of them, as having chosen and adopted the^, from among all other nations of the
earth, that by this means he might inuit the^ to honor and serve him as they
ought, and not to have any other Gods before him. And that if some did put
their confidence in this water, or in the Angel, that troubled it, without
lifting up their hearts to him, that gave this charge to the Angel and this
virtue to the water; they must be put in the rank of those, who abusing the
miracles, which God for a certain space of time wrought to the christian
church, for to give testimony to the doctrine that his Martyrs had confessed
and sealed by their death, and for to move the heathen to embrace it; have
reestablished a kind of paganism, and brought in as many new succeeding Gods,
as there be Saints, and places where any miracle is wrought; to whom the
people, being instructed and exhorted by their Bishops and Curates, without any
warrant of the word of God either written or pronounced; direct their vows,
bring their offerings, and make their prayers, for to obtain, that which they
should not ask of any but of the Saint of Saints or Holy of Holies. I speak
not of the frauds and filthy trumperies wherewith the Priests abuse the world,
and which stink so abhominably, that such among themselves, as have any shame
left, or any nose to smell; are constrained to stop it. To these men belongs
fitly the mystical Interpretation that Saint Hierome recites, ^^^rom. in
(...). c. 22
upon the place of Isayah, where is spoken of two pooles of Jerusalem, and of a
lake, that he expounds from the Traditions of the Pharisees, which Du Perron
and other such evil Angels, troubling the water to fish the better, endeavor
to mende and make up again, as a cesterne that cannot hold any more that
stinking water, wherewith they have watered and bathed those whom the poison
of the Babilonian cup had made so lame, withered, deaf and blind, that they
could not find the issue or way forth of the porches of the Romish Church. Now
if it were behooufull to have an express word of God, conserve always by
means of Tradition, for to use with a good conscience this remedy of the
Poole: Behooued it not also to have the like warrant for the bringing of sick
folk to some Saint that has the fame of working miracles? Again if the word
of God after the doctrine of the Romish church, be but of two sorts, to wit;
that which is contained in the holy scripture, and that which the Apostles have
delivered by word of mouth to their successors, which is called Apostolic
Tradition: I would earnestly desire, that the B. of Eureux, (to whom no thing
is impossible) would declare, what Apostolic Tradition can be alleged for
ground of the miracles done five hundred, yea a thousand, and twelve hundred
years, and more after the death of the last Apostle: and if the Apostles did
foretell of them before their death; in what place are these predictions found:
namely, That at such a time, in such a place, such a Saint, should work such
miracles: and that thereunto without danger of superstition; to offer, and to
pay vows, and to bring their sick? For thus far we both agree, that for to
do these things with a good conscience, it behooves to be grounded on the
word of God: we agree also in this, which the adversaries themselves confess
with us: That the Church is no more governed by new revelations: De verbo Dei.
l, 4., c 9
these are the very words of Bellarmine; our difference is only in regard of
the means, whereby this word of God has been conserved, and in what place it
is to be sought; Whether it be only in the old and new Testament, as we
maintain, or else, as the Bishop of Eureux affirms, in the Apostolic
Tradition, which he makes double, the one absolute, the other he calls
subsidiarie. If he vouchsafe to enlighten us in this obscurity; I will
confess that he deserves himself to be put in the number of the Saints, and
lightened with candles as great as his Croser staff.

The instance of the custom the Jews had, to deliver a malefactor at Easter,
is yet more impertinent than the former. For it is to make tradition to oppugn
directly the holy Scripture, which testifies clearly enough, that, He that
absolueth the wicked, is an abomination to the Lord: Pro, 17.15.
And in another place commands in express terms, to pluck murderers from
the alter of God, Exodus 21.14*
that they may die.

And whether it be referred to infidel governors, Math. 27.5.^ Mar. 15.6.
as S. Matthew and S. Mark do, or to the Synagogue corrupted, as the Bishop of
Eureux thinks to show it by S. John; yet the corruption and transgression of
the Law therein is evident. Therefore Saint Cyrill, for to excuse the ancient
Synagogue, groundeth this custom on the Law written, touching ma^slaughter
committed unawares; Cyr. in Iul, ^ 2. c. 14. Number. 35.
and thinks that the Synagogue that was in Christ's time, of hatred and rage
wherewith it burned against him, transgressed that Law, asking the deliverance
of a detestable robber and murderer, in stead of one that had killed a man by
mischance and unawares: See then the Bishop of Eureux his tradition rased and
condemned by the sentence of a Patriarch of Alexandria. Theophylact speaks of
it these words: We may say, that the Jews, ^heoph. in (...). c. 18.
teaching the doctrines, which are the commandments of men, have invented
many things of their own heads, and have not used the laws of God: so that
this point also became a custom without reason, as many other things, without
commandment of the Law: See here again, Tradition, the pretended word of
God, after our Bishop, called, a custom without reason, by a Bishop, much
ancienter and of better authority than ours. And whereas I said, that they
which deliver Barrabasses, do crucify Jesus Christ in his members: he accuses
me of inuectiues, and of ignorance of the mysteries and judgments of God;
forgetting the place of S. Ambrose whence I drew that conclusion; the words are
these; The Laws of iniquity are such that it hates innocence, and loves
wickedness: VVherin notwithstanding, the interpretation of the name, gives
appearance of a figure: For this word Barrabas, Amb. in Luc. ^ib. 10.
signifies some of the Fathers: those then to whom it is said, Your Father is
the Devil, are declared, that they perfer Antichrist the son of their
Father, before the true son of God.

The sentence of S. Augustine, who says that the Jews are not to be
reprehended, for that they delivered a guilty person at Easter, but for that
they put to death an innocent, should be understood not simply and absolutely,
but by comparison: as if he had said, to put to death, him that brought life
and righteousness into the world, is a crime so horrible, and to deliver a
person guilty is nothing in comparison. For this holy Doctor, was too much
conversant in the Scripture, and too good an interpreter of the places above
alleged, for to declare absolutely unreprovable, those whom the spirit of
God declares to be an abomination before the Lord. But it is not without
mystical reason that our Bishop would make murderers be found
irreprehensible; ^xod. 21.14. ^o. 17.15. ^. Tim. 3.2. ^it, 1.6.
that is to say, capable to be Bishops: it is without reason and not without
ignorance, to call me ignorant of his mysteries, which we are no more ignorant
of, the^ of the tradition of Boniface the fifth who was the first Pope that
ordained; That altars and Churches, should serve for places of fredome to
Malefactors; Platin. in Bonif. 5.
wherein the good Prelate re-established the Tradition of Pilate, to deliver
Robbers.

As for the instances he takes out of the Epistle to the Hebrews, where Saint
Paul recites certain legal ceremonies, of which Moses makes not express
mention; though we should grant him all of them, yet could they not help his
desperate cause: For they are things, Chap. 9.
which concern history, and not doctrine, the only act of the sacrifice,
made for the ratification of the couenante, and not the ordinary use and
custom of daily and yearly sacrifices: and therefore might be unknown,
without danger of salvation, not only of the people, but even of the Priests
themselves, seeing they were not preceps, touching the ma^ners of their
ordinary service, but only certain circumstances of a singular and
extraordinary sacrifice; the substance whereof is described by Moses. In a
word, they be Traditions of such a nature, of which we have often said there be
many, but which derogate in nothing from the perfection and sufficiency of the
Scripture, which consists in doctrine. Now because this chapter with a good
part of the rest of this Epistle, gives a deadly blow to the mass, he
labors to comfort the wound with these Instances, taken from the same place:
because he can not make use of it, as of Achilles dart, or as of a Scorpion,
for to draw a remedy from the same from whence the hurt came; He supplyeth
with his brain as much as he can, and makes S. Paul say, that Moses in the
solemnity of the said sacrifice, mixed water with the blood of the Testament:
which S. Paul says not, no more tha^ Moses; though he say, that he took water
with blood and wool, as if one could not take two things one with another,
without mixing the^, one within another; the priests of the Romish church, when
they baptize, take water, oil and other drugs: Ergo they mix them all
together in the Sacramental water. A goodly argument. What is there in the text
of Saint Paul, that forces us to conclude, that Moses mixed the water within
the blood, for to sprinkle therewith the people, by one only sprinkling,
rather than to say, that he sprinkled them first with water, for to purify and
wash them, as they did the sacrifices before they offered them, which is the
ground of the analogy by which I said, that this ceremony might be gathered
out of Moses?

He reprooueth me of vanity, for affirming, that the sacrifices for sin: And
that such sacrifices were of he goats. The first is manifest, for that Moses
in the first place speaks of whole burnt offerings, which were expiatorie,
and propitiatory: after which he makes mention of sacrifices of thanksgiving.

The other appears by analogy or proportion of the Law, which says. If the
Prince of the people (that is, one of them that have public charge, as the
seauenty Elders and the heads of the tribes had) commit sin, let his offering
be of an he goat. Now in this Sacrifice whereof is question, the 70. elders,
are commanded, to go up with Moses, Aaron, Nadab and Abihu; Leui. 4.22.23
whose sacrifices were of bullockes, according to the Law: It is gathered
therefore by analogy, that the offerings of the 70. elders were of he goats.
To say, that the institution of all these particulars was after the Sacrifice
of the Covenant, were not to consider, that sacrifices (notwithstanding this)
were in use before the Law given by God to Moses, Leu. 4.3.
and that not according to each man's fantasy, but according as God revealed
and commanded it to the Patriarchs. And the Bishop of Eureux cannot show us
by his tradition, wherein the particulars and forms of the Sacrifices used
before the Law and writing of Moses, and them which we see therein set down,
did differ or agree: no more than we can believe, that the knowledge of the
former, was as necessary to the Israelites, that lived under the Law, as was
the knowledge of the latter. I would know of him, from what tradition he
learned, that this sprinkling of the people, by the blood of beasts was rather
execratory tha^ expiatory, as he says: not for to purify the Israelites but
for to bind and bequeath to cursing, etc. S. Paul, Heb. 9.22.
after he had recited this sprinkling, with the sprinkling of the tabernacle,
and of the holy vessels, adds: that almost al things by the law are purified
with blood, referring this purification in general to all the legal aspersions
or sprinklings, but especially to that, which he had more particularly
specified, than any other; namely, which our Bishop, by I know not what cursed
and execrable Tradition calls cursing and execration: And if that be true,
then these words, which Moses pronounced, in performing this sprinkling: This
is the blood of the Covenant which the Lord has contracted with you: shall not
signify unto us, the purifying of our souls, by the blood of Jesus Christ as
the Apostle expounds it, co^paring the figurative blood of beasts, with the
blood of Christ our Lord, which spiritually washes and purifieth our souls,
as the other blood did ceremonially purify the corporal things: But shall
signify our curse and execration, the real accomplishment and execution
whereof, should be found for us, in the death and in the blood of him, whom we
call our Savior and Redeemer, as having delivered and redeemed us from the
curse and execration of the law, under which we were without the shedding and
sprinkling of his blood, when he himself was made a curse for us. He yields a
reason worthy himself, why this blood signified rather execration, than
purification: Gal. 3.13.
Because the children of Israel were already purified by the former washings.
True, but if the washing with water sufficed to purify them, to what purpose
so much blood, as was shed in the ordinary expiatory sacrifices? to what
purpose are said so many masses pretended expiatory sacrifices, if holy water
suffices to purify those, that are sprinkled with it? Why behooved it, that
after baptism Jesus Chapter should shed his blood? why was not remission of sins
without shedding of blood, if the washing by water purifieth, that is, takes
away sins? to conclude, what mad Enthymema is this same: The children of Israel
were purified by the former washings: Ergo, the blood wherewith Moses sprinkled
them afterward, signified unto them cursing and execration. But it agrees not
evil, that he that believes, or makes show to believe, that the mass is a
sacrifice expiatorie and propitiatory, which indeed is execrable and
execratorie; call execration the sacrifice of the covenant, that God
contracteth with his, for to put away their sins therewith; whereof the sacrifice
described by Moses, was the figure and that of the cross the Truth. At least
wise he should consider, that this sprinkling with blood, was not only done on
the people, but also on the altar, upon which Moses sprinkled half and on the
book, which Altar represented nothing else but God, who in this covenant, was
one of the parties, conditioning and promising of his side: shall we say, that
Moses, in sprinckling the Altar with half of the blood, bound and bequeathed
God also to cursing? The book that contained the law, and which was sprinkled
with it likewise, was it cu^sed also? There remained no more but this heap of
blasphemy for him, who cease not to calumniate of imperfection and
insufficiency the sacred book, to say, that it was bequeathed to cursing and
execration. Indeed we read in profane histories of the covenants and leagues,
which the Pagans made, ratifying them by Sacrifices, with oaths and horrible
execrations; yea sometimes tasting of the blood of the sacrifices offered, or
of their own, as it is said of Catilina and some others. Which is not far
from the Cyclopian barbaritie of those Capernaites, or rather Canibals, which
think they cannot partake in the blood of the spiritual covenant we have with
Jesus Christ, unless they carnally drink it, (...) cons. Did. (...) Can. Ego.
^^ieng.
unless they break his body with their teeth sensibly, as their Pope Nicholas
says.

As for the sprinckling of the tabernacle, and of the holy vessels, also the
purple colored wool, and hysop, whereof Moses speaks in the 24. chapter of
Exodus It should be our bishops part to show, that S. Paul in his 9. chap. to
the Hebrews protests and binds himself, to touch nothing of the writings
of Moses, but only what he says in express terms in that place, Exo. 24.
Which shall not be so easy for him to do, as it is for us to show, and for
every one to see the contrary. For the scope and drift of the Apostle is, to
confront and to compare together the two Testaments, the Priests and the
sacrifices, and all the other ceremonies of the old, with the only Priests,
and sacrifice of the new: The Leuiticall Tabernacle, corruptible and
transitory, wherinto the Jewish Priests entered; with the humane nature of Jesus
Christ, in which dwells all the fulness of the godhead, as in a Temple
permanent: the blood of the he goat, which the hie priest offered every year
once, when he entered into the most holy place, with our savior Christ's own
blood, by which he opened unto us heaven for ever. Now it is certain, that
Moses speaks of these figures, in diverse places of his writings: by what
Logic the^, should we conclude that, that which is not found in the 24. chap.
of Ex. cannot be found elsewhere? he speaks not there of the purple wool, nor
the hysop, but Number. 19. he speaks of the^: Neither of the sprinkling of the
Tabernacle and of the holy vessels, but he speaks of it Leuit. 8.16, 30. and
9.9. and 16.14 and so following. And that S. Paul means not to speak only
of the Act of the dedication, as our Bishop would make us believe, it is
manifest, as well by that we have said of the Apostles intention, as by the
conclusion, which is Heb. 9.22. And almost all things are by the Law purged
with blood; By which every one may see, that he no wise means to stay on the
act only of the consecration of the Covenant, but that he mixeth together
diverse ceremonies of expiations, in which there was but one and the same end,
referring all those shadows to their bodies, the figures to the Truth,
without standing to reckon the syllables of Moses, or to quote the places he
alleges, or to observe the order of the times, wherein consisted not the force
of his arguments, and therefore he protests (Chapter 9.5.) not to speak of those
things particularly. The sprinkling of the book, may be comprehended under the
sprinkling of the altar, si^h both the one and the other represented God in
this ratification of the Covenant: for the book contained the Law, and the
conditions that God required in this Contract: wherefore as S. Paul omitteth
the sprinkling of the altar; so Moses omitteth the express mention of the
book, both of them using a Synecdoche.

The inconvenience that the B. of Eureux alleges is, that if the book had
been sprinkled with the Altar, Moses had blotted out the writing of the
Covenant, before he had read it to the people. A great matter sure, that one
cannot sprinkle a thing without blotting and spoiling it; as though he, who in
consecrating Aaron sprinkled those parts of him that God had commanded him to
sprinkle, without plunging or drowning him in blood; though in other places he
sprinkled a great quantity; could not as well sprinkle the book without
marring it, shedding the great quantity of blood upon the altar. There is as
much cunning in this consideration, as there is reason in his reproof of our
translation of the Greek word, (...), which S. Paul uses, verse 19. to
speak: which Du Perron (...), ordains by the tradition of his new Lexicon,
that he^ceforth it signify to read. He persuades himself that the opinion of
Calvin, who says, that in Saint Paul's time, there was perhaps some
Commentaries of the Prophets, which recounted more amply, that which Moses had
touched only by form of abridgement: makes greatly for his purpose: as if it
did follow, that those commentaries contained infallibly the traditions at this
day in controversy: Or because they be lost, that he does the Scripture no
wrong to defame it, as imperfect and unsufficie^t. Let him learn of S.
Augustine, that it is no wise necessary, that all the writings of the Prophets
should be indifferently Canonical: ^^g. de Ciu. ^^i li. 18, 38
(says he) I esteem, that they to whom the Holy Ghost revealed, that which
should be authentical, for Religion, might write certain things, as men,
with an Historical diligence, and other things, as Prophets, by divine
inspiration: and that these same were so distinguished, that the one were
attributed as to them, but the others, as to God, speaking by them: So that the
former perteined to a more ample knowledge, the latter to the authority of
Religion, in which authority the Canon is maintained and kept. Besides which,
if there be yet any writings bearing the name of true Prophets, they serve not
for to have a more abundance of knowledge by them, because it is not certain,
that they be theirs, to whom they be attributed, and therefore we believe them
not, especially those, in which we find things contrary to the Canonical
faith. And thus is Calvin cleared. It is most certain, that the Prophets and
Apostles, ceased not to be men after that God had chosen them to be Prophets
and Apostles: and the gift of prophesying and revealing the mysteries of God to
men, whether it were by word of mouth or by writing, Vide Thom^ Aqui. par. 2*
q. 171. ar. 1.
was not in them as the habitude of a science gotten by study, neither as the
light is in an heavenly body, but rather as that which is in the air, from
which it may be easily separated: so that, as they could not heal al
diseases, at al times and so often as they listed; so could they not prophecy
when they would, 2. Kin. 4.27*
neither knew they any thing but what it pleased the Lord to reveal unto them:
witness Heliseus, who knew not the subject of the sadness and bitterness, that the
Sunamite had in her heart; because the Lord had hid it from him. And Samuel
thought, that Eliab had been him, that the Lord had chosen to be King, in
Saules stead. Nathan also said to David, when he purposed to build the Temple;
1. Sam. 16* 7. 2. Sam. 7. etc. 1. Chro. 17* etc.
do all that is in thine heart, for the Lord is with thee; wherein both of the^
were abused, by the instinct of his own mind: and therefore Saint Gregory,
cited by Thomas Aquinas; says; that it happened sometimes, that the Prophets,
being asked counsel of; by reason of their great use or custom of
prophesiing; uttered things of their own mind, having opinion, that they were
of the holy Ghost. It is not therefore sufficient, that a thing be pronounced
or written by a Prophet or an Apostle, for to have a Canonical authority
attributed unto it; but it behooves also, that there come between the motion
and inspiration of god, assuring those holy men, not only of the truth of the
matter, which they treat; (for all that contains truth, has not Canonical
authority:) but also of the end and use thereof; namely, that it was for to be
authentical, for to serve for an infallible rule to the faith and life of the
faithful. To go about to conclude a Canonical authority of some book, by the
all^gation of some place, that an Apostle cites from it, is a thing that
deserves rather to be laughed at, than to be answered; for by that means it
would follow, as has bin abouesaid, that Menander, Aratus, and Epimenides or
Callimachus, Heathen Poets, should have the like authority, as the divine
Prophets, because S. Paul alleges and approves some of their verses.. And
therefore though we shall say with Calvin, that the particulars and
circumstances, expressed in this 9. chapter, might be taken forth of the
commentary of some Prophet, which we have not, Yet it would not follow; either
that it was part of the Canon, or though it were (which we say only by
concession or grant) that the Canon, which we have is imperfect: God of his
goodness having preserved so much of it, as he knew to be necessary for his
Church, that is to say, the parts essential, though there wanted some of the
parts called integrall.

And though we should not follow the opinion of Calvin; yet would it not
follow that the Apostles had the knowledge of these particulars, by the
tradition or Cabale of the Jews, seeing they might have taken them from some
other books, not written by any Prophet, nevertheless received among the
Jews, though not with Prophetical authority, as some Historiographers are
amongst us. And therefore the cardinal Caietan (who should every way better
know, what is derived from tradition, than the B. of Eureux, who is inferior
unto him in dignity, in knowledge, and in place of reside^ce, the cardinal
having bin ordinarily near the oracle of Rome, and drunk of the fountain of
tradition) says in his Co^mentary upon this chapter, and namely of the
particular of the golden Censoure, which after the opinion of many, was in the
most holy place, from which our Bishop makes his strongest instance; It is not
known, whence, the Author of this Epistle has taken this, namely, that the
golden Censer was, in the most holy place. And the same may be said of the
golden Pot, wherein was the Manna, and Aarons rod, since the solution of the
Jesuit Ribera does not satisfy him; who (no more than this Cardinal) has not
recourse to Tradition, Genesis ^0.12* 2. Sam. 21 etc.
choosing rather to employ therein Grammar, there being the like examples of
Scripture, in which the pronoune is referred to the antecedent farthest of,
than to apply thereto this plaster for all sores; or to borrow the invention
of Calvin, for to take away the contradiction, which the same Cardinal says
to be most manifest, between the place (1. King 8.9.) which has these
express words, Nothing was in the Arc save the two tables of the law: And
this is taken in the sense, that our Bishop will have it. And Bellarmine
himself, does he not receive the opinion of them, that hold, that the golden
Pot and the rod were in some outward part of the Arc, and not within the arc
it self? de verb. De^ Lib. 1. c, ^7


The two last Instances, taken out of the Epistle of S. Jude, have been
touched above: let us confirm here our opinion by the testimony of the same
Cardinal Caietan, who says: It can not be known, whence Saint Jude had the
knowledge of this combat, Comm. in epist. Iud.
that is to say between the Angel and the Devil; yet there be some that
hold, that it, is taken out of the apocryphal books of the Hebrews: who has
then revealed it to our B. that the Apostle, and the Jews held it unwritten
Tradition? the apocrypha books of the Jews, and the tradition, which he
pretends to be the true and pure word of God; is it all one? To conclude,
from whence so ever this history be taken, (...) lib. 3. c. 2 In c^talog*
whether from the book which Origin calls the ascentio^ of Moses, of which
S. Hierome also makes mention; or whether it be from the pretended Tradition,
what avails it against the perfection and sufficiency of the doctrine
contained in the Scripture? How often have we told him, that we are at accord,
that all particular deeds and sayings, ^^hn. 21.25.
are not contained in it, neither can be? ^^l. 1^3*
But from this history, says he, are drawn many excellent doctrines, and the
beginning of this knowledge, could not be humane and natural; but of necessity
must take original from an express revelation, etc. Say it be so; to what
purpose all this? Is not our question, whether there is any point of doctrine,
that should be derived from any other beginning than from the Scripture? Is it
not whether the points of doctrine, contained in the Scripture, may be
confirmed, by some other proofs besides the Scriptures; The Greeks, reciting
this history, say that the Archangell was employed in the Burial of Moses,
^ecum. in ^ist. Iud.
and that the Devil opposed himself thereunto, alleging that Moses was his,
because of the manslaughter committed in the person of the Egyptian, and that
therefore he deserved not so honorable a burial. The doctrines which they
draw from it, are that the Apostle would teach by it, 1. that men have to
render an account after this life: 2 That there is one and the same God both of
the old and new Testament. 3. That the Devil rises up against the souls
departed from the body, and strives to hinder their way to heaven; but the
good Angels assist them, and resist the wicked Spirits. 4 That we ought not to
Judge, nor curse rashly. 5. That honor should be yielded to Superiors. Now it
were for our B. to deny, that these doctrines are contained in the scripture,
and that the Jews could not derive them from any other beginning, but from
unwritten Tradition: and for to do this, he must race out an infinite number
of places of the law, and of the Prophets, and by this means, not only he
should justify his blasphemies against the scripture, but also the heresy of
the Anabaptists, in the point which concerns the obedience due to
Magistrates; as elsewhere he endeuoreth to do, touching the point of baptism of
little children. Now as these doctrines are more tha^ sufficiently proved by
the Scripture, so the history in question, repugneth not any thing thereu^to,
whether we take it as Oecumenius recites it, or after the vulgar
understanding, namely, that the devil, 2. Cor. ^
whose enterprises we are not ignorant of, endeavored to discover the
Sepulcher of Moses, which God had expressly hid, laying therein only this body,
that it might be unknown to all, and might not give occasion to Idolatry; as
it happened among Christians, when they began to vnbury, to transport, and to
worship the relics of Martyrs, and sometimes the relics of thieves and
robbers. It is therefore false, that they which received this History as Saint
Jude recites it; Could not (as he says) after our Maximus, fol. 11^
excuse themselves of superstition in their belief, to give credit to such
^ar^^ations, which had been wholly fabulous, and full of deceits, if they had
come from any other, then from the pure revelation and word of God. I say it is
a mere deceit, to say, that we condemn of superstition or deceit* all that
is not contained in the holy Scripture, as he says we do: for we abase not
the price and estimation of humane writings, though we make the^ not equal to
the divine: we acknowledge the gifts of the author of Truth, eue^ in them that
have always remained under the tyranny of the father of lies; though more in
them that have been translated out of the power of darkness, into the kingdom of
light: We consider both* and examine them by the rule of the Scripture, which
is for this cause called Canon; that which agrees thereunto, we receive with
praise; that which repugneth it, we reject with leave, and accuse of
superstition the belief that is given to such narrations; which cannot have
place, in the recital of Saint Jude; in as much as he is an Apostle, having
the spirit of the Lord in such a measure, that he neither deceived himself,
nor any other in that which the said, or wrote for to be inserted into the
Canon of faith. And if we receive now some verses of certain heathen Poets, as
the word of God, since they were sanctified by the Apostle; what reason were
there, to reject this narration, though it were taken forth of an Apocrypha
book, as the Fathers thought, seeing that no new doctrine can be drawn from
it but that of the Scripture by it is confirmed? It is a necessary point to
know, that the Magistrate is ordained of God, that we owe him honor and
reverence: but know all the particular places, reasons, and testimonies, that
may serve to prove this point; is not a thing necessary to know.

I showed by the way, what proffit the Church of Rome makes of this tradition
of S. Jude; namely, quite contrary to that it contains: for first of all, it
sets forth all the relics of Saints departed, and suborneth false ones
too, for to make the people to commit Idolatry: instead of resisting the
devil when he broacheth such inventions as the Archangel did, etc. Secondly,
instead of honoring and reuerencing the magistrate; the Pope, who calling
himself the universal Shepherd of Christian people, should be universal
pattern to his flock, causes his feet to be kissed by Kings, and Emperors,
yea tra^pleth under his feet the greatest dignities of the earth. What says
our Bishop to this? he cries ignorance against me, (...) 16.
to impute to the Church of Rome, that which from all times has bin practiced
by the whole Catholic Church, throughout all the world; Item, to make no
difference between the relics of Saints, before and after the Incarnation of
the Saint of Saints. We thank him for confessing that the Romish Church
makes the people commit idolatry after relics true or false: For to inwrap
in the same impiety, all the ancient Church, he quoteth a long list of
places of the Fathers, gathering together all their Hyperboles on this matter:
all the relics of Paganism, all the indiscreet devotions of the people, with
the conniuences of the Bishops, brought in with the stream or tide of custom:
all the Prosopopoeiacs, Apostrophes, Epiphonema's, and other figures, of which
their Panegyricks are full, are unto him, grounds of christian religion,
Apostolic traditions, inevitable demonstrations, and indemonstrable
principles: for his manner is to handle the Fathers so, as that he brings away
from them, but the sweeping as it were, far from the industry and wisdom of an
heathen, who gathered gold forth of another dross. Now if I do not verify
this by some contrary places taken forth of the same Fathers that he alleges,
he will cry against me, as he did against the Lord of Plessis: that I could
not do it; and that if I went about but to quote one only example, the paper
would blush an hundred years after. Let us therefore oppose to the place of
Gregory of Nysse, which he sets in the head of his squadron, some places
of that excellent Epistle, which this holy Father wrote of purpose, against
them that go on Pilgrimage to Jerusalem; let us see from which of them we
shall draw most instruction, and resolution. They, says he, which once have
dedicated themselves, to a more excellent manner of life; it shall go well
with them if they take heed always to the words of the Gospel; and as they
that guide their work by a Rule, redress by the streightnes of the same, that
which before was crooked; so I think it meet, that we address and refer
these things to God, applying herein the ordinance of the Gospel, as a Rule
straight and unchangeable. Seeing then there be some, that choose a private and
solitary life; who think that it is godliness and religion, to have visited the
places of Jerusalem, wherein are seen the marks of the coming of the Lord in
the flesh, the thing goes well, if we take heed to the Rule it self; to the
end that if the commandments carry us thither, we may do this work as an
ordinance of the Lord. But if it appear, that it has been brought in, besides
the commandments of the Lord; I know not what this can be, that he which
proposes to himself for a law of good, commands another to do. When the Lord
calls the Blessed, for to receive the kingdom of heaven; he reckons not
among the good works, Math. 2 5
which bring a man thither, going on pilgrimage to Jerusalem. When he declares
the true blessedness; Math. ^.
he comprehends not therein such an employment. Now to what purpose shall a
man employ himself in that which neither makes happy, nor serves for the
kingdom of heauer? He which has understanding let him consider it. After he
represents at large the inconveniences and dangers, whereinto Pilgrims put
themselves; the wickednesses that are committed in the places, esteemed more
holy then others: And because himself had traveled thither, he yeildeth a
reason of it, namely that his charge had bound him to visit the Church of
Arabia, for to reform it; and that he had promised to confer with the
Pastors of the Churches of Jerusalem, who were troubled and had need of a
mediator. Let no man then, says he, be offended for our example; but let our
judgment of it be the more receiueable, seeing we give it of the things that
we our selves have seen: For we confessed Christ to be the true God, even
before we went thither, and afterward likewise, our faith being hereby neither
diminished nor increased. We knew that he was borne man of a Virgin, before we
saw Bethleem; and we believed his Resurrection, before we saw his Sepulcher;
and we confessed his Ascension, without seeing the mount of Olives. Neither
have we reaped any other fruits of our voyage, save only this, that by the
comparison of the places, we have learned that ours are much more holy, than
foreign parts. Wherefore you that fear the Lord, praise him in the places
where you are: For change of places, makes not the Lord nearer; but God will
come to thee, so that the house of thy soul be found such, that he may dwell
in thee. If thy inward man be full of perverse thoughts, though thou be at
Golgotha, at the mount of Olives, or under the sepulcher of the resurrection;
yet thou shall receive Jesus Christ as little into thee, as they that never
made profession of Religion. Therefore my wel-beloued, exhort the brethren, to
travel from the body to the Lord, not from Cappadocia into Palestine, etc.

Let this whole Epistle be compared, with the place cited forth of a
Panegyricke of the same Father, by the Bishop of Euerux; and there is not so
blind an Idolatrer, that sees not, that in this same he speaks according to
the word of God, which he lays for the ground of every good action; and
according to his judgment and belief: in the other according to the abuse of
the time, and according to the testimony, which he suffered, not being able to
withstand it, August. a^ Lannar. a^ ciuit. l. 10*
no more then Saint Augustine, who so earnestly complains against it: And who
in another place, speaking in good earnest, dogmatically, not historically nor
popularly, (that is to say, abusiuely;) says thus: De vera lig. cap. 55*
Let not our Religion be after our own fantasies; for whatsoever truth may be
in them, yet our Religion is better far then any thing we can fain of our own
heads. And a little after: Let not our Religion be the worshipping of dead
men; for if they have lived religiously, they be not such, as that they would
desire any such honor; but would have us honor him, by whom being illuminate,
they rejoice in that we are servants with them of that which they have
obtained. They should therefore be honored for imitation, not worshipped by
religion. De morib^ Eccl. Cath^ c. 24.
He confesses that there are many Superstitious persons in the true Religion,
worshippers of Sepulchers and pictures. But in another place he unfolds his
opinion upon this matter, saying that if we pray well, and as we ought to do,
we should say nothing else, Ep. 121.^ Prob.
but what is set down in the Lords prayer: And that whosoever says, that
which cannot be referred to this Eua^gelicall prayer, though his prayer be not
unlawful, yet is it carnal, which cannot choose but be unlawful, seeing
that they who are regenerate by the Spirit, ought only to pray Spiritually.

To the place that the Bishop of Eureux produces out of Theodoret, what can be
more fitly opposed, Theodor. Ep ad. col*
than that which the same Theodoret writes on the Epistle of Saint Paul to the
Colossians, where he calls, worshipping of Angels, heresy. But if Angels,
which are ordained of God for our guard, which are the noblest creatures of
all, which always stand before the Throne of God: cannot be adored without
heresy, after the doctrine of Theodoret, and the determination of the Council
of Laodicia: shall we say he thought, that the bones of dead men should be
worshipped, what distinction so ever they make, which the people understand as
little as the dead bones do? And if Baronius durst here condemn Theodoret,
(...) Eccl. ^. ad an. ^4.
for that he condemned, as Heresy, this superstitious worshipping of
Angels: How much more shall it be lawful, to condemn of Idolatry and
impiety, them that so seek and prease after this abominable worshipping of
bones and dead bodies? For Saint Augustine in the place above alleged, will
not have men serve, nor adore the heavenly bodies, for this only reason; that
though they be rightly preferred before all other bodies, yet life is much
better.

These heavenly bodies, are not without miracles, which God has wrought in
them, and they do bring more profit to men, and do better declare the glory
of God, than does the dust and ashes of the dead, what miracles soever be done
there, (...) 9.1.
of which the true had none other end but to yield testimony to the truth,
which the Martyrs had confessed, for to convert the Heathen thereunto, and not
turn away Christians from him that is the living God, for to make them worship
dead men: for to withdraw the people from the visible Elements, to the
knowledge of salvation, manifested in the Scriptures, and not for to draw them
to idolatries more then Hethenish, which the Spirit of lies, has the cunning
so well to nourish and set forward, by an infinite number of false miracles,
and such as those were wherewith in times past he so well maintained the
Heathen under his obedience. Dialog. Gazaei. ^. 5. Pa^ ^om. 1*
Here I summon him again to tell us, on what Apostolic Tradition were and are
grounded, the Pirgrimages, adorations, and all those Ceremonies, instituted a
long time after the death of the Apostles? What certainty there is concerning
the relics which the people worship? By what Registers showed the succession
of them that have continued the keeping of them, from father to son? How by
the wars and other public calamities, which have lost and abolished so many
things, there has not been lost so much as a comb of the virgin Marie, a
clout of the childhood of our Savior Christ, and ten thousand other such
pieces? No not under that horrible spoil and havoc, in the time of
Dioclesian, when all the Oratories, and holy places of christians were burned
and ruinate, which serves Baronius for an excuse, and for an ordinary refuge,
when he would fain prove a thing by antiquity, and can not. And to come again
to the history in question; there is found the very dagger, wherewith St.
Michael fought with the Devil, from which Tradition the people learneth, that
it is not by faith, nor by spiritual weapons, Ephesians. 6.^
wherewith the Scripture armeth us, that we must combat the Devil; but that
one must have a good sword and dagger, for to resist him, according to the
Tradition of the Cibille, who commanded Aeneas, going into hell, Virg. 6. E^
to hold his sword in his hand: Tuque invade viam, vaginaque eripe ferrum: That
it is not in the word, and in the Sacraments, that we must seek Christ, with
his spiritual graces, but in some piece of wood, which is said to be a piece
of his cross; in some nail, napkin, towell, or other relic! Though Saint
Paul say, that he knows not Jesus according to the flesh, 2. Cor. 5^
so far is he off from making reckoning of these pretended Relics. The
Scripture teaches us, that God ordained Death as a curse; as the wages of
sin; that dead bodies, bones and graves, were polluted, and did pollute even
the living, by their touchings: because they were as so many myrrors of this
curse, and of the corruption of humane nature, in which the Image of God is so
fowly disfigured. Moreover, this same legal pollution taught the Israelites,
by figure, that which the Apostles under the Gospel taught clearly; namely,
that we should carefully keep our selves from dead works, which are also
called works of the flesh, and to maintain our selves pure and holy: the
pretended tradition on the contrary, teaches, that there is no other purity
nor holiness, but in stirring, kissing, gilding, and adoring of dead bodies: and
whereas the law particularly forbad Priests to touch dead bodies: (...) 22.
there is no sort of people now adays, that so busy themselves in funerals,
and in handling of bones and relics, then the Priests, who feed upon dead
bodies, like Ravens and Vultures, and in the mean while brag they were figured
by the Leuitical Priests, whom they care for as little as for Jesus Christ when
he says, Let the dead bury the dead: unless it be, that they obey him, in
this that being more dead, than living, they will have no other affairs but
with the dead, having no hope of the true life: and this is the reason why in
their altars, whereupon they sacrifice and crucify, as much as in them is,
Jesus Christ, who is that life; they must have the bones and ashes of the dead;
to the end that as well they as their altars, with which they live, might
lively represent unto us, the possessed with unclean spirits, (...). 8. ^5.
of whom the Gospel speaks, with the graves, in which they dwelt.

Now we learn well enough by the Scripture, without the help of any
tradition, that the legal pollution, that came by touching dead bodies, is
abolished by the Incarnation of our Savior Christ: but that they should be
worshipped and adored, with so much superstition and Idolatry, after this
incarnation; there is in it neither precept of it, nor example: though we read
in it the death and burial of Saint John Baptist, of Saint Steven and others:
on the contrary, this distinction of relics before and after the Incarnation,
is repugnant to the Scripture, and destroys it self: First of all; the holy
persons, which dyed in the faith of the Messiah, were freed as well from the
curse of the law, as they that are dead since the preaching of the Gospel; and
therefore God vouchsafed himself to bury the body of Moses; and the death
of the saints were precious in his sight, Deuteronomy. 3^ Psalm. 11^ Psalm. 34^
he kept all their bones, and not so much as one of them perished, as David
sung of his time. Moreover the bones of Helizeus, raising up a dead body, 2.
King^
wrought one of the greatest mjracles that is, and therefore his body we
should well believe to be freed from the slavery of Satan, whose slave as
then, all humane nature was, if we believe the Bishop of Eureux; not knowing or
fayning not to know, that Jesus Christ is the same, yesterday, Heb 13^ Revel.
1^ 1. Pet. 2^
and to day; That the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world, did
always wash and sanctify the faithful by his blood: And the Ceremonial
pollusion might well be done away, by this extraordinary testimony, that God
rendered to his Prophet after his death, notwithstanding the inclination that
this people had then to Idolatry: yet did they never abandon themselves to
such brutishness, as to worship bones and ashes; only the Egyptians were
capable of this madness, who for to heal themselves of the bytings of
Serpents, worshipped the Sepulcher of Jeremiah, that was stoned to death in
that Country; an adoration worthy of them, that worshipped all sorts of
herbs, beasts, fishes, and monsters. Secondly, whereas according to the
Doctors of the Romish Church, the souls of the Fathers of the old Testament
went into Limbo, which they say to be a place without pain; They send the
souls of the faithful after the incarnation of Christ, into Purgatory, there
to suffer the very same torments as are in Hell, save that they last not;
whence may be inferred, that the humane nature is more polluted now at this
day, then it was in old time; and that since the time that the blood of Jesus
Christ was really shed on the Cross, and all the mystery of our redemption
actually accomplished, there is found therein less virtue and efficacy to
purify them, than was before. Thirdly, I demand, why the Patriarchs, since
they were freed from that servitude of Satan, are not called upon in the
Romish Church? Or if all those that dyed before the incarnation of Christ, have
remained the slaves of Satan; why did the Emperor Arcadius give the same
honor to the bones of Samuel, Lector. Niceph. ^. 10. ^ont.
making them be transported from Judea into Thrace, as to an Apostle? Why did
no Bishop, no not the Bishop of Rome, oppose himself against that pollution?
^p. 2.
Wherefore was there even Bishops, to bear the Shrine? Why does Saint Ambrose,
in the place cited by our Bishop, allege sentences out of the old Testament,
which speak of the care, which God had of them that deceased in that time, for
to prove the worshipping of the Relics of the Saints, deceased under the new
testament, if the difference be so great between the one and the other? Why
does S. Hierom confound the Relics of Saint Peter and Saint Paul, with the
body of Moses? ^ig. and (...) Sanct. 3.
To conclude, why does Bellarmine conclude, by the miracle wrought by Helizeus,
that God would have them be worshipped? What becomes here of the difference
between the abominable and polluted carions, vessels of filthiness and
uncleanness, organs and instruments of Satan, so du Perron calls the bodies
of the ancient Saints; (...) 20 p. 2.
and between the darlings of Christ, sweet smelling sacrifices, seats, vessels
and future temples of the Godhead, as he calls them of the new testament?
which might suffice, (...) 2.
without adding Victorious over the devil and hell, by their martyrdom: But
Jesus Christ, to who^ alone belongs this glory, to have vanquished the
Devil and Hell, by his martyrdom, must as well (with him) be spoiled of his
title, for to inuest therewith the bones of the dead; as the Scripture of his
perfection, for to inuest therewith Tradition; which in stead of a word or
two, that the Scripture teaches, concerning the combat of the Angel against
the devil, for the body of Moses; recites unto us very amply the combat of
S. Denis, Annal. Franc. (...) of S. D^
and of some other Saints, against the devil, for the soul of King Dagobert,
which they plucked from him, for that this king had been greatly devoted to
the said saint, robbing others, to enrich him. Also it tells us the good
turn Saint Laurence did to the Emperor Henry; how that after his death,
Alb^r (...) histor. S. ^. 1. c. 36^
the Angel Michael balanced his merits against his sins; the Devil being
ready to seize on the soul as his own, because it was found too light by a
grain of merrite: the good Saint, subtly cast into the Scale where the
merits were, a gold Chalice; (note, that our Bishops grains were not grained
in those days) for to make it weigh down. Yea, it assures us by the mouth of
a Pope, that can not lie, Greg. d^ l. 3. c. 12.
nor err; That silly Priests have done as much or more wonders, then the
Scripture recites of the Archangel; causing the souls of them that were
already dead, and carried away of Devils, to come again; yea, employing in
this Commission the Angels themselves, as Sergeants to bring them back again,
and represent them. And with such foppish tales of their Tradition, as well
absolute, as subsidiarie, one might make great volumes. It suffices to note
herein a word; that all that which both the Traditions tell us of Saint
Michael; is borrowed from the Fables, which the heathen Poets have feigned of
their Mercury; whose wings, sword, balance, (for after Diodorus, Mercury is
the inuenter of weights and measures) and almost all his office, it seems,
that the Priests Saint Michael has inherited.

I said, That the Popes gave license to themselves to tread under feet the
greatest dignities of the earth, of kings and emperors, which those against
who^ S. Jude speaks in his Epist. never did: to which he answeth, that the
Greeks interpret this word (Dignities) in this place, not of secular
dignities, but of Ecclesiastical, and confer this place with that of the
third Epistle of S. John, where he complayneth of the insolency of Diotrephes:
And thereupon he adds, that it is for me to bethink my self, how to acquit
me of this Article, etc.

Oecumenius, from whom he takes his conjecture, understands by this word,
(...) (Dignities) the old and new Testament, (...) 3. ^5, (...)
which interpretation, he confirms by the place of Saint Paul, where he
says, If that which is abolished, was full of glory, or dignity, how much
more glorious, or worthy, is that which is permanent? By this reckoning, and by
the testimony of the same warrant the Bishop brings all the curses and
execrations, which the Apostle S. Jude pronounces, are to fall upon their
heads, that blaspheme the Scripture of insufficiency and imperfection, that
is, which blaspheme the old and new Testament. Let him see if his Mytre be of
proof against these Apostolical fulminatio^s, which are of another manner of
temper, than those of his Jupiter Vatican. For to divert himself from these
yrksome thoughts, he gathers certain flowers out of Luthers book against
king Henry the eight, and thinks to cover therewith all the indignity and
outrage, that ever the most impudent Pope or Monk, did to Prince or Emperor;
either to tread them vnder-feet, as was the Emperor Frederick the first. Or to
poison them, as was the Emperor Henry the seventh. Or to chain them and tie
them like Dogs under their tables, as a Duke of Venice was used; Or to
cannonize for saints the Parricides or murderers of them, (...) the (...) and
^^^le tre^^^ose hel^ ^custs ^ere ^o exe^
as of late were the murderers of Henry the third king of France, and William
of Nassaw Prince of Orange: Or to stir up daily against them new Parricides
and murderers, as they often did against the late Queen of blessed memory,
Elizabeth; which the most shameless calumniator cannot reproach Luther, so much
as to have thought of; Or to raise and invent new leagues and seditions, for to
ouer-flow all Christendom with blood, etc.

Of all these goodly practices of the Apostolic tradition, not of Saint Jude
the servant of Christ, but of Judas, the betrayer of Christ; the Bishop of
Eureux esteems, that the Church of Rome is not tied to yield an account:
For, says he, it is not to you, fol. 132.
that she is to answer for her actions in this regard. O insoluble Argument,
and inevitable demonstration, worthy the expected hatte, which such an Advocate
has reason to demand, that it may blush for him.

There remains the last Instance, taken out of the same Epistle, touching the
Prophecy of Henoch, whereof mention has been made above, and the reason,
declared why the Apostle proves not by scripture, the point in question,
namely, because they, whom he discribeth in this Epistle, as manifest
contemners of Jesus Christ; would have made as little account of the Scripture;
so that it was more to purpose, to allege a judgment, described and
witnessed eue^ by the heathen; for these profane persons, having some remnant
of shame left in them, could not have denied and rejected, that which was
confessed and acknowledged, as well by strangers as by them of the Church. Now
it has been often said unto him, that none of his Instances is receiuable,
for to show the imperfection of the Scripture, unless he bring forth Instances
upon some points necessary to salvation, whereof is not found any proof in
the Scripture. It has been showed him above, that this Article of the
universal judgment, is found in Moses, and by measure as the light of the
world approached and drew near, the doctrine, as well of this Article, as of
all others, has been more clearly expressed, though the contentious never
see this light. A blind-man sees as little the light and brightness of the
Sun at noonday, as that of the morning star: It is not for the co^tentious
but against the^, that the Scripture is written; and those spirits yt seek
issue of all the proofs of the same, shall in the end find entrance into
hell: To such Spirits we say, that which the Scripture teaches: If any lust to
be contentions, we have no such custom, (...). 11.16 ^39.
neither the churches of God. But at least says he, though there should be
nothing like to it expressed in the Scripture, or that the books that contained
something of it were lost, as diverse other writings of the Prophets; yet this
Oracle would not have lost her authority, nor ceased to be the word of God,
and Doctrine worthy of faith. In very truth, if all the Scripture were lost, it
were that which such as he, would wish more then any thing in the world; For
then they would make us believe goodly matters, seeing that notwithstanding
this light of the Scripture, more resplendent now, then it has been these
many ages before; they would without blushing persuade us, that their grains,
Pictures* and other like fopperies, are means for to attain to salvation are
helps of the blood of Jesus Christ, as well as their Traditions are supplies of
the Scripture. But if Bellarmine speaking of what was to be done, ^oncil. lib.
(...).
for the election of a Pope; if in case all the Cardinals should perish at
once; affirms, that it is unlikely ever to happen: Truly we have more
reason to hope and firmly to believe that Jesus Christ, who as the
Bridegroom, has joined to himself the Church with an indessoluble band, will
preserve for her also the contract of marriage, the Indenture of the Covenant,
more necessary to the Church, than the Cardinals to the conclaue: And so, as
that Antichrist with all his wiles and endeavors, shall never be able to
abolish it, no more than could in times past, his predecessor, or his figure
King Antiochus. The Bishop of Eureux by this hypothesis, does he not
confess, that if the Church, which ought to be the guardian of the Scriptures,
should loose them; it should err greatly? And if Saint John pronounces so
fearful a curse against those that add thereunto, or dimish therefrom; what
should become of them, who having charge to keep it, should let it wholly be
lost, and should imagine neuertherlesse. that they cannot err? But when all
the rest should be lost. by what special privilege, should this Epistle of
Saint Jude be saved, which by reason of the shortness of it, might be lost
with the first?

As for the writings of the Prophets, that have been lost, when he has
answered the place of Saint Augustine, above alleged; we shall see what shall
be meet to reply thereto. Aug. de ci^ Dei. l. 18.
In the mean while he persisteth in his trifling impertinences, to allege
unto us still the authority of our Doctors, who do not always agree in the
exposition of all places, though they always agree in the doctrine of all the
points of Salvation: That were good, if we held them in the same degree, as
they of his Church do their Popes; all whose Expositions notwithstanding, they
do not always receive without exception, but are constrained to shift them
off by this distinction: That they speak sometimes as Popes, and sometimes as
Doctors, and that in the latter quality they may be deceived in doctrine;
That is to say, it is then, they deceive themselves most, when they assay to
perform some part of their Office, that is, to teach; yea, were they Apostles.
Now I demand of our Bishop, whether he had rather condemn Cardinal
Bellarmine, who holds with Saint Hierome, Saint Augustine and all Antiquity;
De verbo (...) l. 8. c. 18.
that this allegation of Saint Jude, was taken from an Apocrypha book, (which
moved many of the Ancients, to reject this Epistle out of the Canon, as also
does Cardinal Caitan: than alone to maintain, that it comes from some other
principle of faith, and word of God, for to retain this wretched pretext, to
calumniate the Scripture of Imperfection, and insufficiency?

He reprocheth me that I understand not this maxim; Singularium non est
scientia; saying, that it is not true, but in respect of humane sciences, (...)
40.
not of Divinity, wherein particular things may come in as the object of the
same, seeing that the most part of the Articles it teaches, are particular
points; as the Nativity, death, and whatsoever we believe else of the humanity
of Christ, etc. But does it follow therefore, that we ought or that we can know
every particular thing, said, or done, concerning every one of these particular
points; seeing the world it self were not able to contain them, as Saint John
says? (...). 21.
Now he understood well enough, in what sense I alleged this School Maxim:
but he could not loose occasion of cauilling upon the difference of
Singularium and Singuloru^, not considering the ierk he gives his Master
Thomas Aquinas, who in the beginning of his Summa, takes these two terms
indifferently: (...). 1. ^.
And one that has as much leisure as he might show him, that he understands
not so much cunning in Philosophy, as he makes show of, when he says, that
natural discourse cannot apprehe^d necessarily and infallably, any particular
or singular proposition: For if that be true, the understanding knows not it
own action, when it reasons or discourses, which is ever of a particular
thing: and cannot compare the universal with the singular, neither make
abstraction of the one from the other, if it know not both the one and the
other; nor discern the time past, from the time to come; nor things past, from
things to come, which are particulars; nor judge of the one, by the knowledge
of the other.

To the place of Saint John, which we are wont to allege, for the
sufficiency of the Scripture; He answers. (...). 20, 31. ^142.
1. That it is not in any sort spoken there of the doctrine, but of the signs,
neither of the sufficiency of instruction, but of the efficacy of persuasion.
2. That though they pronounce (haec) should comprehend all that Saint John
wrote, the argument would be much worse; for then should not be spoken, in any
sort, of the sufficiency of the things written; but only of the end wherefore
they are written. To this I say, that we deny not, that this Pronoune (haec)
is understood of the miracles, of which Saint John speaks in the verse going
before. But we maintain that it cannot be with such a restriction to miracles,
as infers an exclusion of doctrine; for as much as this word (Miracle)
being a Relative, cannot be understood, but by his Correlatiue which is
doctrine: For miracles are the signs and seals of Doctrine. Therefore
Analogy or proportion requires, that though Saint John had said at length,
(haec signa) yet nevertheless therein is jointly also meant doctrine, of which
they were signs; by reason of the perpetual and necessary relation of the
one to the other: and therefore if the miracles or signs whereof he speaks
be suff^cient; the doctrine is so also, which is sealed and confirmed by those
miracles. And therefore these means are not of so different kinds as our
Bishop says, And seeing he grants that the Scripture conteyneth
suff^ciently the signs or miracles, for to persuade us with efficacy, all
that is needful to life eternal; he must needs grant also, that it
conteyneth suff^ciently also the doctrine, which is the thing signified; seeing
that Corralatiues concur in the definition of their Relatiues, and cannot be
understood the one without the other. Furthermore, we believe, that whosoever
is effectually persuaded, is sufficiently instructed, in the knowledge of
salvation; which consists not in evident demonstration, which the
understanding of the natural man comprehends, for there be some that are
sufficiently instructed, that understand all points of doctrine, and are able
to discourse of it with admiration to the hearers, who notwithstanding are not
effectually persuaded, but remain Epicures and Atheists within. In a word,
the difference he puts between Sufficiency, and Efficacy, can be none
other, but that which the Philosophers put between that they call Actum
primum, and Actum secundum: habitude, and operation, or actual exercise. What
fond subtlety is this then, to grant that which is greater, namely;
effectual persuasion, (that is to say, to salvation, otherwise it were no
efficacy) and to deny the sufficient instruction, which is lesser every way?
To end this controversy, I offer him an Arbitrer, which he cannot honestly
refuse, though it were in quality of a Judge; I mean Cardinal Baronius,
whose words are these: Saint John having recited these things, (...). tom. 1.
^^r: 34. ^10:
finisheth his Gospel, omitting, as himself testifies, many things: For that
which he wrote, seemed unto him, to suffice, as well for to establish the TRVTH
OF THE GOSPEL, as for to REPROVE HERESIES, for which causes Saint Hierome and
others do witness, that he took in hand to write this Gospel: Does the
Evangelical truth contain miracles only? The Sermons of Christ, his
expositions of the Law, and confutations of the opinions of the Pharisees,
which the Evangelists recite of him; and in a word, all his doctrine which
they set down, are they things contrary, or not belonging to the truth of the
Gospel? Hence is apparent, that our Bishops modification, wherewith he
endeavors still to cloak his blasphemy of insufficiency, in restrayning it
to the confutation of Heresies, first is vain and fraudulent; for as much as
he is constrained to confess, that many points necessary for the simplest
layman, are not contained in the Scripture, and notwithstanding, a simple
layman is not bound, to be able to confute all Heresies: Secondly, it is
disprooued manifestly by the decision of Cardinal Baronius, who declares the
Scripture to be sufficient, even for to confute Heresies, and puts in our
hands this Argument for to overthrow his two first Episcopal answers: that
which seemed sufficient to Saint John, for to establish the truth of the
Gospel, and to confute Heretics; conteyneth a simple and absolute
sufficiency for the matters of our salvation: But the Writings of the
Gospel, seemed such unto Saint John: therefore they contained a simple and
absolute sufficiency for the matters of our salvation.

His third answer is; That though Saint John should speak of the sufficiency
of that which he wrote, yet should that be referred to one Article only,
which is, to make us believe that Jesus is that Christ. And whereas it is
replied unto him, that it is the Epitome, and substance of the Articles
necessary to salvation: he has recourse to his distinction of Mediate and
Immediate sufficiency so industriously set down at the beginning of his
Book, In the ^^cation (...) title.
and by us examined and confuted in a Treatise by it self: yet distrusting the
force of this distinction, he adds another, distinguishing sufficiency into
Authoritatiue and doctrinall, and depriving the Scripture of the latter, fol.
14^
of favor grants it the first. Let us note herein two frauds; the first in
that he presupposes, that St. John spoke but of that, which he himself only
had written; in stead of referring his words to all the Evangelical history,
written before by the other three Evangelists: St. John's scope in his writings,
as all the fathers do witness, being only to make a supply, for a more
express declaration of the Godhead of the son of God, because of the
Heretics, that then denied it: and to confirm and seal by his testimony,
Tert. d^ c. 17. Hier. d^ Ecl in
and Apostolic authority the Canonical books of the new Testament, because
of certain writings supposed and attributed to Saint Paul, by some of his
Disciples and followers themselves. Whereunto has relation that horrible
threatening, which he set as a heavenly seal, to his book of the Revelation,
for a shutting up of the new Testament. The other fraud is to dispute, in what
sense this proposition is sufficient, or not: as if neither Saint John, nor all
the other Writers of the new Testament, had written any thing else but these
words only: Jesus is that Christ, that Son of God, without adding any other
proof or explication, without any other History, or doctrine whatsoever: a
fraud most necessary for his desperate Cause, giving him occasion in
appearance, to heap up a great number of words to fill up paper, or rather
dust to cast into men's eyes. If so many things, as the Evangelists do write,
contain not the means for to prove this proposition, and for to show plainly
what Christ is; to wit, his two natures, and his three Offices; to what use
serve they then? how can a thing so vnsufficie^t in it self, make us have
eternal life? If they contain but a part of the means and necessary proofs,
what reason was there, to set down only that part and to omit the principal?
What reason was there, to make so many books, and to fill them with matters,
which (to set forth our Bishops opinion in one word,) serves to no use at
all, seeing that even that which is written cannot be understood, without his
subsidiarie Tradition? could any more shamefully defame the apostles and
Evangelists? these Notaries and Secretaries of the holy Ghost, than in accusing
them so manifestly of disloyalty in their charge, of having suppressed and
eclipsed essential and principal clauses in this instrument, which they have
framed and left, for to serve for the perpetual canon or rule to the christian
Church? An accusation, that cannot redound, but upon the Holy Ghost himself,
by whose instinct and inspiration, they wrote, that which they wrote, for to
serve to that end and use. Let us conclude then, that this distinction:
Authoritatiue not Doctrinall; is false and blasphemous, leaving to the sacred
Scripture no other title, but of a Letter of credit, but of a memorial, or
direction, as he himself says, without containing the doctrine in it self,
but in another: which is in effect, to dispoyle it as well of authority, as of
doctrine, for to inuest the Pope with both in attributing unto him authority
to teach whatsoever doctrine he lists; seeing they leave Christians neither
balance nor touchstone to prove it, after they have defamed the Scripture,
whereby the men of Beroea, examined even the doctrine of an Apostle, yea, Act.
17, ^
and that only by the scripture of the old Testament, wherein they found
sufficie^cie of doctrine, as well as of authority, for to judge thereof: Indeed
the law is called by the Hebrews (Thora) that is to say, doctrine: and the
Gospel, (...), wc signifies the same thing: But after the Doctrine of du
Perro, it is a doctrine not doctrinal, as the blood of the Mass, is a blood,
not bloody; that is to say, a Pyrrhonia^ doctrine. Yet at the worst, though we
should even admit this fond, false and outrageous distinction, and that all the
Scripture, were nothing else but a letter or credit, or as he says, A
memorial, containing directions and tokens for to find a Physician, which is
able to declare to every on^, Fol. 14^
all the necessary remedies to cure his malady: Yet he should get nothing for
his Pope, nor for all his representative Church. For if a man look well into
this memorial, if he take all the directions and observe well the tokens, that
it conteyneth, he shall not find therein one only iota, that directs him to
that magnificall Roman Hierarchy, for which only our Advocate pleads. If
the Scripture did direct sick persons to the Pope, as to the Sovereign
Physician, only healing all diseases; then should these be the marks or
tokens, that it should give of him: An Idol, beset with gold and precious
stones, set upon a high Throne, with three crowns upon his head, a gilded
Panto^le on his foot which he gives Kings and Emperors to kiss, being
prostrate before him: Cardinals round about him with red hattes, and scarlet
roabes, representing the Senate of the ancient Rome: Many Bishops and
Arch-byshops, mytred, in coapes and robes, and betrapped, as the subject of the
Comedy requires: Innumerable legions of Priests, Curates, Monks, Friars and
Chanons, diuersified with sundry liueries, and dispersed as in Garrison,
through all the provinces of the Empire of that Beast. Indeed we find, ^^al.
17.
that the Scripture lively prescribes a certain woman clothed in purple and
scarlet, bedecked with gold and precious stones, which it calls great
Babylon, the mother of the whoredoms and abominations of the earth, drunken
with the blood of the Saints and Martyrs of Jesus Christ. And this is the
Physician, to whom du Perron, as one of his Apothecaries, directs us, for the
healing of all our diseases; (...). 13.
because it is written; Who-Whosoeuer does not worship this Beast, it shall put
him to death.

True it is, that those she puts to death, are better cured of their
diseases, forsaking this body of sin, and resting from their labors; (...).
14.13.
than those that drink in the cup, wherewith this Physician or rather
Magitian, drencheth such as direct themselves unto him.

Now that which has been said, touching the text of S. John, suffices also
for to understand the expositions of S. Augustine, S. Cyrill: the Bishop of
Eureux bestirreth himself, and heapeth up many words without matter, for to
make them to be understood of miracles, which is a thing not denied; the knot
of the question being, whether it be with a restriction to miracles only,
and a total exclusion of Doctrine: This is it, that we deny him, and this is
it, that repugneth even common reason to speak of a sign so far forth as it is
a sign, without referring it to the thing signified; of a relative without
considering his correlatiue: yt is to say, to speak of the nature and Essence
of a thing, without considering the nature and Essence of the same. Therefore
without using many words as he does; do but observe these words of S. Cyril:
he declares the intention of the Gospel, as if he would rehearse, In Ioh.
lib. C. 61.
that which he wrote; For I have published these things says he, that you
might believe, and that in believing you might have life eternal. etc. And a
little after. If the power of the Gospel, and the greatness of the miracles, be
sufficient to persuade, that the Son of the Virgin, who was called Jesus, by
the voice of the Angel; is the same which the Scripture calls Christ, and who
is the Son of God, not as others, but properlye, and after a singular manner,
even after he was united to the human nature; it is certain that they do
err, which dare deny their Lord. Whence it manifestly appears, that after
his opinion, Saint John spoke not of miracles only, but also of the Doctrine
and force of the Gospel, which is the power of God unto salvation to all that
believe, Romans 1.^
from which force and power, if any separate and exclude Doctrine, he has more
need of Hellebore, then he is capable of Doctrine. And therefore it were our
Bishops part to show, how miracles only without Doctrine, can be sufficient, as
well for manners, as for Doctrine, which is the sufficyencie, that Saint Cyrill
attributes unto them in the place which himself cites, but with cutting off
this that follows; To the end that shining in a right faith, Fol. 157.
works and virtue, we may attain to the Kingdom of heaven, through our Lord
Jesus Christ. Effects, which no miracles can ever bring forth alone, without
Doctrine. But here is the most important point of the question: He says,
Though S. Augustine and S. Cyril should speak not of miracles only, but should
say in express words, Fol. 158.
that the Evangelists have written sufficiently, whatsoever is necessary for us
to know of the deeds and sayings of our Savior Christ, for our Salvation;
Nevertheless it would not follow, that the things only, that Christ either
did, or taught with his own mouth, to his Disciples, are sufficient for the
instruction of the Church. etc. And for proof of this his resolution, he
alleges this saying of Christ. I have yet many things to tell you which you
cannot bear now. (...) 97
A place, which as S. Augustine says, the grossest Heretics were wont to
abuse, for to color all their most abominable inventions. But see here the
impudency of our Bishop, who not content to blame the Scripture of
insufficiency and imperfection; spitteth his filthy blasphemies in the face of
Jesus Christ himself, blasoning him to have no more taught sufficiently by
word of mouth his Apostles, tha^ his Apostles have taught Posterity by their
writings: At least if the lie he gives the Son of God, be somewhat covered
in court-phrase, which he braggeth he can speak so well; yet is it without
courtesy, and without figure of Rhethoricke, that he gives the lie to this
affirmation of the truth it self: I have declared unto you al things that I
have heard of my Father: (...) 15.15
Whence it would follow, that the heavenly Father himself, has not perfectly,
nor sufficiently instructed his son, the Eternal wisdom. Now to agree
these two propositions; ( John 15.15. and 16.12.) we need not have recourse to
that enallage of the time, (...) Joan. (...) ^6.
as some of the Fathers have, under color that the Scripture speaks
some-time of things not yet done, as if they were already done; which the
circumstance of the place, and the sequence of the Text, permits not in this
place: But in the 16. chapter, when our Savior says, that his Disciples could
not bear, that which he had to tell them; he has respect to the sadness and
sorrow, which they were full of, as appears by the 22. verse, they remembered
not what had been already told the^, and were little disposed, to make their
profit, of what they then presently heard, for to prepare themselves to their
charge. And what? If Jesus Christ had hid from the Apostles themselves, some
necessary points; how much more should he have hid them from the other
Disciples, and Auditors of the common people? of which consequently none could
have been saved, if he had died before the day of the Pentecost, before they
had heard the new Articles of faith, which the holy Ghost began then, to
reueile to the Apostles, of which Jesus Christ had never spoken unto them? And
this sentence of our Lord, concerning the Office of the holy Ghost: He shall
teach you all things, and shall bring to your remembrance al things that I have
said unto you: shall be of no more weight with our Bishop than the other, for
to make him confess, that the holy Ghost taught no other doctrine the^ that
which the Disciples had already heard of their master, though they had not
well remembered, nor understood all; for he had rather that the blame should
remain on our Lord Christ, to have taught but by halfes; then on the disciples,
for not learning all well: though with all that he should get nothing for his
Cabbala unwritten, or written in fabulous Books, at leastwise if he receive
this sentence of Saint Augustine, cited and approved by his master Thomas
Aquinas. Whatsoever Jesus Christ would that we should read, of his deeds and
sayings; he commanded his Disciples to write, as with his own hands. To what
purpose then is it to seek that which is written elsewhere by others, though
it were a true thing; seeing that Christ will not have us to read it? And how
much less that which is written in the golden Legend, in the Books de vita
Christi, or other such fables?

He says that Saint Augustine will have us acknowledge many things in the
writings of the Apostles, which our Savior Christ never told them, whilst he
corporally conuersed with them, as among others this excellent doctrine; That
there is in God a word Escentiall and subsisting, by which all things were
created. Behold a notable untruth! The words of Saint Augustine are these: In
Ioh. ^ 96.
Who is so vain and rash, that though he should speak true things as he
lists, and to whom he will; dare affirm, without any divine testimony,
that they are the things which the Lord would not tell? Who among us shall do
it, without incurring a most great fault of rashness, he excelling neither in
Prophetical, nor Apostolical authority? For in very truth, if we had read
something, in the Books confirmed by Canonical authouritie, which were
written after Christ's ascension, it were to little purpose to have read it,
unless one read therwithall, that it was of the number of the things, which
the Lord would not tell then to his Disciples, because they could not bear it:
as for example if I said, that this which we read in the beginning of this
Gospel; In the beginning was the word, and the word was God, etc. Because
this was written afterward, and is not recorded that our Lord said i^,
whilst he was here in the flesh, but one of his Apostles wrote it; Christ and
his Spirit revealing it unto him: is of the number of those things, which the
Lord would not say then, because that the Disciples could not bear them: who
would hear me, saying that so rashly?

Thus you see Saint Augustine protests, that he should incur the fault of
rashness, if he affirmed the thing which the Bishop of Eureux mainteyneth,
that he affirms. Which is made manifest by these words, which this holy
Father adds in the same place a little after. Wherefore my well-beloved, think
not to hear of me the things, which the Lord would not then tell his
Disciples. And in the Treatise following, he unfolds at large this word
(bear:) showing, how one and the same thing, pronounced before one and the
same auditorie, at one same time, is well understood of some, and ill of
others; yea is understood of some, and of others not; because he that
understands amiss, understands not at all: and of them that understand it,
some understand it less, some more; and no man so well as the Angels; (...).
13.9.
because all men understand but in part.

Besides this untruth, it is to be noted, that the Bishop of Eureux, commits
the same Sophisme he imputes to me; in taking our Savior Christ's words,
simply and absolutely, which are said, Sec^^^undum quid, as we say; that is,
for a certain respect, namely of the present sadness and indisposition of the
Disciples; Also for regard of the administration of their charge, full of
dangers; and not for the substance of the doctrine.

He would feign in wrap me in contradiction, because I said in a place; That
the old Testament contained the Gospel, or Christian doctrine: And in another,
Fol. 16^
I say, that the two Epistles to the Thessalonians, contained all the Christian
doctrine; and that for this cause, Saint Paul exhorts them, to observe not
only that which he wrote unto them; but also that which he taught by word of
mouth: whence the Bishop of Eureux concludes; that if the old Testament
contained all, it was then superfluous, to bind them to the observation of the
Tradition not written.

I answer, that neither does the sufficiency of the old Testament, nor that
of the new, abolish or hinder the Ministry of preaching: neither do
general laws and ordinances take away particular Expositions and
applications: neither does the substance of the Gospel contained in the old
Testament, Romans 1^
as Saint Paul witnesses, hinder a more ample revelation in the new: Nor does
the sufficient declaration of all the Alticles of faith, exclude the ordinances
which concern policy, and the exterior order of the Church. Considering that
one may say, that though there had been already some other writings of the
new Testament, besides these two Epistles, directed to the Church of
Thessalonica, yet it might so be, that they were not yet known, nor come into
every place. And to confound the state of Churches springing, with the state
of Churches founded and established by tract of time; is to reason, as men do
in an evil cause; by evil Logic, in an evil conscience, which he here
discovers, as through all the rest of his Book. To conclude, the question
is, whether from this place; observe the Traditions, which you have received of
us, whether it be by word, or by our Epistle: One may conclude. 1. That the
written word is not sufficient to Salvation. 2. That the Traditions the Apostle
speaks of, are of the substance of faith. 3 That they were not written since
this Epistle. To the first I answer, no: because though the Doctrine, that
Saint Paul delivered by word of mouth to each particular Church, were more
ample then that which is contained in each Epistle directed to these particular
Churches; yet does it not follow but that all is written; For that which is
not found in one Epistle, is found in another; Which imports not, neither to
them who had heard the Surplus from the Apostles mouth, nor to us, who may see
in other parts of the Scripture, that which is not contained in one. To the
second I say, the Bishop of Eureux again confounds the prediction of a thing
to come, with Articles of faith: that is to say, History with Doctrine. To the
third I say, that this same History, touching Antichrist is found written,
though not in this same Epistle, nor by this same Author; but by S. John in the
Revelation. These three words do vnmix the Cahos of words he had heaped
together. Let the Reader note by the way, that in this Bishops judgment, To
yield thanks unto God, for that he has chosen us to Salvation, (...) 68.
in sanctification of the spirit, and in the faith of truth. etc. is not a
Doctrine propounded to observe.

Let us see his last argument taken from the place where Saint Paul recommendeth
to Timothy, ^^m. 1.13. (...) 2.
to keep the true pattern of wholesome words, which he had heard of him: And
to commit the things he had heard of him, in the presence of many witnesses, to
faithful men, which are able to teach others; He concludes thence, that all
these consignements, transmissions and atestations had been superfluous, (...)
170.
and unprofitable, if Timothy had heard nothing of Saint Paul, which could
not be veryfied by the Scripture alone. I alleged the exposition of
Tertullian, who observes that the Apostle says expressly (these things:) Tert.
de p^^script.
that none imagine him to speak of any unwritten Doctrine; but that they should
refer it to the same Doctrine, which he had set down in writing. He replyeth
that this place of Tertullian is wrested without showing by the least syllable,
how, or wherein? Neither can he with all his sophistry: For it is the proper
exposition of the same place of the Apostle whereof he treats; and the proper
refutation of this gloss of our Bishop, before invented by the Heretics, that
were in Tertullians time. But seeing this father is not to his relish, let us
present him Saint Ambrose, who expounds it thus: The Apostle wills, that
he commit the secrets to faithful men and worthy, which were able to teach
others, Ambr. ^ Tim. 2.
not indifferently to common and negligent persons, For there must be a great
care had in the choosing of a Doctor or Teacher. This is all S. Ambrose finds
in it, which is in sum: That Timothy, as having the charge of an Evangelist,
should take heed whom he chose for the teaching of the Gospel, Romans 1^ 1.
Cor. 1^ Ephesians. 1.9^ 3.4.
which the Apostle in diverse places calls mystery, or secret. The Bishop of
Eureux opposes to the veryficatio^ by scripture, the attestation of witnesses,
as if they were things incompatible that cannot stand together; as if a thing
witnessed by them that heard S. Paul speak, could not be verified by them that
read his wrightings. As for the Pattern of wholesome words; if he oppose it
also to the scripture; What will follow of it, but that the words of the
scripture, are not wholesome words? and I willingly confess, that they be
deadly, and the savor of death to all Blasphemers. We need but represe^t his
enthimenia in form, for to show the deformity of it: Saint Paul referred
Timothy to the wholesome words he had heard of him: Ergo, he referred him not
to them he had written: Notwithstanding that in another place he exhorts him
to reading; 1. Tim. ^ 2. T m. ^ 16.17
assuring him that the holy letters that is, the written words, are able to
make him wise to Salvation, and perfectly instructed unto every good work. He
answers to this last place; That they may instruct him to salvation, not
immediately and by them selves; but by means of the faith and belief they g^ue
him in Jesus Christ; not by the internal fullness of their doctrine; but by
the direction, and sending to an outward supply, namely to Christ, and by
Christ, to his Disciples. Or else; that they may instruct him in this special
poin^; that salvation is by faith in Christ Jesus: For Saint Paul speaks but
of the Scriptures of the old Testament, etc. This is ever the burden of his
song; That the Scripture has no other sufficiency, than a Letter of credit.

To confute these impertinencies as often as he brings them; were to go
about to make them be found less impertinent. We need but look into the
sixteenth verse following, to know what sufficiency the Apostle attributes
unto it, which he does so particularly, so exactly, and so clearly; that there
is no brain so credulous, or so blockish, that can believe the bearer of this
fond distinction; seeing how the internal fullness of the Scripture is
represented therein, with the right use thereof, which consists in teaching
the true doctrine, ^^m. 3.16.
in confuting the false; in instructing us in good works, and in reproving and
correcting the evil; That the man of God may be absolute, being made perfect
unto all good works. Let us confer this Text with the Perronian gloss: The
Scripture is given only to serve us for a memorial, a Letter of credence, a
direction to outward supplies, namely to Jesus Christ, and by him to his
Disciples. That is to say, every one to his Curate: And it is but for this
only reason, that he makes mention of Jesus Christ: For how else should it
direct men unto Christ, seeing he teaches no more with his own mouth as he
did when he was conversant upon earth? And though he should still immediately
teach on earth, should we receive sufficient instruction from him? No truly if
we believe this Bishop, (...) 48.
who boldly maintains that the things alone, which he did, or declared with
his own mouth to his disciples, are not sufficient for the instruction of the
Church. Add; nor free from Error, and by consequent of correction, as the
Council of Constance could well show him, Con, Constable. Sess. 13.
tearming it rashness and presumption, to teach that Christian people should
observe, that which Jesus Christ has instituted; namely, to communicate the
Lords Supper in both kinds. Now I summon him to show how it can be that the
Scripture serves us for a Letter of credence, for a memorial, or direction to
direct us to the pretended Church; since that he and all our adversaries
maintain, that it is for that Church to show us, and to authorize the
Scripture, which without this testimony should have no more authority, nor
credit, than Aesops Fables? What preposterous Method is this, that gives the
Letter of credence to the bearer, that should receive it of him? What can be
more ridiculous? Can we have a more manifest proof for to show, that his
principal purpose is, to make the Scripture unprofitable, and to bring it
wholly to nothing?

Distrusting himself to be able to sustain this same impertinencie, he has
recourse to another shift, and says, That Saint Paul means, Fol. 172.
that the holy Letters, are able to instruct Timothy to this special point,
that salvation is by faith in Christ Jesus. This gloss, as already has bin
observed, is ouerthrown by the two verses following, which represent the inward
amplitude and fullness of the scripture, as well for doctrine as for manners.
True it is that this point is the substance of the whole gospel; seeing that
whosoever believes, and has faith in Jesus Christ, has life eternal, and
shall not come into judgment, but has passed from death unto life. And if the
scripture did but barely propou^d this sentence only, John. 3.24*
without expou^ding it, without declaring the causes, conditions, proprieties
and effects of this faith; they would be some appearance to put forth this
distinction, of Mediate and Immediate; which in this case is as receiuable as
it is fond and blasphemous in that ample description of the end, use, and whole
office of the Scripture, which this place sets forth unto us. And who will
be so senseless to maintain, that the Scripture is not fit to do the office,
nor to attain to the end, whereunto God who inspired it, has ordained it? Is
it because it speaks not of blessed grains and such like trinkets: But Saint
Paul says he, speaks here of the Scriptures of the old Testament, for it was
them that Timothy had learned from his childhoode, at which time, there was
nothing of the new Testament written: And these Scriptures of the old Testament
could not instruct Timothy immediately, and by themselves.

I answer, that the Apostle speaking of the childhood of Timothy, excludes
not the rest of his age; but shows that he speaks of the whole time of his
life, until then: So speaking of the Scriptures of the old Testament, he
excludes not them of the new; for this term, Holy Scriptures, is general;
And to go about to exclude necessarily a Species, after the position of the
Genus; is but bad arguing: To go about to take away the name of holy
Scriptures, from these two Epistles, which Saint Paul had then written to
Timothy, and which at the least Timothy had read, besides the other writings
of the new Testament, which perhaps he had also seen; is to commit blasphemy.
But there needs none other confutation of such Arguments, but the
representation of their form. Saint Paul makes mention of the study that
Timothy made in his youth: Ergo he speaks nothing at all of his studies made
since. Item, Saint Paul says, that Timothy learned the holy Sciptures: Ergo,
he means only the writings of the old Testament. And by consequent he means
not, that he should learn any thing of the writings of the new, nor yet of
these two Epistles, which he had written to him of purpose, for to instruct
him, how he should walk in the house of God, which is the Church of the living
God, 1. T^m. 3*
the pillar and foundation of truth.

Whereas I said, that the Romish Church, causes an infinite number of things
to be observed, as the laws of God, which we know by their own histories to
have been instituted, many ages after the Apostles: he answers two things. 1
That the practice of certain points, is found have been in the Church a long
time before them, which we imagine to be the inuentors of it (whereof he coteth
afterward seven examples; namely, Prayer for the dead, Lent, Single life,
Confirmation; the Mixture of water and wine, Consecrations of Altars, and the
Oblation or Sacrifice of the Mass.) 2 That they confound not under the name of
Apostolic Traditions, all the Customs observed in the Church, but that they
distinguish between the universal and the particular; And that even among the
universal, some only are Apostolic, to wit, such as have always since the
Apostles times been used in the Church, but the other that have been ordained
in latter ages, are Ecclesiastical.

But the question is not how they of the Romish Church distinstuish their
Traditions. But by what authority, and power, they cause men observe, as the
laws of God, and as necessary to salvation, things that were not instituted
by Christ, nor his Apostles? For those which they call Ecclesiastical, and
which by their own confession, came not in use, nor yet into knowledge, till
many ages after the death of the Apostles; are not less, but much more
rigorously commanded, then those which they call Apostolical.

It shall suffice to verify, and manifest this by one example: It is generally
known, that the most solemn and most religious devotion at this day in the
Romish Church, is that which they call Gods feast or Corpus Christi day; to the
observation whereof, Pope Urban the 4. attributes remission of sins, ^^lla ^uck.
which is the knowledge of salvation; according to the Gospel; And the number
of pardons granted only to the beholders of the same; is almost infinite: And
whether we consider the severity of Prelates in commanding it, and the
magnificence in celebrating it; or the devotion of the people, in preparing
themselves thereunto; and the efficacy they imagine of it; We shall find, that
it is a thing, that they pretend to be much more necessary, and more divine,
than to say, Requiescant in pace, than to abstain from flesh and eggs in Lent;
or any other points of the pretended Apostolic Tradition: In the mean while,
our Bishop himself, though he deny all, cannot deny that this devotion was
instituted, near 12. hundred years after the death of the Apostles; and if he
deny it, Bellarmine will reprove him, ^acr. Euch. (...). 30.
who confesses, that Pope Urban 4. is the first author of it. And no writer
of the Romish Church denies it, though they agree not all, touching the motive
of this institution. For some will have, that the cause of it was, a certain
miracle happened in Italy of a Wafer cake that bled, as a certain Priest
doubting of Transubstantiation held it in his hands: Others attribute it to a
woman of the country of Liege, whom the said Pope had familiarly known; before
his Popedom, and who having given the Pope to understand, a Vision or
Revelation, that she had, touching the institution of this Feast; he straight
ordained it, and celebrated it first at Rome: And afterward Clement the fifth
made a most rigorous law concerning it; confirmed even by the Council of
Vienna. Hereupon I demand our Bishop, to what use is his distinction that he
makes between Apostolic and Ecclesiasticke Traditions, seeing that these
latter are commanded for as much or more necessary, meritorious and divine,
as the former? Again, I demand to what purpose he takes so much pains for
to show that certain things are very ancient, seeing there be newer and
latter things, which have more authority, necessity and efficacy, than the
old; And seeing it is sufficient, that some Pope has ordained a thing,
without enquiring of the antiquity or novelty of the same? For the Pope now a
days attributes as much, yea much more power and authority to himself, than
they, did that were seven or eight hundred years ago; and requires no
less, but much more obedience, in that which at this day he commands, than
in that which his predecessors commanded a thousand years ago: For as before
the God of heaven, a thousand years are as one day; so before this God on
earth, one day is as a thousand years, when there is question to make himself
be obeyed: Yea, the time has been, when Popes thought they could not well
establish their own laws, unless they did abolish the laws of their
predecessors: that is, unless they displanted Antiquity to plant in novelty.
Moreover, if every thing that concerns salvation, as those do that bring
remission of sins: ought to be grounded on the word of God, either written
or unwritten, as he grants, and presupposes throughout his Book: By what
conscience could the Popes institute this new means of salvation, with many
other, in which number are our Bishops grains? If the word of God be only
found, either in the Canonical Scripture, or in the pretended Apostolic
Tradition contained in the writings of the ancient fathers; does it not follow,
that that which is found in neither of both these two Registers; is by his own
confession the word and invention of man? And therefore a vain thing and
displeasing to God, by Jesus Christ his own sentence. Math. 15.


But let us hear Bellarmine on this point: De Verb. ^ l. 4. c. 9.
Nothing is of the faith, but only that which God has revealed by the
Apostles, or by the Prophets; or that which is evidently deduced from it: For
the Church is no more governed by new Revelations, but persisteth in them,
which those men, that have been Ministers of the word, have given by
Tradition; For therefore it is said, Ephe. 2. Builded upon the fo^ndation of
the Prophets and Apostles. Wherefore all the things, which the Church holds
to be matters of faith, have been given by the Apostles and Prophets, either by
writing, or by word of mouth. After he adds: When the whole Church observes
something, that none could institute but only God, and which notwithstanding
is found no where written; We must say, it was given by the Tradition of Jesus
Christ himself, and of his Apostles; The reason is, for that the universal
Church cannot err, not only in that which it believes, but as little in that
which it does, and principally in CEREMONY, or Divine worship.

Let us conclude then by the confession of this great Rabbi, who acknowledged,
that this ceremony of Corpus Christi day, was instituted, well near 1200.
years after the Apostles, by Pope Vrbane 4. the first Author thereof; (unless
the Bishop of Eureux being a Courtier had rather give the glory of it to a
Lady, to that Nun of Liege, who had first this revelation.) that the Church;
that the pretended head of the church, who let himself be governed by a new
revelation, or by an old Nun, has erred and caused all them to err, that
have received of him this new Ceremony, this new Divine worship, this new
means, yea ground of Salvation, and of blessedness, (...). 1.2.
which consists in the remission of sins: Or else that the Church before
that time that had done nothing of it, believed nothing nor heard of it, for
the space of twelve hundred years after Christ; has erred, as well in that
which it did, as in that which it believed, at least wise touching this point
of the Eucharist, which it honored not, after the manner set down in the
third book of the ceremonies of the Romish Church, of which manner he that
will confer it with the ceremonies sometimes observed by the heathen in honor
of Isis, of the Syrian Goddess, of Diana, of the Persians fire etc. shall
find out the true original of it, and an antiquity more ancient, than any
Apostolke Tradition is.

These are the rags, wherewith our Gaboanites do ordinarily deck their
Antiquity, which their own writers freely confess; witness Cardinal
Baronius, who says, That it was to good purpose ordained; that the ceremonies
or services, which belonged to the Pagan superstition, Annal. tom. 2. ad^ chr.
200.
should be sanctified by the worship of the true God, for to be employed in the
worship of the true (...) Religion.

Now the Bishop of Eureux, instead of continuing his reply to my answer,
touching the four points, that we hold with them of the Romish Church; which
are the truth of the Baptism of little Children: that of the Baptism of
Heretics: the proceeding of the holy Ghost from the Father and from the
Son; and the translation of the feast of the Sabbath day to Sunday; which
Articles he had alleged as not having any ground in Scripture; instead, I
say of answering to my reasons by which I showed the contrary: he goes no
further, and after he had consumed well nigh, four years, in seeking replies,
to the three or four first leaves of my book; he leaves the matter in
question, and takes another course, finding it an easier work, to cause to
be written out by one of his Acolythes, or Parasites, many places of the
Fathers, all already gathered and aranged, in Bellarmine, Baronius, and
others; upon the seven points above quoted, which it pleased him to choose;
then to seek in his own brain new cauilations, that he might rid himself
of so many sound proofs drawn forth of the Scripture, which show the
perfection and sufficiency of the same, in that which is necessary for us to
believe, touching these four points alleged by him, rather for to prove
his own imperfection, and insufficiency, then that of the Scripture. And
although it were no more difficult for me then for him, to choose out of the
same fathers, and to oppose as long a list of places, wholly incompatible, and
unreconcilable with them he produces, as above I have done on like occasions;
and to show besides that, the di^simili^tude that there is between some things
which particular persons in the time of the ancient church observed in all
liberty, as indifferent; and with the Church of Rome, commands and exacteth
at this day with an extreme cruelty: Between those things that the one did by
form of remembrance, and acknowledgement, and with the other does for merit,
and for works of supererogation. I could show the B. of Eureux his malice, in
disguising the intention of the Fathers, in mixing and confounding their
Historical recitalles, with their Doctrines; Customs, with Laws; indiscreet
devotions, and manifest superstitions, whereof they complained, with divine
institutions, The sufferance and conuenience of the Church, with the
approbation of the same. Though it were, I say, easy for me, to show all
these things: Notwithstanding, seeing it were out of the center of my subject,
I will not imitate that my self, which I blame in my adversary, who as well
here as else where shows, that he has no other drift nor recourse, then to
obscure the principal, by a thick and dark cloud of incidents, in the
gathering whereof he very well practices that which Iraeneus says of the
Gnostickes of his time, (...). c. 2.
who taking the places of Scripture here and there and wresting them for to
give color to their blasphemies, his holy Father compares them to those, that
after they had undone and dissolved the figure of a King, made all of Precious
Stones, would make of the same Stones the figure of a Dog, or a Fox, for to
make men believe, that it was the same figure of the King made by the first
workman: Or to those who making Centons, or mingle mangle of many matters,
culled out of Homers verses, upon a Subject, that the Poet never dreamed of,
would persuade the jgnorant, that Homer himself treated of that Subject.

Whereas he says, that the instances whereupon we contended, the first day
we saw each other, were the same, whereof he frames these seven common
places wherewith he fills his Book: I answer, that it is false, for of all the
points that he treateh, there was spoken only of Prayer for the dead, and
that by occasion of the Lady, who had newly lost her husband, and was fully
disposed to receive his impressions: Whereupon as I said, after some other
reasons, that this custom of praying for the dead, had neither example, nor
commandment, nor promise in Scripture; we were straightwaies carried on
general different of the sufficiency, or insufficiency of the scripture; as
himself confesses. The Instance whereupon we most contended, the first and
second day of our conference, was the Popes supremacy, which I maintained to
be recent, and new, and by no means could be derived from the Apostles, nor
proved by the Fathers, in the form and manner, as at this day we see it:
during which disputation, it happened that the Bishop of Eureux for to show the
contrary alleged S. Gregory, who says, Epist, ^ Epist, 6
I know not what Bishop is not subject to the Apostolical seat. Thereupon
I required him to proceed with that which followed: for he had the book open
before him, and read therein this sentence, so well, that not being able to
excuse himself from finishing out the place, which he would have cut off, he
was constrained to ad these words which immediately follow; When there is no
fault that requires it, to wit this subjection to the censures: all Bishops
are equal according to the reason of humility. As I noted to the standers by,
this ingenious Eclypse; He replied, that there was no fraud, seeing that none
of that made against him: I answered that thereby it would follow that he who
was a Bishop, was equal to the Pope and every other Bishop unattained, or
convinced of notorious crime: He was forced to grant it me: But when I
requested further, that he would give me this proposition in wrighting signed
by him; he would not hear of it; no more then he found it fit to insert
this question, in the number of the seven that he treats.

There was also spoken of the institution of Monks, of their rules and
ceremonies; specially of the Charter House Monks; which instance importuned
him much, finding neither canall, pipe, nor devise whatsoever that could make
to flow form apostolic tradition, that Angelical perfection, whereof the
Charterous and other Monks do boast. In this altercatio^, he said diverse things
so enormous, and contrary even to the Doctrine of the Romish Church, that if
they had been set down in writing, as I most instantly required; we should
have a goodly mirror of Theology, or rather Pyrronian Technologie. And seeing
he then rather chose to break off the conference, then grant me this just
request; He shall permit me also to finish rather here this answer to his
reply, then to wander with him from our principal question, for to extrauagte
upon the new Instances, that he propounds besides the purpose: Considering
also that before the treating of them after the method that he observes, and
requires; namely, by the only authority of the Fathers, without any
testimony, consequence, or analagie of Scripture; these questions were to be
handled.

I. Whether controversies ought to be decided by the writings of Fathers?

II. Who gave them that authority, seeing themselves never have acknowledged
nor demanded it?

III. Whether, if it were true that the visible Church cannot err; this same
privilege appertain to every Doctor or particular Bishop of the Church?

IV. If it belong only unto some, by what works we shall discern these
infallible ones, from others?

V. Upon what ground is builded our Bishops distinction, that the fathers may
err in quality of doctors and Bishops; but not in quality of Witnesses:
seeing that by this means, one part of their writings, is manifestly made
equal to the writings of the Prophets and Apostles, to whom only, by
special prerogative, belongs this quality or title of Witnesses
irreprochable and without exception, Luke 24.4^ Act. 18.^ 15. and. ^
in that which concerns the points of our Salvation? For though Antipas, and
other Christians are called faithful witnesses of Christ; Reu. 2.1.
This testimony has only reference to their constant confession of the
Truth, in the midst of torments, not for to make authentical unto us any point
of doctrine: Otherwise all the Martyrs should be made equal to the Apostles,
who were chosen, instructed, and sent immediately by our Lord Christ, and all
that the Fathers have written, as Witnesses, should be incerted into the Canon
of the scripture, for to make it an entire Rule, seeing that after Bellarmine,
the Scripture is but a Rule partial, De verbo L. 4. c. 12
not total. Yea, the very Treatise of the insufficiency of the Scripture; if
our Bishop have not written it as a false Witness, and if all that which
contains Truth, is (as he maintains) armed with Canonical authority,
should be added to the Scripture, as an excellent piece of work, and singular
ornament of the same.

VI. Wherefore the Romish Church has changed, reformed, censured and
abolished so many things, which the Fathers reported as Witnesses, concerning
the ceremonies and policy of the ancient Church, and which they teach as
Bishops and Doctors, in expounding the holy Scripture; which expositions, are
nothing else, according to the saying of the Bishop of Eureux, but the
Subsidiarie Tradition, without which the bare text of the Scripture is
unprofitable, not being able to be understood; or dangerous, not being well
understood? And of such reformations, censures, and abolishments, we will
produce when need shall be, innumerable Instances: Meane-while the deposition
of Cardinal Baronius shall suffice, a witness yet living, and who is worth
many others, both for his learning and for his dignity. ^l. Eccl. ^1. ad aen.
^4. impres ^nt.
These are his words: All the Bishops that have succeeded the Apostles, have
not attained the meaning and understanding of the Scriptures, neither has it
been necessary they should always have excelled in this grace. For the
Catholic Church follows not always, nor in all things, even the MOST HOLY
FATHERS, whom we rightly call the Doctors of the Church, because of their
excellent doctrine, though it be manifest, that they be induced with this grace
of the holy Ghost, above others. See here the Subsidiarie Tradition, planted by
our Bishop, supplanted and cut down to the very roots, by the Axe of this
Cardinal, the Popes Library keeper. But does he leave at leastwise to the
ancient Fathers this dignity of infallible and irrefragable Witnesses? As
little truly, contrariwise he exceedingly rejects this outrageous flattery,
(...). 1. ad an ^39. ^22.
when he says, The Acts of the Apostles written by Saint Luke, deserves more
credit, then any authority of the Ancients. Yea, he confesses not only, that
many things have been falsely attributed to the Apostles, but also, that those
things which true and sincere Writers have reported, ^n. chr. 44 ^2.
have not remained entire, without being corrupted.

VII Why we may not believe of many Fathers, that which this same Cardinal
affirms of Saint Cyprian, ^al. tom. 1. ^n. 258.
namely, that he abode not in his error, but renou^ced it before his death,
though that do not appear, neither by his writings, nor by any other
testimony of the Fathers? If Charity was the only cause of this affirmation
touching one ancient Fathers acknowledgement, why may not we use the like
charity, give the same judgment, and conclude in like sort of others;
considering the Retractions that one of the most excellent amongst them,
^ugustine.
has left unto us, and who happily added many others before his death, either
by writing, or at least wise in his mind? Himself also does authorize as to
say of him, that which he said of S. Cyprian: De Bap^ contr. D^ L. 1. c. 4.
It may be this holy soul consented to the Truth; as though we know it not:
For all that was then done among the Bishops could not be written or preserved:
Neither know we all that was written. And in another place: Epist. 48
We find not that he corected this opinion; but it is not without reason, that
we are to judge of such a person, that he corrected it, and perhaps that was
suppressed by those that took too great pleasure in this error, and would not
be deprived of the defense of such an Advocate.

These are my seven questions which must first be cleared, before we come unto
his seven; the most important of which (which is the sacrifice of the Mass) is
elsewhere dispatched, and as yet by him unanswered. And as for the lies he
gives to Calvin, Viret, and Chemnicius, touching the institution of the other
six points: they fall back, not only upon Polidorus Virgilius, Platina,
Sigebert, Bergomas, and such other Historians, minorum gentium; or upon Gratian
the compiler of the Decretals, which serves for Text in the Schools of the
Romish Church, as the holy Scripture does in ours: Vide to, ^ Biblio. S. trum.
P* 1345.
But also upon the head of a Pope himself, namly Damasus, who reports the
institution of certain points, even as the others that follow him. Also upon
Pope Eugenius 2. attributing sovereign authority to Gratians Decretals; and
in general on all the Popes that have approved it since. But what would he
get by it, if we should take the original of these things higher, and of an
elder date, seeing that no authority of the ancients comes near the
authority of an Evangelist? since that which the truest writers have reported
since, has not remained entire, by Baronius his own confession?

To conclude, De verb^ L. 4. c, 11
seeing that Bellarmine confesses on the other side, That the Apostles have
wtitten ALL the things that are necessary for all, and the things which they
had publicly preached to all: It shall be lawful for me to crown the former
questions with this Conclusion, which flows from the Confession of that
Arch-Rabbi: namely, That the seven Articles, which the Bishop of Eureux
propounds, are not necessary to all men, seeing they have not been
publicly preached by the Apostles: Or if they be necessary to all, he must
show by their writings that they have preached them publicly. This is it that
I summon him to do: If he cannot do it, I counsel him to be silent, and to
acknowledge his own imperfection and insufficiency, rather than to attribute
it to the Scripture, which is most perfect, and most sufficient, as well to
save them that follow it, as to confound those that blaspheme it.

FINIS.

