Cassius of Parma his Orpheus: With Nathan Chitraeus his Commentary, abridged
into short notes: most profitable for the framing of the manners of Scholars.

Translated and abridged by Roger Rawlyns of Lyncolnes Inn, Student in the
Common Laws.



At London. 1587.

TO THE MOST HONOrable Lord, the Lord Robert Earl of Essex and Ewe, Vicount
Hereforde, and Bourghchier, Lord Ferrers of Chartley, Bourghchier, and Louayne,
Master of the Queens Majesty's Horse, and Knight of the most noble Order of
the Garter: Roger Rawlyns wishes the true felicity.
RIght Honorable, whereas Love among men, was sometimes of so great account, as
the same has been taken to be the first and chief cause of a Commonwealth,
and not utility, (as affirms the learned Scot) which enforced men by a
natural instinct to communicate their private labors to public use, being for
such their love, requited with the love of those, whom they did so benefit.
Now, the matter is clean contrary: for who is more misliked of the worst,
which are the most, than he that studieth most to common profit? Which
consideration, as it has been one hinderance to me in my Study (the more is
my fault) so is it the cause, why I purpose to suppress, to the use only of my
private friends, that, which otherwise, I could be contented should be common.
And although they can by no means occupy either their Sense, or Reason, but
the same will lead them perforce unto a thankful remembrance of our fathers,
who have by cunning, either ordered the nature, or invented, or ordered the
qualities of things, in a most pleasant course: yet they themselves have no
care, to practice in the like manner, for their own ease, and help of their
posterity: suffering their knowledge gotten in the time of their life, to
depart with their last breath: And some more unloving than others, neither will
themselves, neither will they without reproaches, suffer others to labor in
like practizes of Art, seeming of condition, somewhat like the man, that being
cured of folly, was highly offended, affirming, that he never lived so
pleasant a life, as when he was a fool. So as we may see (except it be in some
men more Christian than others) now, churlishnes to succeed love,
unthankfulness, thankefulnes, folly, wisdom: that being most true in the
multitude, which luuenal says of his times: The earth does now bring forth,
of body small
Bad men, of little wit, or none at all.


But to the Cause, the Scope, and Center of all my speeches, that is,
concerning the Art, in studying, or ordering the Common Laws, as I never
fainted in opinion, that the same may be performed, and in what manner: as
staying my self upon Principles, which of their own nature are inexpugnable,
and fear not the frowning of a Censurer. So do I fear nothing more, than
that I have small part in the same performance: for I am hindered in the
means, which are said to belong to a Student of the Common Laws, that is, to
be lead in his seat, to have an iron head, and a golden purse. For the first,
how little time (of late) I have sat at it, they could be are me witness, that
have been acquainted with my business. For the second, how greatly I have been
distracted, I my self know, Nec ostentabo vulnera and sicatrices meas. For
the third, my purse was never so heavy, but that I could lift it without
help. Moreover, I find with some grief by observation in other men, that he
that practices in any public cause, (as Cardanus says) sets to sale his
own imperfections, his faults will swell in the eyes of his Adversaries, he
must subject himself to infamous slanders, envious reproaches, and contempts,
which notwithstanding ought again of him to be contemned: Vt derisores nostros
de sumno quasi despicientes, derideamus. Yet herein I do content my self, as,
he to descry land, whereunto the Pilot must guide the ship: or as a weak
wretch, to give aim unto others, whose strings I am not able to stir, and
whom I wish, may strike the mark.

London this 27. of September 1587. From Crown Court in Chauncery Lane. Your
Honors most humble To. Rawlyns.

ILLVSTRISSIMO DOmino, Comiti Essexio, studiosorum omnium Mecaenati, R. R. hanc
Chartam (honoris causa) dicat consecratque.
CVi (obsecro) haec potius dicarem quam tibi? qui nobilitate excellis, Nec
sinis ingenium nobilitate premi: Quare, Iuris meum Compendium non potest solum
meam in te obseruantiam apud omnes testari, sed etiam te huius sanctissimae
disciplinae admonere: Sanctissimam disciplinam appello, quia tecum loquor, cui
non est ignota eius praestantia, and diuinitas. Dubitarem sane ita loqui si cum
ijs sermo esset, qui, cum artem sibi necessariam ignorent, eos odio
prosequuntur, a quibus intelligunt seeo nomine superari: cupiuntque nulla esse
iura, nullas leges, quo facilius arbitrio suo belluino omnia turbent. Sed,
fremant, qui volunt, dicam quod sentio. Praestat iudicandi scientia, iudicandi
potestati, and dignus igitur, qui praesit iudicio, praestat Iudici imperito.
Haec omnia tu optime scis. Itaque ad te libenter veniet ars illa, quae
iudicandi normam tradit, quae diuinas, humanasque res disponit, quae omnes
homines in officio continet, malos poenis coercet, bonos praemijs afficit, and
(vt vno verbo dicam) humanam societatem conseruat. Inquit JULIUS PACIVS, Petro
Saletano, epistola sua, in quatuor libros Institutionum, IMP. CAES. IVSTINIANI.

Tui honori deditissimus: R. Rawlyns.

To his loving Masters and friends, the Students of Lyncolns Jnne, R. R.
wishes profit and pleasure in their studies.
MOst beloved Gentlemen, I have herein desperately adventured upon your
favors, hoping that you will take affection for satisfaction, where judgment
is wanting for current payment. If I have offended through folly or
imperfection, you may give me thanks for that, because therein is exercised
your wisdom and patience, (as Saint Paul speaks of himself) wisemen can
easily bear with fools. If you shall judge me of presumption, (as the
Proverb is, Sus Mineruam) why then (alas) pardon that too, I most hartelie
pray you: for, I must confess, (without flattery) that I do so much the more
fear your censures, by how much the more I long after your goodwills. The best
for me, is, that the price of my books is but your pardon and love, which ye
may give without cost: and which if ye shall deny me, yet will I not cease to
love you, and to cloy you with my country fruits.

Your most loving friend and servant: To. Rawlyns.

Of Cassius of Parma, the Author of this Fragment.
COncerning the Author, it is thought that this was the very same man, of whom
Horace makes mention in the 1. of his Satyrs, the 10. book, verse the 62. to
this purpose: Not otherwise then when a man has brought
His mind within the compass of six feet:
Pleased herewithall, or if his hand have wrought
Two hundredth verses, ere he go to meat:
And after dinner, then as many more:
Such was the wit of that Etrurian
Cassius, which as a running stream did flow:
So that a fire was made to burn this Man
Of his own writings, as the fame does go.


And again Horace makes mention of Cassius in the 1. book, Epistle. 5. which
he wrote to Albius Tibullus, the 3. verse.

Albius, O perfect Judge of all our speech,
What should I say, that thou have now in hand?
Thou writest somewhat (that may ouerreach
Cassius his fragments) in the Pedan land.
By which we may gather, that Cassius was of no small account, especially
amongst those that were learned, and of judgment.

Of Orpheus.
Therefore did Cassius (as it seems) give this Pamphlet this inscription of
Orpheus, as in commendation of whose labor in Study, and Continency, all his
verses might be made. Of Orpheus, Plato makes mention Book 10. of his
Commonwealth, where he faigneth, that Orpheus his soul (when he died) would
not be borne again of a woman, for the hatred which he bare to that Sex, but
did choose rather the life of a Swan, as Thamyris had done of a Nightingale.

Of the Argument of this Book.
Cassius of Parma, would by these verses, as it were with the pencill of his
wit, and eloquence, express the likeness and the pattern of a good and gentle
Nature, contending to attain the height and excellency of learning and
eloquence: and of such a Nature, he does first show (not obscurely) the signs,
then the needful helps, next, what should be done of boys, and young men,
while they are yet in the flower of their age: and lastly, what is by them to
be avoided, by the example of Orpheus, while he was yet but a young man.

Cassij Parmensis Orpheus.
Arguta primum cum plectra parentis, and auro
Distinctam sumpsit citharam Rhodopeius here is,
Ridehan^ segnes pulsus, digitosque micantes
Serius, and chordis indocte dissona vocis.
Mox pudor exardens, and gloria dulcis honesti,
Lusibus auertit puerilibus: omnis and illuc
Perditus incumbens, Musae pallebat amore.
Et nunc maternis inhiat, nunc ille paternis
Cantibus: hinc illinc discens dependet vtrinque.
Nulla Venus faciem coepit mentita dolosis
Compedibus: somni fuerat, parcusque Lydi:
Donec, ridiculus dudum, modulamine siluas,
Euulsosque, suis scopulos radicibus egit:
Ausus and ire vtam mortalibus inconcessam,
Poenarum oblitos demulsit carmine manes.
"Non leuis adscensus, si quis petit ardua: sudor
"Plurimus hunc tollit: nocturno ex somnis oliuo
"Immoritur: delet, quod mox laudauerat in se,
"Qui cupit aeterno donari frondis honor.
The same Verses englished.
When first the noble child of Rhodopy,
His Parents quill, in tender hand began hold,
Therewith to sound his harp of Iuory
Decked with lines and asterisks of gold:
His singers drawled, and his strokes were cold
With peering joints, wherewith they laugh, to see
How to the strings his note did disagree.
Straight shamefastnes enflaming with desire
And glorious sweetness of so fair a thing,
From childish sports, which younger years require,
Do turn him quite: henceforth to play and sing
For life he plies: the love whereof does bring
Palenes of face: yet still through earnestnes
He hangs his iawe, while that with greedines
He hears his father, or his mother play:
On him, or her he listening does depend
Even at their lips, no painted wanton, gay
By borrowed hue, could force his heart to bend
Such guilefull gives a liking eye to lend.
Nor were his sleep and food outrageous:
So that, now, he (lately ridiculous)
Could cause the Rock to move, rent from the root,
And woods draw near, he played and sang so well,
That daring go, where else no mortal foot
Had trod: he stild the sprites and ghosts which dwell
Below, did ease from punishments of hell.
"None easy clyming can prevail to gain
"Athing of worth: it will be got with pain.
Which who desires, that man endures sweat,"
Endangering his life through want of rest,"
The ^asting oil, can prove his labor great:"
What first he liked, now he does detest,"
And blots that thing, which whilome pleased him best."
The man must, thus demean himself (I say)"
Who seeks the gift of never dying bay."
Signs.
1 Good Parents. 2 An alacrity, or natural quicknes of wit. 3 To blush, or to
be ashamed of evil doing. 4 A desire to balance the evil deed with greater
poize of well doing. 5 A moderate disposition to pastime or playing.
Helps.
1 A good Teacher or Schoolmaster, as here is supposed by Apollo and Calliope,
the Parents of Orpheus. 2 If the Parents being themselves learned, do teach
and ouersee the teaching of their children, and so are not constrained to give
credit to some blind Schoolmaster, reasoning with as little judgment, as a
blind man does of colors. 3 A mutual affection between the Scholar and the
Master, so as the Scholar do bear a childlike love to the Teacher, and the
Teacher a fatherlike love to the Scholar. 4 It helps much oftentimes, if the
child be brought up in the fathers vocation, with which, by seeing, and by
hearing, even from his cradle, he seems to be acquainted. 5 That he begin to
be taught in due time, not too late, least he prove a loyterer: nor too soon,
least he be at the first discouraged. 6 That the Teacher be not oftentimes
changed: for, as Trees often removed take no sure root in any ground: so
children put from one Teacher to another, do no great good any where. 7 That
the Parents between themselves do not vary, either concerning the matter or
manner of their childrens education, especially in the hearing of their
children, who will easily take advantage of such controversies, and thereby,
as in a doubt, whether they shall do this thing, or that thing, they will not
easily apply themselves unto any thing. 8 That the instruments, means, or
tools of their vocation, be in most fair wise ordered, as that a Scholar
have his book of a fair print, well bound, phillited and spotted with gold,
etc. for herein are children much delighted. 9 That all be begun, with the
help of God, which is here inferred, because that Apollo and Calliope, are
said to have been accounted among the number of the heathen Gods.
Things to be done.
1 The Scholar must nothing esteem to be derided of others, for derision is
incident to all good beginnings. 2 He must not be discouraged, though the thing
seen hard at the first to be learned: for, nothing is casie at the first. 3
Though moderate recreation be allowed, yet, he must not take it in too great
measure: for, not wisemen but sooles keep a continual holiday. 4 Not many
things, but only one thing is to be attempted for, one business of any moment
will require one whole man. 5 He must prosecute his attempted and purposed
vocation with earnest, and continual labor: which, it is thought they do,
which are Lovers of Enterprises, of Pains, with heat and continuance. 6 He
must be a lover of learning: for, otherwise, be his labor earnest, and
continual, yet it is done against the wool, for he performs it with great
coldness. 7 He must ask, and resolve questions, he must love commendations, and
be desirous to find out the truth: that he be ready to ask, hear, and
put in practice the counsels and resolutions of his betters. 8 An exchange of
his good endeavors, with others his equals for their like endeavors, and a
comparing of the same together, with an emulation and desire to do better, and
with an amending of his own doings.
Things to be avoided.
1 A fantasy, or false opinion of his own well doing. 2 Slacknes, which is,
an intermission, or negligent handling of his Study: which is like unto
retchlesnes, which neither knows, nor attempteth any good thing. Sloth
knowing, but, not urging, nor bringing the thing known, to a good end, but
deferring every thing to another day, by pretense of idle excuses. Idleness,
which so performs, that, as good never a whit, as never the better. 3 This
nightly working, though it be here noted in Orpheus, yet is it not simply to
be commended, but the day must be to the Scholar to travel in, the night for
him to rest in: for by continual labor are the eyes hurt, the wit dulled, the
face in color, and the body by swellings, and other diseases thence growing,
deformed and corrupted. 4 A resolute determination, not to amend the things,
which he likes himself, without cause, which seems to be somewhat like the
first point Orpheus here does the contrary, what late he liked, now he does
detest. For, a Scholar ought, upon good reason showed, to relinquish his own
untrue, uncertain, or worser course, to follow the more certain, and better
course of another man. 5 Lust, or unlawful love, which coming of Sloth, is
nourished by excess: and how can he entend to his study, or any other good
medirations, who, as it is in Plautus, is like a wretch, vexed, troubled, and
tossed in the slaughter house of love: who, where himself is, his mind is not:
where he is not, his mind is. 6 Too much sleeping, which is called the brother
of death, and as Menander says, A pattern Unto men, and an image of death. 7
Ouerliberall diet, or gluttony, which is a beastly vice in them, who like
hogs, seem to grunt out these words: We care not for Rumors, so that we may
have wherewith to fill the Rume.
FINIS.
NESTOR his Antilochus: Poynting out the truth and necessity of Art in
study: by R. R. of Lyncolnes Inn, Student in the Common Laws.

Ridentem dicere verum
Quis vetat?
Iuuenal. At London. 1587.

NESTOR HIS Antilochus.
WHen I was come to read this Prosopopey, wherein Homer, the chief of Poets,
who is said to be accompanied with the Muses, was to make a speech of
counsel, fit to beseem the prudent King Nestor, called The Sheapheard of
men, to give to his own son, to the winning of a worthy prize, and with the
prize renown, amongst other Runners, noble Kings and Princes of Greece, which
was by Achilles ordained, to the celebrating of the funerals of his dear
friend Patroclus, having hungerlie tasted other of his pleasant devises, I
conceived hope, herewith to be fed, even, (Ad satietatem) to fulness: Neque
spes fallebat amantem. These be the verses:

When prudent Nestor, standing near his son
Wise like himself: his counsel thus begun.
Antilochus: because, while but a lad
Both Jove and Neptune (loving thee full well)
All horsemanship, which either of them had
Have taught thee: now I need not much to tell:
Yet though thou know the raynes to loose and pull,
Be circumspect withal, thine horse be dull.
Their horse indeed are far more swift, yet thou
With wary wit, may counterpeize their pace:
Then all good council take unto thee now
My friend, to get the credit of the Race:
The Art does bring to pass
That feate, which flies the strong, yet brainles Ass.
Again, by Art, the Pilot, he does guide
On troubled Seas, his swift and tossed bark:
By Art, the Couch-man knows how to ride:
To leave his fellow far behind the mark.
The man, who trusts to his horse and Couch,
Full fraught with folly, wandereth too much
Amidst the Race, and lets his horses stray,
When, who knows helps, although his horse be bad:
An eye unto the mark, he still does lay,
And drives close, with pace, discreet, and sad.
He raynning well, does evermore observe
The goal, from which, he cares, not to swerue.
1 And first, whereas the Poet, supposes the Hearer; to be wise like the
Speaker, he therein councelleth, that no precious stone be thrown before a
Cock, no learned speech to be uttered to swinish men: Qui balbi, praeter
balba, nihil intelligunt, and palatum habent sapientius quam ingenium: who can
better relish reasons of the sun, than reasons that proceed from men.

2 For the Allegorizing hereof, from the particular use of Art in riding, to
the general use thereof in Studying: least I should therein seem to deal as
auckwardlie, as the Grammar Scholar did in his Simile: (Even as a Ship is
tossed on the Sea, so ought a father to love his child) it is to be remembered,
that by some learned, the Affections, which follow the Sense, and are common to
us with beasts, are likened to Horses: The Heart and Brain wherein the Soul
has her chief residence, to the Seat of a Chariot, the whole body to a
Chariot, and Reason the power of the Soul, to the Rider, which as with raynes
keeps back, or puts forward the Affections, least they being too dull,
should hinder from good: or too forward, should lead both body and soul to
hurt: whence seems to be taken the reigning of Princes: for they being of a
farther reach and entendment than the common sort, do seem no otherwise than
the Rider does the Horse, than Reason does the Affections, to excel in ruling
the common people, who are numbered among the three evils: Ignis, mare,
Populus, tria mala. In conclusion the Allegory holding as before, I may
translate this verse.

Fertur equis Auriga, nec audit currus habenas. Thus: Affections do bear the
man away,
Which Reasons Rule, will near adeale obey.


3 Nestor granting natural wit and consideration to his son, and yet giving
him counsel, or knowledge of Art, does confirm that difference, between
Consideration and Prudence, which is taken by Sir Thomas Eliot, viz.
Consideration to be a bare considerance of the Causes, but Prudence to be with
a consideration, a continuance also of the Causes helping, and an auoydance of
the Causes hindering, the atchieuing of the ends of our purposes: that one
being more proper to youth, this other to age. For which reason, Antilochus
having by sleight, not by prudence, gotten the prize from the wise and aged
King Menelaus, yet deiecting himself, and acknowledging Menelaus his wisdom,
offers him his gotten prize, with these words: O Menclaus, suffer now this
wrong,
Your years are more, your wisdom greater too
Than mine: for why, I am but very young:
And youth (you know) do many ways misdoo.
And though mine wit more ready be than thine,
Thy prudent counsel ouerreacheth mine.
Which modest confession of Antilochus notwithstanding, yet wisdom is not
always in the gray hair, but in such as do overcome their Affections,
according to that saying: Sedatis and extinctis cupiditatum ardoribus, and
calore iuuenili refrigerato, cum quadam tamen naturali probitate, senescere
debent, qui sapientiam inhiant. But now for the council or knowledge of Art,
which I have said Nestor gave unto his son, it is to be remembered that the
word (...) is translated Ars, Consilium, or Prudentia, and (...), the Coniugate
thereof, Artista, Consiliarius, or Prudens. Now, if Art and Counsel, an
Artist and a Counsailor be converted, it should seem, that a Councellor should
have skill in Art, especially, for that, that our Laws are known by the
name of Iurisprudentia, and Art, and Prudence, are signified by one and the
same word (...).

4 I hope I shall not stretch the figure, if by the more swiftnes of Horses, I
understand, a greater promptnes and alacrity of wit in some, than in other
some. For by likening the Affections to Horses, I entend all other natural
gifts common to us with Beasts, as Ingeny, in which the Fox excels the
Ass, and in which, some men exceed others naturally, and yet they again, by
Art and good habit of them, whom they do naturally excel for wit, are
themselves excelled: which meaning I apply to this place. The excellency of
Art, above natural wit, may appear by the event of that controversy
between Atax and Ulysses, in penning whereof, Ovid, though in other matters he
goes beyond many other Latin Poets, yet therein he excels himself: In
which controversy, though he attribute unto Ajax a good natural wit, as
appears in that, he urged, whatsoever might stand, to the setting out of his
own worthiness, in remembering the leawd and cowardly pranckes of Ulysses, in
extenuating those deeds of Ulysses, whereby he had gotten credit with the
Graecians, yet Ulysses by more skillful and artificial insinuation with the
Judges, in urging his own Acts with more modesty, and Ajax his faults more
sharply, in extenuating his good deeds more cunningly, and either passing
over with silence, putting over to others, or else avoiding fault with fault,
one of his own by obiecting another to Ajax, he got the Armor, which causes
the Poet to conclude. Mota manus procerum est, etc.

The Nobles, which were Judges, did agree,
And then, what cunning could, a man might see:
The strong man's harnes, was the wise man's see.
Which excellency of cunning above wit and strength, may also appear by that
part of Ulysses his speech, wherein he compares himself with Ajax, to this
meaning: I do foresee, but thou without a mind
Bearst strength: thou know to fight, but I the fit
Seasons for battle, with Atrides find:
Thou but in body: we excel in wit.
How much the Pilot does the Mariner,
How much the Captain does excel his man,
So much am I for policy thy better:
And of my body, by mine heart I can
Perform by far, more than I may by hand:
In inward parts does all the glory sland.


Which excellency of wisdom above strength, may also appear by the
metiment, wherewithal Master Martin Luther is said to have iested at those
Swatrouters, so called of their black Curtolles, wherewith they served, and at
such other Lance Knights, who cutting their horse tails the beauty of
horses, ware feathers in their helmets (a feather and a pen, being in Latin
signified by one word Penna) entending, that now Soldiers did cease to take
their glory from strength, which they defaced, and ascribed the same to
learning, which they advanced.

5 This Simile is herein excellent, because (as I have elsewhere showed)
Mezimmah, which signifies Structura, signifies also, Prudentia, or Dolus
malitiosus, no difference, being between Prudence and Subtlety, in the manner
of doing, but in the purpose of the doer: So as Prudence being in the Hebrew
tongue, so called of a building: the Simile seems good. I know not whether
the ruling of the Magistrate may be said of the Carpenter his Rule, wherewith
he orders in just measure and proportion.

The Pilot: Tully has the same Simile, whereof Princes are said, Clauum tenere
Reipub. To stern the Commonwealth.

That of the Couchman: is continued through the whole discourse, and is
commended as before.

6 The mind may be said to be besides her government, or to stray either by
impotencie of nature, by evil habit, or by want of good habit: when the
defect is by nature, we call the man either a natural, or an idiot. An Idiot,
may be said he, that exercising the fantasy with idle contemplations, never
discendeth to particulars. But, when this exercise is in judgment unto some
certain end, then is it no fault, but necessary to study: for who was more
famous amongst the Philosophers for any thing, than was Plato, called Diuinus,
for his Idea? which signifies (originalis rerum species) or as Tully calls
it (fere species) it seems therefore, if vniuersalls be the beginnings of
Study: that they which labor almost wholly in particulars, go not the
nearest way. If this use of the mind, be in Divinity, it is most commendable:
for the Apostles are called (...): for they do lift from earthly things, and
therefore are called separatae formae, and of (...), comes the verb (...), to
see, which is as commonly spoken of the mind as of the Sense: whence cunning
men were sometimes called Seers: and these make one part of Art. But if this
quality of the mind, in considering Vniversals do there rest, not discending
to particulars, the knowledge of which are the other part, or orderly
perfecting of Art, Art being of things also, and not all only, of those
separated forms: then is it said of such Scholars, that the greatest Clerks
are not the wisest men. That straying of the mind, which comes by evil
habit, is either when a man is De non sane memory, or non compos mentis: The
first, when reason is utterly defaced, coming, either by over laboring the
mind, or by predominance of the affections, which make a man forget what he
sometimes was, or by cuill habit of the body, either in health, by defect, or
superfluity of meats, defect of sleep, or by sickness. The other may come
by the same means, but differs in the manner, as being able which the other
cannot) to speak the truth in manner of discourse, but not in (the matter of
discourse, as of him, that would fetch over the old Moons, and would bring
over Islands, because younger brothers wanted in England. The mind straieth for
want of good habit, either when we are deceived in the Principles, or in not
exact considering of the particulars: or else when the mind has not gotten the
masterie of the Affections, but reason yields, by reason of the continual
fight between the flesh, and her Ruffians with the Soul, which is called
(...), The war of nature, whence Ovid makes Medea, being in love with
Theseus, to dispute her own cause, thus, pro, and contra.

Shake off (if that thou may) from maidens breast
These flames of love, which thou do entertain:
Unhappy, if I could, it were my best,
But this new force does otherwise constrain:
And when that love one thing persuades me to,
Reason, another thing, would have me do.
Reason being at the last overcome, she thus concludes.

I see the best, and do allow the same,
I follow bad.
7 The Egyptians, by an eye, looking foreright, in their Hierogliphikes,
betokened Prudence: And thereto agrees the common saying: Remember the end,
and thou shall not do amiss: which I understand, to be spoken not only
concerning death, but also concerning the practizes of Study.

8 Soft fire makes sweet malt, and Soft and Sure, are the Proverbs. The words
in this place, are, Bouinis loris, An oxes pace: for Softnes Ennius commends
Fabius.

One man delaying, has restorde our wealth,
Not prizing Rumors higher than our health.
9 That the shame of being foiled, ought to be a great encouragement to well
doing, whence Nestor bidding his son beware, least in unadvised driving, he
should wound his horses and break his Chariot, he adds what would thence
follow.

Sport to thy fellows, but a shame to thee,
Considering therefore, all so prudent be.
Which in our purpose, differs not much from that of Horace.

Of idleness contempt will grow in end:
Oh shame for me to live without a friend.
And that of Virgil.

He knowing his own Virtues, Very shame
Doubled his strength, and did his force inflame.
10 Perseverance is councelled: which is hence noted in Antilochus, that when
Atrides being offended, did counsel him to drive after another manner than he
did.

Antilochus, without regard or fear,
Drove faster still, as one that did not hear.
11 In general, Art is after one manner thus described, Ars est (...)
consideratio ex finibus assumptis, Art is the consideration of causes from
(...) ends propounded: according unto which, and orderly consideration must be
taken of the causes, as it is in this other description of Art, Ars est ratio,
ordinem and viam efficiens, Art is reason, causing order and way: That is
ordering, and making easy: So that from both these descriptions one more
plain may be drawn, which is this: Art is an orderly consideration of the
Causes from certain ends propounded: For, that which in the latter is said
Reason, is here Consideration: Order is included by his Coniugato; Orderly;
way is an effect and no efficient cause of Art: for as a fair way is to a
traveler, so is a way made by Art, pleasant to a Scholar.

FINIS.
CERTAIN General Conclusions concerning the condition of our Common Laws,
and that of the same there may be made a Science.

By R.R. etc.

Let no man seek his own, but every man another wealth.

1. Cor. Chap. 10. verse. 24. As when an Eunuch offers violence to a Virgin,
so does he which abuses the Laws.

Eccles. At London. 1587.

Certain general Conclusions concerning the condition of our Common Laws.
1 That of many imperfect Laws, our Common Law, as having fewer
imperfections, is most perfect.

THis shall be manifested by comparison. First, The Laws of the Medes and
Persians were of such condition, as that they might not be altered, whereby was
taken away that Rule, which is the very Sinowes of all Laws. Quod inconsulto
fecimus, consulto reuocemus: Like unto these were the written laws of the
Athenians. It is said of the Venetians, who (besides our Common weal) are of
all Nations in the world chiefly governed by Common Laws of their own: He
that shall substanciallie consider the manner of their proceedings, shall
plainly see that all matters are determined by the Judges consciences, and not
by the Civil nor yet by their own Laws: but all good Laws grounded upon
reason do exercise a power over the Judge himself, as shall be more plainly
showed in the 9. Conclusion. Again, it is said of their Laws, that in trial
of matter upon life and death, the party himself is never suffered to speak,
but he has an advocate for him, and the Auagadori against him: So that many
times the person tarieth two, three, and sometime four years or ever he come
unto his trial of life and death. It is otherwise, and better in our Law,
where the person is not only suffered to speak, but also diverse prisons have
books touching Plees of the Crown, by which some of them during the time of
their imprisonment, become so cunning, as that they cannot only judge of their
own case, but also instruct others, whose cases are different from theirs:
besides the Sessions or Jail delivery are often times: so as the persons are
not long troubled with the fear of death, which is worse than death it self.
If we shall compare our Law with the Civil Law, a learned Lawier Master
Fortescue has given an instance, how in the Civil Law trial is by witnesses
only, but in our Law by witness and by the Country, where also it is
lawful by just proof to except against a witness, and where the Jury (if
the action be local, of lands or houses) is panelled, from, or as near as may
be to that County where the thing in controversy lies: which is a special
point, in as much, as in vain are good laws made, if that in trial they may
be corrupted.

Accipe sio legum errores, and crimine ab vno,
Disce omenes.
But our laws, as the laws of the famous Lawgiver Licurgus, are not written,
that is, they are not therefore laws, because that they are written, as those
of the Persians and Athenians, but they are yearly observations upon manners,
as are our yeare-bookes: whence it is said of the laws of the Lacedaemonians,
and so likewise many be said of our laws: Lacedamonij vero, non jure scripto,
sed moribus tantum vsu annorum comprobatis pro legibus use sunt: Ideoque
Locurgus leges scriptas Spartanis nullas dedit, sed omnium conscensu, mores,
tanquam silex edita fuisset, experiundo obseruarunt: hique adeo tenaces fuere,
vt omni scripto juri anteirent. So that hence may be gathered two extremities:
one, in attributing too much unto the writing, as those of the Medes and
Persians, and of the Athenians: another, in attributing too little to the
writing, that is, to the written reason as those laws of the Venetians,
between both these stands our law, neither giving too much to the law,
which without good reason is written, nor taking any thing from that law which
is written with good reason.

2 That it is impossible that our Laws, as they are now, should be perfect.

LIke as is the cause, such is the effect: but man in his reason unreformed, is
imperfect, therefore cannot the laws be perfected without Logique, which is a
Reason reformed.

The ways of God are perfect with justice in mercy, but the laws of men are
merciless justice, or rigor, whence the law is thus described: Lex est
commune praeceptum, virorum prudentium, delictorum, quae sponte vel ignorantia
contrahuntur coertio, Reip sponsio communis.

Justice, in regard of the imperfection and untruth of the precept, which no
way can prejudice the perfection and truth of Art, is thus described:
Iustitia est constans and perpetua VOLVNTAS suum cuique tribuendi: And again,
Lex est ratio suum vnicuique tribuens, vel id saltem AFFECTANS. Lastly, because
that by the alteration of times, it may be necessary to alter the laws.

3 That though the Law in it self be rigorous and imperfect, yet as much as
the common profit will suffer, it is made gentle, merciful, and perfect by
the Chauncerie.

FOr that is one end of that Court, and is therefore called a Court of
Conscience, because it reasons on the part of the Complaynant by Argument
taken from the law of nature Quod tibi fieri non vis alters ne feceris: and
hence also is it called Cancellaria quasi Cancellans, as taking away and
anihilating the extremities of the Common Laws: So is the Clients matter in
the Common Law termed a Case, but in the Chauncerie a Cause: A Case it is
termed because, according to the description of casus (casus dicitur quando
prater efficientis scopum, nec necessario, neque euidenti causa antecedente,
aliquid accidit) the party at the Common Law does not of himself know the
reason or cause why it is by law adjudged with, or against him: but it is
otherwise in the Chauncerie, where he is more able by light of nature to
foresee the end, and to give a reason himself of his cause or matter.

The Judge at the Common Law by reason makes just, or puts a finite
determination of the Law: but the Chauncerie adding nothing, it only makes
equal, that is, by the use thereof it tends more to a perfection: as when a
Carpenter having cut his pillar, does not so leave, but proceeds to polish
it: whence it is said of the Judge of the Common Law, Ratio statuentis: and of
the Judge in the Chauncerie, Aequitas decernentis.

Where note that the Lord, Chauncellor is entitled with a special addition of
discretion, because that he ought so to relceue the case of a private person,
as notwithstanding the prudence of the Law may be kept touching common profit,
for better is it to suffer a mischief to one man, than an inconvenience to the
whole Commonwealth: and of this ballancing or discerning in causes may it be
said of the Lord Chauncellor, Qui sub libra mansuetudinis, and lenimento
clementiae cuncta deliberat. Now, waying is not but of two several matters; so
as in one scale is the Common Law, in another Conscience: yet not that the
Common Law does never join with Conscience, but because that Conscience
cannot ever in all cases be joined with the Common Laws, and is by reason of
the subtle practizes of common persons to deceive laws: so that the Judge
cannot so circumspectly pitch his hayes, but that these crastie fellows will
find cuasions: for whereas Trespass is described thus, Transgressio est,
quicquid prater modum fit: and the manner or means of doing being but ab
Accident in outward things, and the Common Law having ability to see no
further: such subtle deuisers, will so handle those offenses which they make,
as the causes of the same resting only inward in their hearts, the party
grieved shall be left remediless at the Common Laws: wherefore in this Court
is the matter brought to light from out his conscience: and as for a Fox which
like as a Bear or Wolf, will not rudely rush into every engyne made for his
apprehension this grin as proceeding of further purpose is ordained, as in case
of a Pledge by Moses laws, the defendant was driven to an oath to end
controversies.

4 That notwithstanding the Laws are imperfect, yet that of them so much as
they are they may be made an Art.

Because that Art makes nothing but of things already made, puts a
distinct determination.

5 That the Law though infinite in practice, is notwithstanding finite in
precepts.

FOr that thing may be certain, finite, and perfect in precepts, which is
uncertain, infinite, and imperfect in practice: and so do I desire to be
understood whereas I said before of Reason that it was imperfect, whereby I
mean, the practice of Logique, and so the practice of every other Science: for
I doubt not, but that there may be a perfect Logique. Ptolomey to this purpose
puts a conclusion: Certa possunt esse, qua tamon sunt infinita: which the
Logitian (as I take it) expounding, says, Rations certa sunt, quae numero sunt
infinita: And to this purpose the Wiseman himself seems to affirm, saying,
Man's wisdom is imperfect, and his knowledge in each Science uncertain. But
who knows not, that nothing is more proper to any thing, than certainty is
to a Science concerning the precepts? therefore must this uncertainty and this
imperfection be understood of practice. The Lawyer says of King E. 1. Quam
just, quam misericorditer, quam discrete erga subditos suos tempore pacis,
pacis author, and amator se habuit, non ambigitur: cum tantae aequitatis sit
suae celsitudinis cura, quod, in ca nullus judicum tam attritae frontis, tam
temeraria sit presumptionis, quod a justiae tramite, aliquatenus declinare, aut
aequitatis excedere praesumat. By which speech as he makes it plain, that the
Law is an Art, and so finite and perfect, so elsewhere, though calling the
Law an Art, yet comparing the same to the game at the Chests, he calls it
both infinite and imperfect, which we therefore must understand of the practice:
as thus, Haec quidem ars arts lusili Scaccarij recte comparatur, tum quod
vtraque infinita est and imperfecta, tum quod sicut Rex, regem Scaccorum asfuta
quarit subtilitate mactare, sic pars actrix litigad, vel disrationando, reum
nititur conuincere, redargutum sua veritate, vel cautela.

Again, of God it is said, that his ways are unsearchable, and his paths
past finding out, therefore man's doings may be sought for, man's doings may be
found out. The Wiseman says that it is, The glory of God to keep a thing
secret, but the Kings honor is to search out a thing: It is a man's honor to
bring a thing to light: as to make a Science of that which is obscure: To give
some light that the laws infinite in practice are notwithstanding finite in
principles and reasons: let it be thus. As the Physician has finite Symples,
and concerning them finite reasons, of which Symples, though he do make
infinite Compounds, yet are they all proved good or bad to that end whereunto
they are prepared, by reasons drawn from the finite Simples: So the Lawyer
has his finite elements, Acts, Persons, Things, and their Adjuncts, and
concerning them finite reasons, of which though he compound Cases infinite, yet
are all those cases decided, according to the finite reasons of the finite
elements.

6 That such Lawyers as affirm, that there is no science of the Laws, do
affirm that they profess they know not what.

BEcause (that except the Law be wholly known) there may be somewhat in the
law which not being in the Councellor his knowledge may alter the case.
Besides it is said, Forma dat esse, because that in all study we strive to
perfection, which is a Science: therefore in that respect can no man be said to
know the same, except he know the same as a Science: For as a web of Arras,
beautiful for diversity of colors, goodly for proportions, and profitable
for the matter of the story, is nothing so beautiful, nothing so goodly,
nothing so profitable, when as it is mangled and cut in pieces: so the Law
dispersed here and there confusedly, is nothing so beautiful, nothing so
goodly, nothing so profitable, as if it were built up in one Structure:
Notwithstanding, if a man know the whole law but for any one case, for so
much he may be said to have the science of the whole law.

7 That for want of the science of the Laws, the Queen way sometime loose her
right, what she does by law may be suspected of wrong: Justice may be
corrupted in the Judge and Officer, and the making of the laws more perfect,
greatly hindered.

WIthout instance I will speak in a general manner, thus: because that such
matters in law as are of one sort, as well of the Crown, as of right and
title in land, of debt, of trespass, and of the case with the duty and
authority of officers in judgment, as also of the writs, and of the Acts of
Practice, lie so confounded together, as forgetfulness and neglect may cause
ignorance through their misorders: whereas by Art an easy way is made to
find every thing, and that fully and wholly in his proper place: for that
is the effect of Art: whence a learned man faith, that Art works, Vt non
sit necesse quaerents, caepitulorum numerosit atem euoluere, cui, breuit as
collecta, quod quaritur, offert sine labor. And of Division, it is said,
Diuisio animum legentis incitat, mentem intelligentiae praeparat, and memoriam
artificio^e reforman. The Laws (if in a Science) might be greatly perfected:
because that with better judgment do we apprehend and judge of the effects of
that thing which is composed and set up before our eyes, than of that which is
dispersed, and is not all at once presented unto us.

8 That Logique is the instrument of the science of the Law.

Because that it is the instrument of all Sciences.

9 That any argument drawn from Divinity or humanity (saving the prudence of
the Law, wherein may be crossed no rule of Divinity) is of forcible proof,
though there be no books for it.

THis is proved by the first definition of law: and he that shall deny a good
argument so drawn for want of a book, shall do as much as take away the
Sun, from which the Law as the Moon takes her light: for the principles
which are taken from the law of God, of nature and of reason, are many more
than those which are of Man, and are given by the absolute discretion of the
Judge, and which do concern the prudence of the Law. And therefore hereunto
may be applied that saying of a Lawyer: Leges autem Anglicanas, licet non
scriptas, leges appellari, non est absurdum: Si enim ob solum scripturae
defectum leges minime censerentur, maioris procul dubio auctoritatis robur,
ipsis legibus videretur accommodare scriptum, quam decernentis aequitas, aut
ratio statuentis.

10 That though it require great practice to know the whole body of the Law
and to order the same, yet may it being ordered and well opened be without
difficulty understood of a man, which is no Lawyer.

BEcause that to make easy is the end of Art, and because that it is easier
(as experience teaches) to understand many principles well put together, than
to put many principles well together. So therefore may a man hearing the Law
well delivered, understand the same, though he do not profess the study of
it.

11 That whereof there is no reason given, that can be no Law, and so that the
elder Law, if it have the better reason, is the better Law.

BEcause that the Law is nothing else but reason, and (as Tully says) that
Venus takes her name a Venustate, not Venustas a venere, so may it be said of
the Judge, that he takes his name Iudex a Iudicio, not Iudicium a iudice.
Raemus he says of the inartificiall argument, which is Testimony, whereof Law
is a species, Argumentum in artificiale est, quod non sua natura, sed assumpta
alicuius artificialis vi arguit: It aque cum exquisita rerum veritas subtilius
exquiritur, perexiguam vim probationis habet: in ciuilibus autem, and humanis
rebus plerumque hoc argumentum praecipuam fidem e moribus arguentis efficit, si
prudentia, virtus, and beneuolentia adfuerint.

12 That of the two, it were better the Laws were bad, and the Lawyers good,
than to have good Laws and bad Lawyers.

BY how much the efficient is more worthy than the effect: for a good Lawyer
being a good man, of necessity must make good Laws, but not conuertibly: for
good Laws are abused sometimes by the practizes of the professors themselves:
whence is that saying, Melius gubernatur ciuitas ab optimo viro, quam ab optima
lege.

In Conclusion.

THat the Laws (though in themselves sometimes too strict) are qualified, and
so though being imperfect, are perfected, and though imperfect yet may they be
made an Art: though Cases and their reasons are uncertain and infinite in
practice, yet are they certain and finite, in precepts: though hard at the
first to be known and ordered, yet being ordered, they may with more ease be
understood by the Student, and by him being well opened may without great
difficulty be understood by the Client.

FINIS.
WHo knows to plot the fashion of a frame,
Albeit, it flatter not unlearned eyes,
It Is like, can tell, how to set up the same,
Through little chinkes, that who such light espies,
Encouraging he hasteneth for an end
The good beginnings of a loving friend.
But wretched I, for sight though not the worst,
My feebled wits supporting ill their charge
Surcharged (alas) in chase by men accursed,
(Whose honny mouths their hidden wrongs enlarge)
As toyled Dear seeks shelter in the Town,
Do fly those curres, before you falling down.
For, well I know your help and favor might
Be staves, whereon my fainting Muse should guide
Such steps, that Error could not strangle Right
Through idiot tongues, or hearts of hellish pride:
Your Honor shall be rich in title then,
As Princes erst, a fosterer of Men.
Malum, patienti, Lucrum.

