The Propositions of Sir Anthony Thomas knight, and John Worsop Esquire, for
making of the bargain with the Country, and Henry Briggs Professor of the
Mathematics in the university of Oxford, Heldebrand Pruson, Citizen and
Salter of LONDON, and Cornelius Drible Engeneere, with the rest of the
Undertakers for the drayning of the Level within the six Counties of
Norfolk, Suffolk, Cambridge, Isle of Elie, Huntington, North-hampton and
Lincolne-shire, on the South side of Gleane.
WHEREAS the Country have offered to Master Burrell and his Associates, for
the drayning of the great Level in the six Counties aforesaid, and for the
maintenance of the work, being done, the quantity of 80000 Acres, of which
he offers to engage unto the Country but 10000 Acres for the maintenance of
the work.

We offer, that if the Country will or can allott the said proportion of
80000 Acres to us, we will undertake to drayne the said Level, and will engage
15000 Acres, and a rent of 4 d. the Acre out of the whole 80000 Acres amounting
to 1333 l. per Annum, for the maintenance of our work, and will give to every
Cottager, whose house shall happen to stand upon any part of the Land allotted
to us, the sum of four pounds toward the erecting of a new house, in some
other part of the Common.

But because we conceive it very difficult (if not impossible) to apportion,
and set out a certain number of Acres, out of so many and various particulars,
as must necessarily be contained in so great a quantity of ground, unless the
same should be taken only out of the Commons, and the seueralls spared, which
we cannot conceive reasonable, we therefore propound as follows.

1. FIRST, whereas by the Law, the Commissioners of Sewers have no power to
make a bargain for any Composition of Land, till a tax be set, and not paid,
at the day appointed: We desire that a tax of ten shilling be laid upon
every Acre of land, that lies under the high-water-marke, or is annoyed with
fresh or salt water, or shall receive benefit, or ease by drayning within the
Level; to which low demand we are descended, for the ease of the Country,
which tax must be paid at a day certain, and to remain in the hands of such
as the Commissioners shall think fit to keep it, the Undertakers to have
proportionably thereof, according to such parts and proportions of the said
surrounded grounds, as they shall from time to time drayne; PROVIDED that the
said part be first adjudged drayned, and exceed the quantity of 100000 Acres.

2. SECONDLY, For so much of this tax, as shall not be paid at the day
appointed; we desire of the worst Land, one half; Of the second sort, one
third part; Of the third sort, one fourth part.

3. THIRDLY, Whosoever shall think fit, to redeem such part or proportion of
his own Lands, being several, as by the Commissioners shall be allotted to
the Undertakers, shall (if he desire it) adventure seven shilling for every
Acre of his Land, changed with the said tax of ten shilling (the estimate
being set down under his hand, of the whole number of Acres of his said Land)
so, as it be within 5 of 100, and 50 of 1000; and so shall not part with any
Land of his at all.

4. FOURTHLY, Whosoever shall be unable or unwilling to pay the tax of ten
shilling the Acre, or to venture seven shilling the Acre, and yet willing to
redeem his severalls, given by the Commissioners. We therefore make this
offer, that he shall, if he please, have a defeazance, or such other security,
as by Council shall be advised from us: That if he pay thirteen shilling four
pence for eevery Acre of his said severalls, charged with the said tax of
ten shilling, after they are adjudged drayned by the Commissioners, then he
shall retain all his severalls to himself. PROVIDED, that he demand the said
defeazance, or other security, within one month after the Act or Decree of
Sewers, whereby his Land shall be decreed to us.

5. FIFTHLY, And because we desire to give all possible ease, and content to the
Country, we are content that one shilling of the tax of ten shillings for
every Acre be left in the hands of the owner, and one shilling of the seven
adventured, and one shilling four pence of the money due by the defeazance,
shall remain in the hands of the owners, (...) urgent occasion and necessity
force us to call, for some part, or the whole, which yet we hope we shall not
need. But for the further ease of the Country, we are content that they shall
pay the said seven shillings Adventure, for every Acre of their severalls, in
manner and form following. vz. two shillings within one month after the tax
is set, and two shilling two months after, and the other two shilling two
months after that: one shilling being still left in their hands as aforesaid.
And for the twelve shilling of the thirteen shilling four pence, to be paid
after the work shall be adjudged drayned, we demand to have it paid as
follows; vz. four shillings within one month, and four shillings three
months after that, and the other four shilling three months after that.

^. SIXTHLY, If the house of any Cottager shall happen to stand in any part of
any Common allotted to us, we will build him an other in some convenient place
in or upon the same Common.

If any of these three particular offers be accepted, we will undertake a
general drayning of the Fennes, and other Grounds annoyed with fresh or salt
waters, within this Level, and will expect no recompense, but out of such
lands, as shall be adjudged drayned, or such money as the Countries shall agree
to give before hand by way of Adventure.

We will undertake to make good and maintain for ever, at our own charge,
all such draynes and works, as we shall make, and will engage for the
performance thereof, a reasonable proportion of Land, as shall be agreed upon
between us and the Commissioners.

That all the maine works shall be made Nauigable, and be built for the most
part, with Brick and Stone.

That all Owners of Land and parties interessed shall have liberty to
adventure, after the rate of other adventurers.

That we will undertake to perform all this within four years to be
accounted from the time, the bargain shall be fully perfected, with the
Commissioners and the country. So we receive no impediment from the
Commissioners, nor the Country.

Dated the 11. of January, 1629.

