THE VANITEE OF THIS world.

ANNO. M. D. XLIX.

To the right woorshipfull and my singular good Lady, the Lady Anne Herbert
of Wilton.
Being persuaded, that at this present the light of the truth does more
flourishe here amongst us in England, than elsewhere thoroughout the whole
world, and seeing the fruit of our works rather to empayre than amend,
mischief to grow and virtue to decaie, couetousenesse to reign where
godliness is professed, and of every other thing the contrary to have place,
of that which should be avoided: me seemed I could no less do, than reason
with my self, what all these things should mean. And findyng in conclusion,
that they, which know reason, can not yet rule them selfs by reason: me
thought it necessary to publisshe unto the world this little work, that I
have scraped out of the dust: Not thynkyng thereby to obtain redress of al
men, but in hope that some virtuous minds beholding here as in a glass, the
spots of their own vices, shall yet the rather bend their hertes toward
charitee and contempt of these worldely vanitees. And because I have found so
much negligence in man, that almost he deserves not to be warned any more of
his folly: therefore did I determine to dedicate my book unto a woman, to prove
whether it may take any root in them: to the intent that men ashamed,
thorough the virtuous examples of women, may be provoked thereby to refourme
them selfs, which no kind of admonicion can persuade them to do. And
findyng amongst women your Ladyship in virtue and bountee to excelle as the
dyamant amongst the iewelles, I thought it my duity to commend it specially
unto you. Assuryng my self, that the wonderful qualitees and modestee of your
Ladyship shall be a no less terror to them, that viciousely would repugne
this little work, than the thing it self shall be a persuasion to others,
that being well disposed, may thereof take occasion to amend their lyfes.

Your Ladyships most humble servant Wylliam Thomas.

The things that are conteigned in this book.
THe folly of man. That the pleasures of the body ought not to be followed. How
abominable the vice of glotonie is. How abominable also lechery is. That
beauty is a vain thing. That force and valiantness is also vain. That
richesse deserve not to be esteemed. That honor is not to be sought for. That
dominion ought not to be desired. What a lawful lord is. The fondenesse of
Alexander. What a tyranne is. That fame is a vain thing. Conclusion of the
humayne misery and vanitee. The opinion of Plato touching the blessed life.
God is only good. Christ is the way, the veritee, and the life. Christ
coupleth man with God. The life of Christ in this world. Eternal life. The
knowlage of God. Good works are necessary. The testament of Christ. The new
commandment comprehends the whole law. The love of God toward us. What
our mutual love ought to be. The conclusion what our doings ought to be.
FINIS.
THE FOLLY OF MAN.
CONSIDERING how we are created of two parts, that is to wete, of soul and of
body, the one whereof is most noble, and the other most vile: the one celestial,
and the other terrestrial: the one eternal, and the other mortal. Ought it not
to be called an express Folly, that we universally geuyng our selfs to the
satisfaction and pleasure of this vile earthly and mortal part, do no more
regard that which is noble, celestial and immortal, than as if we had
nothing to do withal? Truly, like as he deserves not to be reputed wise,
that appliyng all his study to the trimmyng of his garments, suffers his
body to perish for hunger and disease: Euin so another ought he to be allowed,
that following the vanitees of the body, habandoneth his soul: the body being
none other but the apparaile to the soul, as the garments to the body. And
well do we deserve to be reputed unwise, when (being on the one part
conformable unto brute beasts, and of the other side partakers of diuinitee)
attendyng only to the ornament of the earthly part, we do as much as lies in
us to transform that diuinitee that we have, into earthlinesse. Wherefore the
prophet justly says, The man in honor comparyng his degree,
Sees not how like unto a brute beast is he.
For though we see this Folly to be evident, yet the more part of us
continually wrappe our selfs in it: because (of worldly wisdom) they ar
reputed most prudent, that most can fasten them selfs therein. Of which our
folly there is not one kind alone, but many and diverse, some moved through one
opinion, and some through an other: some drawn by one affection, and some by
an other: always bestowyng their study how best they may please the body.
For some apply their whole heart and mind to satisfy the pleasures of their
earthly senses. Some other think the beauty or valiantness of the body
worthy to be preferred before all other things: some attend only to the
getting and heaping up of richesse. Some other esteem no felicitee to be
compared unto the atteignyng of dignitees and honors: and many think
lordshippe and dominion to be that only felicitee* that none may be greater
or equal: and finally there wants not also of them, that settle all their
desires to the gettyng of glory and fame. Unto the study of which things (if
I be not deceived) the most part of al living men have bent their thoughts and
travails. Wherefore examynyng them by one and one, I determine now to see
whether there be any thing in any of them, that should cause us thereupon so
much to fix our desires.

That the pleasures of the body oughe not to be followed.
AS for the pleasure that trauaileth our senses, is none other but a crafty
flatterer, that with his faulse sweetness, and with his feigned pleasantness
gives to understand the ill to be good, and the noisome to be profitable. For
that soul, which suffers her self to be tangled with the allurynges of
pleasure, must needs at length find her self captive and thrall unto the
body: as the divine Plato well reherseth, saieyng, Pleasure like a driven
nail fasteneth the soul to the body, and ioygneth it so hard together, that
it makes it become corporal. Whereof it follows, that she (the soul I say)
estemeth those things to be true, that the body presents unto her: and
consequently delityng in that that the body deliteth, must needs depart far
from every high and honorable consideracion: as it seems the good Roman
well understood, who having heard a philosopher of Athenes say, that every
thing ought to be done to thentent to atteigne pleasure, prayed god to give
that opinion unto Pyrrhus and to the Samnites (than enemies to the Roman
people) thynkyng by that mean, the Romans should easily atteigne victory
against them, as by the exaumple of Anniball it did well appear, To whom the
pleasures of Capua were more noisome,
Than were the battles of Trasimene and Cannas to Rome.
Wherefore not without cause did the city of Sparta long time withhold the
eyes of her citisins far from the delices of Asia: and Scipio Emilius (sent
into Spain) incontinently as he arrived at the army, commanded that all
those things, which served the army for pleasure, should immediately be
taken away. For the which both the Lacedemoniens and Scipio deserved no
less commendacion, than Xerxes mearited blame in rewardyng them that were new
inuentours of deliciouse things, and so did Tyberius the emperor in erectyng a
new office over the pleasures in Rome. But what words may be sufficient
woorthily to derect the vileness of Aristippus? Who being nourisshed with
most holy erudicion in the schole of Socrates, (only to atteigne pleasure)
disposed him self to live in the court of Denis the tyranne, supportyng to be
spitted on, and a thousand other villainies, which he regarded not as long
as he might with pleasure fill his bealy. And therefore did Diogenes woorthily
call him the kings dog: For though he had called him the kings swyne, me
seems he shoulbe have dooen him no great wrong. And like as this man's life
(of all men of good opinion) deserves reproach, euin so the sentence of
Epicure (who otherwise had been a very commendable man) may rather a great
deal be followed than defended: in that he said, he knew not how to find any
pleasant thing, if the taste of meats and the use of venereall things were
taken away.

How abominable the vice of glotonie is.
Touching the first whereof (which is the pleasure in eating and drinkyng) I can
not see what greatter enemy nature may have. For whereas she has given us
appetite to conserve our life's withal, we contrariwyse live only to serve our
appetites, as it does well appear by the deserved reward that follows
thereof unto them, that with delicate meats and drinks spend their lives. For
they in manner enioie nothing of that taste that nature has granted us, when
in steed of appetite that should call them to their meats, they are feign a
thousand ways to devise how they may get them selfs an appetite* and so
do lack the true pleasure and sweetness of that, wherein they most delight.
Truly, better savor did Persians find in their Nasturtio (a gross meat
that they used) than ever did Mark Antonie, or Cleopatra, in their most
sumptuouse and prodigal bankettes, or than ever did Uitellius amongst all
the sauourye delycacyes brought him from so many countries, and beyond so many
seas. And therefore much commendable was the aunsweare of Alexander unto the
queen of Caria, who daiely sent him exquisite meats diligently dressed:
being this, That his cooks were better than hirs to make his meat sauourie,
meaning his travail by night that made him dyne well, and his sobre diner that
made him to suppe well. Artaxerxes, brother unto Cyrus, having lost his
provision in a certain discoumfiture, was constreigned to eat barley bread and
dried figs for very hunger, which so much pleased him, that he said: O
what a pleasure is this, that I never tasted the like before? Wherefore I
conclude it to be much superfluouse the study and sekyng for the varietee or
deintethnesse of meats: seeing the delight of the taste consists not in the
qualitees of the^, but in the appetite of the man. Besides that the true way,
long to enioie a pleasant taste, is a sobre life: For who otherwise does
seek it, thynkyng to satisfy him self, hyndreth surely the long time that
he might else enioie: nothing in this world being a greatter shortner of man's
life tha^ the pleasing of the mouth, which brings him to a thousand
infyrmitees, the most greuouse that man may have. And what other way is there
that can so soon consume our substance and patrimonies? what thing can so
soon take from us our senses and understanding? what thing is more apt to
make us disclose our secrets? And is there any other, that so promptly
brings us in sklaunder and quarelles as it? No surely: and therefore says the
prophet Esaie well: Woe be to them that rise early to go to the tauernes.
Esaie. 5.
Like as in the gospel it is written, that the rich man (who before had lived
deliciousely) liftyng up his eyes from hell, Luc. 16.
desired Lazarus (that before died at his door for hunger) to descend out of
the boasome of Abraham to refreshe him in his burning heat.

How abominable Lechery is.
BUt to come unto the other pleasure, that Epicure esteems to consist in
carnal copulacion, the same is called of Plato a vehement and furiouse
pleasure. And before him Sophocles the Poet had named it a fierce and a
cruel tyranne: not without good cause. For this fury obteigneth no sooner the
dominion over man's mind, but that it so does rauishe him, that skarcely may
he attend to any other thing: and though well he happen to find his own
error, yet for all that, cease he not to follow it. He sees the better, but
him nothing it does prevail,
For following the worse he shows him self al frail.
And what other affection has there ben seen, that ever has brought man and
woman to so headlong entreprises, to so perilous works, and to so wicked
deeds, as this? Truly (as I believe) none. For this enduced Semiramis to the
unlawful embracinges of her own son. And this made Artaxerxes unto.ccclx.
women that he kept, to ioygne in the noumbre of his concubines.ii. of his own
daughters. What shall I say of Euridice, Queen of Macedonie, that to give her
realm unto an adoulterer, poisoned her own soonnes? What of Cambises, and of
Caligula, that violated their own systers? I woull not speak of the
unnatural use of Tyberius: and woull also pass over in silence the
abhominacion of Nero, of Heliogabalus, and of other Roman emperors, whose
vices to remember makes me to abhor the rehersall of their names. Yet will I
not forgette Ruben and Absalon, that shamed not to couple with their fathers
women. But he that woul well understand, how venemouse a pestilence this fury
is, let him behold Solomon (the light of sapience) who having, DCC. wyfes,
and.CCC. concubines, ouercomen of rage, suffered him self to fall from the
true god, and to be led into idolatry, I forbear the most filthy examples,
whereof the holy scriptures are no less full then the profane: and will only
rehearse the unbridled appetite of them that have been enduced to embrace and
to use the dead carcasses: which both in the ancient and also in the later
memories are evident, besides that I could reken How Pasiphe so foul applied
her beastly wit,
That in a cowes hyde to a bull her self she knitte.
Which I say not to give auctoritee withal unto the fable, but under this
fable to say, that peradventure in these our days there have been known more
than one of such exaumples, no less foul, odious and abominable then the
filthy vice is whereof they proceed: which being so abominable as it is, is
many times cruelly avenged with just dolor. For there is no injury so bitter,
nor none that so promptely moves the people unto arms against the bloudde and
against the life not only of the mean sort, but also many times of their
own sovereign lords. Rome never refused the yoke of tyranny till the
violatyng of Lucrece: and the ten rulers were susteigned until that the
chastitee of Uirginia was tempted. Shall I say that the force used against
Pausania caused the death of king Philip? yea and more, many times not only
the injuries, but false suspicio^s have caused subjects to take the weapon in
hand against their princes, as it is read of Ippoclo king of Chii, and of a
noumbre of others. And what cruel vengeaunces do we read in the scriptures,
that have followed for this vice? Besides the general flood that destroyed all
the world, and the.v. citees consumed with celestial fire. Was not the
defilyng of Dina daughter of Jacob, occasion, that all the men of Salen were
hewn to pieces? and for the violence dooen to the wife of the leuite, was not
the tribe of Benjamin brought to destruction? And of late days for their
disordinate life in this vice, were not all the frenchemen in Sicile slain at
the ringyng of the euensonge bell? whereof yet remaigneth the proverb of the
Sicilian euensonge. We therefore seeing how much this vice is foul, perilous,
and damnable, ought by so much the rather with reason to refreigne and govern
our appetites: like as the holy ghost by the prophet does admonisshe us,
Be not as horse or moses without intelligence. Psalm. 31.

That by bitte and bridle are brought to obedience.
For the nature of this plage unto our souls is such, that we another delight
in the passed pleasure, nor yet can be satisfied with the present: and that
which we look for tourmenteth us still: so that I can not see, why it ought
not more to be abhorred than desired. And seeing both this and all other
corporal pleasures to be short and vain, which also do let and remove our
souls from virtuous and laudable works, and from our health: reason would,
we should not suffer our most noble souls by those means to be made
subjects unto our most vile bodies: being assured, that in our images created
to the likeness of god, we are celestial and immortal creatures, whereas in our
mortal images we are no better than wourmes fode.

That Beauty is a vain thing.
AS for our bodily beauty I see no cause that should move us thereon to ground
our thoughts. Nor I woull not now go about to declare* how Plato does call
us from the beauty of our bodies, to the beauty of our minds. But is there
any thing in it other than as the pleasantness of a new flower, that being
fresshe and fair in the morning, shows it self at night all pale and
wythered? the smothe and tender skin becomes wrinkeled and lothesome: the
light of the sparklyng looks become dark, the aborne or golden hear either
forsake us, or become hoar: the ruddie lyres of the young faces become pale
and ill colored, the tender beardes become crespie, and the upright persons
become arches. So that unto them that in the fondenesse of their beauty have
over much delited, there rests none other but a certain bitter memory,
that makes them to say with the Poet,

Werie that I am, helas what was I? And this is it that so much causes the
saieyng of Lais the harlotte to be commended, in that she consecrated her
lokyng glass unto Uenus: because she would not see her present astate, and
what she had been she could not see. Wherefore seeing beauty to be so vain
and transitoriouse a thing, the persons of most lively spyrite have very
little esteemed it. Spurina feared not to mangle her visage, thereby to avoid
suspicion of adoultrie. And Zopyrus, for the service of his master, king
Darius* cut of his own nose and ears.

That force and valiantness is vain.
THe like whereof (that has been spoken by beauty) may also be said by
force, and by the other prosperitees of the body. For though king Lisimacus slew
the Lion, yet was not his honor so great therefore as his blame was, in that at
the instaunce of Arsinoe he poisoned his own son Agatocles, a valiant
young man, whom he already had ordained to be his successor in the realm:
and through whose virtue he had achieved many victories. But behold, he that
had ouercomen a Lion* was overcome of a woman. And although Maximinus the
emperor was so strong and deliver of him self, that he overthrew all that
ever would wrestle with him, that he would tire any horse in rennyng, and do a
thousand other feats in such wise that he purchaced thereby the surname of
Milo: yet was his govern so ill, that he and his son both were slain of his
own soldiers, with that celebrated rumor, that pity it were any one dog
should live of an ill litter. And had it not been better for him, to have been
less strong and cruel, and more just and quiet, that he and his might have
enioied the Roman empire? But neither his force, nor yet his allectorie (a
jewel that is reputed to give victory) through which he had atteigned so
many victories, could defend him from the hands of his own men, as the
saying of the prophet verifieth, Never delivered shall be the puissaunt,
For his greatness, be he ever so valiant.
So that me seems, I may well conclude, that neither in beauty, nor in force,
nor yet in any other prosperitee, man ought to put his felicitee: because they
are all subjects unto time, unto infirmitee and to a thousand other
mischiefs. Besides that there be diverse brute beasts, that in diverse kinds
excede man in the excellence of gifts of their bodies, the egle and the heart
are quicker of sight: the wild bore and the mole are subtiller of hearing: the
dog and the gripe smell farther of a great deal: and many beasts there be
that live longer then man: and many that are more light, more stronger and more
galiarde than he. Wherefore we ought not to put so much of our felicitee in any
kind of our own corporal force.

That riches deserve not to be esteemed.
BUt come we now unto richesse, the thing universally so much desired and
holden so dear: though in very deed it neither deserves so to be desired*
nor yet is worthy to be made so much of as it is, because that being subject
unto the power of variable fortune: our thoughts (how much so ever they be
inclined) can not be surely stayed in them. For their propretee is such, that
who so spends the^, can not have them* and who that keeps them unspent,
enjoys them not: and yet do we give our selfs so much to the gettyng of
them, that some cease not to wade thorough the large seas enuironned on all
sides with death, now into the east, and now into the weast, and many times
into the new world, to become rich. Some other, not contented with the
haboundaunce of those fruits, that our mother the earth does bring forth
unto our use, forbear not to enter into it, serchyng the secret veins thereof
to get out the gold and silver, with the other metalles. Some other think
it no peine to wear harneyse, to suffer hunger and thyrste, heat and cold,
to lie and sleep on the bare earth, and to put also his life in continual
adventure for the only hope of a fair day, to make him self rich with
other men's gooddes. Some other bestow all their lives in their countyng
houses, imagenyng how they may best gain (be it lawful or unlawful they
pass not) and many of them can not be restreigned neitherby the law of god,
nor yet of man, but that they will lay out their money to usury. Some other
keep open shoppes of ghostly things, sellyng not only the things that ought
not to be sold: but also those that are impossible to be bought. And finally
noumbres there be, that bestow their labor in most vile and dishonest
exercises, only to thentent to become rich. For there is not so mischieuouse
nor so vile a thing in all this world to be done* as men for the gain of money
woul not offer them selfs to do. Which caused the great disciple of
Socrates to say, that there was nothing in this world more perniciouse than
gold and silver, as the holy scriptures in the Ecclesiastes do testify.
Eccle. 10*
There is nothing more mischiuous than a covetous man, whither mountest thou in
pride thou earth and asses? There is nothing more wicked than the love of
money. For who loves it, sells his own soul. And he that woull see plenty
of examples of the naughtiness and mischiefs, that through this blind
couetousenesse have been committed: let him call to mind the histories of the
Roman emperors, in the which he shall see the re^raite of all filthiness.
There shall he see, how for every light accusa^ion princes gooddes in manner of
all parts of the world were confiscate: and that the kings, who yielded the^
selfs under their obedience, if they brought any treasures with them, lost
not only their treasures, but their life's withal. If by their testamentes
they had made any other heirs to their realms, or to their richesse* they
brake those testamentes. And if by their testamentes they had ordained the
emperors to be their heirs, living to recover health, the emperors would
cause them to be slain. They spoiled the temples, and defaced the images of
their own gods made of gold or silver: they held open market of other men's
life's, and also of their own justice: And finally there was nothing (how
shameful so ever it were) that they would forbear to do for money. Yea and
not so much as the princes of the people of god, but that they have been
corrupted with the like iniquitee. For the children of Samuel, leauyng the
fathers steps, perverted their own judgments for couetousenesse. Like as
the king Acab caused Nabot to be slain, to have his goods. And Saul, against
the special commandment of god, saved the heardes of the Amalechites: whereof
there followed upon him the loss of his reign* with possession of the wicked
spyrite. It should be all to long to rehearse the notable examples conteigned in
the ancient histories, of the detestable works that men have attempted
through the insatiable thyrste for gold. And yet one shall I recite happened of
later time.

Maomada the Moore king of Granata, being in the wars persecuted by other
Moors, made his recourse for succor unto king Peter of Castiglia, and
coming unto him, brought with him a great quantitee of treasure, which
treasure, so much tempted the king Peter, that he not only took it from the
Moore, but also caused him to die of the shotre of arrows: and was the first
him self that shot at him. Whereof the miserable king woorthily reproved
him, saying, that shamefully violatyng his own faieth against all law of
humanitee and nature, he triumphed over a king that had put him self into his
hands. These be the fruits that grow upon the ill graffe of the gredie
desire to have. And yet is there nothing to be had, but that which God
promyseth by the mouth of his prophet Jeremy: That the gooddes of couetouse
men shall not be enioied of their own heirs: Ierem.
Which me seems that David does also verify, in saying: He gathers
treasures, and woteth not for whom. Psalm. 38.
Wherefore to conclude, what this vice is, me seems it to be none other, but a
certain dropsy of the mind: For like as he that is infected with the
dropsy, the more he drinks, the more is his thyrste, euin so the couetouse
man, the more he gets* the more is his desire. Which is confyrmed by the
saying of Ecclesiastes, that who loves money can never be satisfied. Eccle. 5.
And further this appetite has such a propretee withal* that the elder we
wax, the younger does it grow in us: and the less need we have, the more
gredie we be.

That honor is not to be sought for.
BUt what shall I say of them, that feed upon the wind of ambicion? Truly
none other, but that they which be most ambiciouse, and most deligent in
purchasyng of honors and other dignitees, they are least worthy to have them.
For (according to the saying of Plato) the good shippemaisters ought to be
sought for, and prayed to govern the ships, rather than they should seek to
be received. And like as it is meeter, that the diseased seek to the phisician
for counsel, than that the phisician should go about to seek for the sick:
Euin so, he that knows him self apt unto magistrate, dignitee or office,
should rather abide till he be called thereunto, than to seek for them him
self: and reason would, that he should be sought unto, desired and prayed: as
Paulus Emilius declared well, when being elected consul against Persa king of
Macedonie, instead of thankyng the people, said, that he accepted that office
for their benefit, and therefore intended not to thank them. for if they
knew any man meeter unto that entreprise than he, he prayed them not to spare
their new election, and he gladly should be contented to forgo the charge
thereof: by reason of which offer he was the more honorably confyrmed in that
Consulate. Nevertheless, offices may be well and worthily sued for* as often
as the sutour defyreth that office for the benefit of a commen wealth, and not
of him self. The example whereof has been well seen in the old Cato, who
(coueryng to be Censor, and having many concorrentes that desired the same) in
steed of the flatery and prayers that the others used, said to the people:
This people has need of a severe physician to give them a strong purgacion:
and because I am such a one, as can minister it accordyngly, therefore give it
me: and so with seueritee obtained that, which other men by flaterie and
friendship travailed for. This kind of requiring and receiuyng of offices and
dignitees, are commendable and worthy, whereas the more part of us provoked of
our own perverse opinions, entreat, pray, and almost beg for it: one
while of the prince, and an other of the people. And many times the princes
either for bribes, or through affection, give those offices and dignitees, not
to them that deserve and are worthy of them, but to such as are most
agreeable unto their appetites: like as the people (who Plato compares to a
great beast) furiously without discrecion grant their favors here and there,
whereof it follows, that oftentimes, when we think to be honored and exalted,
with shame and reproach we find our selfs overthrown. Yea and how many times
have the people dooen their best to put them unto rebuke, that have been
worthy men? The histories declare evidently the repulses given by the people
of Rome unto the Tuberones, to the Metelli, the Emilii, the Scipions, the
Marii, and the Catones, and not yet contented with those repulses, how many
of the most noble citisins have the wicked people ben accustomed to hate and
persecute? Did not the Romans banisshe the great Camillus? Did they not
expel Cicero, father of their country and of eloquence? Did not both the
famous and worthy Scipions Nasica and Africanus, die banished in exile? And the
Atheniens also were no less vncurteise toward the rareste of their commen
wealth, for they made the worthy Miltiades to die in prison, and banisshed the
wise Themistocles, the liberal Cimon, and the just Aristides out of their
city. The like whereof has happened in all other commen wealths, as well
ancient as present. And why should they not? having the examples of the
grauest Romans and of the best learned Atheniens before them? As for
princes, that exalte the unworthy and suppress the virtuous, because there
are so many examples seen of it daily, I shall not need to rehearse the
auctoritee of the histories thereunto, but this woulle I say, that neither the
princes, nor yet the commen wealths, can dishonor the virtuous by not
exaltyng them unto the degrees of honor, rather in not calling them, they
dishonor them selfs and the places also, in which they create the unworthy
men. For (as Plato says) he that is worthy of an office or dignitee, is
officer and of dignitee in deed, and not he whom favor or fortune grants it
unto. And therefore I say, vain is their enterprise, that in sekyng of
dignitees and offices consume their life's. For if they would consider what I
have said, and what the places of honor be, and that the honor and
reverence, which is used, is dooen more to the place than to the person,
sittyng there in manner as the countrefaict does in an interlude, perchance
many there be, that would eschew the vanitee thereof, which now pursue it
withal their power. But this pestilence is so great, that not the temporal
but the spiritual have been tempted withal, insomuche that Christ him self
has been sued unto for the sittyng on his right and left hand in his
kingdom: Luc. 20. Mar. 10
and like as he answered* that they wist not what they asked: so may we say
unto our selfs, that seeking degrees and honors (which can not long endure)
we seek we wot not what.

That dominion ought not to be desired.
LOrdship surely in apparaunce is a goodly thing, to the eye only, that sees
no more but the outward parts thereof. But he that woull penetrate further,
shall perchance see, that within forth it is all an other mattier. And to
treat justly thereof it behooves us first diligently to consider, that there
be two kinds of lords, the lawful and the tyranne.

What a lawful lord is.
IF he be a lawful lord, it behooves him principally to think, that he is
ordained of God over his people as his lieutenaunt, to govern them and to keep
them in like manner, as he governs and preserves the whole world: and ought
to know, that those people are none of his, nor prepared for his profit, but
rather that he is given unto them as a minister, as Paul says to the
Romans. The prince is gods minister unto men for their wealth, Romans 13.
and is a minister to avenge with wrath the ill works of the wicked: by reason
whereof he ought not to have regard unto his own interest, but to the wealth
and benefit of them that are committed to his charge. His office is to
provide, that they may well and honestly live: He must keep them from the
assault and violence of strangers: It apperteigneth unto him, to keep them in
peace and concord: he ought to determine their causes with justice, seeing that
each man may have his own, with chastisyng the ill, and rewardyng and
honoryng the good: he must ordeine judges and magistrates, not for money, for
ambicion, or for affection, but according to their worthiness and merits,
and ought to commit that charge unto every man, that the appoincted man is
most apt to entreprise. And wheather it be in peace or in war, openly or
privily, speaking or doing, always it shall be necessary for him to follow the
laws, and not to depart from them, but to be an executour of them. For (as
Plato says) he that governs according to the laws, is truly a king and a
lawful lord. And he that departs from them (as the same Plato affirms) is
a tyranne. But admit Plato were not a sufficient aucthor unto this sentence,
Moses him self, speaking of the institucion of a king says, that he ought
to be with the law, and to read in it all the days of his life: to the end
that he learn how to fear his lord God, how to keep the words of his law,
and the constitucion of the same, and how to put it in execucion. And besides
that Samuel having annoyncted Saul, and made him king of Israel, wrote the
law that he ought to observe in a book, and set it in the sight of God. Now
if this be the right office of a lord, whereof grows this great desire of
dominion, seeing that the lord ought to be subject unto them that seem
subjects unto him? and that for the great business thereof he can skarcely
find leisure to sleep? Many times reasoning with my self about these things,
and calling to remembrance Alexander (who^ the world has surnamed the great,
and in whom by all likelihode there have been diverse great gifts of actiuitee)
me seems he wanted the principallest condition that belonged to a king.
Which is, that he knew not what was the office of a king. For when he had
vainly conceived in his mind an opinion to conquer all the world, he said
on a time, When we have gotten this world, what shall we than do? Fond
Alexander.
O vain and foolish Alexander* what aduailed it the to have had Aristotle to
thy master, if thou have not learned how to find a do, when well thou were
lord of all the world? what other should thou have dooen, than rule it and
govern it well? Uerily thou had been more worthy to have been called
king, if thou had tarried at home, and governed well thine own, than for
all thy conquestes in vsurpyng upon others: and better it had been for the, to
have known how to have governed thy self, and to have eschewed wine and
ambicion, than to file thy hands with the blood of thy dearest and most
faiethfull friends, or to suffer thy self to be called king of the world, or
ever thou had gotten a small part thereof: persuadyng the people furthermore,
that thou wast the son of god. But leave we now the foolish Alexander, who
rather has merited the name of tyranne than of king, and let us come to
conclude of the lawful lord, that seeing his office to be such, as here
before I have rehearsed, and as it is in deed, I can not see any thing therein,
that should give man cause much to desire it. For a more easy thing it is a
great deal to be governed, than pleasant to govern others.

What a tyranne is.
ANd now that I have declared* what a lawful lord ought to be, it may easily
be considered, what a tyranne is, and in few words to descriue him He that
makes his will a law, and for him self woorketh al,
A tyranne (I say) and not a prince you may him call.
And like as these kind of men, appearyng gloriousely to the sight,
accompanied and enuironned of a number of gentilmen and ministers that follow
them and serve them, do represent a certain outward similitude of
felicitee: Euin so inwardely they are on the the other side turmented with corsies
and passions of the mind, that another their gardes, nor their armures can
defend their ill consciences from the infernal furies. They never have good
time nor rest. In company of their own wyfes (which is wont to be most
comfortable unto man) they have almost no joy, and amongst their own
children (wherein man should rejoice) they seem to be among their enemies. Of
the sweet fruit of friendship they never taste, because that not findyng in
their own hertes to love any man, they can not conceive how any man should
love them again. If they eat or drink, they fear poison: If they sleep,
they dream of arms, blood, persecucion and death: and continually suspect
that, which they know them selfs worthy to have, and are a fearde of as
many as be their subjects. Whereof it follows, that they trust no man. And
some there have been, that would never go to bed with their own wyfes, but
that they would first search the chamber, wheather there were any body hid,
and sometime search the very clothes of the bed for fear of knifes, and
many of them would cause men's beardes and their own daughters hear, for
dread of like foolisshenesse to be cut of. Amongst all other Charles the.vii.
french king, fearing to be poisoned, rested certain days without taking any
meat, whereof he sickened: and so thinkyng to flee death, fell into it. But to
pass over the rehearsal of the violent and shameful ends, that numbres of
them have made in all ages and in all nations, I conclude, that there is none
astate so unhappy as that of tyrannes, who either must live miserably, or die
sklaunderfully. I forbear to reken up the troubles that they have (be they
lawful lords or tyrannes) in their daiely wars, the loss of their men, the
destruction of their citees, the spoil of their countries, the discoumfiture
of their armies, their own captiuitee, and a thousand other aduersitees, that
are commenlie seen. So that in effect lordship is more bitter than sweet, and
consequently a thing not to be desired. And though well all the sweetness of
the world were to be found therein, yet ought we not therein to put the end of
our desires. For (as the apostle James says) Our life is none other but a
vapor, Iac. 4.
which appears a little while, and incontinently is dissolved.

That fame is a vain thing.
ANd as for glory and fame, it is true that it seems every man, as he is more
excellent of spyrite, the more does he desire it: which is clearly seen in
every study and in every art, as well in arms as in learning, as well in
peincture as in grauyng, both in the handicraftes, and also in housbandrie, in
all travails, in all peines, and in all perilles, it seems none other savor
to be so sweet, as the hope to atteigne glory thereof. Yea and further, this
desire is so far entered into our minds, that they which write books in
dispraise of glory, purtyng to their names, seek that which they persuade
other men to avoid. And this was it that moved Alexander before the tomb of
Achilles to sighe and say, Happy wast thou Achilles such grace to find,
As the verse of Homer to keep thine acts in mind.
And the same was it that moved Julius Caesar at the sight of the image of
Alexander to sighe, because at that age that Alexander had done so many
things, he yet had dooen nothing worthy of memory. The like of which thing
that happened unto Caesar of Alexander, happened also to Themistocles of
Miltiades, whose tropheys (notable marks of passed victories) would not
suffer him to sleep. And like as Alexander for the desire of glory was
liberal unto writers, euin so was Caesar diligent in writing his own
commentaries, to help them that would write of him. And Themistocles said,
that he could hear no sweeter voice than of them that should sing his own
praises. Some moved through this desire have builded citees, and called them
after their own names: some have made them goodly houses, with puttyng unto
them likewise the titles of their names: some have set up goodly sepultures,
and some goodly images, thynkyng to make them selfs therewith perpetual. But
what is all this, in respect of the life it self, which many men have spente
only for love of this glory and fame. For examples whereof I could reken up
noumbres of men, that who by one way and who by an other, have disposed them
selfs unto wilful death. And amongst all other, Empedocles in hope to deifie
his name,
Threw him self quick into Ethnas flame.
But what followed thereof? Instead of the godhead that he presupposed should
have followed, he has left behind him a notable memory of his folly. And yet
not contented with this, there have been some, that with their naughty and
wicked doings have sought to purchase immortalitee unto their names: as
Caligula, seeing nothing worthy whereof there should remain any memory of
him, wisshed, that in his time there might some notable ^uyne happen, that
should give men cause to rehearse his name. And the emperor Adrian caused
those to be slain, that he might here should excel him in any thing, to the
intent he might remain as most excellent of his time. Besides this, there have
been temples burned, and other fouler things dooen only for the desire of
fame, which to recyte here should be both to long and also to odiouse. In
effect the prouocacion of this desire is such, that like as in commendable
things it makes men hardy, even so in dishonest things it makes them
desperate. Wherefore I shall not need to persuade, how much vanitee is therein.
And yet when I consider, how the learned men compare the earth unto the
firmament, as a small poincte almost invisible: I can not chose but ask,
wheather our fame can pass the terms of this poinct or not? I believe no. Or
rather I believe, that it can not extend to the full terms thereof: because the
more part of this poincte is occupied of waters: and of that part that yet
remains dry, no small portion is without habitacion. Because the heavens
do not allow the sites thereof to susteygne man, either for the extreme
heat, or for the extreme cold, besides the numbres of deserts that are
occupied with wild beasts: In such wise that of this poinct there rests a
small part inhabited. And yet for all that the same small part is divided
into so many nations, that I think there be no one nation, that knows all
the rest, nor that is known unto all the rest. Furthermore the tongues be so
diverse, that I doubt wheater there be so many diverse kinds of beasts, as
there be langages of men. Besides that, the customs of countries do so much
vary, that the thing which is commendable one where, is not allowable an other
where. And what shall I say than to them, that (understanding one tongue) are
very few of a whole nation that can skylle of the memory of antiquitees? or to
whose ears the notable ancient things are rehearsed? All which things
considered, I rest in manner astonished with my self, to think how after the
division of this poynct, the fame of the most famous has her feathers so
clipped, that her whynges woull not bear her to fly through a small part of
the inhabitauntes of the least poynct of that other poinct. And then if we
woull consider, how our fame can have no place in any part of the time
passed, and than remember again, that noumbres of famous men, which have
been in the old worlds, are now clean forgotten, the like whereof may happen
unto us: I think, though well we were assured, that our fame should dure to
the worlds end, we should not yet settle our felicitee therein. For a
thousand years in respect of the eterni^ee is as the twinklyng of an eye. It
is written, that nere unto the river Hypa^^s there bread certain little
beasts, which live but one day, and yet I say their life has more
proporcion toward the whole time of the world, than our fame may have
toward the eternitee. And here in earth we can hope to have none eternitee,
because as the apostle Peter affyrmeth, the elements shall be destroyed by
fire, and the earth withal that is contained in her, shall with fire be
consumed. And finally, if it were possible the earth should endure for ever,
and our fame spread thoroughe the whole world likewise immortal, what were
we the better? Or what could we (from whom all feelyng is utterly taken) enioie
thereof?

Conclusion of the human misery and vanitee.
COnclude therefore, that there is very little felicitee or steadfastness to be
found in these things, wherein the most of us use to fix our minds, and to
apply our travail. For evident it is, that our studies in this behalf are
none other than express vanitees and folly. And therefore says the prohete,
The astate of man is none other than vanitee plain,
For he consumes his life in thoughts and travails vain.
And imagenyng (says he) we lead our life's, meaning, that we imagine it
possible for us to be happy in this darkness, and in these vanitees, which
in vain we busy and travail our selfs to get. Whereof it follows, that
thinkyng to become happy, we find our selfs overthrown in unhappiness and
misery. For what greatter misery can there be, than having habandoned the
charge of our souls for contentacion of our bodies, that we can now find
nothing, wherein we may well delight or be justly satisfied? These things here
before rehearsed are they, whereunto (as I have said) men's thoughts are
generally given. Finally amongst the philosophers there have been diverse
opinions, wherein should consist the end of all goodness. And they all
togethers wantyng the light of the troth, went about to find this goodness
in the bodies of this world. But seeing the world is compounded and
corruptible, sufferyng mutacion and alteracion, it is impossible to find any
steadfastness in it. And therefore those wisemen of the world with their
doctrines, have remaigned wrapped in a labyrinthe of ignorance: nor there has
not been seen amongst them any light of the troth, saving only in the
doctrine of Plato, Plato his opinion touching felicitee.
who denies it should be possible for men to be happy before their minds
(separated from these earthly bodies) be returned unto their propre nature.
For whereas our understanding has no clear knowlage of things, and therefore
can not be quiet, it follows, that not quietyng it self, it is impossible it
should feel the true felicitee.

The greatest goodness.
ANd because the greatest goodness is it, that for it self is desired to be
gotten, which ones gotten may so quiet us, that we need not to desire nor
to seek any further. Therefore does Plato determine, it can be none other, but
god only (though he call him not by that name) as he in whom all bounty and
perfection consists, or that is the bounty and perfection it self. And if a
gentile, borne in the darkness of this worldely ignorance, out of the law of
god, out of the light of the troth, and out of the favor of grace, did see
and perceive, that here in earth we can have no felicitee nor steadfastness:
how much more ought we that have the clear knowlage of the true doctrine, of
the true law, the true light and the gift of grace? how much more (say I) ought
we to know the infyrmitee and misery of mortal things? and knowing them, to
unfold our selfs out of them, and to lift up our thoughts unto the true
and eternal felicitee? It is written in the epistle to the Hebrews, that we
have no steadfast abidyng here: but that we seek one, which shall be our
habitacion. And where is it? truly none other but that, toward the which
nature has so framed us, that thitherwardes we have our faces reised. To
heaven, to heaven I say, together with our eyes we ought to address our
thoughts: and that with a ready mind, because, as the divine Poet writes*
The heavens following their course still about do turn,
Showing us the pleasures of their most beautiful form.
For in deed both night and day does the heaven still twynde about us, in a
manner calling us thither, and following us with the ornament of her flambyng
beauties: and as it were saying unto us: O how fair is it that here is hid
from you, if those lights that glister in me, and that seem so fair unto
you, be none other but shadows in comparison of the superior beauties, Which
you earthlimen, that worms J may well call,
Must ascend unto, to supply the angels fall.
And there is nothing can be said more proprelie, because that like as the
silk worms, having finisshed their work, gets them whynges, even so we
that have wrought christenlie, shall be apt to take our flighte thither,
whereas we shall be accompanied of angels. Wherefore now syns our propretee is
such, let us awake from our long drowsy sleep, and beatyng our whynges
together mount on the tippe toe, Appliyng well our eyes toward that twyndyng
lewre,
That our celestial king has made for us so pure.
Our lewre is heaven, with which the supernall faukener reclaimeth us, to the
intent we should flee thereunto, and thereupon rest us. Wherefore liftyng our eyes
unto heaven, and our minds above heaven: and confessyng our passed errors,
the vanitees of our present life, and the ways of the world, despisyng also
the worldly doctrines: let us now begin with an hot desire to say with the
prophet, Who shall give me the feathers of a dove,
That J may flee to rest me there above.
Of our selfs we can not lift us from the earth, to put us on the way
toward that celestial country, if we be not helped and guided the way. Who
than shall help us? who shall feather our whynges? and who shall be our guide
in so stype and long a vyage, as from the earth unto heaven? Surely a small
labor it is for us, amongst our selfs to find him that shall be our skoute,
and that shall give us not the feathers of a dove, nor of an Egle, but angels
feathers to carry us upon the whynges of the wind: amongst us is the light
that lightneth every man, which comes into this world: and amongst us is
that soonne of the celestial father, which has given us power to become
sons of god. And now being become sons of god, ought we to doubt, that he
our father woul not draw us his sons unto him? No, no, truly no: Let us
apply our selfs therefore to seek this way, and let us this day begin to
seek this light, and this son of God: because (as thapostle James writes) we
know not what shall be to morrow. Iac. 4.


Christ is the way, the verifee, and the life.
THe right way to atteine the greattest goodness, and to go unto the true and
perfect felicitee, is that which Esaie prophesied should be called the way of
holiness: wherein a spotted man should not put his feet. And this is none
other but our savior Jesus Christ (who saying, I am the way, the veritee, and
the life, and that none comes to the father but by my mean) reaches us, that
we ought to seek none other way: because that he being the way, we being
with him, shall be sure not to wander: and he being the veritee, we ought not
to fear* that we should be deceived, and he also being the life we are sure,
that he woull not let us fall into the shadow of death. And seeing furthermore,
that he is the light, it is to be supposed, that those ways, which are far
from him, are da^^enesse, and who that walks in the dark, woteth not whither
he goes. Besides that the high father has witnessed for him, saying, This is
my well-beloved son, in whom I have pleased my self, hear him: which
declares, that there is none other way to come unto him.

Christ unites man unto god*
HE than is the true mean between god and us: as he that in his godhead being
true soonne of god, is one self thing with God: and that in his manhood being
true son of man, is one self thing with man. Through which union that he
has with god and with man, he being mean, does so unite man with god, that
man enters into god, and god into man: as Christ him self witnesses, saying:
I am in the father, and he is in me, and you in me and I in you: For if we be
in Christ, and he in the father, it follows also, that we are in the father:
And if Christ be in us, and the father in him, consequently must the father
also be in us.

The life of Christ in this world.
BUt for all this I may not forgette to say, that he has spoken these
things unto them that shall keep his commandments, which commandments
are those, that he with his own works and words has declared unto us. And
as long as we follow the ways of the world and of the flesh, it is
impossible for us to walk after his examples, or to put his words in
execucion. For he never sought the pleasures of delicate meats, nor of
precious wines: but fasted and suffered hunger and thirste. And in his hunger
had stones presented unto him, went seeking fruit on the trees, and found
none, for thirste demanded water of a strange woman, and in his last thyrst
was fed with a most bitter drink. He habandoned all other corporal delites,
and kept the flower of his virginitee immaculate: and so much loved clennesse,
that he would be borne of a maid. In the beauty of his body he delited not,
suffryng him self to be spytte upon, to be haled and torn. He used not his
force, when having overcome the world with the prince thereof, he would suffer
him self to be taken and bound of them that fell at his word. He esteemed so
much richesse, that all the rich men of the world being but his dispensours,
he yet would be borne in a stable, and living here in the earth amongst men
(whereas the foxes have their buries, and the birds their nestes) he had no
place to put in his head. Of honors he was so studiouse, that though honor
proprelie apperteigned unto him, yet would he use grossly the company of the
publicanes and commen people: and in steed of an honorable tribunal would
ascend on the tree of the cross between two thieves. And unto lordship he
clymbed so, that being king of kings, and lord of lords, he lived still
privately, and as a subject sent Peter a fisshyng to pay the duty unto the
customers: and fled from them that would have made him king. As for fame he
was no more studiouse thereof, than of the other worldly vanitees. For he being
the same that only deserves glory, commanded the sick that he had healed,
not to publisshe his works abroad: and suffered not the devils to tell what
he was. And if he, in whom was all pleasures, all beauty, and all power: and
from whom proceeds all richesse, all honors, and all empires, and he who is
king of all true glory, living in this world with us, despised all these
things, geuyng us example to do the like, why do we with so much study
and travail follow the contrary? If we woull be ioygned with Christ, it
behooves us not to follow the ways of the world and of the flesh. Because
that his procedynges having been far of from those, he that walks by them
takes a diverse way from Christ: And the more we go in them, the further we
separate our selfs from him: as diverse lines that drawn straight from one
poinct, the longer that they go, the more different they be. And syns we have
briefly declared by his example, which is the way to go unto eternal
bliss, I woull we see now, as near as we can, what the way that his word
teaches us is.

Eternal life.
HE than addressing him self toward his celestial father, says on this
wise: This is everlasting life, that they know the only God, and that Jesus
Christ, whom thou have sent. Unto which knowlage we must believe, that we
neither by the subtiltee of our own wits, nor yet by the profoundenesse of
our sciences, can ever atteigne, the thing being of so ample, so unmeasurable,
and so inco^prehensible a greatness as it is.

The knowlage of God.
FOr that knowlage, that we must hope to have of him, must come by grace
through the light of him, that may lighten our understandings, and open the
eyes of our minds: and rest we shall in continual darkness, if those inward
eyes receive not light by that supernall son, as our natural eyes have power
to discern the things of this world by the son that we daiely see. And
therefore said the apostle true: that we know not god, if first he know not us.
For like as if our mortal eye woull see the soonne, it is first necessary
that the son show him self: Euin so willing with the eyes of our mind to
see god, it behooves him first with the light of his own light to discover him
self unto us: which the divine bountee has done, not only by geuyng us most
largely of his grace, and sendyng into thearth his only begotten son: who is
(as it has been said) the true light, and it that lightneth every man coming
into this world: But also by the continual sendyng of the holy ghost into the
hertes of his elected, with faieth to kendle in them the light of his grace.
This light than of the everlasting son being spredde over us, has discovered
unto our eyes the light of our immortal part: by the which beholding god
through Christ, we may by our faieth in Christ come to the knowlage of god.
But to this faieth and belefe there behooves no small consideracion: For we
must keep the way of life, mainteignyng our faieth lively with good works.
Because that like as works without faieth are not received of god for just,
Good works are necessary.
even so our faieth is but dead, if it show not her self fruitful by
charitable woorkyng. And as the grace and mercy of god is haboundaunt in us
without our deseruyng, so with our good works ought we to follow his
commandementes to make our selfs apt vessels of his grace and virtue, and to
become lively tabernacles of the holy ghost. For (as Paul says) Not they
that hear the law, but they that fulfill the law shall be justified before
god: dooyng us to understand, that though we have our iustificacion of faieth:
Yet in manner it suffiseth us not without works. And James the apostle writes,
that if any man say, he has faieth, and woorketh not, his faieth is dead: and
following, in speaking of Abraham's iustificacion, he says, That through his
works he was justified, having offered his son Isaac unto the altar: and that
faieth did help him to work, which faieth thorough the work was made
perfect. And adds furthermore these words: Behold therefore, that man is
justified by his deeds and not by his faith only. To the prouffe whereof he
alleges an other example of Raab, who for saving the messengers of the people
of god, was saved her self, and says on this wise: Likewise was not Raab the
harlot justified by her works, having received the messengers, and conveyed
them away? Wherefore he concludes, that as the body without spyrite is dead,
euin so is faieth without works. But this (you must consider) he has not
written to extol works withal, or to take from God any part of his glory
(who of his divine bountee by mere grace and by faieth only does justify
us) but to the intent that being already assured in faieth, we should be the
more ready with good works to confirm and increase our faieth. For this
lively and woorkyng faieth is it that Christ meaned, when he said: So let your
light shine in the sight of men, that they may see your good works. For if
you keep your faieth closed in your hertes without woorkyng, it can give no
light at all: as it may appear also by that other saying of Christ: I am the
vine, and you the branches: and they that bring forth no fruit shall be
shredde away. For Christ being our body, and we his members: he would we
should know, that he woull not take them for his members, that woull not
travail by well woorkyng to persevere in him, as it is evident by exaumple of
the curse he gave unto the fygge tree, that he found fruitelesse.

But because this matter is more then evident, it is time we enter to diffine
what those things ought to be, which we should work, willing to remain in
the astate of Jesus Christ. And where can we so well learn it, as of Christ him
self? who (having said before, that all the law and prophets depended on two
commandementes, that is to wete, on the love of god and of the neighbor) the
last euennyng that he supped with his beloved disciples, knowing he should no
more eat as a mortal man with them, he showed them right well, how
perfectly he loved them. For after that he had washed their feet, and
licenced Judas to go about his bargain, he ordeigned his testament, in the
which amongst other things, the words of his will were these.

The testament of Christ.
I Give you a new commandment, that you love well to gethers: As I have loved
you, so love you one an other: and thereby shall men know that you are my
disciples, if you have charitee amongst you. O ardent love of the divine
benignitee. O liberal benignitee of the divine love. He said not, as he had
said before unto the people, that the principal commandment was, Thou
should love God with all thine heart, with all thy mind, and all thy soul,
and that the second was: Thou should love thy neighbor as thy self. No, he
said not so, but the sweet Jesus said: I give you a new commandment, a
light commandment do I give you, which I my self have first fulfilled
toward you: and that is, that without further burden of the law you shall be
friends amongst your selfs, and that you love one an other as I have loved
you: and you shall be known for my disciples, not if you love celebrate or
worship me* but if you love amongst your selfs, and if charitee be with you.
Behold here, how many ways, and by how many means our sweet savior goes
about to draw us easelie unto salvation. He with this one light commandment
enduceth us to the fulfillynge of the whole law: which dependyng before on two
commandments (the love of God and of the neighbor) is now comprehended in
this one new commandment on this wise: Our savior Christ being man amongst
us, was one of us that should love amongst our selfs: and so loving him
(being also God) it came to pass, that we loved god, by reason whereof in this
one commandment was the whole law fulfilled, which before Christ's
incarnacion was impossible, God and man being through our defaulte of nature
and rebellion plainly separate. But now that Christ, both by grace and by
nature had ioygned them togethers, The new commandment, compreh^ndeth the
whole law.
he would also knitte the two old precepts in one, and for the new and
meruailouse effect of it in vnityng man with God, would also call it the new
commandment: because it united the love of man with the love of god. And this
in mine opinion is the true interpretacion of those words.

The love of God toward us.
NOw than has our lord for fulfillyng of his law commanded us to love
amongst our selfs, and how? even as he has loved us. But how has our lord
loved us? So much, that it can not be expressed. For (besides that he has
created us of naught, and fourmed us unto his own image and likeness, and
has ordained us over all the works of his hands, having put all things
under our feet) whereas we by disobedience turned our backs unto him: and
through our own fault and wilfulness are becomen rebels against him: he
to reconcile us unto him, has willed him self to do penance for our sin,
and to make us apt to ascend unto him (as the prophet says in his psalms)
he made the heavens to incline and descended unto us, Of god he became man to
make us parttakers of his diuinitee,
Of immortal he made him self mortal, to give us his eternitee.
Of impassible he made him self passible to deliver us from passion, being
pure and uncreate, he took on him an earthelie body, to make our souls and
bodies glorified: He dwelled in the earth to make us citisins of heaven: He
suffered hunger and thyrst to feed us with Ambrosia, and with angels food:
He suffered him self to be tempted of the devil, to deliver us from his
temptacions: He would be taken and bound, to loose and deliver us out of the
chains of our enemy: He suffered him self to be scourged and tourmented, to
draw us out of peine and tourmentes: He refused not to be reised up on the
cross, to reise us unto eternal triumph: Nor yet refused to be wounded with
spear and nails, to heal our incurable wounds: he suffered a crown of
prickyng thorns, to crown us with the crown of glory: he willed to die, to
purchase our life's: and descended unto hell, to make us ascend unto heaven.
These things has our savior dooen for our love, besides infinite others,
which I should not be hable to rehearse, though well I had all the tounges
both of men and of angels. And yet for all the fervent love that he has
borne us, and for all the wonders that he has done and suffered for us, he
requires no more of us but love, and how? Not for him self alone, but in
token that we are his, he has entered into our company, and rekenyng him self
as one of us, has willed us in loving one an other, to love him amongst our
selfs. But peradventure some may think this an hard commandment, that we
should love no less amongst our selfs, than as he has loved us: because his
love being infinite, it is impossible our love should be equal thereunto.
Wherefore it is to be noted, that Jesus Christ, who descended from the boasome
of the eternal father into this vale of misery, to make us an easy way unto
paradise, neither commands us impossibilitee, nor yet any thing that should
be over hard for us to fulfill. For he says not, that we should love so much
amongst our selfs, as he has loved us: but that we should love togethers in
like manner as he has loved us, as it were to say.

What our mutual love ought to be.
I Woull not that you love togethers as worldly men are wont to do, whose
works and love tend proprely unto their own wealth and profit. For all the
benefits that they do toward their neighbors, are done in hope of some
delight, profit or honor, that should follow thereof. I woull not (says
Christ) that you love after that sort, but you ought to love together, as you
have seen me love you, which has been not for mine own interest, but
altogether for your wealth, your benefit, and your exaltacion. So than shall
you love togethers, that each man shall desire to help other without respect
unto any interest of his own: and so (in mine opinion) shall we fulfill the
sentence of those words of our savior, when this love amongst our selfs is
free and liberal, and not uttered of purpose as a merchaundise. Finally it is
a wonder to consider the unspeakable bountee, the incomparable benignitee, and
the incomprehensible love of Christ toward us, who not contented by his own
exaumple to provoke us curteslie to love togethers, has yet further bound him
self, for the love amongst our selfs, and for the charitee that we shall be
knitte togethers in, to reward us most largely, saying: If we help one an
other in our necessitees, if we visit one an other, and receive one an other,
all the good that we shall do unto our neighbors, we shall do unto him: and
there shall not be one draught of cold water given, but that he woull see it
rewarded. And with what reward? The good deed to be multiplied by an
hundrethfolde, and to give us everlasting life withal. This shall be the reward
of our love. And our love is it that must make us whynges to bring us up into
the true way toward the high felicitee. For our love and being in charitee
togethers, is it that reiseth us up, and that knitteth us unto god, as the
dearly beloved apostle of Christ says: god is charitee, and he that
dwells in charitee, dwells in God, and god in him.

The conclusion of our doings, what they ought to be.
NOw having found, what the true felicity of man is, and what is the mean
and way to bring him thereunto, shaking of all these short worldely
pleasures, the frail corporal prosperitees, the corruptible richesse, the
ambiciouse and inconstant honors, the great and perillouse lordeshippes, and
the transitory smoke of mortal fame: let us dispose our selfs with all our
hertes and with all our minds unto this most holy love, that Christ calls
us unto, and unto this most gloriouse charitee, that knitteth us together with
God: and so louynglie togethers, let us feed Christ in the hungry, give him
drink with the thirsty, cloathe him in the naked, herboroughe him with the
herboroughlesse, visit him in the sick, redeem him with the captives, and
bury him with the dead. And this not with our hands only, but enforcyng us
to have our minds open toward Christ, let us teach the rude, counsel the
ignorant, reprove them that err, comfort the afflicted, and bear
pacientlie all injuries, forgeuyng them that offend us, and praiyng for our
enemies. Of all which things let us freely make a present unto Christ, in
yeldyng unto him by our lyberalytee toward our neighbors, that which he
most liberaly has given us. And so united in charitee amongst our selfs, as
true members of that body, whereof Christ is the head, we shall find our
selfs by Christ also united unto God: and with our minds all separated from
the face of these vain, mortal and earthly things, attendyng only unto the
true celestial and everlasting goodness, enflambed with fervent desire
thereof, we shall begin to say unto him with the prophet, Than shall be
satisfied our cheer,
When that thy glory shall appear.


FINIS.
JMPRINTED AT LONDON IN FLETESTRETE IN THE HOUSE OF THOmas Berthelet. Cum
priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

ANNO. M. D. XLIX.


