A TREATISE OF FAITH, AND OF SOME PRINCIPAL FRVITS THEREOF.

Delivered in two Sermons, upon the third Chapter of the Epistle of Paul to the
Ephesians, Verse the 12.

With some additions and Enlargements, tending to the satisfaction of such as
are in doubt, whether they have Faith or no, and to the comforting of such as
are troubled about the weakness of their Faith.

By G. Throgmorton, Minister of the Word of God.

Ephesians. 3.12. In whom we have boldness and access, with confidence by the
faith of him.

LONDON, Printed by I.^. for William Sheffard, and are to be sold at his Shop,
at the entering in of Pope's Head Alley, out of Lumbard-street. 1624.

A TREATISE OF FAITH, AND SOME FRVITS THEREOF.
EPHESIANS. 3.1^. In whom we have boldness and access, with confidence by the
faith of him.


THe Apostle in the former verses, had by many excellent titles set forth the
glory of the Gospel, and his Office, and Ministry in preaching of it,
advancing it far above the Law, and the Ministry of the Church in former
ages. The Gospel he commends, and sets forth especially by the subject matter
thereof, which is Jesus Christ. In this verse, he continues his praise of the
Gospel, from the saving fruits and effects, as its received by faith, and
Christ the subject matter thereof rightly apprehended.

The principal scope of the Apostle in this verse, after his commendations of
the Gospel, is, to show the excellency of faith in the gospel apprehending
Christ, above all natural faith, and confidence in any creature, and above all
faiths, and religions in the world, as the only sure and infallible means of
salvation. This excellency of true saving faith in Christ, is set forth from
the virtues, or fruits it brings forth in the heart, and soul, or inner man
of him that has it, such as no other faith, or any other Religion, that leads
us to any other creature, or means, or name under heaven, or in any other
Gospel or doctrine can breed, that is, that (...) and (...), that access to
God by Manuduction, with that confidence, and freedom of speech; Therefore he
inferres by way of exhortation in verse 13. that they should show forth these
virtues of their faith in all afflictions, and not faint.

The Exposition of the words (...) signifies Manuduction, or leading by the
hand to God, 1. Pet. 3.18. Which being performed by Christ our Mediator the
Son of God, taking us by the hand, we go with boldness and confidence to
God This we have in, and by Christ the second Adam. The necessity whereof, is
raised from this ground originally; That whereas the first Adam, and his
posterity were cast out of Paradise from all fellowship with God, and from the
tree of Life, the way shut up against him, Genesis 3.24.
and kept with a Sword drawn, full of Terror, and Horror; Christ Jesus the
second Adam, not only opens the way again by his blood, Heb. 10.19, 20.
and makes a new living way, but takes us by the hand to lead us to God, with
boldness and confidence, remoouing all matter of fear, and the sword shaken.
This is also opposed to that going to God by the old Church under the Law, at
mount Sinay, in the giving of the Law, and first Covenant of works, by the
Manuduction of Moses their Mediator, Gal. 3.19. They had not this Manuduction
with this confidence: they stood afar off trembling, and might not go up
into the mount to God: Yea so terrible was the sight, that Moses himself their
Mediator said, I fear and quake. (...).
Hebr. 12.21. And whereas all this came originally by receiving, and admitting
the devil and his counsel, and believing his false gospel and promises: So
contrarily, all this good comes to us, by believing Christ Jesus the Son of
God, whom God has sent from Heaven to us, to redeem and save us, Acts 7.37.
that great Prophet whom God has raised up to us, of our brethren like to us,
and by receiving him for our King, Priest, and Prophet by faith, ((...),) such
a one as God has sent, and given him to us. Also by faith in Moses the people
had access to God, and by taking, and following him their Prophet, they came
nearer to God, and God to them, then any other Nation and people, as Deuteronomy. 4.7.
What Nation is there to whom the gods come so near to them, as our God is
near to us in all that we call to him for, yet had not they by Moses that
(...) so near to God, nor with that confidence, as now all Nations have by
Christ.

(...) signifies open manifestation and appearance, Such as were of forward
disposition and free spiri s to express themselves boldly without sear of
their adversaries, were called (...) A^st Rhet. lib. 2.
with glorious liberty which stands in lifting up of the face and countenance,
and in freedom of speech: its opposed to the effects of the sentence of
condemnation by the Law, when malefactors and guilty persons, arraigned and
convinced by evidence of inditements, that they can say nothing for themselves,
being abashed and confounded, have both their mouths stopped, and their faces
covered, and so carried away to execution. This appears in the arraignement,
and sentence passed upon Caine, Gene 4.13, 14.
which made him cry out, that his punishment was greater then he could bear,
because he was cast out from the earth, and from Gods face he should be
hidden having his own face, as covered with eternal shame, never to come to
appear before God, to sacrifice or pray to him. But he that believes in
Christ shall not be ashamed. 1. Pet. 2.6. Romans 10.11. Haman after the sentence
of death was passed on him, his face was covered, and he had out of the Kings
presence, never to appear more before him. And this is the state of all the
damned, upon the last sentence of condemnation passed o^ them, that they a^e
pun^shed with everlasting perdition (...) from the face and presence of the
Lord. 2. These. 1.9 never to come and appear before him, nor to speak, or to
pray to him, or to praise him, and for confusion of face and shame, wish the
mountains to fall on them, and the rocks to cover them. Contrary to this
woefall estate of the damned, is this blessed and glorious (...) of the Saints
by the sentence of the justification of life in Christ that without shame or
fear, they may come before God with open face, (...), 2. Cor. 3.18. ( and not
as Moses with his face covered) verse 13.
may behold the glory of the Lord with open face, and be changed into it.
verse 18.
For having our sins pardoned, and our persons received into favor with God,
we may behold his face and glory, as reconciled in justification, and so are
changed into it more and more, in sanctification from glory to glory.
Whatsoever boldness of face, and glory of countenance, or liberty of speech,
we may have toward men, in and by our selves, and our works; we have none
toward God but by Faith in Christ. Romans 4.1. First the Law indites, arraignes,
and stops our mouth, as Romans 3.19. shame and confusion couers our faces, and
then Christ lifts up our head, as Psalm. 3.3. Thou art my glory, and the lifter
up of my head: Yea, he annoints our head with oil, and gives us the oil of
gladness, for the spirit of heaviness, 2. Cor. 1.21. 1. Ioh. 2.20, 27. as God
has created oil to make the face to shine gloriously. Therefore contrarily,
by the law in humiliation, they cast dirt on their heads, and covered their
faces in pleading their guiltiness, and in days of fasting the Pharisees were
(...). Mat. 6.16.
Now Christ our high Priest was anointed with this oil of gladness above his
fellows, that it might lift up his face for us, in the sight and presence of
God to appear before him, and we receive an anointing from this holy One, and
he annoints our faces with oil of joy, for this (...), which word signifies
specially freedom, and glory of speech in prayer, or praises of God, and
thankesgiuings, for in Christ we have a new mouth, a new speech, tongue, and
language of Canaan. The end of man's creation being chiefly to glorify God;
Adam was created with an excellent mouth and tongue, wherewith to glorify him,
which was his greatest glory, life, and happiness: but by harkening to Satan's
blasphemous mouth, and tongue, belying and dishonouring God, and believing it,
he and all his posterity, have lost their natural mouth, tongue, and
language, and have the mouth and language of Satan, readier to blaspheme and
curse God, then to pray to him, or to pr^ise him; and being man become earth,
and lacking the Image and Glo^ie of God, and borne of the earth, Ioh. 3.3^.
he speaks of the earth, as an earth-worme, with an earthly mouth rising out
of the dust: As Satan is a liar, so is every man from the womb, going astray,
and speaking lies. Therefore Christ gives a new mouth, tongue and language, if
we hearken to him as our only Prophet and Rabbi, and a new (...), by his spirit
of Glory in us, according to his gracious covenant in Christ, Isa. 59.21. And I
will make this my covenant with the^, says the Lord: My spirit that is upon
thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy
mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of the seed of
thy seed from henceforth and for ever. Therefore Christ is called the Truth.
John 14.6. But first he is the Way, then the Truth; our Way to God, and our
(...) as Priest, and then is he the Truth, and gives us a new mouth.

But these particulars appear more fully in the observations: only thus much
for unfolding the text, and the sense of the words.

Wherein we consider two parts. 1. The Excelcellencie of Faith in Christ set
forth by two virtues or works in the heart and inner man.

1. Access to God, or Manuduction with boldness or confidence, or a confident
access to God by Manuduction.

2. (...), Glory of face with liberty of speech.

2. The limitation of this excellency and of these virtues; They are not in
the whole man and believer, but (...), that is so far, as he is in Christ,
not as he is or ever was in the first Adam, or as he is in nature, in the
flesh, and world, or as he is in any other estate and condition in this life,
or that any man can have in any other Religion then by Faith in Christ. And
whereas the child of God may complain that he finds and feels contrary to
all this, fear, trembling, flying from God, shame of face for his sins, and
his mouth often stopped, and not able to pray or praise God:

Answer is here made; It is true, so far as we are not in Christ, and have
nature and flesh in us; but as we are in Christ, we have all this contrary
good. 1. De Iure, though not de facto, by right, though not by full possession.
2. We have these in some measure, though mixed with contrary corruptions. 3. We
may have more, if the fault be not in our selves. 4. We shall have all these in
full measure. 5. These are prepared for us in Christ, and our Faith in Christ
will grow up to these, and increase with the increasings of God and of Christ,
if we pray, as Paul here does for these Ephesians, so they may have all this in
Christ and that their Faith may grow and have these virtues working in them, as
in the verses following, verse 16, 17, 18. which imply, that they had them not
as yet from Christ, as they should have hereafter, but were only laid up and
prepared for them in Christ.

The sum then is, that no Faith, nor Religion gives that access to God, with
that boldness, so cheerful and glorious a countenance, such a mouth to
praise God, to pray, and speak freely to God, to power out our hearts before
him, that gives such a Spirit of prayer, and of Adoption to cry Abba Father, to
make a man bold to plead with God, (...), to stand upon interrogatories with
God, and to parle with him, especially when Satan, sin, and conscience accuse.

Now these virtues are not sanctifying graces in us in their full perfection,
but they are such blessings and benefits in Christ, as Faith draws from
Christ. Therefore he says, (...) in which Christ they are, as in the propper
natural subject, root, and fountain and Head, and which Faith draws and
receives from Christ or possesses in him, and therefore he says (...). and so
I come to the observations. (...), in whom, that is in Christ. By Christ
dwelling in us, we have and exercise these virtues of Christ; or Christ shows
himself to be in us, and we to be in him by these virtues. All saving good
things in us, are saving virtues, in and from Christ. Romans 8.2. 1. Pet. 2.9. To
show forth the virtues of him that has called you out of darkness. As the
soul shows it self to be in the body by the life and virtues it exercises
in the body, such as the body it self has not by its natural humors: So
Christ exercises such virtues in the heart and soul of a Christian, as the
heart and reasonable soul have not naturally.

As a man shows himself to dwell in a house, by the wisdom, authority,
power he exercises therein: So Christ to dwell in us by faith as in his house,
when he exercises his virtues in us, Ephesians. 3.17. Heb. 3.6. Whose house ye are
if ye hold fast your confidence and hope of your rejoicing, etc. 1. Cor. 1.30,
31. Col. 2.6. As ye have received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk in him: And
by his life, virtue, and strength to do all things, and not by the strength of
nature, and of your natural spirit, as Paul, Philip. 4.13. I can do all
things by the help of Christ strengthening me. Romans 8.10. If Christ be in you,
the body is dead in regard of sin, but the Spirit is life in regard of
righteousness, that is, the body lies dead from sinful actions and motions,
from which a man's natural spirit, wit, and policy cannot restrain him, and
his bodily members to make them lie dead, but rather quicken and powerfully
sway them. Romans 3.15. and 7.5. The passions of sins which are by the Law,
have force and vigor in our members, to bring forth fruit unto death, and
Romans 6.12. but if Christ be in us, he deads these, (...), the passions of
sins or sinful passions, that they cannot work in our bodily and earthly
members; For they that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the affections
and the lusts, Gal. 5.24.

Luke 11.21
and heart in peace, by the vigor he exercises in swaying their minds, wills,
and lusts, as Ephesians. 2.2. John 8.44. 2. Corinthians. 4.4. So Christ.

2. Reason.
We are the children of the first Resurrection, begotten of Christ, risen from
the dead, 2. Pet. 1.3. by the greatest virtue and power of Christ quickening the
dead, 1. Peter 3.21. We are not only begotten of Christ, by virtue of his
Prophetical office, as he is light, as Hypocrites only enlightened are: but we
are begotten of Christ by virtue of his Priestly office as crucified for us,
unto Adoption and Justification of life, and by virtue of his Kingly office, as
risen from the dead to Sanctification, and participation of his Divine nature,
2. Pet. 1.4. As Christ was discerned and differenced from all the sons of men,
to be known to be the Son of God, (...), Romans 1.4. by his resurrection from
the dead; as the first begotten from the dead, Col. 1.18. So are all we his
younger brethren, by the same Spirit of power raising us to a new nature and
life with him, Romans 6.4, 5. Col. 3.1. and 2.12. Ephesians. 2.6. we are discerned and
differenced from all the natural sons of men.

and which no creature else can exercise in us, 2 Cor. 13.5. 2. Cor. 4.10. As
we bear in our bodies the dying of the Lord Jesus, that is, the greatest
miseries and afflictions, So the life of Jesus is manifested in our mortal
flesh, that is, his greatest quickening, comforting virtue, when no creature can
do our mortal bodies any good, in sickness or in death, or other
infirmities. Christ is not only our light, but our light of life; that is, in
whom we have not only light of knowledge, but the same a quickening knowledge,
putting life into our wills, and affections, and bodily members to practice what
we know. The Hypocrites light of knowledge, is like the candle light, which
quickens nothing: the Saints light of saving Knowledge, is like the Sun-light,
which quickens herbs, trees, plants: our light of natural reason, Philosophy,
Policy, cannot so quicken us, and make us so lively and vigorous to good
duties, as this light of the saving Knowledge of Christ, Ephesians. 4.20, 21, 22. Let
us show forth the virtues of Christ our light in us, Ephesians. 5.8. 1. Pet. 2.9. A
man may have a wonderful light of Knowledge in the lantern of his brain,
and yet his heart, will, and affections lie as dead as stones from desire or
endeavor to embrace or practice the good he knows, and have no virtue from
Christ, to live, walk and fructify.

Cor. 13.5. For as many have Satan in them, that do not know or feel, or
believe Satan to be in them: So many have Christ, etc. and as many intertaine
Satan in them, by receiving his lying Gospel, and promises of wealth, peace,
comfort by sinning, and his temptations and persuasions to sin: So we receive
Christ when we believe and receive his persuasions, and temptations to good
duties, and suffer the words of exhortation, and believe his promises, and
gladly embrace his word. Therefore such as so did, were baptized into Christ
for seal and assurance that Christ was in them, Acts 2.41. 2. John verse 9.
See John 14.23. If any man love me, he will keep my words, and my Father
will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him. Adam,
and Eve, and Judas received Satan into them, when they received his counsels
and temptations, and suffered themselves to be swayed thereby; So co^trarily
we receive Christ. If when we give place to wrath, Ephesians. 4.26 27.
we give place to the Devil, counselling and exciting us thereto; then
contrarily we give place to Christ and receive him into our hearts, when we
receive his Gospel of peace, counselling, and commanding us peace, and love, by
reasons from the Gospel, that is, from his love and peace toward us. Every one
that harbors willingly in his heart any known sin, and sinful suggestion
of Satan, he intertaines Satan; the malicious man has a furious Devil, the
wanton a voluptuous Devil. So he that regards no sin in his heart, but casts
it out, Christ persuading him thereto by his Gospel, and not the Law alone
enforcing him by terrors; He that turns from sin upon such suggestions,
promises, persuasions, as Christ makes to him, he receives Christ by faith
first.

Rabbi, to be his Disciple, and as the only Way and Truth, it goes before
Repentance, which is nothing else but a walking in Christ, as we first received
him by faith; showing forth the virtues of Christ, and the life of Christ to
walk as he has walked. For Repentance is the life and virtue of Christ
received as our way, Truth, and Life, and made all our Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption, and our light of life. What is
Repentance but living and walking in Christ? For out of Christ every motion is
to death, and hell; and can a man walk in Christ, before he have Christ by
faith in his heart, Coloss. 2.6. As ye have received Christ Jesus the Lord, so
walk in him.

Thus we see that all saving good things, are saving virtues in and from
Christ. Now how, and by what means, do we receive and draw these virtues from
Christ, or enjoy them in him?

Ans. This is only by faith of him (...), that is, by Faith receiving or going
to Christ's person, pitching on him alone as revealed and offered in the Gospel.

By Faith of him.
Doct. Faith in Christ's person, Name, is the only means of receiving all
saving virtues from Christ. Romans 3.22. Act. 3.16. When we believe the Gospel
and glad tidings offering us Christ's person with all his benefits and virtues,
and behold him to be such a one toward us, as the Gospel reueales and offers
him to us, that is, as 1. Cor. 1.30. our Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification, and Redemption, our King, Priest, and Prophet; then is he
indeed become such a one toward us, and we are made such in him, 2. Cor.
3.18. Beholding as in a looking glass, viz. the Gospel, the glory of the Lord,
with open face, we are changed from glory to glory; For in the Gospel, God sets
forth Christ before our eyes, Romans 3.25. (...) as the Mercy-seate was exalted
and lifted up before the eyes of the people, that all may look up to him as
the only Propitiation through faith in his blood, and so find mercy and peace
with God. Faith looks up to this Propitiation or Mercy seat, and to this
brazen Serpent thus lifted up in the preaching of the Gospel, and so finds
healing virtue. It directs our thoughts and desires to Christ in the sense of
all sin and misery, as offered in the Gospel for cure, and so receives
remedy. Isay 45.22. Look unto me and ye shall be saved, all the ends of the
earth, etc. Look not unto lying vanities.

Gal. 3.1.
O foolish Galathians, who has bewitched your eyes, that is, corrupted your
minds and judgments, and drawn away your thoughts and desires from Christ,
that ye should not look up to him, who by the Gospel is so clearly manifested
and described before your eyes: that ye should not obey the Truth, believing
Christ to be such a one to you, as the Gospel offers him to you; but look a
squint to circumcision and works, and other means of salvation. Believing the
Word of the Gospel, offering us Christ, and embracing the same gladly, we
receive Christ's Person and all that is his, and enjoy them by this only means
as fully as any creature can enjoy any natural good, by any natural means,
as trees enjoy the earth and sap of it by their roots, so by faith in the
Gospel we enjoy Christ's person, and all the sap of the Spirit of Life in
him, Coloss. 2.6, 7. As the members enjoy the Life and Spirits of the Head, by
the bond and union of the nerves and arteries: So we the members of Christ by
this Faith, receive the spirit of life from Christ our Head, Romans 8.2. with
Gal. 3.2, 5, 14. As meat is received and inioyed by eating, light by looking
on it; So is Christ by Faith. By Faith in the Gospel, and promises we know
Christ, we taste him, and feed on him. 1. Pet. 2.3. We are rooted in him,
built on him, Col. 2.6. united to him. By it we receive his Person, and are
begotten by him into his Nature and life, Ioh. 1.12, 13. By Faith we go to his
Person and receive life, Ioh. 5.40. Ye will not come unto me, that ye might
have life; and we are made living stones by coming to him this living Stone,
1. Pet. 2.4. By this Faith we are built on him as on a Rock, and the gates of
Hell cannot prevail against us, Math. 16. By Faith we walk in him, Col. 2.6.
We eat his body, and drink his blood, that is, we enjoy all the Divine
virtues of his Godhead, and the merits of his Person in all his sufferings, and
that fullness of the Godhead as dwelling in him bodily, that he is Emanuel God
with us, and we are filled with all fulness of God, and all this only by
believing the Gospel, that there is no faculty or virtue of soul or body, of
man or any creature that can enjoy any natural good belonging to it, more
fully and surely, then we may enjoy Christ, and his Person, life, merits,
virtues by Faith in the Gospel only and the promises. Hereby we know him, we
taste him, we are rooted in him, built on him, united to him, married to him.
Such is the necessity and virtue of Faith in the Gospel, that by it, the Son
is ours, we have and possess him for our own, even his Person as our Husband,
and his unsearchable riches. See 1. Ioh. 5.9, 10, 11, 12, 13.

Christ, and his benefits? there is no means but his Word, and Gospel embraced
by Faith; and this means is infallible, and all-sufficient by Gods ordinance.
Therefore care to get nothing, but Faith in the Gospel, that the word of Christ
may dwell plenteously in us, and then Christ himself, with all his riches, and
saving benefits are in us, Colos. 3.16. We need not take thought, who shall
ascend up to heaven, or who shall descend into the deep: if the word be near
us in our mouth, and in our Heart, then Christ descending, and ascending, both
abased, and exalted, crucified, and glorified, and all-sufficient to Salvation
is ours, and in us, as Romans 10.4, 6, 7, 10. Say not, what may I do to obtain
eternal life, and as John 6.29. to work the works of God, to serve him, that
we may earne the bread of life; This is all the work that God requires, and
means of obtaining all saving good, to believe in him, whom he has sent,
first from Heaven to Earth by incarnation, and now to all of us, by the
preaching of the Gospel, Act. 3.26. Ephesians. 2.17. and Ephesians. 3.6. receiving the
promise of Christ by the Gospel, we are made one body with him, and the whole
Church, and inheritors of all the same saving good: Christ has ordained, and
Sanctified this means only, and infallibly to convey himself into us, his
spirit, life, righteousness, merits, and not the Law, or any works, or
merits of man, or any creature, Gal. 3.2, 3, 4. Obey Christ the Son, John 3.
vlt. Stumble not at his word, 1. Pet. 2.8. be not offended at it, Ioh. 6 60,
61, 67, 68, 69. hear Christ, Matthew. 17.5. this great Prophet, Act. 3.22, 23.
and he will give the holy Ghost to them that obey him, Acts 5.32. The
rejecting of the Word, is the rejecting of Christ, the receiving of it, and his
Ministers, is the receiving of Christ. John 14.21, and 13.20. 2. Thessa. 1.10.

Oralem manducationem: for by none of all these do we enjoy Christ: which
Idols, the Devil taking away the Word, and Gospel, has substituted in the
room to hold Christ by sense, and not by Faith. Admit we could receive Christ
by sense, yea, and fill all our senses with him; yet our souls could never be
saved by him, nor enjoy his saving merits, and virtues, which can never come
into the heart but by Faith, and the riches of the full assurance of
understanding, in comprehending the mystery of God the Father, and of Christ,
which made Paul's preaching so full of agony and difficulty, Colos. 2.1, 2.
which needed not if it were sufficient to salvation, to communicate Christ to
the senses internal, or external. But Christ is inioyed of the soul unto
salvation, only of true believers through Faith, Ephesians. 3.17. who often have
least feeling and fruition of him by sense, and he is often most tasted of
Hypocrites by sense, and felt by outward comforts, who least enjoy him in their
hearts by Faith of the Gospel, and promises to salvation. It was an easy
thing, for Paul to give a taste of Christ to the senses, but it was his agony
as he says, Colos. 2.1. and his childbearing pains to form Christ aright
in their hearts, as Gal. 4.19. and so to give their hearts sound and saving
comfort indeed, Colos. 2.2.

Having showed that all saving good things in us, are saving virtues, in, and
from Christ, and how, and by what means we receive and draw these virtues
from Christ, or enjoy them in him. Now in the third place, we come to consider
these saving virtues in particular, whereof here are two specified, the most
saving, which respect God as their object, and the state of justification
before God, and not so much our estate of sanctification before men, and these
are two, first (...), a confident access to God, or rather a Manuduction, with
confidence to God, secondly, (...) boldness of open face with liberty of
speech, for so much does the signification of the word import, as may appear,
2. Cor. 3.12, 13. and as shall further appear in a larger unfolding of the
text in the next Sermon.

(...) this word imports two things, first access to God, secondly the manner,
by leading, or Manuduction, whereof I will speak in the next Sermon.

to that light which none can attain unto, 1 Timothy 6.16.
(...). Therefore the phrase (...) not only to believe God, or believe that
there is a God, but by this faith to enter into God, to dwell in the secret of
the most High, Psalm. 90.1.
and to abide under the shadow of the Almighty, to lodge in his bosom, and
hide our selves with him, and under the shadow of his wings, Psalm. 63.
to dwell in God, and God in us, 1. John 3.
that he keeps us as the apple of his eye, Psalm. 17. Mat. 23.37.
and he gathers us as the Hen does her chickens under her wings. He bears
us as his Lambs in his bosom; the Name of the Lord is a strong tower, Pro.
18.10.
the righteous run to it, and into it, and are exalted: there is intimate
communion between God and us in our hearts, and souls. For in Christ his
nature is fatherly to us, not a consuming fire, as to wicked men, and
unregenerate: He is the natural element of a regenerate heart, and soul,
wherein it lives, mooues, and works all its works in God, John 3.21. (...).
Every parent gives free access to its birth to come to it, and to hide its
self in its bosom: how much more God the Father of mercies? This is our
privilege by the Gospel. In the old Testament, none could so much as see God
and live; no man could warrant his heart to go unto God.

Hos. 14.3. Ashur shall not save us, neither will we ride upon horses, neither
will we say any more to the works of our hands, Ye are our gods: for in thee
the fatherless finds mercy. Thus says every true believing, and repentant
soul, and this is the work of Faith and of true Repentance: If we can call
God Father, we have free access to him, and into his bosom, and under his
arms we may hide our selves with him.

Sam. 12.19, 20, 21, 22. Count this thy only happiness, and rejoice in it.

Cain, runnagates upon the face of the earth. If we have no access to God,
whither shall we fly from his presence, who is present in all places? All our
sins, and all evils, and miseries find us out, whersoeuer we hide us, if
we have not him our Sanctuary, and inward Holy place to hide us, as his secret
ones, to abide under the protection of the Almighty. We have in God alone, a
secret hiding place, and Sanctuary to retire our selves unto, where no devils
sins, enemies, crosses, though they make hue and cry, and fierce pursuit
after us, as blood-Houndes, may be able to find us. God has such a secret
bosom, and hiding place for his children, such a refuge and Sanctuary, whither
Christ himself is entered, Heb. 6.18, 19, 20. even Jesus our forerunner, and is
now safe above the reach of all devils, and men, and has raised us up
together, and made us sit together with him, in these (...), most High,
Heavenly places of refuge; our life is hid with Christ in God our Father, and
neither famine, peril, sword, Romans 8.35.39.
can separate us from the love of God, in Christ Jesus.

us, and all ways, and means of redemption, escape, and deliverance from
enemies, and evils, if we have this (...), Heb. 10.20.
this new and living way made for us, we are safe; and contrary, if all
creatures opened their bosom to entertain us, and the world love us, as her
own, and foster us: though nature should command all her children, and forces,
to aid, and entertain us, so that we could make our neastes in the stars:
yet if God be against us, he will pluck us thence, he will hunt us with
Bloodhounds, and draw us out with fishing hooks. Therefore repair to God,
and prepare thy place of refuge with him, against the evil day, acquaint thy
self with his bosom, and secret love daily, that it may be thy present help
in time of trouble, and open to thee, and not locked and shut up in time of
danger. Psalm. 42, He is my present help, and my God.

(...); In whom, that is, in Christ we have this access, and entrance to God,
and Faith gives it, and works it for us, not in our selves, our works,
merits, righteousness, o^ by the mediation of any Saint, or Angel: No
creature can make way for us to God, but Christ his Son Romans 5.2. 1. Pet.
3.18. Who died for sinners, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to
God. John 14.6. I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life: no man comes to the
Father, but by me. No way to God, but Christ, no entrance to him, but by his
Son. By Satan, and Adam, we were led out of the way, banished, and separated
from God, the devil teaching, and leading us a false way, how we should come
to be Gods, knowing good and evil, and so lead us in the way of perdition,
from God: this he did by lies, and falsehood, deceiving us, and so killing us,
and every sin, like Satan, its parent, does (...) draw us out of the way from
God, and (...) intise us with promises of false comforts, profits, glory, and
so kill us. Iam. 1.13, 14. Romans 7 11. Now Christ, contrary to Satan, and to all
sin, as a Prophet he teaches us the right way, and as a great high Priest
of good things to come, Heb. 9.11.
and such as are truly good, and not only having the shadows of good things,
he gives us true good things, by the word of truth, which is the Gospel, Heb.
9.11. with 10. 1. John 1.17. This Law of shadows was given by Moses, but Grace
and Truth, comes by Jesus Christ: and whereas Satan, and sin, kill by
deceit, and reign over us by death; Christ as King, and Lord of life, quickens
us. No man in sin and Satan, could so much as see God, and live: but now
Christ, is both our way to God, a^ our Prophet, the Truth of all shadows, and
ceremonies of the Law, as true Priest, by whom we go to God, and as King,
and Lord of life, we live by him. He is our light, as Prophet, to show us the
way; he is our Priest, to make the way to God; he is our King, to make us
live in Gods sight, that we may not cry, as Hos. 14. He shall revive us, and
we shall live in his sight. This is our confident access to God, without
fear, that the sight, and presence of God, shall not kill us. All the works,
righteousness, and mediation of men and Angels, cannot make way for us to God,
but only Christ his Son: He is the only way, and entrance to God.

Luke 16.26.
by such a ^hasma, or gulf, that only by such a person, and high Priest, as
is infinitely holy separate from sinners, Heb. 7.22
and higher then the Heavens, can this gulf be filled up, to make way to God.
Therefore Christ first descended into the bottom of our hell, Ephesians. 4.9.10
and misery, and from thence ascended, Heb. 2.9.10.
far above all things, that he might be our (...) to bring many children
unto Glory, Heb. 2.

For be we never so near God, in place, Church, ordinances, yea, and have God
in our mouths, and could eat his real flesh; yet our hearts, and natures,
are infinitely removed, and separated from God, without Christ the Son of his
bosom bring us to him, and he is Emanuel God with us, so that now, Romans 8.39
neither height, nor depth, can separate us, the Son of God, the second
person, having brought us so near to God. For no evil is so great a means of
separating us from God, as Christ is good, and a means to bring us to God, the
chief good. No evil of sin, or punishment so contrary, or remote from God,
as Christ is near to God, equal with God, and one with God, and pleases God,
more then all sins can displease him, Matthew. 3. vlt. My beloved Son in whom
I am well pleased. Mat. 3.17. John 1.18.
John 1. The only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, he
unfolds God to us, and makes us nearer, and deerer to God: then sin which
comes out of the bosom of the devil, can make us hateful, and detestable to
God, and this only Christ can do. To bring two such contrary natures
together, as light, and darkness, Gods infinite pure nature, and our fleshly
corrupt nature, must needs be by an infinite means, of infinite merit, and
virtue, God, and sin are so contrary.

Therefore count all as doung, for Christ, to bring thee to God. Our wit,
wealth, beauty, learning, righteousness, goodness, may make way for us to
men, and Kings priuie-chambers, and to men's Thrones, and Courts, Romans 4.1. But
considered with our sins, they are doung to God, and he casts us, and all
ours as dung out of doors, see Phil. 3.7.8.

Cor. 3.18. In the Law, and in Philosophy this question is much moved, and
entreated of, what the chief good, and happiness of man is, and how it may
be attained: but only Faith in the glass of the Gospel, resolves it fully.
To see the face of God which is our life, and happiness, to behold the Father
of glory, and to attain to this chief good, and by what way, and means to
compass him, Romans 16.25. Ephesians. 3.5.
is the mystery hid from the foundation of the world. The creatures all cry,
and profess they are not the chief good, but point at God their Creator, and
direct us to him. The Law more clearly shows God to be the chief good; but
how we should attain unto him it shows not, but but by a way impossible for
flesh to go, Romans 8.2. But the Gospel does more fully reveal God, as man's
chief good, and shows Christ to be the only way, and means of coming to
him. Nature and Philosophy, and all wit of man, is dim, and weak in seeing,
and apprehending God the chief good; but its stark blind to discern the way,
and means, whereby man, especially a sinner may come unto God; This is that
hid wisdom, 1. Cor. 2.7.9.
which God determined before the worlds to our glory, which neither eye has
seen, nor ear has heard, nor ever entered into the heart of man, or Angel to
conceive, how once falling from God by sin, they should ever be able to
recover God again, and come into favor, and fellowship with him. For there is
no way in nature, as by creation to God; all way is hedged and stopped up by
sin. All natural good things, have a natural way prepared by creation,
whereby to be attained; but there is no way to attain to that supernatural
chief good; its a light which cannot be attained unto. 1. Tim. 6.16.

The way is now prepared by grace, that is Christ, the Son sent from Heaven,
Ioh. 17.3.
not borne by nature, as a natural way, but sent from above as a Ladder
reached up to Heaven, Genesis 28.12
Gods salvation which he prepared before the face of all people. Luke 2.31.
Luke 2.31.

to prepare the way, Matthew. 3.3.

Its not a way made by us to God, but a fitting of our selves for Christ, who
is the way, and that is as much as in us lies, remoouing the things that
hinder us, that is our sins by repentance, and by faith receiving Christ. Not
that repentance and Faith are our way, or any means to attain God our chief
good, but as preparations and qualifications for Christ, who is the only way
and means of obtaining God. For faith of it self and Repentance, do not
justify us, or commend us to God, but dispose us for Christ to enjoy, use and
improoue him, in whom we walk as in the way to God, and eternal life and
happiness. Faith and Repentance, and al^ good works are not worth a rush, nor
have any virtue to bring us to God, but as they are from Christ, and do use
and improoue Christ. By faith we receive and choose Christ as the only way to
God, forsaking all other ways, and means, and by repentance we walk in
Christ as in the way to God. Col. 2.6. As ye have received Christ Jesus the
Lord, so walk in him: so that neither Faith nor repentance are the way, but
Christ. Therefore as ye have received Christ by faith, as the way, so walk in
this way by Repentance; that is, forsaking all sin and all means of safety
and lying vanities, make use of Christ Jesus only for all saving good, Who is
made unto us of the Father, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification,
Redemption, 1. Cor. 1.30. For Faith, Repentance and all the works in the world
without Christ cannot bring us to God, and are of no worth with God, but as
they make use and improouement of Christ.

All our gain and advantage in life and death, Phil. 1.21.
and then let Christ alone for bringing us to life, heaven and happiness. Let
us by Faith make way for Christ, to come into our hearts, to be our Prophet,
Priest, King, Shepherd, that we may receive him, offering himself; and then
he will make way for us to God, to heaven and eternal happiness; Let us as
sheep that go astray daily, by Repentance Convert and return to Christ the
Shepherd of our souls, 1. Pet. 3. vlt.

(...), Access with confidence, or a confident access, not such as was under
the Law with fear and trembling, where the sight was so terrible, that Moses
said, I fear and quake. See Heb. 12.12, 13. with verse 18, 19, 20.

We come not before God as Devils and Malefactors drawn into Gods presence,
as before the Judge with fear and trembling, to be arraigned unwillingly,
enforced by conscience, nor yet as uncertain beggars that roue and wander up
and down for help, and knock at every door, and so go to Gods door, but
know not what intertainement they shall have there. But we have good
assurance, and good security, and go confidently in exspectation of finding
good entertainment with God, Heb. 12.12, 13. Lift up your weak hands, and
strengthen your feeble knees and make straight steps to your feet, least that
which is halting be turned out of the way, etc. As if he had said; There is
great danger and fear, we be turned clean out of the way, if we go not
confidently in the way. Prou. 18.10. The name of the Lord is a strong tower,
the righteous runs to it, and is exalted. Running implies confidence, Psalm.
33.6. They shall run to him, and their faces shall not be ashamed, etc.

a confident glorying and boasting. Heb. 3.
2. Chron. 20.20. Trust in the Lord and ye shall be assured, Romans 5.2.
that is, your hearts shall be confident and free from those fears, scruples,
auxieties, whereby carnal men that trust in earthly things, Luke 12.29.
hang in suspense like Meteors in the air, wasting themselves and their lives,
with continual cares, fears, and griefs, and are (...) as Iam. 1.6, 7, 8.
running from one help to another, and are never secure, Psalm. 27.14. Be strong
and he shall strengthen your heart, that is, seek all your strength and
safety by faith in God, and not in earthly things, and God shall strengthen
your hearts with confidence. No faith breeds (...), but this, Luke 1.4. that is
full certainty, and Act. 2.36. Phil. 3.1. All other refuges that men fly unto,
are with doubting, anxiety, and some distrust whether our works, or mediation
of Saints or Angels, or any creature, because both the refuges themselves are
not sure, nor cannot promise certain and infallible help, and therefore can
give no full security to the mind; but God is a most sure invincible and
impregnable defense and strong tower, and therefore the righteous run to it
with full confidence: or secondly, the means, that men use to attain thereto
may fail them, and therefore they use them not without care, fear, anxiety;
but Christ is a most sure and infallible means to bring us to God, and cannot
fail, and therefore this Faith in him breeds that confidence, That as God is a
sure strong and undoubted defense, that no man can make question: So is Christ
his Son like him, as sure a Mean and Mediator to come to him, and to obtain
him.

But of this virtue of Faith, and how its increased and confirmed in Christ the
object, shall appear more in the next Sermon.

(...), that is, boldness of face and freedom of speech. Of all the virtues
of Christ, which he dwelling in our hearts, exercises in us, Psalm. 3.3.
this is one of the chief, that he is the lifter up of our heads, and exalts
our faces before God, and gives us free liberty of speech to plead with God,
that we poor sinners, dust and ashes may plead and parle with God, and stand
upon interrogatories with him, 1. Pet. 3.21. The interrogatory which a good
conscience makes to God. For the conscience being acquitted from the guilt of
sin, by the sprinkling of the blood of Christ, is made bold to question with
God, and to ask him what he has more to lay to our charge: What more full
and perfect satisfaction his Justice can require, then what Christ has already
made. Isa. 1.18. Come let us reason together. 2. Cor. 7.11. We can make our
(...) and clear our selves before God, for whatsoever can be laid to our
charge; and cry Abba Father, and pour out our hearts before him in all our
afflictions, and bemoane our selves to God, and all our wrongs, crosses,
indignities. For Christ having stopped the mouth of the Law, and of all
iniquity, and of our crying sins, which stopped our mouths, as Romans 3.19.
Psalm. 107.42. thereby opens our mouth to God. David upon the guilt of murder
and adultery had his mouth stopped, and gagged, and every man by the Law and
spirit of bondage, has his mouth sealed up: let Christ's spirit open it, by the
sprinkling and washing of the blood of Christ, applied by faith, and then upon
experience of Gods free saving grace and mercy, pardoning and healing the guilt
of his sin, his mouth was opened, that his lips might set forth the praise of
this his saving grace, love and mercy.

Christ is the Lion of the tribe of Judah, and courage with God is his natural
peculiar virtue, and which he dwelling in our hearts exercises in us, and
especially as he is now risen from the dead, and sits at the right hand of God,
making intercession for us. For whatsoever Christ is in Heaven, or does for us
there, he is the same in our hearts, and the virtue and influence of it
descends into us, and raises us up together, Ephesians. 2.6.
and makes us sit together with him in the heavenly places; Ephesians. 3.17.
and Christ dwelles in us vertually, as he does in heaven, yea Christ risen
from the dead and making intercession for us in heaven, and living there for
us, is the same Christ in our hearts, and in the temple of our souls, and
consciences, as he is in heaven, the same person, exercising the same office
and virtues in the inner holy place of our consciences before God, whereinto he
is entered by his blood, and has made way for himself to reign in us, as King
of Salem and Prince of Peace, as he does in heaven for us. For God is in the
Sanctuary of our consciences, being purged by the blood of his Son, as he is
in heaven his holy place, our souls being made and framed like to heaven to
be Gods House and Temple. The Fabric of the Jewish Temple, was not only a
type of heaven, but of our souls the Temples of God, and therefore Christ is
our High Priest and does his office o^ Priesthood as well in our souls as in
heaven, and as A Minister of the true Tabernacle which God pitch and not man.
Heb. 8.2.


As by his blood he entered as by a new and living way, Heb. 10.20
into the Sanctuary o^ heaven, so does he enter into our consciences: and a^ he
makes intercession, an^ speaks for us in heaven, (...) does he in our hearts
wit^ that (...), 1. Pet 3.21.
the Interrogatory which a good conscience makes to God by the Resurrection of
Jesus Christ from the dead, or Christ r^sen up in it, with that (...) and that
Spirit which (...) makes request for the Saints. Romans 8.26.
Christ was arraigned, accused, condemned for our sins, and he satisfied and
answered for all, that we also in him might answer for our selves.

being found in Christ, Phil. 3.9.
not having our own righteousness, but his righteousness. Else, if thou
straightly mark what is done amiss, who is able to abide it? Psalm. 130.3.

Zachary. Infidelity make dumb; but as soon as by faith we receive Christ
into our hearts, he opens ou^ mouths to pray, which before we could never do
Christ gives a new mout^ and tongue, not only t^ speak to men, but to God not
only to plead our evil righteousness in the courts of men, but in God
courts, and to stand upon interrogatories with him Romans 4.1. If Abraham be
justified by works, he has to glory, but not with God; He may stand and
plead his righteousness boldly, in men's courts, but not in Gods. But we can
plead in heaven, and make our Appeal to the Throne of Grace, and there make
our Apology, Hos. 14.2.
and Take to us words, and say, Receive us graciously, so will we render the
calves of our lips.

Ye are careful says Paul, 2. Cor. 13.3. To prove and try your Ministers,
ye will have experience of Christ speaking in me; Its well, 2. Cor. 13 3.5.
but withal prove your selves whether Christ be in you. Know that the same
Christ, and so his spirit that speaks in me, and opens my mouth to speak from
God to you, enters into your hearts, and opens your mouths freely to speak to
God. Hereby we may know if we hear the word sauingly, and receive Christ by
Faith. Therefore not only prove and try your Ministers, whether Christ speak
and preach in them, but also try your selves whether ye be in the Faith, and
receive Christ, to speak to God in prayer, else ye are not fit nor able to
judge whether Christ speak in me. Such a spirit of liberty and (...), as opens
the Ministers mouth to speak from Christ to the people, such a spirit enters
into the people and Church by Faith, in the word heard, and opens the mouths
of the people to pray. Prayer is a common gift of every member of the Church.
Every one must call on the Name of the Lord that will be saved, See Romans 10.13,
14, 15.
though every one must not preach. First, the Ministers mouth must be opened to
preach, before the peoples mouths can be opened to pray. To put down a
preaching Ministry under color of setting up a praying Ministry is by
sinful Hypocrisy, to put down both; and to devour not only widows houses,
but the house of God under color of long prayer, as the Pharisees then did,
and Papists now do.

EPHESIANS. 3.12. In whom we have boldness and access, with confidence by the
faith of him.


THere are two principal radical and fundamental graces in a Christian heart
and inward man, viz. Faith and Repentance, Hebrews 6.2. Repentance from dead
Works, and Faith toward God. These two roots show themselves by fruits in
life and conversation. Repentance shows it self in hating and flying sin,
and in using all means of abstaining from sin and vanities. Faith shows it
self in motions and employments toward God, which are chiefly these two.

1. Our Access to God by Manuduction, as led by Christ, which makes us
confident in going to God, because we are led, and go not of our selves. As
with all care and fear, we fly all sin by repentance; so we must boldly and
confidently go to God, being led by Christ taking us by the hand.

2. The second motion or employment, is freedom of speech.

The first is of the inner man, the second of the outward man.

The work and employment of Faith in the soul called that (...), by which we
most serve, honor and attend on God, as Ioh. 6.29. Heb. 6.10. 1 Thessalonians. 1.3.
stands in these things here set down in this verse. 1. We take Christ our
Mediator by the hand, and lay hold on him, (...), that is, that faith which
lays hold on his Person. 2. Having him by the hand, and led by him to God, we
have access to God, and go to him (...) 3. We go with boldness and
confidence being so led, and having such a guide, as the second Person in
Trinity, the Son of God. (...), 4. Being come to God in this confidence,
led by Christ, we open our minds, and hearts, and speak to him freely with
open face without fear or shame. Of these in their order.

1. Faith lays hold on Christ's Person, and takes him by the hand in all
motions to God, and in all things wherein we have to do with God. We must have
nothing to do with God, without Christ our Mediator. As the Jews had no
dealings with God, no access to him, but by the high Priest taken from among
men, Heb. 5.1.
and ordained for men in all things appertaining to God; Therefore they first
went to the high Priest, before they went to God. So we must first go to
Christ, before we go to God, John 14.6. Heb. 7.25. The soul cannot think of
going to God, but it thinks of laying hold of somewhat, by which to be
imboldned to go unto God, to find acceptance with him. Therefore it says to
it self; Mich. 6.6, 7, 8.
Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and bow my self before the high God?
who, or what shall warrant me, a worm, dust and ashes, to go to so high and a
great God? Reason and flesh says 10005. of rams, and ten thousand and five
rivers of oil, and some great thing answerable to so great a God. No man can
apprehend the Highness and Greatness of God above himself, and think of
going to him, but he must also think of what he must bring to God.

But Faith, as it only sees aright the height and greatness of the most High
God, and the face of tha Father of glory, in the glass of the Gospel, wherein
also he has revealed and offered us a Mediator, answerable to himself, and
to his glory: so faith only answers this question, and resolves the soul,
saying, He has showed thee O man, what is good, and what the Lord requires of
thee; There is nothing great, and good enough for God, but Christ his Son: He
is infinitely abased, if any thing never so great, or good, be thought fit to
present to God, or to warrant us to go to him, but only Christ his Son.
Especially we think too basely of his Majesty and Glory, if we conceive that
the same offended by sin, and dishonored, can be satisfied by any creature,
but by his only Son, the second person in Trinity, and shall we think to
give the fruit of our body, for the sin of our soul! No, its only the fruit
of the Virgins womb, that Branch, and Offspring of David, the only begotten
Son of God.

Now Faith, first lays hold on the humane nature of Christ, as a handle fit
for man's nature, to lay sure hold on: and as the hand of the Son of God, fit
for us to grapple, or graspe, and embrace as our own flesh. For it cannot lay
hold on the Godhead; its fire consuming; in the manhood it imbraceth the
Godhead, dwelling in it bodily. Colos. 2.9. As he that holds a Lantern by
the handle, receives, and holds also the light thit is in the Lantern: So he
that by Faith lays hold on Christ's flesh, and body, as the Lantern, lays
hold on Christ the second Person, and the fullness of the Godhead, and he is
Emanuel God with him. Matthew. 1.


Luke 18. some on Saints and Angels, as the Papists: let us only lay hold on
Christ.

(...), 2. Heb. 2, etc. 12.2.
having hold on Christ, he goes before, and leads, and we follow him, as our
(...) and (...), and our forerunner, Heb. 6.18, 19, 20. 1. Pet. 2.25. We were
as sheep that went astray, following our lusts, but now are returned to the
Shepherd of our souls, that he may lead us to God. Its nothing, what sins
we turn from, if we turn not to Christ, to lead us to God, the chief good;
its nothing, what evils we avoid, if we go not straight to God, and make
straight steps to our feet. This leading by the hand, is opposed as a Medium,
or middle virtue, or motion, to two extremes.

First desperation, whereby Devils, and wicked Men fly from God, and come not
to him, but as drawn, and compelled, and that with horror, and hatred of God.

Secondly, presumption of proud, and blind Iustitiaries, that go to God of
themselves, as the Pharisie, Luke 18. not led by the hand of a Mediator, but
trusting to themselves. As Satan leads all wicked men's souls to Hell, so
Christ leads the souls of all Saints to God. That is called the Spirit of the
world, which swayes the whole world, Ephesians. 2.2. this the Spirit of Christ,
swaying all his body, and members.

He only leads us, because he only remooues whatsoever makes us unworthy,
or unfit to come, or fears, and discourageth us to come unto God, and gives us
whatsoever makes us acceptable, as his Person, merits, sacrifice, etc.

He came down from the bosom of the Father, to bring us thither, and was
made flesh for this end, that by the hand of his flesh, we might lay hold on
him crucified, and risen again, and so be drawn by him to God. He is that
ladder of ascension to God. John 3.13.

his blood to God, and is risen from the dead, for this end, to be our
Shepherd, and is gone the way before us? To us has God raised up his Son
Jesus, Act. 3. verse. last.
and sent him to bless us, in turning every one of us from our iniquities,
Acts 3. vlt. He is raised up to us of God, and given us to be a Prince, and a
Savior, to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of Sins. Acts 5.31.

they are without hope, and without God in the world, Ephesians. 2. and without all
hope, of ever coming to God. He that obeieth not the Son, to follow him, and
to be led, and guided by him, shall not see life, Ioh. 3.36.
but the wrath of God abides on him; but he that believes in the Son, to
follow him as his Shepherd, and his voice, and doctrine, as John 10. has
everlasting life. My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and I give unto
them eternal life. see 2. These. 1.8, 9, 10. Because they obeyed not the Gospel
of our Lord Jesus Christ, to be led, and guided by him, the Prince of their
salvation, but followed their own reason, and lusts, and senses, etc.

3. John 14.6.
Therefore commit thy self to Christ, to be thy guide, to walk by him as the
way, to be counseled, and led by him as the truth, and quickened, and
strengthened by him as the life; and never doubt, but he will bring thee to God
safely, and thou shall never miscarie. He will bring thee into his rest, and
where God dwells, and present thee before his face, and perfectly save thee.
Heb. 7.25. Thou shall never perish by any sins, lusts, temptations, crosses,
miseries; for Christ has made the way safe through all these, and lead the
way by sins, temptations, death, to make it (...) a living way, Heb. 10.20 1.
Pet. 2.24
bearing all our sins in his body on the Tree, who in that he suffered, and
was tempted, he is able to succor them that are tempted. Therefore only
commit thy mind, and heart, to be guided by him, trusting to him as thy
Prophet to counsel thee, and call none Rabbi but him: thy only Priest, to
lead thee to God, and king to defend and to quicken thee. Renounce thy reason,
wit, learning, lusts, and all creatures, trusting to Christ thy Shepherd
only, to bring thee out of Egypt, of Satan's bondage, and darkness, and to
lead thee through the wilderness of this world. For only the Son that came
from God his bosom, can bring us to God, commit thy way unto the Lord, and thy
thoughts shall be directed.

He as the Shepherd of of thy soul, 2. Tim. 4.18.
will keep thee from every evil work, nor suffer Satan, or lust, or the
world, to withdraw thee from God. Isa. 30.21.
When thou turnest to the right hand, or to the left, thou shall hear a voice
behind thee, saying, This is the way, walk in it. Psalm. 23.
He is thy shepherd, and he will convert thy soul, when it goes astray: 2.
Tim. 3.16.
He will make us wise to salvation, against the deceits of sin, and sinful
vanities; He that follows him shall not walk in darkness, but shall have
the light of life.

Say not in thy heart, Romans 10.6, 7.
who shall ascend to Heaven, or who shall descend into the deep to go to God!
For Christ is come from above to bring us to God, and he is descended into the
lowest deepes, to draw us out from thence to God, so that neither height, Romans
8.39.
nor depth, can separate us from God. Be God never so high above us, and we
suncke never so low in hell, and misery below him, even to the bottom of
hell; Christ is come from above, to carry us up above, and he is descended into
the lowest depths of misery, to fetch and draw forth the most miserable, to
exalt them to Heaven, and to bring them to God. Therefore neither famine,
peril, sword, Verse. 37.
height, or depth, can separate us from the love of God in Christ, but Christ
will bring us to God, if we make him our Shepherd, and lay hold on him.

Say not, 1. Cor. 1.
I am Paul's, I am Apollos, Christ is the only shepherd of our souls. Say
not, what Saint, or Angel shall lead me to God? Was Paul crucified for us? or
did Peter, or Paul, or any Saint, or Angel come down from Heaven, or descend
into Hell, and come from the dead again, to lead us to God? God dwells in that
light inaccessible, 1 Timothy 6.18.
which no man, or Angel can come unto, but only Christ to lead us to God, to
see his Face, and to enjoy his presence. By other means and guides, we may
be brought to wealth, glory, honor, health, as by learning, love, works of
righteousness, Philosophy: but never come to God, to see and enjoy him.

God, to seek all life, comfort, glory, strength, and safety in God, and not
in our selves, or any creature, that there be not in any of us an evil heart
of infidelity, Heb. 3.12. verse 14.
to depart away from the living God; Then are we partakers of Christ, if we
hold that (...), that principal pillar of supportance, and the foundation of
our sustentation, which is God our Rock, and Adonay our stays; For so I
understand that place.

Consider how thou come before God, in prayer, and in his Church: how is it,
thou dare appear in his presence, and tread in his Courts, who makes way for
thee, and leads thee? There is a third fleshly boldness, whereby by many rush
into the Lords house, and to his Table, which makes them more bold then
welcome, as Isa. 1.12, 13. who being not led by Christ, when he shall question
with them, and say, Mat. 22.12.
Friend how came thou in hither, not having me for thy guide? they will
become speachlesse, overwhelmed with the more desperate horror, as they came
in with the more boldness. They are most bold to go to God, who have the
least grounds of true boldness, and these have most fear in the end. Isa.
33.14. If Christ make way for thee, then be as bold, as thou will. Hebr.
4.14, 15, 16, and chap. 10.19.22.

In this Manuduction, or leading to God, not go to God by our selves, but we
must be led by such a one, as is of the same infinite, Holy, and perfect nature
with God, and never departed from him, Ioh. 1.18. (...).
but lies always in his bosom, who leading us by the hand, we have boldness
toward God.

For that we may be bold, and confident with God: First our hearts, natures,
and consciences must be purged, from all that which is contrary to God, and
made of Gods nature. Secondly, we must have perfect acquaintance with God, as
lying in his bosom; neither of which have we in our selves, and in our own
persons, but in the person of Christ, dwelling in our hearts by Faith, Ephesians.
3.17. and by putting on the Lord Jesus Christ, we have both: first our
consciences are purged from all that which is contrary to God, as the guilt of
sin, as Hebr. 10. Draw near with a true heart, in assurance of Faith.

Faith first purges the heart, and by that purgation after increases its own
assurance in the heart.
First, a true heart purged, and sanctified, and then follows assurance of
faith. But what makes a true heart, and like to God? He shows its one by two
things. First sprinkled with the blood of Christ, to justification, and Christ
dwelling in it. Secondly, washed in our bodies with pure water of
sanctification, begun in it. As the strongest, and stoutest creatures are
afraid of those things, which are contrary to their natures, which other
creatures never so weak fear not, being of the same nature. No more fearful
creature then a fish, flying at the shadow of a man; yet it fears not the
Ocean sea, because its of its own nature, which Lions, and the stoutest
creatures fear.

Hos. 13.8.
else he meets us as a Bear robbed of her whelps, and as a Lion in secret
places. In whom both these are wholly wanting, as in Devils, and all wicked
men, there is no access to God, no acquaintance, nor communion with him, as in
all of us by nature, we are alients from God, and strangers from the womb,
and go astray, and can never come where God is. In whom these are imperfect,
as in the regenerate; that nature is partly renewed, and fellowship, and
acquaintance with God in part, to know God by repentance; but in part through
contrariety, and corruption of nature, and defection from God daily by actual
sins, there is no immediate access to God, but by a Mediator, leading by the
hand: as among men that are strangers, though of the same nature. In this mixed
condition, there is a mixed motion of access to God, which is by the
Manuduction of a Mediator, of perfect nature, and intimate fellowshippe with
God. If in our own persons we were perfectly holy, and like unto God in our
nature, and had full, and perfect acquaintance with God, never departing from
him, nor estranged by any sin; then we might go to God of our selves, and
needed not a Mediator, to take us by the hand.

Again, have we never so much corruption of nature, if there be any true
grace, and spark of Gods nature, and life in us, we need not fear, and run
away from God, as long as we have a Mediator, to take us by the hand, who
will not despise, nor quench the smoking flax, Matthew. 12.
nor break the bruised reed, Heb. 10.14.
but with one offering has perfected for ever, them that are sanctified, in
any small measure. And though we daily fall from fellowship with God by sins,
yet if there be any constant will, and desire of repentance, and seeds of
conversion, and acquaintance with God, and that we hate not fellowship with
God, as the Devils, and fly from him, (as they are not capable of a Mediator,
by such a contrariety, to lead them, neither are such their children.) We are
capable of a Mediator, to bring us into perfect fellowshippe with God, and of
such a Shepherd to lead us, and convert us. 1. John 2.1, 2. God in himself
is full, and perfect light, See 1. Ioh. 1 5.10. with chap. 2.1.2.
and in him is no darkness at all: We by nature are nothing but darkness,
and in us is no light at all.

Now comes Christ a Mediator between us both, that because there can be no
communion between light, and darkness, Christ the middle person in Trinity,
becomes a middle person also between God and us, by taking our flesh; between
God that simple light, and us that are nothing but darkness, and
communicating of both our natures, and taking upon him all our sins, brings
us into fellowshippe with God, reconciling, and killing the enmity between
God and us in justification, and then imparting Gods nature in part, in
sanctification: which because its imperfect, by his perfect sacrifice, and
intercession, and leading to God daily, he renews, and increases our
fellowship with God, and communion, till we be presented perfect in Christ
Jesus, to God his Father. According therefore to our mixed condition in this life
of light, and darkness, holiness, and corruption, we have a mixed access to
God, which is by Manuduction.

Hence arise these consectaries. First, we must have sin, corruption of
nature, contrariety and enmity to God in nature, and life, and often fall
from God by daily sins; else we needed not a Mediator. We might go to God of
our selves. Secondly, We have need of such and so great a Mediator to lead us
to God, as is holy, harmless, separate from sinners, and made higher then the
heavens, because the cursed enmity of our natures, and estrangement from God,
so requires it, and needs it. None other can lead such wicked sinners to God,
so full of enmity and abomination in nature and life, to so just and holy a
God, but such an infinite holy Son of God. Thirdly, If there be any spark of
God and Christ's nature and life in us, its sufficient to make us capable of
such a Mediator, to take us by the hand as his brethren, partakers of his
flesh and blood, to bring us to God his Father. Fourthly, Such as have no love
to God, nor fellowship with Christ by repentance, but love darkness rather
then light, and fellowship with sin and Satan, have in this estate no
benefit of this Mediator.

should abhor him: or if there be sin, and corruption, yet its so little,
light, and venial, that we need not make so great friends and suite, a Saint
or Angel may be sufficient for mediation. Such a Puritan was the proud
Pharisee, and every carnal presumptuous Atheist, who without faith and
repentance dare go to God in the Church, to the Word and Sacraments, and such
as go in confidence of their ceremonial righteousness. These lay the
imputation of Puritanisme on others, which themselves chiefly practice.

a sinner to God. For its worse then any sin committed against God, to be an
Advocate for sinners, to dare to speak for them, and to countenance them
before God, as Romans 1. verse last. unless that he that shall dare to do
this, be as great as God, and as a surety will undertake to satisfy and answer
God for them: and therefore to make any Saint a Mediator to God for sinners, is
to make him God. So much of the Ground of this leading.

In the Means and Manner of leading, we consider. First, the Person leading.
Secondly, the Persons led. Thirdly, the hands by which the one leads, and the
other is led.

The Person leading, as I have showed, is only the second Person in Trinity
the Son of God, made flesh like unto us, as I have already showed.

The Persons led, are the Saints and children of God, reconciled by Christ's
flesh crucified, and imperfectly sanctified as is also showed. The hands by
which this leading is made, are carefully and distinctly to be considered. And
first the hand of Christ the Person leading.

The hand of the second Person in Trinity Jesus Christ, even now as he is man,
is his spirit. As it was the hand of the second Person before he was made
Flesh, so it is now since he is made Flesh, especially since his Resurrection.
The hand of God is the hand also of Flesh, now risen from the dead, and
glorified. Now God has no hand but his Spirit; the Father and the Son have
no hands but the Spirit the holy Ghost. For nothing can proceed from the Father
and the Son, but the holy Ghost, which is sometimes called the hands of God:
Thy hands have made me and fashioned me, that is, as elsewhere is expounded,
his Spirit, Eccl. 11.5. Who knows the way of the Spirit, and how the bones
grow in the womb of her that is with child? Job 26.13.
His Spirit garnished the heavens, and renueth the Face of the Earth; Psalm.
104.^0.
Thou sendest forth thy Spirit, and they are created, which in other places is
called his hands: His hands prepared the dry land; Psalm. 101.26.
And Christ calls it the finger of God; If I by the finger of God cast out
Devils, Luke 11.20.
then is the Kingdom of God come unto you, which is expounded by him to be his
Spirit. Its also called the breath of God which proceeds from him; the heavens
were made by the word of the Lord, and all the Host of them by the breath of
his mouth; and His word and Spirit proceed and come forth from him together:
that is, his commandment and infinite divine Spirit and power, as his Arm,
and therefore its called the Word of his power, Heb. 1.2. Who has believed our
report, and to whom is the Arm of the Lord revealed? and the word is (...),
breathed forth by his Spirit. Its called the shadow of God, and the wings of
God, and whatsoever proceeds from the Father and the Son, to Man or to any
creature, is only the holy Spirit. Luke 1.35. The holy Ghost shall come upon
thee, and the power of the most High shall over shadow thee. Psalm. 90.1.
Psalm. 90.1. Such as dwell in the secret of the most High shall abide under the
shadow of the Almighty. Psalm. 63. Under the shadow of thy wings, will I
rejoice; all which must be meant of his Spirit, counselling, comforting,
strengthening, as Isa. 30.1. Woe be to them that seek a covering, and not by
my Spirit. Therefore Mary conceiving by the holy Ghost, without all power of
nature, a weak woman, sings, Luke 2.
that God had showed strength with his Arm. As the shadow comes from the body,
so the holy Ghost from God, which is therefore sometimes called a shadow,
because it shows it self but darkely, obscurely, and mystically, and yet
surely and powerfully, and this especially in the Ministry of the Church, both
in Ministers and people. In Ministers, as Isa. 50.16. I have hid thee under the
shadow of my hand, that I may plant the heavens, etc. that is, I will
powerfully by my Spirit way thee, and enable to this so great a work, as to
make a new world by thee, and protect thee from devils and men. No shadow can
proceed from God, but what is God himself, his Spirit and Divine power and
virtue, which when its given obscurely, and not so manifestly, is called a
shadow. In people as Acts 3.19. that is, when God in his infinite love, mercy
and grace, shining to you as his face, shall send to you his Spirit, the
Comforter, which shall assure you of the pardon of your sins, and refresh you
with joy, peace, comfort in Christ's righteousness applied to you, blotting out
your sins out of your consciences, if ye continue to grieve, repent and to be
sorrowful for them daily, and by sorrow to kill and mortify them. Let all
your care be only to repent, and to lament your sins, to mortify them, and
to grieve for them all your days, and God knows the best season when to
refresh you with comfort, which is the Season of all Seasons, (...), that is,
when to give you the Spirit the Comforte^, as an infinite gift of his Fatherly
love and mercy, and when to show you that his Fatherly Face, and the refreshing
from it, by sending his holy Spirit to assure your grieved hearts of his
favor, and true reconciled in Christ, which is the most comfortable refreshing
season, that can come to a man's soul. Now we must not appoint God this season,
when to refresh us, with the comforts of his Face, and Love by his Spirit; but
we must go on in our work, and labor of repentance, and daily turning to God
flying all sins, and using all means of obtaining all the good promised us,
and God in his due time, after all our toil, labor, and sorrows, will send
his Spirit to refresh us.

But this by the way, to show what Gods Hand is.

Now this Hand of God, is also the Hand of Christ the second Person as made
Flesh; Its the Hand of Flesh, especially as risen from the dead and glorified;
the holy Ghost is his Breath, Shadow, Wings, Arm, Hands, and whatsoever
proceeds from him toward his Church, both Ministers and people, is nothing
but that eternal Spirit, the third Person, who proceeds from the Father and
the Son, John 14.26. By which as High Priest, Heb. 9.
he offered himself without spot to God, as with his own Hands; So now much
more the same Spirit proceedth from him in more abundance from his Flesh
glorified. For before, Ioh. 7.39.
the Spirit was not given in that abundance, because that Jesus was not yet
glorified. But now this Flesh of Christ being glorified, this eternal Spirit
is all the Breath, Arms, Hands, Strength, Shadow, Light, and Glory of Christ;
He now breathes nothing but the holy Ghost and Spirit. He breathed upon his
Disciples, Ioh. 20.21.
and said, Receive ye the holy Ghost. He has it now at command as his Breath,
and as natural to him, and can as easily and plentifully give it; He holds the
7. Stars his Apostles, and Ministers in his right hand, not of Flesh, but of
the holy Ghost, and being risen, he gave commandments to his Apostles, not by
a humane breath and voice, as before, but more specially by the holy Ghost,
Acts 1.2. See John 5. The time shall come and now is, but shall be much more,
that the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, that is, shall shall
have his quickening spirit, 1. Cor. 15. The first Adam was made a living soul,
and all that he could communicate to his posterity and children, if he had
continued in innocence, had bin only a living soul, qualified with Gods holy
Image: but the second Adam is made a quickening spirit, which he communicates
to his members and posterity, and which proceeds from him. This Spirit is
Christ's light, by which he shines to us, Ephesians. 5. Awake thou that sleep, and
stand up from the dead, and Christ shall shine unto thee. (...), Whatsoever
proceeds from Christ's Flesh now in heaven, is nothing but Spirit; He is
ascended far above all things, Ephesians. 4.7, 8.
to fill all things with his Spirit. Whereas therefore he is said to feed us
from heaven with his Body as Manna, and to wash us from our sins in his
blood, to guide us with his light, all this is nothing but his Spirit, which
being purchased by his death, comes as it were through his body and blood given
to us, as our own flesh and blood. This Spirit is obtained and given by his
death and sufferings, and comes to us by his humane flesh and nature, into our
flesh and nature. Ioh. 6.63.
Therefore his Flesh is called meat indeed, and his blood drink indeed. For
the flesh of it self profits nothing, but because for the merit of his
sufferings in his flesh and by it, as by a cundit the third Person the holy
Ghost, proceeding naturally from the Father and the Son, is hereby procured
to flow, issue, and come forth to us and into our hearts by grace. Galat. 4.4.
Because ye are sons reconciled to God by the death of his Son, God has
sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, which cries Abba Father.
The Spirit does and would ever naturally issue and proceed from God into us, as
Iam. 1.17. did not our sins stop the current, and keep him out of our
hearts, by our indisposition and unworthiness, and vncapablenesse of receiving
him, as Ioh. 14. Which the world cannot receive, because it sees him not,
neither knows him; but our sins removed and abolished by the death and
sacrifice of Christ, and by his flesh and body broken, through it, as by a
conduite the spirit again has its issue, and vent to flow into our sinful
flesh, and hearts, and God becomes again that (...), That living God, Iam. 1.3.
that gives to all men simply without exception, whatsoever his sins he, and
reproacheth no man, that by faith comes to him; but poures of his Spirit upon
all flesh. Act. 2.17.
This Spirit as its God the Fathers hand, so its Christ's our Saviors hand, the
hand of flesh, which Christ reaches from heaven to us, as to his brethren, and
takes us by the hand. Now that Christ is glorified in our flesh and nature,
that Spirit which from eternity proceeded from the Father and the Son, and
was as their breath and hand, by which they made the worlds, and breathed into
man's face the breath of life, and made him a living soul; the same spirit and
third person, does now proceed from the Father of Christ, as man, and from
Christ the second Person Incarnate, and is now both the breath of Christ, and
the arm of Christ, which breath of eternal spirit, Christ now breathes into
man dead in sin, to make him a new creature, created in Christ Jesus unto
good works, creating anew all the powers and faculties of soul and body, as it
were new hands, and feet, quickened with a new life, for new motions toward
God, and services and works; its the hand and arm of Christ, which he now
reueales and makes bare from heaven, and thrusts into our hearts, quickening,
and creating in us new hands, that is, new faculties of our souls, to lay hold
on and fasten on spiritual good, purchased by his death, and offered us by his
Gospel.

Christ by his Priestly Office, has performed all things needful for our
salvation, and prepared all saving matter. And by his Prophetical Office in
the Ministry of his Word, offers us himself the second Person incarnate to be
our Savior, and all his saving benefits and spirit, if we will reach forth our
hands, that is, the faculties of our souls, to receive and apprehend him; but
our hands lie dead in sins, that is, our minds and hearts from understanding,
choosing, willing and affecting any such Person and his Spirit and benefits
offered. Therefore Christ as King risen from the dead, and as Lord of life,
reaches forth his arm, and hand from heaven, and creates in us new hand^ that
is, new minds and hearts; He breathes into us the breath of life, that is,
his quickening spirit, that quickens our dead hands, to apprehend spiritual
things; For the natural man, by his natural soul and spirit, 1. Cor. 2.
as (...). Therefore the Spirit creates in us. First, a right hand of Faith, to
know and apprehend the Person of the Son of God, and to choose, and take him
for our Savior, as he is revealed, and offered in the Word, rejecting all
other Persons, Angels, or Saints, or any creature, or our selves, and our
works, betaking our selves to Christ alone, and to this second Person in
Trinity made flesh, fastening upon him, and receiving him as offered and
commended to us in the Gospel, even as crucified, and made our King, Priest,
and Prophet, our Wisdom, Righteousness, sanctification, and redemption, and
all that good which the Gospel sets him forth, and commends him unto us, Christ
himself gives us such a mind, 1. Job. 5. The Son of God is come and has
given us a mind to know him that is true, and his infinite hand and arm, that
is, his Spirit, creates this mind as a hand, by which we fasten upon this
Person, even the hand of Faith, believing the Gospel, by which we are united to
Christ this Person, and are in him that is true, and the only true Savior,
that is, in his Son Jesus Christ, this is very God and eternal life, and
therefore can by his Spirit, give us such a mind to know him, and quicken our
dead minds, as a living hand to apprehend his Person, with all his benefits
offered to us.

2. This Spirit and Hand of Christ creates and quickens in us a left Hand, of a
renewed Will and Affections. For our wills and affections being dead in sin,
self-love, and lusts of the world, this Spirit breathes into them such holy
motions, as casts out these wicked lusts, and swaies the will and affections to
heavenly things, which spirit the Comforter so felt, quickening the will and
affections, they again close with this spirit, consent to it, embrace and
hug these holy motions, and resign up themselves with full resolution, to
forsake all for his Spirit and Graces, and to be ruled, guided, and swayed only
by this Spirit; as by the hand of Christ, and to be comforted, supported, and
ordered by it. That as the Faith of the mind as a right hand, chooses the
right Person, and prefers him before all, and takes him only by the hand as
a Mediator, all-sufficient to bring him to God; So the renewed will and
affections join hands with his spirit, that omnipotent quickening hand which
has created them a new, and put a new life into them, by spiritual and divine
inspiration; which Person with all his offices and benefits offered, and which
hand of his spirit and spiritual motions and inspirations felt in our hearts,
by the word preached, when our hearts, wills, and affections, do (...) gladly
embrace, then Christ and we are one, and we go hand in hand together to God,
and to heaven, he leading us by the hand of his Spirit, and we following him by
the motions, and inspirations of it, Romans 8. For as many as are led by the
Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God. But if any man have not the Spirit
of Christ, the same is none of his. Now some in hearing the Word, resist, and
put back the hand of Christ, the holy Ghost, rejecting all spiritual motions,
and will not be led by them, but choosing rather to follow their own reason,
flesh, sense, and lusts, to walk after the flesh, not after the Spirit, as
sheep that go astray, and will not return to Christ the Shepherd of their
souls to be led, and guided by him, 1. Peter 2. Romans 10.21. In preaching of
the word, Christ stretches forth his hands, that is, offers us his Spirit,
to counsel, guide, inlighten, sanctify, and men refuse it; which some do
ignorantly, the Spirit having not enlightened their minds, to enable them to
discern it self, to be the hand of Christ graciously offered, and reached
forth to them; and this is the common state of the World, and of all sinful
natural men, as Christ shows, John 14. Which the world cannot receive,
because it sees him not, nor knows him, that is, which Spirit and hand of
Christ, the world, and all natural men cannot receive, nor lay hands on, or
join hands with, because they are not enlightened by it, to know it, and
Christ, and therefore cannot will, or desire them, but ye know him, for he
dwells with you, and shall be in you.

Some do it upon knowledge wilfully, and maliciously, who being made
partakers of the holy ghost, and enlightened by it, so far as to know
Christ's person, the Lord of glory, and his Spirit of glory, and to see and
discern his gracious arm, and power, and to taste, and feel in some measure,
and to perceive the spiritual motions, and inspirations of it, and the powers
of the world to come, that is, the powerful virtues, and suggestions to a
better life: but this Spirit, and the hand of God, not ouercomming the stony
hardness, and impenitencie of the heart, and will, dead as a stone in self
love, and lusts of the world, to make it resolve to forsake it self, and its
lusts, and the world, to receive, and choose Christ's person, benefits, counting
all things as doung for him, and to embrace the hand of his Spirit, and
promises above all creatures, and his spiritual motions, and inspirations: but
though they know them to be such, yet for self-love, and for their lusts
sake, to keep them unmortified, they will rather fight against the spirit,
check it, and kill, and strangle the good motions of the spirit, and rather
crucify Christ again, and pierce through his hands and feet, then that he
shall crucify their flesh and lusts, and his hands mortify them and their
lusts, and therefore through the rottenness of their unrenewed hearts, they
utterly fall away from Christ his person, and Gospel, whom they know, and have
professed, and acknowledged, and maliciously hate him, and persecute him, and
his Ministers, and members, and in the disposition, and affection of their
hearts, as much as in them lies, they crucify again to themselves the Son
of God, and make a mock, and scorn of him, and of sincerity, and holiness,
and tread under feet the Son of God, and despite the spirit of grace,
seeking to expose to all shame, godliness, and sincerity, and godly
Ministers, and people, even whom their consciences know to be such, and only
because they profess, and urge the mortification of their flesh, and lusts,
and living, and walking spiritually, which their corrupt, and impenitent
hearts, and wills cannot endure. But they that are Christ's, Galat. 5.
have crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts, that is in the heart,
choice, will, and purpose, accepting, and allowing, and embracing that, which
Christ has done for them to that end, which wicked men abhor and reject,
being offered them.

Some through ignorance, reject the gracious, and merciful hand of Christ,
reached from Heaven, even his Spirit, and saving virtues, and benefits. Some
though knowing them by illumination of mind, and by some taste of Divine
sweetness, and comfort in them: yet, overcome of their lusts, and love of the
world, their hearts, and wills unrenewed, and unchanged, grow to hate, and
detest them, seeking their destruction, and abolishing, because they seek the
destruction of their flesh, and lusts; and therefore had rather Christ were
again crucified, and dead for ever in the grave, then that he should rise,
with such hands of his Spirit, as should crucify their flesh, and lusts.

Therefore such is their malice, that they would even pierce through these
hands of Christ's spirit, as the Jews pierced through, and crucified through
ignorance, fleshly Christ, as I may say, in the days of his flesh, when he was
in abasement, to whom Christ promises pardon upon repentance; Matthew. 12.
If any man speak a word, against the Son of man, that is, as only knowing
him as a Man, and ignorant of his Godhead, and Spirit, it may be forgiven
him: But if any man blaspheame the Holy ghost, and Godhead of Christ shining,
and sparkling in him, it shall never be forgiven him.

Some now maliciously, crucify Spiritual Christ, risen from the dead, and
shining into their hearts, and souls, by his Spirit, and coming to apply his
Cross, and Death, to crucify their flesh, and lusts, by his Spirit, and
Spiritual hands: they now, not as in the days of his flesh, but in the
eternity of his Spirit, and Glory, would crucify again, and abolish for ever.

They that are thus affected toward the spirit, are said to be so affected to
Christ; because the Spirit is Christ's hand, and because it reueales, presents,
and offers Christ's person, merits, righteousness, and the saving virtue of his
Cross, to crucify all our lusts, for this spirit takes of Christ, and shows
it unto us, Ioh. 16.9, 10. it comes with its hands full of Christ. So that as I
love Christ, and take him by the hand, when I gladly embrace his Spirit, and
suffer my self to be led by it, and its spiritual motions: so contrarily,
they hate Christ, and crucify him, and pierce through his hands, that hate his
Spirit, and destroy his spiritual motions suggested to their hearts.

For as some of the Jews, through ignorance of Christ's Godhead, crucified
Christ only, as a poor man, the Carpenters son, that had proudly usurped a
Kingdom over them, and against Caesar, and therefore put him to death as a
Traitor, and as only crucifying his fleshly hands: Yet some others, and
especially the Scribes and Pharisees that knew him by the light of the Holy
Ghost, that he was God, and by the finger of God had cast out devils, (as
Christ knowing their hearts, professes they did) They crucified him not as the
Son of man, nor only his fleshly hands, as he was the Carpenters son, but
his Spiritual hands, as he was the Son of God, hating his spirit and power,
in the Ministry of his Word, and Miracles, and Doctrine, and Disciples, for
which sake they chiefly crucified him, that if they could possibly, they might
abolish for ever his Name, Doctrine, Religion, Profession, Spirit, and Church,
which now began to be gathered. He was crucified of these, not as the Son
of Joseph, but as the Anointed, and Holy One of God, anointed with the Holy
Ghost, and with power, doing what they could to crucify the Holy ghost, and to
pierce through the hands and feet of the Spirit. They trod under feet, not
the son of man, but the Son of God, and made a mock of him. Hebr. 10.

(...) in confidence, Christ leading, and taking us by the hand, and we laying
hold on his flesh crucified for us, we go confidently. If we lay hold on any
creature else, and be led and guided by any Saint, or Angel, we go with
fear, and doubting, with perplexity, and anxietie, when conscience of sin
accuses us, and are never secure, that we shall be saved. To be bold and
confident with God at any time, but especially in the conscience of sin, is a
marvelous courage: Before whose face and presence, the Angels are abashed, the
mountains melt, whose Majesty and presence is, so glorious, fearful, and
terrible, that no creature can abide his presence, when he is angry. The most
Holy Angels without spot of sin in nature, and conscience, yet cover their
faces, as abashed at his presence, though doing his will, in obeying the voice
of his mouth.

How much more must sinful man, dust and ashes melt, and be confounded with
shame, and horror, at the presence of so Holy a God? yet Faith in Christ,
makes confident and bold. Jacob had strength, and courage, and prevailed with
God. Moses endured as seeing him, that is invisible, by this Faith in Christ,
who at Horeb in the giving of the Law, where the sight was so terrible, he
confessed, I fear and quake. Romans 5.11. We not only glory in afflictions,
says Paul, which some stout hearted carnal men have done by pride, ambition,
or strength of nature, who upon the sight of God, have trembled like Belteshar,
but we also glory in God, see 1. John 4.17. and 3.21. Abraham's boldness was
with God, to parle with him, though he was but dust and ashes.

We see how hard a thing it is, to be bold in the presence of a King, a
mortal man, especially if he be angry: His wrath is like the roaring of a
Lion: How much more to be bold in the presence of God, the King of Kings, when
he is angry, who cutteth off the spirit of Princes, who is terrible to the
Kings of the earth, that they fear in their Priuie-chambers? Psa. 14.4. Psalm.
76.5.

Sin weakens, and breaks the heart, and soul of man, by breeding doubts,
fears, griefs, tremblings, and horrors: So the Devils, and Adam, by their
fall, brake themselves into shiuers of fears, and tremblings. And as the
Devil trembles, so our corrupt nature, and guilty conscience, like his, is to
do as the Devil does; for we are broken, and infected like him by sin,
Romans 5. when we were yet of no strength, Christ died for us, that is, when we
were broken, and infected with the guilt of all sins. Therefore the Law,
first breaks us, and kills us with the sight, and guilt of sin, before Christ
cures us, and binds us up; and this is the cure of the heart, and soul, by
Faith in Christ's blood, and breaking for us, his terrors, horrors, griefs,
and pains, in soul and body, that we are strengthened with confidence, Ephe.
3.16.
by his spirit in the inner-man, 2. Tim. 1.7
and have not the spirit of fear, but of power and love, and of a sound mind,
Romans 8.15 Isa. 61.1.
not the spirit of bondage, to fear again, but of adoption, to cry
confidently, Abba Father: This is to bind up the broken hearted.

Therefore is Christ called the Rock of the soul, Mat. 16.18. Upon this Rock
will I build my Church, because he gives the heart, and soul, built on it by
Faith, strength of courage, nd confidence. Therefore the fearful, and
unbelieving, are cast out with dogs. Revel. 21.

Christ is the Redeemer of the soul chiefly, and therefore from fears,
doubts, and griefs chiefly, and from the spirit of bondage, to fear again.
The chiefest virtue of bread, is to encourage, and strengthen the heart: So
Christ crucified, his body broken, and fed on by faith, its virtue is, to
encourage, and strengthen the heart with confidence toward God.

If therefore we feel fear, fainting, doubting, go the more to the
Sacrament of Christ's body, which as it requires some courage, and hope, that
we shall find strength, and nourishment of confidence by it; so it also gives
it, and makes us bold with God, and fearelesse of sin, and death, as Christ
incourageth. Ioh. 16. vlt.

wealth, friends, let us go only by Faith to Christ, to give all true
confidence, security, and comfort of mind, and heart, by his death, and
blood, as the only bread of life, and strength to the soul, and of cordial
virtues.

For all carnal men feel fear, and grief, and anxietie of mind, and in
this sense, they go to the world, and wealth, to the Law, and works, and
seek to secure, and strengthen, and free themselves from these fears, and
griefs, and to heal themselves by wealth, and trusting here to, and say, If I
could do, and live, thus, and thus, and had so much wealth, or perform this,
or that righteousness: then my mind would be quiet, and at rest, and
fearelesse. But these things can never give security, and rest to the mind,
and heart, but vexation. Go to Christ by Faith, and he will give thee rest.
Matthew. 11. verse the last.

crying, Luke 17.5.
Lord increase our faith, and give us more courage, and strength of Faith in
heart, by feeding us with thy body, and blood, Mar. 9.24.
Lord I believe, help my unbelief. Therefore he says here, by Faith of him,
that is, by going to Christ by Faith, and betaking our selves to him, and
laying hold on him, we have a confident access to God, with more confidence,
then we can have by laying hold on, and choosing any other to lead us.
Therefore eat his Body, and drink his Blood, that is, take and choose his
Death, and blood, for your only meat, to nourish, and strengthen your hearts
with comfort, and peace, as only cordial, to give you courage, and confidence
against sin, and Satan, and boldness with God, and it will do so. For as
meat requires some life, and strength, to take, eat, and digest it, and so it
gives, and increases more life, and strength to the heart: So Christ the bread
of life, requires some strength of Faith, to receive him, and digest him, and
so he gives more strength, and courage with God, and against sin.

Therefore we must go to the Sacrament, as well to increase faith, as to bring
Faith with us. In going, we must by Faith renounce all comfort, and confidence
in our selves, and all creatures, and go out of them to Christ only, and
embrace him, that he may give us all true boldness, and confidence toward
God, that nothing may encourage us, but Christ, and that he may give us better
courage, then any other creature can give us.

Choose, and take Christ, for thy only (...) thy guide, and Captain to lead
thee to God, and he will encourage thee, with invincible strength, and
confidence, and give thee a heart of steel: but trust to any thing else, and
it will fail thy heart, and not be a sure Rock to it, but leave it in fear,
doubting, anxietie. Go to Christ only, and he will give the legs to go
better, and strengthen thy feeble knees, and make straight steps to thy feet,
and encourage thy heart to come more to him, and to God by him: but go to any
other, and they will increase thy fears, doubts, and scruples. Take heart to
go to God by Christ, and encourage thy heart, and he will give thee more
courage; Be strong, and he shall strengthen your hearts. Psalm. 26.14.

All true Ministers and Christians boldness, and (...), to preach, or go to
Gods house, to appear before him, to worship him, is by faith in Christ, and
toward God, as seeing him, and in sincerity approouing the heart to him, as
beholding him in Christ, 1 Thessalonians. 2.1, 2. The hypocrites boldness is only
toward men, in blindness and darkness, not seeing God, but only men, whose
eyes and ears they can please, and only satisfy their exspectation. If
Ministers could manifest Gods face and presence, and God would show himself in
them, as in the Primitive Church; only believers durst join themselves to the
Church, and to the Lord: hypocrites would either abhor, or tremble, or be
ashamed to appear, Act. 5.13, 14. 1. Cor. 14.24, 25.

The best and greatest boldness and confidence is toward God. Devils and
wicked men by sin, pride, malice, or by wealth, learning, authority, power,
may be bold toward sin full men, weak and impotent and base like the earth as
themselves: but they have no courage or boldness toward God, but quake and
tremble at his Majesty; and especially when they are ouermatched by death, or
any other evil. They that are bold in man's day, only beholding man, shall
tremble in the Lords day, when God shall exalt himself. Such as put their
strength and confidence in their wealth, pride, malice, are most fearful and
cowardly with God and death.

Let us draw near with a true heart in assurance of Faith, Heb. 10.22
without all doubt and scruple, seeing we have such an all sufficient High
Priest over the House of God, Heb. 7.25
that can perfectly save them that come to God by him, Heb. 7.26
holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and higher then the
heavens, that has all-sufficiencie, of all-sauing good, as King, Priest, and
Prophet, to vanquish, and remove all sins, and devils, and to confer all
good.

Receive Christ into thee by faith, lay hold on him to lead thee, renouncing
reason, and sense, that thou may be strong, and confident without all fear.
For therefore we fear, and are in doubt, because we look to our selves, and
to our own strength, and righteousness, and rest thereon, and go not wholly
out of our selves to Christ, to rest our hearts on him, and to receive him
only into us, to comfort, and encourage us, but we receive the World, or our
works into our hearts, and feed on them, which will never strengthen our
hearts. This bread wants that staff, and strength, and virtue to uphold our
hearts against sin, Satan, and so many crosses, that they cannot be strong,
but full of fear and doubting, because they are not built on Christ the Rock,
and are not fed with his body broken, and blood shed, which only is that
bread which strengthens the heart of man to go to God, without fear and
fainting. For therefore was Christ's soul and heart, and body broken with
fear, fainting, horrors, that ours might be bound up and healed.

If we have no boldness with men, but fear their earthen faces, and tremble
at their wrath, whose breath is in their nostrils: If the conscience of sin
make us tremble before men: how much more before God the Judge? 1. Pet. 3.15.
with Isa. 8.12, 13. Seek boldness with God. Its nothing what boldness we
have with men, that our hearts and consciences warrant us to stand upon
Interrogatories with men, and challenge, Who dare lay any thing to our charg?
and we can show our faces in any court, and stand upon our righteousness But
dare we do so with God, and stand upon interrogatories with him, either in
Justification, as 1. Pet. 3.21. or Sanctification, Psalm. 138.23.
as David, Lord Prove me and try me if there be any way of wickedness in
me? In whom we have access with confidence, as we have our access to God out
of our selves only in and by Christ, so we have our confidence only in Christ,
and not in our selves.

First, in regard of the matter, all matter of confidence is only in Christ,
viz. his Death, Resurrection, Merits, Righteousness, Intercession, as 1. Pet.
1 21. and 3.21, 22. Luke 18.9. with verse 8. and 13, 14. 2. Cor. 1.9. Phil.
3.3.9.

Secondly, as the Rock and efficient cause of our actual confidence,
dispensing it to us arbitrarily, as he sees fit, and we need, as enemies,
troubles and dangers increase. There is nothing in us naturally but fear, and
a spirit of infirmity, and weakness, wherewith we are bound, and go faintly,
but Christ suggesteth and breaths into us a spirit of courage, and confidence
above that we have by faith, whereof faith is an instrument and means to draw
it forth. Our hearts naturally meditate fear, and we weaken and discourage our
selves, and Christ incourageth us, and gives us strength and confidence. We
must understand that there is a double confidence. 1. Seminall, which is in
faith, a kind of natural child-like confidence seeded in us, whereby we are
well persuaded of Gods fatherly heart and good will, as little children
naturally are of their parents affection, and yet upon all dangers and
miscarriages, or other accidents, they fear and tremble through weakness of
judgment, and apprehension, and imbecillitie of nature, in which infirmities
its the parents wisdom and indulgency to encourage and comfort, Ephesians. 6.4.
not (...) to be furiously angry least they be discouraged and all together put
out of heart. So is it with God and his children; they have some child-like
persuasion of God the Father his Love, by which they go to him; which
persuasion is seminall in their hearts, the first habit of Faith, but which is
not of strength to carry them to God with confidence when conscience of sins,
Satan and Enemies, and dangers assault, but by weakness of judgment and
apprehension, and frailty of the flesh, they are ready desperately to cry out
for fear, as the Disciples did at the sight of Christ coming like a ghost
upon the waters, till Christ encouraged them, and strengthened them saying; It
is I, be not afraid, Christ is not furiously angry against our infirmities,
fears, doubts, but spares us as a Father spares his child that serves him
as well as he can, Psalm. 103.
though with never such weakness and frailty; and he supports us in our
fears and doubts, as Psalm. 93.18. When I said my foot slippeth thy mercy O
Lord held me up. Psa. 93.19.
In the multitude of the thoughts of my heart, that is full of fears,
doubtings, distractions, thy comforts rejoice my soul. So Christ gives all
believers confidence, dispensing it, as we need against our many sins,
temptatious, dangers, enemies. For as our life is hid with Christ in God, so is
our confidence, which is our life and strength, increased and dispensed as
Christ pleases, as 2. Chro. 20.20. Trust in the Lord, and ye shall be
assured, that is, confident. If ye by faith go only to God, believing that he
is able and willing, according to his promise to help, and choose him only for
your Savior, and protector, and rejecting all other, betake your selves to him
alone, he will not only save you, but give assurance and security of salvation
beforehand, which is indeed the greatest part of salvation, the healing of
the soul of sinful fears, doubts, and scruples, and stablishing the heart
and mind in peace passing all understanding, as I have before touched.

Object. I fear my faith is not true, because I cannot be confidently assured
that God will help me, not rest therein without fear.

Answ. Our Faith may be true though weak, and joined with fear. Let us strive
therefore against the fear and weakness of our nature, and flesh, and use our
weak faith to go unto Christ, and he will give us strong confidence. That is
his gift, and not of our selves. Its that fruit, or rather growth and increase
of the first faith, sown in our hearts rightly improoued, as Psalm. 26.14. Be
strong and he shall strengthen your hearts, and trust in the Lord, that is, do
you improoue your weak faith to go to Christ, seeking to him for strength and
courage, and increase of your faith, and go not to any creatures, to make your
selves strong, confident, and secure in them, and Christ will give you
confidence and security, as Psalm. 73.26. My flesh fails me, and my heart
also, but God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever.

Matthew. 12.
That he will not quench the smoking flax, nor break the bruised reed.

We have a small root of faith in our selves, but the body and truncke is in
Christ: by this small root we live and go to Christ, and cleave to him, and
sigh to him in our weakness, and being thus humbled, we depend on him daily
to support our faith, and increase our confidence, which we must not look to
have always in our selves, but in and from Christ as his free grace shall
arbitrarily dispense the same.

Therefore he suffers some of his Saints, and members to be more weak then
others, and fearful, and into some he infuseth a greater spirit of
confidence. Some go weakly and faintly all their days, and can hardly lift
up their weak hands, Heb. 12.
and feeble knees, to make straight steps to their feet. And this Christ does
partly for exercise of his own grace, and mercy in supporting such weak ones,
and for exercise of our mercy and love. Romans 15.1, 2. 1 Thessalonians. 5.7. As the
soul infuseth not the like vigor, and virtue of life, comfort, strength into
all the members of the body: So nor Christ.

We must as well go to Christ for faith and confidence, as for any other
grace, and he requires of us persuasion and faith, that we shall receive it
from him, viz. that he will in dangers, fears, sins, temptations,
strengthen, encourage and comfort us against them all, even death, and hell,
and all enemies. Say not, I am a creature so weak and faint in faith, that I
shall never stand against these. Cast not away thy weak faith, as Heb. 10.35.
Sit not still, and keep not thy bed, because thou can not go so strongly to
Christ as others can; but go as well as thou can with thy feeble weak
knees, and let not that which is halting be turned out of the way but rather be
healed; Heb. 12.
Seek for more strength of faith, rather then despair and cast away all
faith. Fight the good fight of faith, and strive to lay hold on Christ and he
will strengthen thy faith; only seek not to strengthen and secure thy heart in
wealth, policy, thy own righteousness. For he is the shepherd of our
souls, Psalm. 23.
and has promised to convert our souls and to dwell in our hearts, if we by
faith choose him to dwell in us, to be his house, rejecting all other lords
and spirits, then will he come into us and strengthen us by his Spirit in the
inner man, as Ephesians. 3.16, 17. and he dwelling in us, as in his house, we shall
hold fast our confidence and hope of rejoicing unto the End. Heb. 3.

Therefore pray as the Disciples, Luke 17.5.
Lord increase our Faith, and cry as the Father of the Daemoniake, Mark. 9.24.
Lord I believe, help my unbelief, and give me confidence; and believe that
he will pardon thy weak faith, and heal it, as well as any other thy sins
and enormities, as long as they are but infirmities which thou striuest
against, lamentest and labourest for strength of faith, desiring above all to
honor God with confidence. Believe he will pardon the want of belief, as
long as thou striuest and labourest to believe, and do not affect
infidelity with an evil heart of infidelity, Heb. 3.
totally evil and unfaithful, to depart away from the living God, and to
forsake him our Rock and portion, choosing and preferring other creatures, as
Heb. 10. vlt. For that which our hearts choose for our portion, they trust in,
and are strong and confident in. Where our treasure is, Math 6.
there will our hearts be also. Lam. 3. The Lord is my Portion, says my
soul, therefore will I trust in him. Hereby I know, I have some true faith,
though with much fear, when I choose God to be my chief portion, to be
secure, confident and fearelesse in him. As a servant that chooses a Master,
in whose power, riches, authority, for protection and maintenance, he reposeth
himself to quiet, secure and rest his heart in him. Some choose wealth; some
the Arm of flesh; But a Christian by faith chooses Christ. Therefore Christ
says, A man cannot serve two Masters, to repose confidence and safety in them
both, but we must either cleave to the one, and despise the other, or hate the
one, and love the other. So ye cannot serve God and Mammon, to seek safety
and security from them both. The heart seeks its security but in one
treasure. See Math. 6.21.24. That which is our portion gives us confidence; It
belongs not to our Faith, but to our portion which faith chooses, and pitcheth
on, to give us confidence. Choose God for thy portion, to rest thy heart in
him, as he has promised to be the Rock of thy heart, and then try and see, if
God do not give thy heart secure confidence as a Rock, Psalm. 73.26. and 2.
Chron. 20.20. Trust in the Lord and ye shall be assured. Let thy heart be
Christ's house to dwell in thee by faith, and thou shall see, that he will
strengthen thee by his Spirit in the inner man, not to faint or fear in any
afflictions, as Ephesians. 3.13, 16. Thou shall then sensibly feel and know, that
Christ is in thee, and thou art his house, in that thy heart keeps this
confidence and hope of rejoicing unto the End, as Heb. 3. that is, hereby we
sensibly know it. We are Christ's house before by faith; but we do not so
sensibly feel and know it, that he dwells in us, till he as the Master of the
house, strengthen and encourage our hearts.

Wicked men and unbelievers do not believe, that Christ can or will strengthen
their hearts, to make them strong and confident without fear and grief,
therefore they put their strength and confidence in wealth, pride, malice.

Pride is to them as a chain, Psalm. 7.3.
cruelty couers them as a garment. They arm themselves with these weapons of
the flesh, and imbolden and encourage themselves by them, and not in God and
Christ their Portion. They seek freedom from care, fear, and trouble of
mind in wealth and honor, and promise to themselves all security of mind
and heart, and safety of life, and estate in these things, as Luke 12. My soul
take thine ease, eat and drink, thou have much goods laid up for many
years. Contrary, a believing heart, believes as God says, not as Satan,
Reason and flesh say, viz. that though he had all abundance, Luke 12.
yet his life stands not in his riches, and though he had all the world, it
will not keep his mind and heart safe from fears, cares, grief, nor his
body and life safe, quiet, nor secure, but only God and Christ's love and mercy,
and therefore nothing will content him but these.

Therefore he goes to God, and Christ, only to repose his soul in them, and
having them, he is persuaded as the word says, that his soul shall dwell at
ease, and be secure, his defense shall be the munition of rocks, Isa. 33.
that the Name of the Lord will be a strong Tower Prou. 18.
to him, if he could attain to it, that he should lie down in peace, and
sleep, and rise again, Psalm. 3.
because the Lord would make him dwell in safety, Isa. 33.
that bread should be given him, and his waters should be sure: But the
wilful infidelity of unbelievers, makes them resolutly to conclude, and say,
Who is the Almighty, that they should serve him, Job 21.15.
and what profit should they have, that they should pray unto him? They count
not God any such secure refuge, Isa. 28.15.
and therefore make falsehood their refuge, and under vanity hide themselves.

They cannot rest nor sleep, without their God Mammon, their chief portion,
and their bellies filled with that meat that perishes. Contrary, a Christian
cannot rest, nor sleep, feeling his soul empty of God, and Christ, and the
meat that indureth to everlasting life. Because he believes, that Christ's body
broken, is that only bread of life, that can quicken, and strengthen his
heart, with courage, comfort, and confidence invincible, and therefore chooses
no other food but this, and lays forth his money, Isa. 55.2.
and labor chiefly for this, John 6.27. being persuaded that all nourishing,
comforting, and strengthening virtue to the heart, is in Christ's death, blood,
and sufferings, and that all other bread is but ashes, Isa. 44.20.
and that a seduced heart deceives men, that they cannot deliver their souls
from feeding on these vanities.

If we believe, that all comfort, and confidence is in Christ crucified, and
go to him for it, we shall find him indeed, that bread of life, that will give
life, comfort, strength, courage, as he promises, by his word, and Sacraments.
In which Faith, and sense of his fears deadness, David so often repaires to
God, praying, Quicken me, O Lord, Psalm. 119.
according to thy promise. Let us likewise, go to Christ, and say; Lord Jesus,
thou have promised, that if we come to thee, thou will give us life, if
wearied with our pride, infidelity, fears, and doubtings, we lament the
same, and come to thee, thou will ease, and refresh us, with strength in our
souls, and not break the bruised reed.

Lord Jesus, renouncing all other means of easing, resting, and refreshing my
soul, and heart, and of giving me comfort, and confidence, and to free me
from my fears, and cares, and sinful troubles of mind, I come only to thee,
the Shepherd of my soul, See Hos. 14.3.
who call me unto thee, as Matthew. 11.28. and Psalm. When I am afraid, I will
trust in thee. Therefore Lord ease, and refresh my mind, with confident rest,
and repose in thee, from all fear, doubting, anxietie. Thou have promised to
give to the thirsty soul, that faints with fear, grief, and trouble of
mind like the parched ground that gapes, the water of life.

Lord Jesus, thou wast weary, and thirsty in body, and soul, and askedst
drink, both Spiritual, See Heb. 4 15. and 2.17, 18.
and bodily, whereby thou perfitly know, what it is to have a weary, faint,
and thirsty soul, full of fear, grief, doubting, and did promise the
water of life, which I believe, thou only have to give, and wilt give, and
therefore I come to thee. I know, and believe, that thou promisest no more,
then thou can perform, and that thy Spirit, and righteousness can do it,
and therefore I renounce all other means of refreshing, and come to thee, as
thou call me, crying, in the last, Ioh 7.37.
and great day of the Feast, promising to make a better Feast then that was, or
all the Feasts of the year, even a continual Feast, to all that are
thirsty, and come to thee, to drink, to refresh, and satisfy their hearts
desires, in thee only, as our Passover sacrificed for us. 1. Cor. 5.7, 8.



Jeremy, Lament. 3. My strength, and my hope is perished from the Lord.

Secondly, its not a wilful, willing, and obstinate despair, rejecting all
counsel, and means of confidence, as in Ahaz. Isa. 7.12. but a desperation,
lamented, and striuen against, with subjection to any counsel, and means for
the cure, desiring, and prizing Faith above all things, and therefore is not
damnable.

Thirdly, especially if thou can thus do, which is my counsel to thee, to
labor to do, that is, to go to Christ, though quaking, and trembling, and
full of fear: fly not from Christ, to any creature for refuge and confidence,
1 Samuel 12.20.
for that is to go after vain things, that cannot profit. Though by fears,
and doubts we sin, and offend Christ, yet, fly not from Christ, the only
medicine of sin, and cure of doubts, and infidelity, especially, he calling,
and commanding thee to come unto him. Therefore obey his commandment, and hope
above hope, and believe above thy faith, that his grace and mercy, will pardon,
and heal thy infidelity, and say, I will not utterly fear, and despair, but
in despite of my fears, and distrustful heart, and Satan's temptations, I
will go to him, because he commands me; If I cannot go by faith, yet, I will
go by obedience, because he commands me to come to him, and not suffer my
fears to keep me back: I will resolutely cast my self on him; if I cannot
do it faithfully, yet, with a wilful resolution to obey, his commandment:
though I cannot do it with heart and affection, and delight, as I would, and
should do it. Even despairing of all hope from him of any good, yet wilfully,
and resolutely, cast thy self on him, saying, if he will let me perish, so
let it be, I will go to him, though without all hope, and commend my self to
him, and if I perish, I perish.



Why art thou so cast down my soul, Psalm. 42.
and disquieted within me? wait on God, and Christ, and in despite of
despair, with a contrary desperate resolution, above all reason, sense, or
hope, say as Jonas, Jonas 2.
yet will I look toward thy holy Temple, though to all reason, and sense, I
am utterly cast out from thy presence for ever, I will not yet give over
prayer, I will yet fight the good fight of Faith, I will cast my self on him.

As there is in some wicked men, a desperate wilfulness of rushing into evil,
against all means of restraint both of promises, threats, mercies, and
blessings from God, and examples, and prouocations from men, and a desperate
will in men, to adventure upon desperate means, as if they were mad, upon no
ground of reason or hope, but only their own foolish credulity, believing
their own conceit, and following the hardness of their own hearts and
desperate wills, so much will they attribute and sacrifice such honor to the
Godhead of their conceit and will: That honor do thou give to Christ, by a
desperate resolution of a holy will, converted to God, above all hope, and
against all fears of apparent evils and discouragements, to all reason, upon a
credence of Gods word and promise, against all arguments of despair, cast thy
self upon Christ, because he bids thee. As Peter at Christ's commandment goes
upon the waters, and at his commandment casts forth his net, to make a draught
against all doubts and arguments of despair. Such authority gives Faith to
Christ's commandment, and word, and such is the obedience of Faith.

Obey not therefore thy own fears, and doubts, to believe and follow them,
but obey Christ's commandment, to believe against all reason, and sense,
fears, doubts, and despaires. This is the obedience of Faith, simple, and
absolute, without any reason why, but only because Christ commands. For its
Christ's commandment, that whatsoever our sins, and unworthiness, our
fears, doubtings, and infidelity be, and how great so ever our misery be;
that yet we should believe, that he will pardon, and heal all. Nay, because
our misery by sins, and punishments of God, on soul and body, are great, and
desperate, passing all created power, to cure, or help them; therefore to
believe, and to go to him, ordained of God, a Physician, to heal all that are
desperately sick, and diseased, and past all hope, in reason and sense: Yet,
there is hope in Christ, and he commands us to believe it, and upon his
commandment, to go to him, to ease us of the burden of our sins, and
miseries, when they lie so heavy upon us, and so fastened on us, as we conceive
no possibility of remoouing them, nor of any ease, and refreshing from any
creature, promising, that he will give us rest.

Obey the commandment, which commands thee to believe, against all unbelief,
and above all belief, and to hope, above hope, that is, in infinite doubtings,
to believe, and in all despaires, to hope, and when all reasons, grounds,
means, and hopes are wanting, yet to believe, only because God commands thee
so to do. Though nature, reason, sense, and thy own heart, and faithless
fears, and all creatures forbid thee so to do, Lam. 3.
saying, That thy strength, and hope, is perished from the Lord, yet obey, and
believe none of these, but Gods commandment, commanding thee to believe his
promise, against them all, and so to honor him as God, above them all in
power, mercy, truth, and faithfulness.

Though they say, thy case is desperate, God says it is not: they say, Thy
daughter is dead, Mar. 5.35.
why troublest thou thy master with prayers, and suites any further, now all
hope is past? But Christ says, Fear not, only believe, and fight against
all, that persuade thee to the contrary, even Satan, flesh, reason, nature, and
all the World. For this commandment of believing, is contrary to all
creatures. All other commandments of the Moral Law, of natural equity, and
Justice, are seconded, and sealed by the testimony of all creatures, to be
just, faithful, and true, and they persuade to the obedience of them: only
this commandment of believing, is contrary to all creatures: Heaven, and Earth
are against it, and bid us despair, for there is no hope. This therefore is
the greatest obedience, and the chiefest work, most pleasing to God, and most
honoring him, as God, above all creatures, and against them all, and
therefore, God will honor, and save such a soul, against all creatures. He
that believes in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live. John 11.25. Of
all sins, and sinful passions, its the hardest to resist infidelity,
fears, doubts; and of all combats against sin, to fight the good fight of
Faith. Because nature gives some strength, and aid, to resist other sins,
and natural reason, but only God and his word, to resist infidelity. Nature,
and all creatures, forbid this belief, that a dead man should live, and rise
again. When we feel sin, and dead works, which surely bring death in
reason, sense, and conscience, and course of nature, when we feel a dead
heart, and see nothing, but dead bones, as Ezekiel. 37.3. that these dead bones
should live again, all creatures forbid us to believe it, yet, Christ commands
us to believe, that he is the Resurrection, and the life, to quicken the dead,
and to trust in his voice, that the dead shall hear it, and live, whatsoever
the death be in heart, or conscience, and whatsoever soule-murdering despaires,
and fears, destroy the life, peace, and comfort of our souls, and
consciences, yet, if we will hearken to Christ's voice, and obey his
commandment, to believe his promise of life, comfort, peace, willing,
desiring, and indeauouring to believe, he will quicken in us the life of
Faith, and fill us with joy, and peace in believing, and make us to abound in
hope, Romans 15.13.
through the power of the holy Ghost, Fulfilling the good pleasure of his
goodness, 2. These. 2.11.
and the work of Faith, with power in us.

Faith, has God for its object, in two respects.

First, of his Person, and Divine authority, which it believes simply, and
only, because God says so, and commands him to believe his bare Word. This is
that special honor, which Faith gives to God, above all creatures, that,
though all creatures should command us the contrary, upon never such reasons,
arguments, and probabilities; yet, we will believe God, upon his bare Word,
and commanding us so to believe, because he is God, and ought so to be obeyed,
and believed, though we can see no reason for it. For if he be Jehovah, he
will give Being to his Word, and has Wisdom, Power, and will, to do
whatsoever he says, else he were not God. Therefore, because the Gospel, a
mystery, and hid wisdom, above the capacity of men, and Angels, is preached
by Gods sovereign commandment, Romans 16.26. and we are commanded, to hear,
and believe it: therefore we will so do, only, because God commands. Romans
10.16, 17. Faith therefore comes by hearing, and hearing by the word, and
commandment of God, which commands preaching, and hearing, as the means to
beget Faith. Now all wicked men, and unbelievers, do not only not believe,
when the Word is offered, but by a rebellion of will, they refuse to believe,
Psalm. 50.
and cast the word behind their backs, and the commandment to believe, and
will not submit themselves to the means of believing, in obedience to God,
because God commands them. But if they hear, its when they list themselves,
and whom they please, and in such manner, and measure, as likes themselves, as
learned, eloquent preaching, and for such ends as they think fit, and not in
simple obedience to God, as his commandment, and ordinance, to get Faith, and
by Faith, all saving good in Christ, but in obedience to their own reason, and
lusts. Such men, their infidelity is not in them an infirmity, but an
obstinate rebellion, as of enemies to God, and despisers of his commandment,
and of Faith.

The Saints doubt, and fear, but against their wills, highly prizing faith, and
earnestly desiring it, they submit themselves to the commandment of believing,
which they obey as well as they can, at least in consent, and earnest desire to
obey, and believe, subiecting themselves gladly to all counsel, and means of
getting Faith, as Romans 7.16. I consent to the Law, that it is good. So they
consent, to this Law of Faith, as singularly good, and delight in it, Romans
7.22.
concerning the inner man.

If this be true Obedience to the Law Moral, thus far to obey, though we
cannot fulfill the commandment: then also is this rather true obedience to the
Law of Faith, to be willing, and desiring, and to labor to believe upon Gods
commandment, lamenting our unbelief, and striving against it, when we cannot
believe as we would: Especially the commandment of believing the mystery of
the Gospel, so far above the capacity of Men and Angels, being a commandment
infinitely harder then all the commandments of the Law Moral, which have
their ground in nature by creation. But to believe that God will quicken the
dead, and justify the ungodly, and save sinners, etc. Is a commandment
against nature, reason, and sense, and all creatures, and all power and
authority in heaven and earth, commanding to believe the contrary. Yet this
honor does Faith give to God, commanding us to believe, and this obedience,
that we renounce Nature, and Reasons Rule, and Authority, and all creatures,
to obey God, as most wise, true and faithful, and King and Prince only, that
by his Word creates and commands all things; 1. These. 2.
Receiving his Word not as the word of men, but as it is indeed the Word of
God, of sovereign authority with us above all creatures.

sake; so in the second place for the reasons and proofs given by him. Some
things we must believe simply and only upon Gods commandment, because he bids
us believe them, though he gives us no light of reason, nor no proof to our
sense by experience, as the principles of Religion. Some we believe, because he
gives us clear reasons, and proves his words by sensible experience and
undeniable arguments to reason and sense, Psalm. 119.140. Thy Word is proved
most true, therefore thy servant loves it, as Ioh. 20.29. Thou have seen
Thomas and believed, blessed are they that have not seen and have believed,
only upon my commandment, Ioh. 3.12. If when I tell you earthly things ye
believe not, that is, doctrines demonstrated with natural sensible proofs, to
your reason and sense here on earth; How will ye believe when I shall tell you
of heavenly things, above reason and sense to conceive, commanding you to
receive them upon bare divine authority, without reason and grounds to
believe? If we believe not God, nor honor him as true in his word, proved by
good reasons and grounds revealed to us, and light shining to our
understandings, much less will we believe him upon his bare word, to honor
him as God.

(...), the first part of liberty by Christ, is of heart our (...) by which we
go boldly to God, and to the Throne of his grace

The second is that liberty of our mouth, to spe^ke to God. Maruailous
largeness of mouth, and liberty of speech, to speak to God freely, in
prayers, praises, and thankesgiuings.

We are all by nature dumb and deaf to God, by a dumb and deaf spirit of
Satan: possessing and dwelling in us, till Christ redeem us to be his own
servants, we neither can nor dare speak to God. But Christ our Lord gives us
in Redemption, an open large mouth to speak to God, to sing to him, and praise
him, as Psalm. 51. Open thou my lips, that my mouth may set forth thy praise.
Isa. 51.11. The Redeemed of the Lord shall come and sing in the height of Sion.
Psalm. 40.2. Ezekiel. 12.
Therefore God is said to put a new Song of praise in our mouths, and to pour
on us a large spirit of supplication, to take to us words, as Hos. 14.

For this is the principal End of our Redemption, that we should have liberty
of speech to call on God and praise him, that our mouths should be open to
him, to set forth his glory, as it was the chief end of our creation. Isa.
43.21. Romans 10.
This people have I formed for my self, they shall set forth my praise.
Therefore with the mouth we confess unto salvation, and sing to the Name of
the Lord. Therefore David prays, That God would not utterly take the word of
truth out of Psalm. 119.
his mouth. And this is Gods covenant, Isa. 59.11. As its the End of our
creation and redemption, and the chiefest part of our happiness; So the
contrary, is the chiefest part of our misery by our Fall, to have our mouths
shut up as beasts, from prayers or praises.

Psalm. 22.26. and Psalm. 63.5. Dan. 5.4. They ate and drank, and praised the
gods of silver and gold. How much more then the Saints fed with Christ's body
and blood, and that plenteous redemption that is in Christ, praise him?

Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth is enlarged to pour out. Math.
12.34.
If the Treasure of the heart be large, the mouth will largely dispense.
Christ is a most rich Treasure in the heart of all store of good, therefore the
mouth must needs be answerable to open and confess, and unfold the mystery of
Christ, and to praise him. Where there is nothing of God and Christ in the
heart, there is no mouth opened, but shut up to confession and praises.

Cor. 7.11. and to plead our clearing and Justification in Christ, to pray and
call upon the Name of the Lord, to praise and confess his mercy and truth.
Heb. 3.1. consider the high Priest, (...), that is, whom we all confess, as 1.
Tim. 3.16. (...), that is, by joint confession of all, its a great mystery,
etc. Have we left book prayer (though I simply condemn it not, but allow it
in young Christians, while they are as babes, and nothing differing from
servants) but true Christians continue not in this bondage but grow up to this
liberty to pray in the H. Ghost, Jude 20.
as the Spirit gives them utterance; have we a natural liberty and facillity
of mouth to speak of holy things, and not as Socrates taught, by rote? Can we
speak more abundantly and fluently in the causes of God, then of any thing
else in the world, and sing more joyfully of Gods mercies, ways and works?

speak and pray to him, and make any suite, as Matthew. 22.12. (...). But if he
gives our souls liberty out of the Devils prison, from that dumb and deaf
spirit, to come to him in prayer, and to tender our petitions to him, its an
evidence, that he intends our perfect deliverance and good issue out of all our
troubles. If he vouchsafe us the honor to call on him, to speak or petition
to him, its certain, its his purpose to free us, Psalm. 10. last verse. When a
King is purposed to destroy a Rebel or offender, he commands him to be kept
close prisoner, and not come forth, to make or present any petition, to come
into his sight, or speak to him: but if he give him leave to go abroad,
though with his Keeper in restraint, only with liberty to use his friends and
best means, it shows there is hope of his enlargement, and of the Kings
purpose to free him. So if we have liberty to go to Christ by Faith, and
take him by the hand, and use him our Mediator, by him to petition to God, and
make our suites, its assured security to be heard and delivered.

Hereby we may also know if we have been fed with Christ, and have drunk his
blood and spirit, or the spirit obtained by his blood in the Sacrament; we
shall then sing and praise Christ and his benefits, our mouths will be opened,
as Psalm 22.26. and Ephesians. 5.18.

Likewise if we be the redeemed of the Lord Jesus, and his servants by
redemption, he will give us a new mouth, and language to praise and honor him.
The receiving of a new language is a note and mark, and indeed a bond of
subjection. Thus the ancient Romans did plant their language, the Latin
tongue in the countries which they conquered; And the Kings of Spain, cause
the Indians to speak Spanish. Whom God conquers by his Word, he plants his
Word in their hearts, and in their mouths. Where Christ or Satan reign in the
heart, their language and voice, or tongue is in their mouth. If Christ dwell
in the heart by faith, he will give a great (...) in the mouth, Ephesians. 3.17.
with 12. verse. and Heb. 3.6.

The Beast of Rome exalted by Satan the Dragon, or the Dragon reigning in the
Heathen Emperors, and their successors, gave them a mouth to speak as a
Dragon.

As Christ especially reigns in his Ministers, and sets up his Kingdom in
others, by them preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom; so he gives them a
special mouth, and (...) above others. 2. Cor. 13.3. So he promises to Moses
in a special manner to be with his mouth, to conquer Pharaoh, and to redeem
his people, and to give his Disciples a mouth and wisdom, against which all
their adversaries shall not be able to speak or resist; but it shall conquer
them, and all their wisdom, policy, sophistry, and all the wisdom of this
world, and of the Princes of this world, which come to naught. Men's beastly,
profane, earthly, and fleshly speech, mouth and language shows, that they
are base slaves and vassals to the flesh, belly, earth, and Satan. Contrary,
holy and godly speech, and the Word and Truth of God in men's mouths, holy
conference of divine things, show Christ to reign within. When the word of
Christ dwells in us plenteously, Col. 3.16. and we abound in all speech, and in
all wisdom, as 1. Cor. 1. not in excellency of humane speech, and wisdom,
but as 2. Cor. 6.11. As God reigns by his word, and its his kingdom, so where
he sets up his Kingdom, in any man's heart, and soul it gives him the lip of
excellency, and a mouth of glory, as to Christ, speaking with that (...) and
authority, and not as the Scribes, Mat. 7. verse the last. God rules and
gouernes all by his Word. He stilleth the raging of the Sea, by his Word. Reu.
19. The word of God, is King of Kings, and has many Crowns upon his head,
conquering the Beast, and false Prophet, and sends them to Hell, and the rest,
that is, the Kings of the Earth are slain by the sword, that comes out of the
mouth of him, that sits on the white horse, that is, sanctified godly
ministers, which sword, is the gospel of the kingdom.

For Christ reigns by his Word, in the mouths of his true Ministers:
contrarily, Antichrist reigns by the Temporal sword. His Kingdom stands not
in his mouth, and word preached, as of the true Prophets, Revel. 11.5. Out of
whose mouth came fire, to devour their adversaries, that is, the holy Gospel,
in spiritual, and powerful preaching: For thus it becomes true Ministers to
fight, and to kill their adversaries, verse 5. But the Beast that comes out of
the bottomless pit, makes war against them with the Temporal sword, and
kills their bodies, verse 7, 8. for their kingdom stands in Temporal Power,
Honor, and Dignity. Christ's Kingdom is his Word Preached: Antichrists
Kingdom, and power, stands in Kings, and Princes power, the ten horns of
the Beast, wherewith he is armed to gore, and wound the body of Christ.

From Adam to the building of Babel, the Church of God was one, and uniform,
and all the servants of God confessed one faith, in one language, and professed
their obedience, and subjection to the kingdom of Christ in one language, the
Hebrew, the Primitive holy Tongue, till the confusion of Languages came in, at
the building of Babel. In the Primitive times, all the Churches, and servants
of Christ, professed their obedience, and subjection to Christ, the Lord that
had bought them, by one uniform confession of Faith, till spiritual Babylon
erected, brought a confusion of Languages, and differing confessions of Faith,
and of the worship, and service of Christ in diverse articles of Doctrine, and
Discipline, of differing forms of Churches, between Sardis, Philadelphia, and
Laodicea, which will continue till Babylon it self be destroyed, and then the
universal Church shall be uniform in all Nations, and one confession of
faith, both of Jews, and Gentiles, professing their joint subjection, and
service to Christ their Lord, in one form of confession of faith, in one holy
language, and form of worship, praising God with a joint Halleluiah. Revel.
19.1. the general state of the universal Church, and the common form of
Divine worship, and praising, from the first calling, and rising of it out of
Egyptian bondage, and Antichristian darkness to this time, is a new song
before the Throne of God, now reigning over them, being redeemed from the
tyranny of Antichrist; A new song of praise, and worship, not before heard for
many ages, Revel. 14.3. The song of Moses, and of the Lamb, chap. 15.3. the
song of a small number; chap. 14.3. But now that Babylon is destroyed, and both
Jews, and Gentiles called, and Church enlarged by the coming in of the
fullness of the Gentiles, the common form of Divine worship, and praising of
God is altered, and brought to the first, and Primitive ancient form from the
Creation, which is Halleluiah. See Revel. 19.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.

FINIS.

