Seven Sermons, OR, The Exercises of seven Sabbaoths.

1 The Prophet David's Arithmeticke. 2 Peter's Repentance. 3 Christ's last Supper.
4 Christ combating with Satan. 5 The Sea-mans Card. 6 The Sinners Bath. 7 The
forming of Eve the first woman.
Together with a short Treatise upon the Commanndements.

Quench not the spirit, despise not prophesying 1 Thessalonians. 5. 20. Let the word
of God dwell in you plenteously Coloss. 3. 20. Printed by Valentine Sims, 1599

To the right Worshipful Richard Broughton Esquire, one of her Majesty's
Justices of Assise, for the Counties of Merioneth, Carnaruan, and Anglisea, and
of her highness counsel, in the Marches of Wales, Lewis Thomas wishes
continual health, and perfect happiness.
RIght worshipful, the care of my dutifulnes, enforced by the loadstone of
your affection, and more then common kindness toward me, has inboldned me to
present these few labors, the first fruits of my endeavors, to the eyes of
your discretion, hoping you will, in respect of good meaning, and in regard of
neighborhood, I trust, with no less care vouchsafe to patronize the same, and
suffer them to shelter under the defensive shadows of your safe protection.

Many I confess have travailed in the same kind before me, both largely and
learnedly, (far beyond the reach of my skill) many wise and cunning Bezaleels,
fraught with all spiri^^al knoledge, for furthring of spiritual workman^^p,
has God in our time raised (and still may ray^^ I wish) for the building of the
Temple of his so^^in the hearts of his children, a temple more glorio^s ^. King.
6.
then that was of Solomon's, though it were ou^ ^^ayd within and without with
the purest gold. M^ self also have aduenturd to com after the^ with my
free will offering, howsoever worst able of a thousand to furnish the buylding
of the sanctuary, which though it may not presume to prease among the chiefest,
yet may it look for acceptaunce at least in his due place, like the goats
Exodus 35, 23.
hair among the fine purple and skarlet.

The book is too small to be termed a Volume, your labor will be the shorter
in perusing is: But I trust it will be found of such value, as may upon due
consideration be nothing to your dislike: whatsoever it is, I recommend both my
self and it to your good favor, and so omitting unnecessary circumstances,
in regard of your weighty employments, I take my leave, resting in more
affection, than protestation.

Your worships to command. L. Tb.

These Texts of Scripture are handled in this Book.
1 The Prophet David's Arithmetike. Teach us, O Lord, to number our days,
Psalm 90. 12. II Peter's repentance. So he went out and wept bitterly, Matthew
26. 75. III Christ his last Supper. The Lord Jesus in the night that he was
betrayed, took bread, 1. Cori. 11. 23. IIII Christ combating with Satan. Then
was Jesus led aside by the Spirit into the wilderness, to be tempted of the
devil Matthew 4. V The Sea-mans Card. And when they were entered into a ship,
his Disciples followed him, Mat. 8. 13 VI The Sinners bath. If we confess our
sins, God is faithful and just to forgive our sins, Ioh. 1. 9. VII The forming
of Eve the first woman. Also the Lord said, It is not good that man should be
alone, I will make him an help meet for him, Genesis 18. 21. A Treatise upon the
Commandments. Blessed are they that do the commandments, Revel. 22. 14.
The Prophet David's Arithmetike.
Psalm. 90. verse 12. Teach us (O Lord) to number our days.
THe Prophet David notes the careless security, and wilful ingratitude of
carnal men, whom neither the shortness of life, nor the plagues of God,
powered out for sin, can stir up to a duetifull obedience.

In many precedent Psalms, he takes occasion by checkes, and admonitions to
draw the wicked and obstinate, to a consideration of Gods benefits, and
blessings bestowed upon them, as in feeding, and protecting them infinitely,
in suffering the Sun to shine upon them, the rain to fructify the earth,
their children to multiply, and grow up before them, like the Olive plants, or
like the pollished corners of the temple: their sheep and cattle to increase,
etc.

Yet notwithstanding finding them to be nothing the more thankful unto God,
or mindful of his goodness, and seeing them to run on still in their
wickedness, without remorce or feeling, as if they had been sold 1. King.
21. 25.
to work iniquity like Achab, and Jeroboam, The Prophet turns to his
compassions, and prays for them that would not pray for themselves, desiring
God to turn their hearts, and to continue his mercies toward them: and this
is briefly the substance of all this Psalm.

Now then to descend into a more particular narration, and to make you
acquainted with the sum of the doctrine contained in these few words of my
Text: observe with me these two principal points, which the words do offer
to your consideration; viz. the petition of David, and a reason or motive
enforcing the petition.

The petition in these words, Teach me to number my days.

The motive in these words, That I may apply my heart to wisdom.

I will only speak of the former in this place, viz. David his prayer.

Teach us, O Lord, to number, etc.] This text may well be termed the Prophet
David his Arithmetike, a better Arithmetike than our school humanitians, and
professors of Arithmetike in Universities are wont to teach.

This crosses and utterly confuteth the course of the vain men of this world:
for they give themselves to calculate other matters.

The Merchant numbreth his debts, the Usurer his money, the Lawyer his clyents,
the Husbandman his goods and cattells, the Captain his soldiers: but David a
man after Gods own heart, knew well the vanity of the one, and the necessity
of this other; and better Arithmetike.

He desires God to teach him to number, not his wealth, nor his riches, nor
his possessions, nor his tresures, nor his pleasures, but his days. Teach me,
says he, to number my days. We read of Nabucad-nezzar a King, so he was like
David: but he had not learned to number his days, so he was unlike David. This
proud king walking and strowting in Dan. 4. 27.
his royal ^allace at Babel, was numbering the towers thereof, and was
numbering his wealth, and his magnificence, and power. Is not this great Babel,
is not this my kingdom. etc? This Arithmetike made Nabucad-nezzar proud, and
made him forget God that gave him that power, and that honor, and that
monarchy.

But this Arithmetik of David's taught him humility, and meekness, and keeps
him so far from forgetfulness of God, that he rather forgets himself, and his
kingly titles, and honor; for in this psalm, but especially in this verse he
disclaimes, as it were, from al his regal authority, power, and state, and
exhibites himself a perfect pattern of humility.

Though he were Gods anointed, and invested with great majesty, and honor, yet
he forgot not his pedigree, but has registered the same to all posterities, in
that he says: thou tookest David when he followed the Ewes great with young,
and annointedst him to be Psa. 78. 70.
Prince over thy people, of a shepherd crowning him a King.

And though he were a King of the earth, yet he knew he was but a King of
earth, a man of the same mowld that others are of, and subject to the same
corruption: nay him Psalm. 22. 6
self in another place, calls himself, a worm and no man.

And as he could teach himself a lesson of mortality, so could he teach it
others also: speaking to magistrates, he says thus; I have said, ye are Gods,
but ye shall al die like men: and that Princes should not escape uncontrolled,
Psalm 82
he a Prince tells Princes, that they should also die like others.

And therefore since Princes, and magistrates, and people, and all must die, he
prays God for himself and others: saying. Teach us; O Lord, to number our
days.] We find 1. Chro. 21
this prophet numbering, but not his days, as in this place, but there he
numbered his subjects, he would needs know his strength, and power, and the
number of his people; but himself and all Israel smarted for that folly: and
himself being brought to the knowledge of his sin, confessed he had done very
foolishly. And therefore now he works more wisely, he prays God to teach
him to number his days: here he takes in hand another kind of numeration.

The prophet shows, that except the Lord Psa. 127
buyld the house, they that buyld it, labor but in vain: and except the Lord
keep the city the keeper waketh but in vain.

There he proves that in buylding it is God alone who is the * Architectus,
both to lay the foundation, and the roof too.

In keeping of the city he is the only watchman of Israel, that never
slumbereth.

And here he proves another property to be in God, which is, that he in
teaching, is the only schoolmaster, or doctor, verifying that in the 15. of
John his Gospel, without me ye can do nothing: he is al in all, a schoolmaster
of all, both learned, and unlearned, even to teach princes knowledge, and the
Senators wisdom.

This lesson must needs be well learned, that proceeds from such a teacher: in
the 86 and 119. Psalms he prays the Lord to teach him the way of his
statutes: and here he prays God to teach him another thing: to to number his
days.

David shows he was no truaunt in the school of Christ, but having learned
one lesson, he couets to learn another, and still calls upon God, like a good
scholar upon his master, O teach me thy testimonies: teach Psalm. 119. 33.
me thy statutes, teach me thy ways, teach me to number my days.

All that will be scholars in the school of Christ imitate David: covet to
learn more and John. 15.
more, that you may bring forth much fruit.

If you have already learned your rudiments, your Alphabet of religion, labor
yet further, to come to the depth of divinity, like the Prophet Ezech: who
when he had waded in the waters about the sanctuary, he waded deeper and
deeper, first to the ankles, Ezech. 47.
then to the knees, then to the loins, till he could pass no further.

We are first children, and then we suck the 1. Pet. 2. 2.
milk of the word: afterward we become men, and then we must digest
stronger meat.

We must be so well schooled, that we may be able to answer every man, that
shall ask us a reason of the hope that is in us.

So well schooled, that we may be able to teach others, as Peter being
strengthened did Luke 22. 32.
strengthen the brethren, and as Priscilla, who though she were a woman, was
notwithstanding able to instruct Apollos an eloquent man, and mighty in the
Scriptures.

This short lesson of David ministers this instruction to us, it teaches us,
whom we should pray unto, who^ we should entreat for a supply in our wants, he
teaches us to fly unto God only, for in him dwells all fullness. This he
taught us once before in the 64. Psalm, where disclayming from all other Psalm.
64.
gods, or Angels, or Saints, he says, whom have I in heaven but thee? David
did know there were many holy men in heaven, Abraham, Noah, Moses, all the
Patriarchs, and Prophets, Martyrs, and Confessors before him, yet he had
learned to invoke none, to pray to none but God only: there he taught, and
here again he teaches, that God alone must be sought unto, none but he
implored. None can teach us but God, and therefore we must submit our selves to
be taught only by him.

Teach us, O Lord, to number etc.] Eve our progenetrix had learned one lesson
from God, at the delivering of the commandment, Gene. 2. 16
wherein it was charged, that they should not eat of the forbidden tree. But
she was not contented with one, but would feign have choice of teachers, like
a truanting scholar that still changes his master: Genes. 3. 4.
and therefore she learned a second lesson from the devil. He taught her, that
they should not die, but should live like Gods, knowing good and evil: but Eve
found him a lying teacher, for they became devils, and death was sentenced
against them and their posterity, because they forsook their first teacher.

Many now a days, specially the conceated wise, will not offer themselves, to
be taught of God, but they will teach themselves, and learn of themselves,
they will fly to their own wisdom, and their own strength, and their own
policy, and their own knowledge but their own strength becomes weakness,
like the strength of Sampson, when he Judge. 16
gave it to an harlot: and their policy becomes Ester 7
simplicity, like the policy of Haman, when he thought to slay all the Jews:
and their wisdom foolishnes, like the wisdom of Achitophel, 2. Sam. 17
which turned to folly, because he had not learned it from God. That which
they most glory in, soonest deceiues them, like Absolomes hair, that seeming
to be his bodies 2. Sam. 18.
best ornament, became an halter: as he would have betrayed his father, so his
own hair became his own traitor, and discovered him to the enemy, like
Ziba, that betrayed 2. Sam. 16.
Mephibosheth.

All such that refuse to draw their knowledge from the fountain, they are
reproved in that general check; this people take counsel of their stock, and
their staff teaches them.

Saul was never forsaken so long as he counseled with God, but when he chose
a 1. Sam. 28.
witch for his schoolemistris, God rejected him; and he became his own
executioner, he that should have slain his adversaries, slew him self, and
ministers greater cause of triumph to his ennimies. Teach me, etc.] David
coming to be taught, first acknowledges his ignorance, and therefore prays
god the author of all knowledge, to give him knowledge.

In the first Chapter of the second book of Chronicles we find Solomon the son
asking of God wisdom: and here we find David the father asking of God
wisdom also.

A good father chawlkes the way first, and as gracious a son that well might
seem to descend from so good a father, follows the same path after, both
walking toward God, a father to them both, both of one affection do ask one
and the same thing, viz. wisdom, but respecting a diverse end; the one, to
thend he might the better govern his people; the other, to be able thereby to
number his days.

And this much shall briefly suffice for the clearing of the first note, which
teaches you if you will learn of David, to pray unto God for knowledge;
desire him to direct you, and teach you; as to teach you al things, so
principally this: pray him to learn you to number your days.

This lesson well learned will bring you to the knowledge of all your other
duties. It follows.

Dan. 5.
To number.] It is ascribed unto God by Daniel, that God alone numbreth,
weighs, and divides, he measures times and seasons, days, and years, and
he that is the numberer, will teach us to number, if we will offer our selves to
be taught by him.

No lesson is more necessary for these times considering how sin has spread
it self, like a leprozie over all flesh: and iniquity has gotten the
vpperhand. And more then this, the vialls of Gods wrath are powered our already
upon us, to consume us, as we are all eie-witnesses this day. Al had bin
prevented, if we had bin careful, to get unto our selves this one
comfortatiue, more worth than all the balm in Gilead, to have knowledge to
number our days.

From the first words of this psalm to this present text, now handled, the
prophet recapitulateth, and recounteth the shortness, and misery of this life,
and in the tenth verse, he makes up a calender as it were of man's age, in that
he says the life of man is threescore Psalm. 90.
years and ten, and though men be so strong that they come to fourscore
years, yet is their time then but labor and sorrow, so soon passes it away,
and we are gone.

The note raised hence must be this, the shortness of time ought to make us more
circumspect: and certainly if men did in a careful conscience surueigh the
short scantling of our years, and crosses incident to the same, they would not
run so wilfully to the vomit of sin as they do, and so seal up their own
condemnation.

The want of this consideration blindfolds the sinful souls of men, and
casts them headlong into a thousand inconveniences.

Genesis 19.
If Lot had numbered his own days, as he lived to see the Sodomites days both
numbered and determined, when fire from heaven consumed them, he had not
proceeded to commit incest so soon after with his own daughters. Genesis 9.
Righteous Noah forgot his righteousness, and being drunk, lay uncovered in
his tent, his own sons being ashamed, that their own father had cast off
shame.

He could preach to the old world, that their days should be an hundred and
twenty years, and then should the flood come, but he forgot to number his own
days: and therefore a second inundation prevailed against him, he became
ouerflowed with wine, as the old world with water.

Dan. 4.
If N^bucad nezzar had numbered his time, when he numbered his towers, and
riches, and honor, he had not so soon lost his honor, nor have bin sent out to
dwell with beasts in the field, where he was compelled to eat grass like an
ox, because he lived like an ass, til his hairs were grown like Egles
feathers, and his nails like birds claws.

Belshazzar carowsing wine among his Dan. 5.
nobles, thought of nothing less, than the numbering of his days, although
even then the moment of time was come, when he should resign up, both life and
kingdom.

Not to stand upon particulars: if the great rich man in the Gospel had bin as
careful to Lu. 12. 19. 20.
number his days, as he was cumbered with devising how to take down hi^^lde
barnes, and to build up new, thinking to store up for many years, that voice
of terror had not sounded from the Numberer of times, Thou fool, this night
will they take the soul from thee: he dreamed of many years behind, but
because he reckoned without his host, (for he never schooled himself where
David learned his Arithmetike,) therefore he deceived himself, and that day
proved to be the last of his life.

Such is, and has ever bin the course of carnal men, that do fix their eyes
upon the present time only, and do think that the same shall never be altered.

This security was far from Job, when he Job. 14. 14.
says, all the time of my pilgrimage will I wait, til my changing come: as if he
made it his occupation every day; from time to time, he waited for his
changing. Job has left few his like behind him, few such Numberers of time
recorded. Job and David both do teach us to number our days, as they did their
days.

Satan casts so many golden baits in our Coruinus.
way, that we clean forget our time, as Coruinus forgate his name.

We are so busied like Naball about white 1. Sam. 25. 10.
earth, and red earth, in raping and scraping transitory trash, and so devoted
to fleshly pleasures, and deceitful vanities of this life, that we have no
leisure at al to think on death and so we chop into the earth before we be
aware, like a man walking upon a green field covered with snow, and not seeing
the way, runs on, and suddenly falls into a pit.

Herodotus writes of Sesostris a King of the Egyptians, that he was carried in
a chariot drawn with four Kings, whom he before had conquered, one of the
four casting his eyes behind him, looked often upon the wheels of the
chariot, and was at length demanded by Sesostris what he meant to look back,
so often: says he, I see that (...) which were highest in the wheel, (...)
sently lowest, and the lowest eftsoo(...) highest, cogito de mutatione
fortu^(...) upon the inconstancy of thy(...) hereupon aduising himself (...)
mild, and delivered the sai(...) As it did Pirrus.
history notes man's mortalit(...) Teach us to number our d^(...) speaks not
of years, or monet(...) but of days, noting the shortness (...) in the word
Days.

And the same phrase is used of all the (...) men, upon the like occasion:
Jacob told Phar^oh that few and evil were the days of his pilgrimage;
speaking of the time: to note the shortness of life, he names not years, but
days, and speaking of the toils and troubles of life, he calls it a
pilgrimage.

Job in like manner in numbering his days, my days, says he, are more swift
than a post: Job. 9. 25.
and in the 26. verse they are swifter than ships.

Our Savior in teaching us to pray, bids us pray thus: give us this day our
daily bread. Mat. 6. 11.


As if we should reckon the continuance of our life no longer than a day. And
again, God calling upon sinners, says, To day if you (...) his voice: a day
consists but o^ (...) an evening, and a noone: some (...) way in the morning
of their life (...) ^ot the heat of the day, and h^ (...) ^t the line of his
life until the (...) but all the day.

(...) ^es the life of man, to the (...) ^asse, whose glory enduret^ (...) ^t
is green in the morning, an^ (...) night.

(...) ^t is within and without us, are s^ (...) remembrances of death: all
things cry (...) to us, that we must hence, as Christ cried, (...) ^am not of
this world.

The Sun rising in the East, and falling in the west, and al in one day,
shows our rising, and falling, our coming in, and going forth of this world.

The apparel wearing upon our backs, the meat disgested and egested, and
returning to putrefaction, the graves shrowding so many corpses under our
feet: to be short, Time the mother of al things, and the changeable state of
times, even winter and summer, cold, and heat, seed time, and harvest, all
do cry unto us, that we shall wear and di^, and corrupt, as they who were
living are now dead, and lie in the dust.

First we wax, dry then old, then cold, then sick, then dead, so is earth
turned into earth.

We are not skilful numberers of our days, like David, til we have learned to
recount the dangers and casualties, and uncertainties of our corruptible
condition.

A spider being able to choke us and a As it did Pirrus.
hair to stifle us, and a tile falling upon our heads to extinguish us, and
that in a moment of time, when we least expect so sudden calamities: we read
of Anacreon, that he died in eating of an egg.

Fabian a senator was choked with an hair, Pope Hadrian with a fly: if Jacob
counted his time but short, having already lived an hundred and thirty
years, what reckoning may we make of our time which is far shorter?

In the time before the flood, the age of man was great: Adam lived 930. years,
Noah Genesis 5. Genesis 5. 26.
950. Methusaleh 969, almost a 1000 years.

But after the flood in Terah his days, who was father to Abraham, the age of
man was a great deal shortened from 900. it was brought down to two hundred,
and under.

Terah lived 209. Abraham his son not Genesis 11. 32
so long, 175. Moses 120. Joshua an hundred and ten.

In the Prophet David his time, it was scanted yet shorter by much, half in
half, Psalm. 90.
he counted the years of men to be threescore and ten. All has this use, it
teaches us to look back into our lives, and to learn to redeem the time,
by a timely repentance.

To draw to a conclusion, life it self is but an harbenger of death, and we
live to die. God that numbered the hairs of our head, has numbered our years
also, and we can not pass them, whether in middle age, or in old age, or in
infancy, when, and where, and how, we know not, for the issues of death are in
the hands of God.

When our end and final dissolution shall come, is therefore concealed from us,
because we should be always prepared, and think every moment upon death, the
end of all flesh.

As a bird guides her flight with her train, so the life of man is best
directed by a continual recourse unto his end. Now the Lord of life and death,
in whose hands is the breath of every living thing, so direct us by his holy
spirit of grace, that we may learn to number our days: that we may run out
this short race of our sinful pilgrimage, in godliness and much patience,
looking to Jesus, the author and finisher of our faith, that when we shall have
finished these days of sin, we may be translated to a better life, in the
kingdom of glory which God has purchased to us, in the bloudshedding of his
beloved son: to whom with the father, and the holyghost, be rendered al
glory, majesty, power, and dominion, now, and ever.

Peter's repentance.
So he went out, and wept bitterly. Mat. 26. 75.
IN regard of the dissoluteness of the present age wherein we live, and
general iniquity of these the worst and last times, wherein the sins of men
are multiplied, being grown to the full, and unrighteousness is increased
upon the earth, as was fore-tolde by our Savior Christ, in the 24. of Matthew
his Gospel, for that we are all better acquainted with sin, than with the
remedy for auoidanc^ of sin, which is repentance, without which we neither
can have peace of conscience, no^ yet the favor of God, who is a father to none
but the penitent, such as are truly humbled under the burden of their sins,
and do^ carry a purpose of amendment.

I have endeavored at this time, to lay before your eyes the true portraiture,
and the lively Anotomie of a repentant sinner in this example of S. Peter: you
shall behold him chaulking out the way, that leads to repentance, whose
foote-steps you must follow, foot by foot, and step by step, if you will
come where he is, where is perfect peace and joy, such joy as shall not be
taken from us, greater joy, and glory than Peter Luke. 9.
had on mount Tabor, where Christ was transfigured.

Peter wept here for a time, and that but a short time, in respect of
eternity: but there he rejoices continually, without ceasing, his joy has no
term, nor limitation of time. So is it verified which was spoken by our Savior
Christ, in the 5. of Matthew, happy Mat. 54.
are ye that mourn, for ye shall rejoice.

Peter's mourning is turned to mirth, his sadness to solace, his pain to
pleasure, his repenting to rejoicing, for Christ has wiped away al tears from
his eyes, because with him the first things are past already, and now he is
crowned with glory like the Angels.

And this he has now in heaven, because God loved him walking a good disciple
here on earth, showing himself to be indeed, what he was in name, videlicet
Simon an obedient hearer.

He is also called Peter, videlicet confident and strong in faith, like a rock
invincible.

And in this place we find him penitent, his obedience is testified in the
history of his life, for at Christ his commandment he for sooke his calling,
and became his disciple: his strength of faith our Savior himself proves,
where he says upon his confession of him; Thou art Peter, and upon this rock
will Mat. 16. 18.
I build my congregation.

He was penitent, the words now read unto you doproue the same: for after he
had sinned, he went out and wept bitterly.

O that every Christian man were thus qualified like Peter! these three graces,
repentance faith. and obedience, are better welcome unto God, than the three
presents Mat. 2. 11.
given by the wisemen unto Christ, gold, frankensence and mirrh, are not so
precious.

But before I proceed to the embowelling of these words now read unto you, I
must first acquaint you with the substance of that which went before my text,
being the occasion of the words now to be handled. When Christ was about his
passion, and even now was ready to be offered up unto his father, for the
sealing up of our redemption, being under the hands of the civil magistrate,
to be either condemned or acquitted, the text says, Peter stood a far off,
to see the end, as the fifty eight verse witnesses, there we read that he
came into the high priests hal, and there sat down with the servants, to see
what would become of Jesus.

And while he sat there, the history notes, that a maid came unto him, and
challenged him to be one of Jesus disciples: also wast (says she) with Jesus of
Galile, Read the 69 verse, and so forwards, but he denied, and said, I wot not
what thou say: the second maid came, and charged him in like manner, and then
he swore, he knew not Jesus.

Being the third time charged by the standers by, he began to curse and swear
that he knew not the man: such is our corruption, and Satan's policy in
tempting us, when we fall once, we fall again and again, like Peter, who
having denied Christ once, made no bones of it, to deny him the second and
third time.

Mark the degrees of Peter his sin: first he denied him simply, without any
oath, as one not greatly regarding what the maid said unto him, I wot not what
thou say: but the second time he rapt out an oath, he know not the man: and
the third time he proceeded to curse and swear.

A bare oath would not serve, and therefore he cursed himself too: he was
become so cunning and so prompt a swearer, as if he had made an occupation of
it all his life before.

So soon as he had learned to lie, he had learned to swear, for lying, and
swearing, are partners, like a thief and a receiver, inseparable companions,
and as I may say, swornebrethren, that always iumpe together in a sinful
society.

And having learned to lie and swear, he had learned at once to curse too:
cursing came in like a sixth finger, to make up the mess, when the table was
full already.

We never read of Peter's swearing any where else, yet here upon a sudden,
oaths and curses, showed themselves, sooner then Chan^ Genesis 9. 22.
spied Noah's nakedness.

The watchword which the Moabits used in the chase of their enemies was this:
now 2. Ki. 3. 23.
Moab to the spoil: and Satan's watchwoord to the sins that prayed upon Peter
in this place was this: now lies and oaths, and curses to the spoil: and there
made such a spoil of Peter, that like a man in a trance, or distracted of his
wits, he wist not what he did, no^ once remembered himself, no more than Dan.
2. 5. Genesis 19. 35
Nabucad-nezzar remembered his dream, or Lot his incest. See what we are, being
left to our selves, Peter even now confidently said, that he would lay down
his life for his master: yet he that would seem to be the strongest, showed
himself the weakest, and he first Mar. 14. 72
denied his master.

This was Peter's fall: but we are to speak of Peter's rising, and of Peter's
repentance, for so soon as he was wakened with the alarm of a seely cock, he
began to remember his sin, and to weigh the greatness of it: for so Mark
records of him, and Peter says he remembered the words of Jesus, and weighing
that with himself, he went out and wept: our text says he went out and wept
bitterly.

So he went out.] This text affoords three special notes, being three degrees
of Peter his repentance. viz. remembrance of sin, remorce of sin, hearty
inward sorrow for sin, sending forth outward significations, even streams of
tears. Thus having found out the mine, let us now dig for the treasure.

So he went, etc.] This word So does send us to the first words of this
verse: for the word does in nature employ a necessary coherence or connection
of the words of my text, with that which went immediately before in the same
verse: the first words of this verse are: And Peter remembering etc.

The cock by crowing did put Peter in remembrance, for before he never thought
upon his sin. He was careless till the cock warned him: thereby we learn,
that the first step to repentance, is the remembrance of Psalm. 51. 3.
sin: and therefore the Prophet David says, my sins are ever before me.

As if he had kept a register, or a memorial book to look upon, that the
clear view of his sins might work a detestation thereof, and so send him
over unto God for remission, as the Israelites fled to the brazen serpent, Number.
21. 9
when they were stinged with scorpions.

And lest any of his sins should escape ^im, the same Prophet desires the
Lord to purge him from his secret sins.

Nothing holds a marrso long in sin, the want of due consideration.

The very remembrance of sin in a can full remorce, is of force enough to
batter ^ very heart of a christian man, that carrieth^ ny feeling, and is not
altogether obdurat, a^ hard-hearted, like Pharaoh, one that cann^ repent.

For I speak not of them that are estrau^ ged from God, and are given over to
a ^ probate sense, despising the Lord in the s^ bornesse of their corrupt
natures, kno^ he never so often at the doors of their con^^ences.

Such, if at any time they shall rememb^ their sins, are nothing humbled to
rep^tance, like Peter who went out and wept, b^ they grow malecontent, and
desperate, like (...)das, who having bethought himself, ho Mat. 27. 5.
tra^terously he had dealt with his maist^ went out and hanged himself.

See the differences of effects of consid^ration in the good, and in the wicked
ther^ membraunce of sin works a biting^ morce, and a great grieuing sorrow
in bo^ good and bad, but it breeds a godly sorro^ in the one, and a desperate
sorrow in the oth^ such a sorrow as in the godly pricks them forward to
repentance, such a sorrow in the wicked, as does drive them to despair, like
Achitophel and Cain.

Remembrance of sin to the wicked, is the hideous handwriting upon the wall
that Dan. 5.
drove Belshazar into a dumpe. This consideration is the very key, that opens
the door to the closet of our hearts, where al our books of accounts do lie.
It is the very looking-glass, or rather the eye of the soul, whereby she
sees herself, and looks into her whole estate.

In the ninth of Deuteronomy. and seventh verse Deuteronomy 9.
Moses charge the people to remember their sin, and there he puts them in
remembrance how often they provoked the Lord, by that means calling them to
repentance.

He went out, etc.] Now comes in another step of Peter's repentance: he first
weighed his sin, as M^rke notes, and in the meditation thereof being now
thoroughly wakened from his former drowsines and slumber of sin, he went out:
wherein note the effectual operation of Gods spirit in the children of God:
after we have sinned, presently the grace of God calls us home again, and
suffers us not to rest: like the dove that being sent out from Noah, found no
rest for the sol^ Genesis 8.
of her foot, til she returned to the arc: no^ can Peter now find any rest
til he had found Christ by repentance, whom he had lost by denial.

Peter his sin was great: it was no sma^ bait that Satan laid in his way,
for wha^ greater advantage could Satan almost hau^ wished than this, unless he
had driven him to despair too: and sure he had prevailed in this also, had not
the neuer-failing hand of Gods mercy stayed him up after his fall, for his ow^
glory, and to the unspeakable comfort o^ the godly, who though they fall, can
never fa^ away: for the promise of God stands sure and has this seal: deus
nouit qui sunt su^* God knows who are his.

And our Savior Christ says; of those who^ thou have given me, I have not lost
one, sau^ Ioh. 17. 12.
that son of perdition.

Peter went out, etc.] Being ashamed to stay any longer in the place, where he
had so grossly sinned, in denying his master, and for that in regard of the
company, he could not so well advise himself of the greatness of his sin, by
sounding the very bottom of his conscience, by a due examination, he left the
company, and went out.

He went out, etc.] As Isaac went out into Ge. 24. 63.
the fields to pray, so Peter went out to meditate and consider what he had
done. The faithful soul, when it is desirous to enter into any holy
consulation, or conference, couets to be alone, like Christ in the desert,
sequestered Mat. 4.
from the society of men. Jacob being alone wrastled with the Angel, and
prevailed for Genesis 22. 24
a blessing. Jonah went out of the city Niniuie to mourn. Jonah. 4. 5.


Moses was bid to put off his shoes, Exodus 3. 5
when he pressed nere the flaming bush, so we must put off our shoes of
carnalitie, and go out from our selves, as it were casting off our old
affections, as the adder casts his slough; if we will tread upon holy
ground, and press to come where God is.

Peter, so long as he stayed in the high priests hall, among the enemies of
Christ, he became as one of them, and had quite forgotten, that ere Christ was
his master, or he his scholar, and therefore he demed him whom he should have
confessed, but being divided from those wicked ones, he deeply weighed within
himself the guilt, and greatness of his sin, as if he should have reasoned
in this or the like sort with himself.

Oh, what have I done miserable man, that I am, how daungerously have I fallen
in denying the Lord of life, my Lord?

I a rebellious sinner, to deny him that s^ued me, and by his death redeemed
me. An^ was I so wicked as having denied him once, must proceed to deny him
thrice together and that with oaths, and curses, and banning^ Has my
protestation and confident bold^ nesse come to this issue? have I showed m^
self so cowardice, and such an impote^ weakling, that I could not remain
consta^ till the morrow.

This last day, I protested if all the world were offended, yet I would not be
offended, Mat. 26. 33
yea I was ready to lay down my life fo Christ my Lord, and yet lo, before
the cock^ crew twice, I had denied him three times.

O perjured wretch that I am? how hau^ I transgressed? what a shipwreck have
made of my faith, by denying him that die^ for me? I that thought my faith
strong enough to encounter with the whole world most shamfully suffered a
maid, a woman and the weaker vessels to discountenaun^^ me.

Is this, not to be offended, is this; to giu^ my life for my master^nay, is
not this to forsake him quite, and to join with the wicke^ Jews to condemn
and crucify him?

For what could I have done more hainously against him, unless I had joined
with the wicked, to take his life from him? Judas did but betray him, and sell
him for money, and I have voluntarily denied him without hyre, and without money.

The world hereafter, and al posterities shall take knowledge of my sin. My
name deserves to go with a brand upon it, like the name of Jeroboam; my name
cannot once be mentioned, but my sin must likewise be remembered.

Jeroboam goes with his train, Jeroboam 2. Ki. 10, 29 and. 2. Ki. 3. 3
that made Israel to sin: and Peter deserves to have his train too, Peter
that denied his master. In this or the like manner, Peter at his going out,
reasoned with himself, and surely nothing is so mighty in operation, nothing
so forcible, as the benefit of consideration, the careful weighing of our
sins, it is the very stone, that must sincke into Goliath his temples, it is
the spiritual hammer breaking the stony hardness of our hearts. And Satan
should never be able to deteine so many sinful souls in the slavery of sin,
if they did but examine, and consider of their sins.

For this examination, this going out wi^^ Peter to parley with our sins,
where it hat^ his effectual working, there it sifteth eue^ corner of the
conscience: it lights a candle ^^ our understanding, and makes a search, an^ as
it were a quest of inquiry, throngh the sinful places thereof: it searches
and sweep Luke. 15. 8
every foul corner, like the woman that ha^ lost the groat: and when they are
all summoned, and do make their appearance at the bar^ of consideration, they
are all arraigned, an^ condemned, and executed, and our soule^ quite rid, and
purged of them, like a prison at the goal delivery. This examination lays
open, as it were by way of evidence, al^ the losses, and harms done by sin: as
the lo^sing of the grace of God, which once was given us, and all things
accompanying grace, as the virtues, and gifts of the holyghost, wherewith the
soul was beautified.

Secondly, the loss of Gods favor, and his fatherly protection: thirdly the
loss of the reward of all our good works: fourthly the loss of the peace of
conscience: fifthly we make our selves guilty of eternal condemnation, and so
consequently do bind ou^ selves to all those encumbrances, whereto the
reprobates are subject, as to be inheritour of hell fire, and to be in the
power of the devil and his Angels.

These are the losses and inconveniences, which we draw upon our heads in every
sin that we commit, and have we not need then to go out with Peter after
every sin that we commit, weighing the greatness thereof, as he did, and
never rest, like the restless dove, till we fly to God, as the dove to the
arc, by an unfeigned repentance.

This made Peter go out, and this was his consideration, and the same must be
ours too, if we will have rest to our souls, or peace to our consciences.

He went out, etc.] The place from whence he went, was the high priests hall,
the place of judgment, where Christ was arraigned, where the scribes and
people were gathered together against Christ, none but wicked men assembled in
that place: and here was no place for Peter.

Therefore he went out:] Good men must not company with the wicked at any time,
and if they happen to light in their society, ^ike David among the Philistines,
they ought then to make speed to go out from them according to the counsel of
Solomon: turn Prou. 15.
away from the wicked man. The Lord will have the righteous to out go from the
wicked, as Lot went out of Sodom to dwell in Zoar.

Peter sat in denying his master; but now being brought to the knowledge of
his sin he bestirred himself and went out: when we are most secure, and at
greatest ease, resting our selves as it were in the chair of security and
drowsinesse, then is Satan most vigilant and watchful to snare us.

As when Jobs children were feasting, and thought least of any danger toward
themselves, Job. 1. 19
the devil spied his opportunity to destroy them, by throwing the house upon
their heads.

When Belshazar was sitting at the table, carowsing wine among his nobles in
vessels Dan. 5.
of silver and vessels of gold, then were the hideous fingers upon the wall
ready to pen his tragical end, and the ruin of his kingdom.

Lot had no sooner betaken himself to ease Gen 19. 33
in Zoar, but Satan prevailed against him, to cause him commit incest with
his two Genesis 9. 21
daughters: he tempted Noah the preacher of righteousness, after he had planted
himself a vineyard, to take so deep a taste of the grape, that he became
drunk, he became ouerflowed with wine, as the old world with water: and this
was a worse deluge then the first.

He that preached to others but a little before, could not preach to himself a
lesson of sobriety, but lay uncovered in his tent, and was a rebuke to his
own children. If these mighty ones have bin ouerthrown, how shall the
weaklings stand? No marvel if the low shrubs be rooted out and supplanted,
since the tall Cedars in Lebanon are thrown down.

This security was far from Job, who as he showed himself in other things
to be patient, showed himself in this to be vigilant, in that he says I
feared al my ways. If Peter had watched Satan, as Satan watched him, l^e had
not bin snared: but when he sat, Sa^^n saw he was careless, and therefore the
more subject to be tempted, and to be overcome.

We read of the cranes, that when they Pliny.
flock together to feed, one of them uses to feed a far off, and that
crane so singled from the rest, still as he feeds looks round about him, and
observes if any danger be toward them, if he spy any body drawing nigh,
then he gives warning to the rest, and so they save themselves: shall this
policy rest in unreasonable birds, and shall it not ^ found in man? If when
Peter his body ha^ taken it rest, his soul had wakened, and observed, Satan
casting a net about him, to in^ tangle him, he had deceived the deceiuer, b^
while he sat, his enemy walked round about him, and circumuented him so, as he
had n^ power to escape.

Peter sat when he fell, like a man in ^ slumber, that falls beside his
chair, but now he stands up, like a man, newly wakened out of a dream, and
he goes out. The godly are ever for the most part noted, either going,
walking, or running. The Prophet Ps. 119. 33.
David desired the Lord to teach him to go the path of his commandments: and
having Ps. 119. 32.
learned to go, he had also learned to run the way of his commandments: I will
run the way of thy commandments. One comes Luke. 10.
running to Christ, desirous to know what he must do, to obtain eternal life,
he thought he Mar. 10. 17
could not run fast enough, being in the way to eternal life.

Zacheus ran to meet Christ: a certain blind man in running to Christ threw
away his cloak, to the end he might run the faster.

And Peter held his station no longer, but Luke. 19. 4.
besturd himself, and made haste to go out, when he felt the lively
soule-stirring motion of Gods spirit calling him to repentance.

Samuel could not sleep, when the Lord 1. Sam. 3.
called, nor Peter sit any longer, when the spirit of God called upon him by
the crowing, of a cock. Let us learn of Peter to yield to the woorking of
Gods spirit, now the cock croweth, and as many as are watchful may hear it:
now then let us prepare our selves to repent like Peter.

And he wept bitterly.] Here is the third degree or step of his repentance,
testified by his tears.

Pliny writes that the tears of the vine do cure the leprozie of the
skin: So the tears of the faithful, grafted into the true vine Christ
Jesus, do cure the leprozie of sin.

S. Aug. says, when the Eagle waxes old, she plungeth her wings into a
fountain of clear water, and so renueth her strength: So we must wash and
bathe this whole body of sin, so shall we become lusty and young as an Eagle.

S. Cyril upon this weeping of Peter says; Locum flendo recepit, quem negando
perdidit: he found that in weeping, which he lost by denying: and though he
denied him, says Nazaianzene: God is more merciful, than m^ can be sinful, if
man will be sorrowful. ^ 2. King. 2
Elisha threw salt into the waters, to man them sauory and sweet, so must we
season o^ prayers with salt tears, to make them sauo^ unto God.

Great cause had Peter to weep, consid^ ring 1. Sam. 1. 7
the greatness of his sin: for if Ann^ had cause to weep for her
barrenness, mu^ more cause had Peter for his barrenness ^ faith.

If Rachel wept for her children, becau^ Iere. 31. 15
they were not, much more cause had Pet^^ to weep for his graces, because they
were no^

If Agar wept, being turned out of her masters house, should not Peter mourn
much rather for turning himself out of his maste^ house, and denying his coat?

If Thamar wept, being deflowred of he^ 2. Sam. 13 19.
virginity, has not Peter cause to weep, for being deprived of his faith
and constanci^

If the Virgin Marie wept, for the death o^ her Son, as if her soul had bin
pierced tho^ row with a sword, has not Peter cause t^ weep for denying him,
that died for him?

Many causes we see may procure tears; bu^ sure, to deny Christ as Peter did,
is a caus^ that should even dissolve all eyes into tears* If the eye be dry
at any time, it ought in no case to be dry, when we should weep for sin.

No tears are lost, that fall from the eyes of ^odly men, for god catches them
before they can fall to the ground, and he treasureth them Psalm. 56, 8
up in his bottle.

If you will direct this watery humor to his due course, and derive this flood
of affection to the right channel, we must weep for our sins like Peter.

Such weeping is both the salve and smart of sin, curing that which it
chastneth with true remorce, and preventing need of new Cure, with detestation
of the disease.

Tears tie the tongues of all accusers: and soften the rigor of the seuerest
judge: when they are most pitiful, they are most powerful; and when they are
most forsaken, they are most victorious; full of strength, like to Samsons
hairy locks, even to foil whole armies. Iud. 16.


This heavenly dew of devotion never falls, but the sun of righteousness
draws it up, and upon whose face soever it drops, it makes the same most
amiable and glorious, like the face of Moses, when he came down Exo. 34, 35
from the Mount.

Most sweetly was it uttered by a divine of sweetest utterance, that repentant
eyes are ^ cellars of Angels, and penitent tears the sweetest wines. which
the savor of life p^ fumeth, the taste of grace sweetneth, and t^ purest
colors of returning innocence hig^ly beautifieth.

O that our hearts were such a limbeck^ evermore distilling so pure a
quintessenc^ drawn out from the weeds of our offenc^ by the fire of true
contrition. Heaven would mourn at the absence of so precious a water and earth
lament the loss of so fruitfu^ showers.

Sure till death close up the fountains, the shall never fail running: and
then shall ou^ souls be ferried in them to the haven of life that as by them
we were first transporte^ from sin to grace, so in them w^ may b^ waf^ed from
grace to glory.

And thus have I delivered unto you, the three degrees of Peter's repentance,
which steps we must all pace, if we will tread the way that leads to
eternal life.

And now, if I might be so priuileged, 2. Chro. 1. 7
that I might receive what I would at Gods hands, like Solomon; I would entreat
no more but this of him, that he would direct every one of us to keep these
steps, which his apostle S. Peter, has troaden out before us.

There is none of us but has offended ^th Peter, we have denied Christ as he
did, though not in the same manner, yet sure in as ^^eat a measure: and had we
lived to have ^^ne Christ in the flesh, and had bin in like ^ort urged, as
Peter was, we would not have ^icked to have likewise offended.

But how many are among us, that though ^hey confess Christ in name, do not
deny ^^m in deeds and works? we profess the ^^me of christians, but live
like infidells, ha^ing a show of godliness, but denying the power of it. We
have nothing from Christianity, but the name, like Labans Idols, that were
called gods, and yet were but blocks.

What fruit has the word wrought in us? what amendment of life? what
reformation? every man sound himself, and descend into his own conscience,
and he shall find himself now nothing better than he was many score years ago:
as proud now as ever, as covetous now as ever, as vain every way now as ever,
as unapt to serve God now as ever: and what else is this then to deny Christ?

Although Christ is preached unto us every Sabbath, and we all in good measure
acquainted with the will of God opened unto us in his word, yet who cares to
walk w^ thy of his knowledge, and to practice in a ^ ^ly obedience that which
we know; and is ^ this to deny Christ?

We hear how straightly God co^maunds us to keep his Sabbath, and yet^
wilfully violate the same: if we present o^ selves in the beginning of the
Sabbath, offer unto God the morning sacrifice, we^ not come in the afternoon,
to give him ^ evening incense: But we reserve the be^ part of the day to our
selves, and do best^ it upon our lusts: and is not this to d^^ Christ?

Peter after he had weighed the greatnes^ his sin, was so offended with
himself, the he had almost drowned himself in his ow^ tears. Since we have
sinned with Peter, us repent with Peter, ^ who after this did sin^ no more. The
same Peter after this, too^ penance of himself, for his Denial, and co^
ragiously gave up his life for the testimony ^ Jesus Christ.

Let every one of us the^ go forth with Pet^^ and weep before the Lord, like
Ezechial that he may forgive us our misdeedes. If w^ had as many eyes in our
heads, as there b^ grasse-piles upon the ground, yet we oug^ ^o weep them all
out for our sins.

If ever there were a time for tears, then ^^is is the time, wherein
eye-streames ought ^o be most behoouefull, for this is the time of our
visitation: this is a time that should be devoted wholly to mourning
meditations, ^^ke the Captive Israelites upon Babilons banckes.

Were Jeremy now alive, and saw the iniquity of these times, and the vialls of
Gods wrath already powered out upon this land, and the inhabitants thereof, for
the sin there^n committed, he would again renew his tragical ditty in the
ninth of his prophecy; O that my head were a well of water, and mine eyes a
fountain of tears, that I may weep day and night for the slain of the
daughter of my people!

The scarcity and streightnes wherewith we yet are, and of long time have bin
afflicted should force us to take up a lamentation, and to howl out with those
husbandmen in Joel his time, for the wheat and for the barley, because the
fields are wasted, and the harvest is perished.

Our Ephah is become small, but the shekel great, and God has utterly broken
the staff of our bread, as Ezechiel speaks, and had we not need to weep
bitterly with Peter, a^ with David to water our couch with teare^

Yet notwithstanding all this: where is ^^ humiliation that is required who yet
(...) neth to the Lord? nay we seem to be ha^^ned in our sins, and we have
m^de our ha^ like the adamant, that the impression of Go^ graces cannot enter.

Resembling herein wicked Pharaoh, an^ those senceles Egyptians, who were so
fr^zen in the dregs of their sins, and their ha^ so stony, that the ten
plagues powered vp^^ them, did no whit humble them, or ma^^ them to relent.

The like remorceles obduration we read Amos 4.
of in the fourth of Amos, there the Lord checketh the people for their
rebellious obstinacy, in not reforming themselves acco^ding to his righteous
judgments.

I have given you cleanesse of teeth in ^ your cities, and scarcenes of bread
in all you^ places, yet you have not returned unto m^ says the Lord.

I have also with holden the rain from ^o^ when there were yet three months
to the harvest, and yet you have not returned unto me.

I have smitten your fields with blasting and mildew, your great gardens and
vineyards, and I have sent the pestilence among you, to devour you, and still
concludes every plague with this bitter complaint, and yet you have not
returned unto me, says the Lord.

There are none of the aforesaid plagues, ^ut have bin inflicted upon us, yet
we show no reformation.

It is not long since God struck us with the rod of pestilence, being a
general plague, that did spread it self over all the land, and almost over
every particular congregation, and yet that did not humble us.

What heart can think of the sorrows of that time without compunction, or what
eye can look back to the ruins of those times without compassion? Was any
sorrow, since that time like the sorrows then, when the fattest and welthiest
of us were compelled to seek our bread with sighs, and to give our pleasant
things for m^ate to refresh our souls?

What a time of sorrow, and perplexity was it, to see all our friends and
neighbors, to stand a far off, disdaining to approach nere us? how the
destroyer did bes^^rre himself, in taking away the strong man, the graves do
yet witness that shroud so many corpses.

They who this day carried the dead b^ dies to their graves, were themselves on
t^ morrow carried by others into their grau^ The parents mourned for the death
of the children, and the children mourned as f^ for the death of their parents.

This was the time of our visitation, who now regards it? it is al now
forgott^ like a wonder that dureth but nine days. ^ that time the Lord took
from us o^ markets and faires, the greatest stay of ^ common wealth, and not
for a Sabboath^ weeks, but for many weeks, many Sabb^oths; even a Iubile of
Sabbaoths.

During the time of that humiliation, eu^ one seemed to turn unto the Lord,
and t^ Lord turned from his fierce wrath, and so t^ plague ceased.

But all that is now gone from us lik^ dream, and we have since returned, like
t^ dog to the vomit, and like the filthy sow* our old wallowiug in the mire.

And therefore a second plague has ou^ taken us, this plague of famine, being
indee^ so great, as the like has not bin seen in t^ memory of any man now
living, or of our ^ there is before us.

This is a time, wherein that proclamation ^^ereof we read in Joel, might well
be pub^shed in our streets.

Hear O elders, and hearken O ye ancients: ^hether any such thing has bin in
your Joel, 1. 2.
^ies, or in the days of your fathers, tell your ^hildren these things, and
let your children ^^ their children, and their children again another
generation.

And we must yet look for the continuance. ^f this plague; for till we leave
our sins, God ^ill not leave off to punish us.

I do not see any mean of reconcilement ^r pacification of this great wrath,
but even nightie and strong crying unto the Lord, and a general forsaking of
sin. We must ^^ke a covenant of our selves, that we will no ^ore transgres,
as the people did in the time ^f Iosuah.

When Nineveh was but threatened, it spee^ly Jonah. 3.
repented, the King himself and all the people believed God, and proclaimed a
^ast, and put on sackcloth, from the greatest ^^ the least of them, and they
cried mightily unto the Lord, and turned from the evil way, and from the
wickedness that was in their ^ands; and as they repented, God repented ^f the
evil, that he determined to do unto them, and he did it not.

Let us humble our selves, like these Ni^uites, by turning to the Lord with
fastin^ weeping, and mourning: for the Lord is g^^cious, slow to anger, and of
great kindnes^ and such a one as is sorry for our afflictions.

If we thus unfeignedly turn unto the lo^^ he will yet be jealous over us to
spare us, a^ to remove these judgments.

He will yet open the windows of he^uen, and instead of curses, power upon ^
twice so many blessings, as he doubled to ^^ his goods: instead of scarcity
we shall ^^ have plenty, for the mouth of the Lord ha^ spoken it.

I will yet send you corn, and wine, an oil, and you shall be satisfied: the
pastur^ shall yet be green, and the fields shall reioy^ for the harvest.

I will give you the rain of righteousne^ Joel, 2. 23.
I will cause to come down for you the fir^ and the later rain, and the
barnes shall be f^ of wheat, and I will render unto you the yea^ that the
cankerworme has eaten, and the years, that the caterpiller has devoured, an^
we shall yet rejoice before the Lord, eue^ man under his own vine, and under
hi^ ow^e fig tree.

Sic paucis lachrimis, gaudia magna dabit. for a few short tears, he will give
infinite joys: such joys as neither eye has seen, nor ear ^ath heard, nor
has it entered into the heart of man, what God has prepared for them that
love him. For the accomplishing of which joys, and finishing of these days of
sin, O thou whom my soul loves, make haste like the Roe upon the mountains,

Amen.
FINIS.
Christ his last Supper.
The Lord Jesus, in the same night that he was betrayed, took bread: and when
he had given thanks, he brake it, and gave it to his Disciples: saying. Take
eat, this is my body, which is given for you: do this, as often as you do it,
in remembrance of me. 1. Cor. 11. 23.
ALL the volume of Gods book, does most plentifully lay out the unspeakable
love of God toward us, in creating us in holiness, protecting us in security
from millions of dangers, which else would swallow us up, in governing us
with the scepter of his word, in sanctifying us with his comfortable spirit, in
illuminating us with his knowledge: but most of all, for saving us, when we had
lost our selves, being now redeemed, not with silver and gold, but with the
death of his beloved son Christ Jesus, who humbled himself to the death of
the Cross, and sustained all contumely, shame, reproach, yea the very pains of
hell for our sakes, al for us.

All being infallible testimonies of the superabounding love of God, in giving
us his Son to die for us, that so many as believed on him should not perish,
but have everlasting life.

And this love of God is made manifest unto us by two special pledges or
tokens^ that is, by the two sacraments, that of Baptisine, and this of the
Supper of the Lord: Reave. 13. 8
both like John Baptist, do point at Christ, the lamb of God, the slain
lamb from the beginning, whom they that know not, abide in wrath. Both declare
and show forth Jesus Christ crucified, and that we have remission of our
sins in his blood only.

Baptisine is that holy institution of Christ in the new testament, wherein we
are washed with water, in the name of the Father, the Son, and the holy
Ghost, to signify that we are received to grace, by the virtue of Christ's
death, that by blood we are cleansed from our sins, and are regenerate by his
spirit, and therein are bound to testify a newness of life, after our new
birth.

This baptisine contains three things; The sign, water, the ceremony, the
sprinkling of the water: and the things themselves, viz. the sprinkling of
Christ's blood, and the imputation of his righteousness.

This other of the Supper of the Lord, represents likewise Christ crucified
and assures us, that by his death, we are freely saved from the malediction
of the law, assuring our selves, that as our mouths receive the bread and
wine, so our souls receive Christ, and his righteousness.

These Sacraments are as conduits to conueigh Gods graces unto us: the one is,
to purge our souls from sin: the other is, to feed us, after we be purged.
The first is a bath made of Christ his own blood, to wash and bathe our wounds
therein: thesecond is, amost comfortable and rich garment to cover our souls
after they be washed.

In the first, Christ has substituted in his place, his spouse the Church, to
pronounce in his name, remission of sins.

In the second, he has left himself, and his own flesh and blood
sacramentally, to be a precious food to cherish her withal. I purpose only at
this time to show you the comfort and edification, that we receive by the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper. For my text does lead me thereunto.

In the night that he was betrayed.] Here is set down the very Institution
of this Sacrament, with circumstances thereunto belonging.

The Lord Jesus: There is the author of it. In the night: There is the time. He
took bread: There is the sign. He gave thanks: That is the first action in
the sacrament. He brake it: There is the ceremony. He gave it: There is the
use of it. Saying: Take, eat, this is my body: There is the fruit of it. Do it
in remembrance of me: There is the charge of it.
When Christ died, the law ended, and the Gospel revived: after his death
circumcision was abolished, and the Pascal lamb no more used: for that the law
and ceremonies thereof were now to have an end. In steed whereof, he instituted
these two sacraments, Baptism for circumcision, and for the Pascall lamb, his
last Supper; so called, for that it was instituted in the night that he was
betrayed.

Much need not be spoken concerning the Author of this institution; only we
are here called upon for a most dutiful reverence in the celebration thereof,
since it is here noted by the Apostle to proceed immediately from Christ.

If it had pleased God to have used the ministry of an angel, or of ma^^in the
delivering forth of this sacrament, we had notwithstanding been pressed to a
careful observation thereof.

But to the end he might stamp in this holy mystery; a greater impression of
excellency, in regard of the singular comfort lapt up in the same, therefore
he has conveyed it unto us imediatly from himself. It ought therefore to be
more highly reckoned, even for his sake that was the author of it.

For if the word spoken by Angels was Heb. 2. 2.
steadfast, and every transgression received a just recompense of reward: how
shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation, which first was preached by
the Lord himself, and was afterward confirmed by them that heard him.

The people of Israel did not omit to observe the Passover throughout their
generations, because Moses the servant of God had so commanded them.

Much more careful ought we to be in the retaining of this Sacrament, since
not Moses, but Christ himself has commanded us to observe the same for ever,
throughout our generations.

For this man is counted more worthy of glory than Moses, inasmuch as he is
more excellent then the Angels, being the brightness of the glory, and the
ingraued form of Heb. 1. 3.
his person, as we read in the author to the Hebrews.

In the night that he was betrayed: at his betraying he ordained this sacrament:
comfort was revealed unto us when christ was disco^forted. When he was in
greatest heaviness, he prepared for us a solemn feast, even a more sumptuous
banquet then that of Aha^uerus, for whosoever eats of this bread shall live for
ever.

A better and more nourishing meat is here presented unto us, than Sampson
found in the dead lion. Judas and the scribes were this night devising how to
betray Christ, how to destroy him that should have saved them.

But Christ was devising how to finish the work of our redemption, and to
fulfill his fathers will.

Judas was devising how to take away his masters life, but Christ was devising
how to give them life, who were dead in the life of grace.

Judas, as he was wont to carry the bag, so Ioh. 12. 6.
he thought to mend the bag, as Gehezi thought to enrich himself with
Naamans 2. Kin. 5. 22.
gold.

He sold Christ in that night for money, but Christ bought us with a deerer
price than s^luer or gold, for it cost him his heart blood: all this amplifieth
the greatness of the love wherewith he loved us.

In the night when he was betrayed.] It was a bitter night, and an heavy night
unto Christ, as the history of his Passion declares, a night of sorrow, and
anguish, a night of perplexity and fear, a night wherein all the sorrows of
death gate hold upon him.

What a night was it to see his own disciples forsake him? how grievously was
he troubled in Gethsemaneh? himself testified ^is exceeding sorrow, when he
said, my soul ^s heavy unto the death.

Look the twenty sixth of Matthew, twice he repeateth his passionate prayer: O
let this cup pass from me.

What a terror was it unto him, to see his own Disciple Judas come and betray
him with a kiss, a great multitude following him with swords and staves to
take him.

And when they had taken him, what injury did they not unto him? how was he
mocked, spitted at, and beaten with fists.

Such a bitter night was it unto Christ, but it was to us a night more
comfortable than the day of our birth, a night brighter than the brightest day:
^a night more comfortable unto us, then that night of deliverance was to Exodus
12.
the Israelites, when they went out of Egypt from Pharaoh and from the
Egyptians: for in this night was the mystery of our redemption begun.

He took bread.] Now we are come to the institution. As there is no substance
with out his shadow: so there is no Sacrament without his sign.

And the sign in this Sacrament is the bread and wine.

God in these familiar matters, shrowdet^ instruction of greater mystery.

We are best acquainted with the use o^ bread, and we well know what strength
our bodies receive by it, the same and more is Christ to our souls, to nourish
them to eternal life.

After we have fed our bodies with bread and drink, we are hungry and ^hirsty
again: but Christ the living bread that came from heaven, so feeds our
souls, that they hunger and thirst no more.

Sampson could not see the honey dropping, Iud. 14, 9.
but he must needs be licking: so we cannot behold Christ inuiting us to so
heavenly a banquet, but we long to be feeding, and when we have fed, and
disgested this spiritual food, we never hunger any more, because our soul
are still full, as the Prophet David says; my cup is full: and in the strength
Psalm. 24, 5.
of this food, we are able to continue longer then Eliah did.

And when he had given thanks.] Christ did first give thanks: that's the first
action in this sacrament: he would not break the bread, nor give it to his
disciples, till he had sanctified it. To teach us what we must do before we
feed our selves.

He is ill worthy of the creatures of God, that will venture to use them, with
greater liberty then the Son of God did.

In the twenty six of Matthew, we find him not sitting down, til he had first
said grace, nor r^^^ng again, till he had sung a Psalm.

Unthankful people, that notwithstanding this example of Christ in this place,
will yet forget God, that feeds them, deserve to die with meat in their
mouths, like the Israelites ^^. 11, 20
with quails in their nostrilles.

Christ in giving thanks, calls upon us for gratitude and thanksgiving in
all matters whatsoever, for what have we that we have not received? for our
food, our health, our liberty, our peace.

All the creatures of God give praise to God that made them, and shall
ingratitude rest only in men?

That which Christ here has taught, the children of God in all ages have
learned of him, and practiced.

The Prophet David in the hundred and third Psalm, calls upon his soul, and
all that is within him, to praise the Lord.

The very birds do not feed themselves in the morning, till first they have
chyrped and sung out praises unto God, that made them.

Pl^^ie records, that there is not so fierce* o^ cruel a nature in the world,
but it is allured and won by benefits: and stories do make report of strange
examples in this kind, as of lions and dogs toward their benefactors; only
an obstinate is he, among all the savage creatures that are whom neither
benefits can move, nor curte^^es can mollify, nor promises can allure, nor
gifts can gain, to the grateful service of his Lord.

We have nothing from our selves, but our sins: all else comes from God; yet
we forget God; that gives us all things: the bread to feed us, the earth to
bear us, the light to comfort us, our clothes to cover us, yea more than can
be most, his own son to die for us, and yet our hearts will not call upon our
mouths, to acknowledge the author of all this.

So ingra^efull are we, like those nine leapers, ten were cleansed, and but one
returned Luc. 17. 17
to give thanks.

So is it with us scarce one of ten have learned to be thankful. Nature has
stamped in the very beasts of the earth, a kind of gratitude, Esaias proves it,
to reprove men, for that they show themselves so unlike beasts. Esaias. 1


The ox knows his owner, and the ass his masters cribbe, yet Israel
knows not me.

Among these lepers above cited, we find one better than nine, and they were
men, one man better then many men; but here we find beasts better then men.

If we will not learn of David, nor yet of Christ David's Lord, learn of an
ox and an ass, to be thankful.

He brake it.] The breaking of the bread may not pass without his note: It
betokens the participation of his body; as bread cannot be given, nor divided
unless it be broken, so the flesh of Christ cannot equally be communicated
nor imparted to the faithful receivers, unless first it be broke. As we
cannot eat whole loaves, until they be cut into pieces and morselles, that so
we may the better chew them and digest them: so that other bread in the
sacrament must be broken, and divided also, because it cannot otherwise be
redeemed.

Besides, the breaking has in it this mystery; it signifies the breaking of
Christ's body, viz. the torments and tortures, and bitter pains that he
endured for us, both in his body and soul.

As our eye then beholdes the breaking of the bread in the sacrament: so let
our spiritual eye, the eye of the soul, look upon Christ, and his passion:
look upon him reviled, scorned, spitted at, whipped, araigned, crowned with
thorn, by false evidence convicted, and condemned, and sentenced, and executed
between two thieves, his hands and feet nailed through: gaul and vinegar
given him to drink: his most precious side goared and pierced through with a
spear. All this must be seriously thought upon, with all other occurrences
of his death and passion, when thou see the bread broken.

And gave it.] After he had broken it, he gives it, for now it was made fit
for them, and they were as capable to receive it, and as he gave it, so he
gave not it alone, but he gave comfort with it, even himself with it: 2. Kin.
2. 13
as Elisha received at one time, both Eliah, his cloak, and his spirit too.

Take, eat, this is my body.] As if he should have said: I have already fed
your bodies with material food; lo, now receive better meat, food for your
souls, which shall feed them up to eternal life.

Because Christ came to fulfill the law, therefore he first ate the Passover,
with his Disciples, and so finished that, and abrogated it, in steed whereof,
he preseutly for the comfort of his Church, ordained this sacrament of his
body and blood, which should for ever be used, a special mark of the true
Church, being arightly administered.

In this sacrament we receive Christ Jesus God and man, we eat his body, and
we drink his blod: so we beleene and teach: but by his body, we mean not
that body which was at the table when this sacrament was instituted, not that
body which was crucified for us upon the Cross, not that body that was
incarnate of the virgin Mary: But by his body we mean the force, and
fellowship, and power of his body, with all his goodness and righteousness.
[This doctrine is as true as Christ is Christ, and the Scripture is Scripture.]
Howsoever the Papists maintain the contrary by their doctrine of
transubstantiation: which is an execrable doctrine and a detestable heresy.

They hold that the bread and wine in the Sacrament, is turned after the words
spoken by the minister, into the very flesh of Christ, and the wine into his
blood.

A gross and most absurd opinion, that we should rent with our teeth the very
flesh o^ Christ our Savior. This is even to cruci^^^ Christ again like the
Jews: and to mak^ a worse rent in his body then the Jews did in parting his
garments.

Auerroys his interpreter of the Papists speaks thus: that he compassed al
lands almost, and yet could not find a worse sect the^ these Antichristian
heresies; for (says he) they rent and tear with their teeth, him that made
them, and so do dishonor him whom they should honor.

All the reason that they build upon, is but the words only of the institution.
Christ said, This is my body: ergo they say, we must believe it is his body:
nothing indeed makes more against them: for mark the words: Jesus took
bread, etc. I will demand of them by interrogatories thus:

What did Christ take? Bread What did he break? Bread What did he give? Bread
What did they eat? Bread

What did he call his Body? even that which he took in his hands, which also
he brake, and gave to his disciples, viz. bread.

This is my body then, must thus be construed: viz. This bread is my body:
which is a figurative speech.

And the very same Phrase is used by the Lord himself in the old Sacraments
of the law. The Lord speaking of circumcision, says: This is my covenant
between you and me. Genesis 17. yet circumcision is not the covenant but a sign
of the covenant. So in the Phrase, it is all one: This is my body: that is,
this bread is a sign of my body.

Pascha item Iehouae transitus: The Paschal Lamb is called the Lords
Passover, yet is it not the passover, but the sign of the Passover. And
Paul in the first to the Corinths the tenth, says; the rock was Christ: So
God the father is called, an husbandman: God the son a vine, a door: Peter
is called Satan, Satan is called a Lion. All are figurative, or tropical
speeches.

S. Paul decides this controversy, when thrice after the consecration, he
repeates the word bread.

But they affirm further, finding this argument to be weak, that this bread
and wine, is turned miraculously, whom we answer Austin.
wirh S. Augustine: Sacramenta honorem tanquam religiosa habere possunt, sed
stuporem tanquam mirae non possunt. And again says the same S. Augustine; non
dubitant Dominus dicere: Hoc est corpus meum, cum signum daret corporis sui^

If it were a miracle, there could be no error: it would appear to be truly
altered. The bread would take the form of flesh, and the wine would appear to
be blood: but in quantity, and quality, we see they remain al one, without
alteration of substance, more than in use.

Search the scriptures laid out in the scripture, and we shall find no
conueniency between this and them.

The rod was turned into a serpent: the Israelites Exodus 4.
saw it.

Water was turned into wine in the marriage John. 2. 9.
at Canah: the guests saw it, and tasted it.

The ancient fathers are against them: Theodoret says, Mistica signa non
amittunt propriam naturam, the mistical signs do not lose their proper nature.

Will they hear the testimony of one of their own fraternity. Macarius a
monk says, in the church is offered bread and wine, viz. Exemplaria corporis
and sanguinis Christi.

I say according to the truth of Gods word, there is no alteration, but the
bread and wine still remain al one both before, and after the words of
consecration.

The mutatio^ is not in substance, but in use; for they be as seals of Christ's
merits for us: as for example; take wax, fastened to a writing, and it differs
not from other wax, but in use only, not in nature, but by the ordinance of
man.

But the sacraments are ordained for a more excellent purpose. And being only
in use, after the administration, they have no place but during the action.

The things in these visible signs represented unto us, are Jesus Christ, and
al his graces, and treasures: for the virtue of our faith is such, that it
ascends from the earth into heaven, and there does knit and unite us with
Christ, which is the cause that the Primitive church s^ng, sur^um corda, lift
up your hearts: signifying, that we should prepare, not dentem, but mente^: not
our mouths, but our hearts, to apprehend Christ, and the benefits of his death.

Not poring upon the Pix, looking for Christ to be there, like as the shaueling
priests did, in the time of blindness.

For they after they have blasted and breadied, and blowed upon the bread, they
kneel down to it, and worship it: saying; Agnus dei qui tollis: thrice do they
call the bread, holden in their hands, the lamb of God: was not this
abominable Idolatry? The author of this idolatrous leuation of the bread was
Pope, Honorius about the year of our Lord 1210 yet the adversaries dare
brag, that their mass came from the Apostles, like the old Arcadians, who
hold themselves to be a day elder than the Moon: forgetting how they
themselves call it Sacrificium nouum. wherein they strangle the antiquity of it.

For a better resolution, note the force of these arguments, overthrowing the
Papists doctrine of transubstantiation.

The first Argument.
It is against the nature of a natural body to be in more places than one at
once: Christ's body being in heaven, cannot be in the Sacrament too, that it is
in heaven and there abides, that pregnant place in the third of the Acts
proves it, whom it behooves the heavens to contain, until the restoring of
all things.

Besides, the Article of our faith, proves his being there, and his own
testimony in the fourteenth of John; I must go to my father.

Until Pope Vrbane this error of the Papists was never received in the church;
he first compelled men by fire and faggot, to receive this abominable doctrine;
it is not much more then five hundred years ago.

The second Argument.
S. Augustine says, that Abraham, Moses, and the Prophets, received the body of
Christ truly, and effectually, before Christ was incarnate of the Virgin Marie:
even the same body we receive now.

S. Paul proouing as much, they did eat all one spiritual meat, and drink
one spiritual drink: all this notwithstanding, yet our adversaries do urge,
except you eat the flesh of Christ, and drink his blood, there is no life in
you; what life then has Abraham, and David, and all the holy men, that died
before Christ.

Note the absurdities of the Papists doctrine; they overthrow the nature, of a
sacrament, in confounding the sign with the substance, they make their maker:
they draw Christ from heaven to the table, at their own pleasure; they give him
infinite bodies.

Which is given for you.] This is the fruit of it; this sacrifice were nothing
available, if it concerned not our good.

This was the end of this institution of Christ's Supper, his body was given for
us.

Christ died not for himself, but for us* this was that holy sacrifice, which
the sacrifices of the old law shadowed, the blood of oxen, and of sheep did
purport, that Christ's body should be offered, and his blood powered out for our
sins.

Given for us.] Here is all merit excluded, the mere love of God caused
Christ to die for us. So God loved the word that he gave his only begotten Son,
that so many as believed on him should not perish, but have life everlasting.

Having now the participation of his body and blood, we may sing with S. Paul:
now there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus: God spared not
his only son, but gave him for us al to death: and again, who shall condemn?
it is Christ who is dead, or rather who is ^isen for us.

This should make us love God, and this should stir us up to be thankful
unto him for so inestimable a benefit. And God does call upon us, for this
thankfulness in the following words. Do it in remembrance of me.

O it is a thing especially to be remembered: this benefit of our redemption: O
it ought to be printed upon our nails, and upon our tables; and upon our beds,
that we might never forget it.

Let us remember Christ his death: for it is our life, it saues us from death,
even eternal death.

David could say of Jerusalem: If I forget Psa. 137. 5.
thee O Jerusalem let my right hand forget her cunning: yea let my tongue
cleave to the roof of my mouth, if I prefer not Jerusalem to my cheifest joy.

So let us say the same of Christ: if we forget thee, O our redeemer, let our
right hand forget her cunning, yea let our tongues cleave to the roof of our
mouths, if we prefer not thy death to our cheifest joy.

Remember thy creator, says the Preacher, Eccle. 12, 1
so I say, remember also thy Redeemer.

Thou ought sooner to forget thy self, as Messalah did his name, the^ to
forget him that died for thee.

Consider this you that forget God, you that dwell in sinful Ierico, leave your
sins, they procured Christ's death.

Christ has died for us, that henceforth we should learn to die to sin, and
walk in newness of life, knowing that our old man is crucified with him, to
thend the body of sin should be destroyed.

You then remember him as ye ought, when you lay all the story of his Passion
before you, as if you loo^ed upon him now crucified and hanging on the
cross, enduring all the torments and pains of hell, both in body and soul
for our sakes: consider of all the tortures and bitter pangs of his innocent
passion, which Nazianzene compriseth in three words, (...).

Buffets and blows, mockes and mowes, railings and reuilings, whips and
scourges, pricks and thorns, hammers and nails, cords and ropes, cross and
gibbet, thirst and vinegar, reed and spear, these were the instruments of our
redemption.

All this, and more then can be uttered, did he sustain patiently for our sakes
in his most blessed body. Which though they be now past in him, ought not
lightly to pass from us, but ever to be fresh in memory; as David said: I
will never forget these iustifications of thine: so let us say, we will never
forget these torments of thine.

The christian souls of men should live Act. 7, 55
and die in the meditation of Christ's life and death; like Stephan in the
contemplating of his glory.

If the Philosophers call contemplation the greatest and chefest felicity,
certainly then in this contemplation consists the greatest felicity.

The forgetfulness of this benefit drives us blindfolded into al sin: for when
we forget Christ, we straightwaies forget our selves too, and so this proud
flesh of ours will not suffer us to crucify our crooked affections.

What flesh can be proud, that beholds our Savior so poor and contemptible
upon the cross? or what soul having any spark of grace, like the maimed faith
of Agrippa, ca^ now give himself over unto sin, considering the severity
of Gods justice upon his own natural and only begotten Son for our sins,
which otherwise could not be cleared, but by so dear a price, even the heart
blood of so glorious a person.

But of this enough, although enough can never be spoken, and it ought rather
to be mused upon in our hearts, than amplified in words. Here may wise men
study and wonder, like the disciples gazing after Jesus ascending, or like
Elisha; when his master was taken from him.

I will end with the words of this short charge in this place. Do it in
remembrance of Christ.

Remember Christ has redeemed you: Christ has reconciled you: his blood has
purged you: his faith does justify you: his appearing will glorify you: to
him with the father and the holy spirit be glory for ever.

Amen.
Christ Combating with Satan.
Then was Jesus led aside by the spirit into the Wilderness, to be tempted
of the devil. And when he had fasted forty days and fortye nights, he was at
the last an hungry. Then came to him the Tempter, and said, if thou be the
Son of God, command these stones to be made bread, etc. Math. 4. 1.
This Historye is recorded for our learning, and for our exhortation: for our
learning, to the end we should know, that Christ by this his fast, hunger,
temptation, and victory over Satan did all this for our sakes, and therein
works our good and safety.

The faithful in Christ, must know, that they shall never be left in
temptation, nor overcome in affliction, because our head Christ Jesus, has in
his own person overcome al these things for us, according to that sweet
testimony of himself, in the 16. of John, Be of good cheer, I have overcome
the world.

We are exhorted after this example of Christ, to endure hunger, temptation,
and any necessity or cross of affliction soever, that God shall lay upon us,
when and so often as it shall please God to exercise us with any such trial,
arming our selves with patience, and much constancy, and we shall undoubtedly
be delivered at Gods hands al in good time. God will comfort us when we are most
pinched, as in this place he comforted his son after his long fast, by
causing the Angels to minister unto him.

In the time of trouble and heaviness, when we combat with the devil, and our
own flesh, comfort seems for a time to be hid, like fire that is raked up in
the ashes, until the bellows of Gods providence blow upon it, and then it
shows it self upon a sudden, like the sun out of a cloud, when the storm
is past.

God requires that we stay his leisure, and at length, though his help and
succor, seem as far from us, as Lazarus in Abraham's Luc. 16, 22.
bosom, yet it will come at last, to do us most good, as the Sun that was
rising is risen, and as the sheaues fell before Ruth in the gleaning time. If
when we be no sooner down, God presently raises us up, Ruth. 2, 16.
why here can be no trial of patience: but God is wont to leave us for a
time, to the full swallow of affliction, that we seem past all recovery, like
Lazarus now four days already in the grave, and when we think Ioh. 11, 17.
least of danger, then God assisteth us by a speedy deliverance, and all our
troubles fall from us on a sudden, like the chains that fell Act 12, 7.
from Peter's hands: and so before we be aware, we are cast upon the shore
like Jonah.

The spirit of God led Christ into the city, where he wrought miracles, and
to the temple, where he preached, and to the mount where he was transfigured.

In the former chapter before this text, the same spirit led him to lordan,
where he was baptized, and here in this place he leads him aside into the
desert, to the city, to the temple, to the mountain, sea and desert, to
fulfill Mat 3. 15.
all righteousness.

What needed Christ to go to the desert, but to teach us how to carry our
selves, when we are driven to the desert?

Men cannot always live among men, they cannot still be in the city, but
sometimes they must be driven to the wilderness, as Moses was cast out among
the flagges: and therefore Exodus 3.
since the desert is a place subject to many incombrances and temptations, a
place remote from comfort, we had the more need to be armed against the
dangers there.

As the Israelites could not pass to Canaan, but through the desert of sin, so
we must not look to pass hence to our spiritual Canaan the kingdom of God,
but through the wilderness of sin.

Nay some of us are never out of this desert of sin, as many of the
Israelites left their bones in the wilderness.

Let Satan use never so violent a reluctation with thee, yet God will help
thee in Genesis 32, 31
thy wrastlings, and make thee strong like Jacob, so that thou shall prevail,
though thou go away hawlting, as Joseph went away with Ge. 39, 13.
a torn garment.

Be thou confident and strong, flying to Gods providence only for succor, as
the Dove fled to the arc for refuge, and in the Genesis 8, 9.
end, Satan shall have the foil, and thou the victory

Learn of Job to be of courage, who had such strong consolation in the midst
of his heaviness, that he could say; though God do kill me, yet will I still
trust in him. How weak was Satan, and how strong was Job, though Satan could
weaken his body, he could not weaken his soul; and therefore being ashamed, he
could so little prevail; he gave over both field, and conquest to a sick man.
Job Job. 13, 15.
though he could not stand upon his feet, for weakness, gets the victory
notwithstanding. Let men in weakness then take courage, since the victory
sometimes falls to the weakest. Be thou never so impotent, and weak, yet know
that God is strong to help thee, and confound the devil.

First Christ is driven to the desert: that is, he is left alone, and as it
were forsaken, of God, of Angels, and of men, and of al creatures, which might
seem to minister any way unto him.

Here we are to note the force and strength of this temptation, he is for a
time left desti^ute of help and comfort

For what temptation were it, if we were not forsaken, and left alone to our
selves, and specially, so to be left alone, that we neither know, nor can
devise, how to relieve or sustain our selves, for that all means do seem to
fail us.

Here is the trial of a christian man's faith: here it will appear, whether
you have faith like the Prince, that unbelieving wretch in the dearth of
Samaria^ or whether you have faith almost like Agrippa, or alogether like Paul,
eue^ to escape unconquered from the devil, as Paul escaped unhurt fron the viper,
Ect. 28, 5.
when he shook it into the fire.

God went far with the poor widow, when he suffered her to come to so low
an ebb, as that now she had but so much meal 1. King, 17.
as would suffize to make but one cake for her self and her family, and but a
quantity of oil in the bottom of the cruze; but yet though she were now at
the point to resign up her life, God so blessed that little oil, and that
little quantity of meal, that it served both her and her household, all the
time of the dearth: so, though it be long, comfort comes at last, and makes up
our mouths, lik^ Daniel his harvest dinner.

Peaury can be turned into plenty, and Psa. 23, 5. 6.
emptines to fulness, when God is determined to help us, and then we can sing
with David, my table is well furnished, and my cup runs over.

God went far with Helias, when in the. 1. king, 17.
time of three years dearth, he sent him to the river Cherith; yet the Lord
caused th^re the ravens to bring him bread and flesh in the morning, and bread
and flesh in the evening too.

God went far with the Israelites in the Exodus 17.
desert, when they could get no water for themselves, and their cattle; yet God
had prepared there the rock, to stream forth water abundantly: not to stand
upon examples, which are infinite; God went far with his own Son, the
brightness of glory, and the engraven form of his person, Christ Jesus, in
suffering him to endure this extremity of hunger, full forty days, before the
Angels Ioh. 10, 27.
came and ministered unto him.

In this it will be seen, whether we be the children of God, or the children
of the world: my sheep says Christ, hear my voice: let us then hear his
voice. His voice Ioh. 1 6, 33
has sounded long ago: I have overcome the world: so let us say, we have
overcome the world: and Goliath is never able to shrink this stone, but it must
pearce into his temples to return glory to Israel, and shame to the
Philistines.

If when in thy greatest need, and most pinching extremity, when thou have
not so much, as one mite to throw into the treasury, when all the substance
thou have cannot afford to buy thee meat for one meal, to satisfy thee and
thine; nor can look for any help from others, and yet do rely upon God in
his gracious providence, why then know, that he who sustained his own Son, in
the desert, by the ministry of his Angels, will sustain thee too. Before
thou shall starve, and perish in that extremity; God will send his Angel to
feed thee, as he sent his Angel, and Abacuk to feed Daniel in Babylon.

Indeed man is weak, and flesh is frail, and Satan is busy to tempt, as to
tempt at all times, so specially then, when thou art in the desert, when thou
art alone.

Hunger is one of the straightest extremities, and least able to b^ooke
patience.

Adam continued in his righteousness, and transgressed not, till the hour of
eating, Genne. 3.
and then when hunger called for meat, no mea^e could qualify his unbridled
appetite, nor satisfy his lust, but the forbidden fruit: and so he swallowed
the bait, that proved to be his bane.

As the Prophets children cried, death is in 2. kin. 4, 40.
the po^; so Adam might have cried, death is in the apple.

The belly has no ears, and therefore is apt to receive no instruction.

And this was the first hook, that ever Satan baited, to intrappe us in the
belly.

He well knew man's daintines, and therefore he applied himself to his humor;
and so we were never ware of the hook, he had so subtily couched it, till it
was in our throats.

The belly will tempt us to incredulity, and distrustfulnesse, as it tempted
that Prince, on whose shoulder the King leaned, 2. King. 7.
who though he had heard it proclaimed by the Prophet Elisha, that there should
be plenty of vittels, that a measure of flower should be sold for a shekel, and
two measures of barley for a shekel, by the next morrow, yet he was faithles,
and said it could not come to pass, though the Lord should make windows in
heaven; but it came to pass, and as a just punishment of his incredulity, he
was ^oden to death in the gate, and he saw it, but might not taste of it.

Let this Prince be a president of terror, to all unbelieving wretches, that
will distrust the divine providence.

Why should we distrust God, since we know that he cares for sparrowes: and
how much better are we than many sparowes?

Job. 39, 3.
Yea he feeds the ravens, that cry unto him, and himself charge us, not to
be careful for our bodies, what raiment we shall put on, nor for our bellies
what meat we shall provide; for after all these things do the Mat. 6, 25.
Gentiles seek.

He that spoke unto Paul, saying: my grace 2. cor. 12, 9
is sufficient for thee, says the same unto us, and to all the godly: my gace
is sufficient for you.

And therefore why are ye careful, O ye of little faith?

The belly made the Israelites distrust God in the wilderness, when they
murmured, and wished themselves among the flesh pots in Egypt, for there say
they, we ate Number. 14.
bread our bellies full, but now we must die with famine: they would not rely
upon God, longer than he fed them with bread from heaven, or gave them water
out of the hard rock.

God requires that his children do wait his leisure: for he staieth and
restrayneth his blessings from us, for a season; because our faith and our
patience may be sounded.

It is no marvel if their faith stand sure, who live at ease, and are not
humbled with any cross of affliction, that have all their heart can desire;
that have long life, like Methusalah, great store of wealth like Solomon: honor
like Haman: lands, and possessions, like the rich young man in the Gospel.

These were never driven to the desert: but let God lay his hand upon the^, and
take from them all that ever they have, returning them to the world, as naked
as Job; let him take away, first their children, after that their goods, then
touch them in their bodies with sickness, and it will appear whether they
have faith or not, and that constancy, that was in Job, who after al his
losses, yea his own wife standing at his elbow, tempting him to curse God, yet
could say, shall we receive good at the hands of God, and not evil? Job. 2. 10


I rather suppose, that a great sort being tempted with the loss of goods, or
any such like trial, would rather shrink away from God like Demas, or like
the accusers that ran from Christ: or like the young rich man that went away
sorrowful when he heard that he must part with his goods, if he Mat. 19, 22
would inherit life.

He loved his riches better then Job did his, and therefore he mist that
which Job found, viz. a better Paradise then Adam lost.

O let us be wary and circumspect, when we shall at any time be thus tempted,
that we shake not the profession of our faith, as 2. Tim. 4, 10.
Demas did, when he embraced the present world: nor let us yield to Satan,
though he drive us to the desert.

He has driven Christ thither before us, and he in getting the victory over
Satan in this his temptation, has promised to give us the victory likewise,
when we shall be in like manner tempted.

We are not better then the Apostles and Disciples of Christ, they have been
led into the desert? Ducti fuerunt in desertum, sed non deserti.

Look the eleventh to the Hebrews, they Hebru, 11
were stoned, hewn asunder, tempted, slain with the sword; they wandered up
and down in sheepskins and goatskins, being destitute, afflicted, and
tormented, they wandered in wildernesses in mountains and dens.

All this did they endure in patience, knowing that they should find in
heaven, a better, and a more enduring substance.

Faith must sustain us, as it sustained them; for the just shall live by faith,
and this faith Romans 1, 17
shall never fail, till the heavens be no more.

For he that said unto Peter: I have prayed Luke 22, 23
for thee that thy faith fail not, says the same unto us also, and to all the
faithful. I have prayed that your faiths fail not.

And when he had fasted forty days and forty nights, etc] Here is set down
the miraculous abstinence in fasting forty days without meat, which is not
therefore pende to the end we should imitate the same, for our endeavor would
fail in the attempting of it: for who is able to fast forty days, without
receiving any nourishment: but it is rather set down for our comfort, and the
strengthening of our faith, which is the end and scope of al his other miracles.
Howsoever our adversaries the Papists have in a superstitious co^ceitednes
supposed, that our fast of forty days in the lent time usually holden, has
his warrant from this fast of Christ in the desert.

But they are utterly deceived, and this opinion of theirs has not any shadow
of truth or probability.

Christ rather in this shows the harmony and consent between the new and
old testament, as Moses the servant of God receiving the law on mount Sinai,
did fast forty days without meat, so would Christ fast so many days,
bringing to us the new law, viz. the Gospel.

This fast then of forty days which we celebrate, has not his ground from
hence, but it is a mere ordinance of man, and if it be not observed as it
ought in his true use, viz. being taken only for a civil ordinance,
profitable to the commonwealth, for preserving and increasing of that, which
otherwise would be extraordinarily consumed, it will carry with it matter,
rather of foolish superstition, then of any sincere devout religion.

Further, if it had been expedient for us to have imitated this fast of forty
days, Christ would have in his Gospel commanded it, but we find no such
commandment, nor can any probable collection be drawn out of scripture to
induce us hereunto, therefore it is rather a ceremonious fast, then a true fast,
not being rightly celebrated.

The Israelites had as great reason to have stablished a like fast to that of
Moses in the mount, as we to stablish ours now by the example of Christ.

The time of fasting is to be determined by the church, according to the
occasion, otherwise it will savor of superstition. That is it which S. Paul
reprooues in the Galathians, Dies obseruatis, ye observe days and months, and
years, I am in fear of you. We may not therefore prescribe times and fastes
at our own pleasure, but when the church shall so appoint, upon special
occasion.

And this has ever been the order of the primitive church, to appoint times
of fasts, at such times as they felt the hand of Gods Judgment against them
for sin, or any imminent peril, then they would give themselves to prayer
and fasting, being thereunto admonished by the pastors or ministers.

Further, our adversaries have erred in this, they use this fast, as purposing
to merit heaven thereby, wherein they miss the true end of fasting, which is
not to merit or obtain remission of our sins thereby, but to make us the more
apt to serve God in prayer, by taming our bodies, as the apostle notes, and
humbling our selves, and by the exercising of all good works. yet further to
make the best of it, if they have ordained it as a mean to chasten the body,
yet because they have not left it free for every man to undergo the same
voluntarily, but do by violence as it were, compel men to observe the said
fast, it cannot please God.

I omit to speak of the great losses, harms, and inconveniences proceeding
from such fasts.

How many have miscarried in that long time of abstinence, especially the aged
and sick, and weak, and women great with child.

Let no man mistake me, for I do not condemn fasting, I condemn the abuses of
it, as we may sin in the best action that we take in hand, we rather commend
it in all sobriety, as a most necessary christian exercise, and not for
certain days only, but even throughout our whole lives, if possibly we might
perform the same.

It may then be here demanded, why does the Prince command this Lent fast. I
answer: Positive laws made by Princes, for the conservation of the policy,
not repugnant to the laws of God, ought of all subjects with reverence of the
magistrate to be obaied, not only for fear of punishment but for conscience.
Conscience, I say, not of the thing, which of it own nature is indifferent,
but of our obedience, which by the law of God we owe to the magistrate, as unto
Gods minister; by which positive laws although we subjects be restrained for
certain days, from some kind of meats, which God in his word, has left free
to be taken, and used with thanksgiving at all times, yet because such laws of
Princes are not made to put holiness in one kind of meat or other, or to make
one day more holy then another, but are grounded merely upon policy, all
subjects are bound to obey the same; according to Paul his precept: Omnis anima
superioribus potestatibus subiecta est: let every soul be subject to the
superior powers.

Another doubt arises hence, whether we Romans 13. 1
may in fasting withhold from our bodies all meat and drink, or not, during
the determined time of fasting, or whether by fasting is meant, to use a
temperate kind of diet, a more sober diet than we were wont.

There are great variety of opinions in this case.

Some think they fast well, if they abstain only from flesh and fish, some do
only feed at that time upon fish, and others eat of all water fowls.

Some eat neither herbs nor eggs: some receive nothing but dry bread, some
abstain all the day until night, and then they eat without difference.

Here we have need of a skillful Pilot, to direct us in our compass. It
appears by many testimonies of scripture, that a true fast consists in a
general abstinence from all kinds of meats for the time.

If men shall be truly humbled under the burden of sin, and shall feel the
wrath of God upon them for their sins, when they shall considder of the
reward of sin, and of the pains of hell. I say, this being seriously done,
their minds being occupied, partly with fear and terror; partly with a desire
to be delivered from the guilt of sin, and the wrath of God, suing and
entreating in all humility unto God for pardon, all lust of meat will be laid
apart.

Then nothing pleases us more then to mourn, and to weep out before the Lord.

2. Sam. 12.
Thus did David fast, when he entreated the Lord for his child: so did Achab
humble himself by fasting and weeping before 1. Ki. 21. 27.
the Lord, for his violence offered to Naboth.

So did the Ninevites, when it was proclaimed Jonah. 3. 6.
by Jonah, that within forty days it should be destroyed: there it is
recorded, that the King rose from his throne, and proclaimed a fast, saying:
let neither man nor beast taste any thing, neither feed, nor drink water.
Where we are to observe the manner of their fast, they did eat nothing.

David before mentioned, did eat nothing so long as he fasted.

When forty thousand Israelites died in Iud. 20. 26.
the battle against the Beniamites, the scripture says, all the children of
Israel went out, and wept before the Lord, and fasted all that day, until the
evening, eating nothing.

Christ himself gives a full solution to decide Luke. 5, 33.
this doubt, in that his answer made to the Pharasies, when they demanded of
him why his Disciples fasted not? his answer was this: can ye make the children
of the wedding chamber fast, as long as the bridegroom is with them?

Like a good master, he defends the innocence of his scholars, and proves
them not to be guilty of transgression, though they fasted not, and withal,
reproves the Pharasies of superstition, and ignorance; of superstition,
because they put a religion in the outward works, of ascribing holiness to
the mere action, not respecting the end of fasting: of ignorance also, because
they could not discern between time and time.

But by this answer it appears they did not fast, for Christ graunts it.

Fasting then by these testimonies before alleged, and by Christ his own
assent, is the withholding of all natural food, for the determined time of
fasting.

what fasting is.
Six hundred thirty fathers in Calcedone decreed, that every man should
abstain the whole day from meat.

Fasting then may be thus defined. It is a true and unfeigned humiliation of a
man voluntarily vnder-gone, whenever the consideration of our sins, or the
wrath of God for sin, hanging over our heads do stir us up thereunto: which
fasting and humiliation is testified. by our outward behavior, and by
abstinence from all bodily food.

3. good ends of fasting.
This fasting serves to three good ends: viz. to repress and keep under the
flesh, so mortifying our evil affections.

Secondly, that we may give our selves more seriously to prayers, and to
thanksgiving.

Thirdly, as an external testimony of our inward humiliation, both before God
and men, as is expedient.

He was at last an hungry: then came to him the tempter.] Mark how Satan
watches his opportunity: when Christ began to be hungry, then the devil began
to tempt: as while men slept the envious man came and Mat. 13. 25
sowed tares: Satan shows him self like Satan: and fittes himself to the
time and place, making them suitable to his purpose.

Opportunity and place met together, hungry necessity, and serpentine policy
kissed each other, and all conspired together against Christ.

As Abigail said of Nabal, as his name is, 1. Sa. 25. 25
so is he: for Nabal is his name, and folly is with him: so may I say of the
devil, that as his name is, so is he: for devil is his name, and deceitfulnes
is with him.

He is a subtle pollititian, and a cunning artificer: for he has bin learning
his policies, ever since he discarded himself from heaven, he practiced first
against Eve, when she walked alone, and stragled from her Genesis 3
husband: after that he tempted Cain, when Ge^. ^. 8
he had gotten him to the field, mark how he plies his policies to the time.
He spied Eve alone, and Cain in the field.

He tempted Nymrod to build Babel, Lot Genes. 11
to commit incest, David to number the people, Nabu-cadnezzar to commit
idolatry.

He tempted Christ the Son of God with Mat. 4. 2. 5, 8.
three sundry temptations in this cha. who then must look to go free? never
any living could escape without Satan's sifting. For it is true that S. Peter
has written: he goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour.

Athanasius records of a certain holy Efrems vision.
man in his time, that saw in a vision the whole world revealed unto him, and
he saw it all hanging full of nets, and devils sitting by to watch the same.

There is no way to escape this fowler, but by watching him as he watches us,
and so we shall deceive the deceiuer: and if he catch us in his net, we shall
be able to get out again, God will give us strength to break his Iud. 16. 12.
nets, as Sampson brake the coardes.

He was at length an hungry.] When the forty days were full complete and
ended, and Christ now waxed hungry, then the Job. 1. 14, 16. 18.
tempter besturd him self, and began to bro^ch his temptations, first one,
then another, and after that another: like the messengers that came to Job,
every message being heavier then other, and so were Satan's temptations, the
latter stronger than the former, till he had spent all his darts; and none
prevailed, no more than those unhappy news, could quail Jobs courage, or
daunte his faith.

Noah was no sooner drunk, but Satan Gen 9. 22.
was ware of it, and caused his own son to discover his fathers nakedness.

When Moses had staid now in the mount Exodus 32.
forty days, the devil the mean while tempted the Israelites to make them a
goulden calfe.

Satan thought no time fitter, to overthrow the house over the heads of Jobs
children, Job. 1. 19.
then when he spied them feasting together: and in this place well weighing the
opportunity, knowing that Christ was hungry, he temptes him to distrust God. If
thou be the son of God, command these stones to be made bread.

The devil in this place shows himself, worse than himself, for in the
fourth of Luke, he confesses Christ to be the very son of God, and here he
seems to doubt, saying, if thou be the son of God: he doubted and yet he knew
it well enough: he that urged Peter to deny Christ, thought to prevail with
Christ also, to make him deny Gene. 20. 2
himself, as Abraham denied his wife.

Here Satan in seeking to snare Christ, is snared himself, like Haman, who
made a Ester. 7. 10
gibbet for Mordocay the righteous Jew, and was hanged thereon himself.

As Achitophels counsel turned to folly, so Satan's policy was indeed but
simplicity: 2. Sam. 17
and it proved his fatal overthrow, like Saul his own sword sheathed it
self in his masters side.

Satan would never appear like Satan, but being a devil, he would be taken
for an angel, the rather to deceive; and therefore we ^uc. 10. 18.
read that he fell to the earth like lightning; but in this place he bewrayes
himself to be a devil, in doubting of Christ, whether he were the Son of
God or not.

For in the fourth of John's general Epistle, the spirit of God dismasketh the
devil, and takes from him his visar, in that he says: Every spirit that
confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of God, and every spirit
that confesses not Jesus Christ, is the spirit of Antichrist.

He in Job calls himself, the compasser Job 2. 2.
of the earth, and here he compasses the desert, thinking to compass Christ
in the desert; but he that compasses others, sometimes compasses himself,
and so does Satan here: the bird has spied the fouler, the net is broken, and
Christ is delivered.

Satan when he combated with Eve, prevailed, and with Cain, he prevailed, and
he conquered Nimrod also, that mighty hunter: but here he is ouermatched,
and Christ conquereth him, and puts him to the worse, as David overcame
Goliath. 1. Samu. 17


Command (says he) that these stones be made bread.] As if he should say; thou
see h^ we hunger has pinched thee, here is no bread to be had, nor any
provision of meat to be expected, for thou art in the desert sequestered from
the society of men. How will thou do? will thou look that God the father
should extraordinarily feed thee from heaven? nay, if God were careful of
thee, he would have relieved thee before this. Thou have now remained full
forty days, and so many nights, and yet he ministers not to thy necessity:
how is he careful of thee, that sustaineth not this thy long hunger?

Live now by thy faith if thou can, thou might do well, if thou could
feed upon stones, for here is no bread, not so much as a crum.

With this strong temptation does he assault Christ, and not only Christ
himself, but eue^ all his members, and this temptation was no small corrasiue
without doubt, unto our savior, for he was not Stipes, but ho^o verus licet
integer peceati.

But what is Christ's answer? Man shall not live bread only. As if he should
say, will thou have me rely so upon bread, that I should have care on nothing
else but to feed my belly: I tell thee Satan, man shall not live by bread
only.

Little did Satan expect so full and resolute an answer from so empty a
stomach.

John 4. 32
But as Christ told his disciples, I have other meat that ye wot not of, so
here he tells the tempter, he has other bread, that he was not aware of,
even the word of God, which fills both belly and bowels so, that we never
hunger more: like the roll that Ezech. 3. 3
Ezechiel took from the Angel, and did eat it, and it was in his mouth
sweeter then honey.

The same must be our refuge, like little Zoar to fly unto, when Satan
assaulteth us, let us run to the word, let us answer him with Scriptum est,
like Christ.

The word of God must sustain us by faith, as it does all the godly. Our God
is God all-sufficient, and will never fail us, if we rest upon his providence:
he that said to Abraham, I am the great reward: says Genesis 15. 1.
the same unto us also, if we have the like faith that Abraham had.

But this faith must call upon thy patience, to abide quietly the lords good
leisure, hold out yet a little longer, and he that shall come will come, and
will not tarry, and at his coming he will reward thee for thy patience seven
fold into thy bosom.

If thou call upon God this day, and he hears thee not, call again to
morrow, and the third day, day after day, till he hear thee, like the
Israelites, when they fought against their brethren the Beniamites: though it
go hard with thee for many days, and many years, yet be sure that ere long
the year of Iubilee will come, and set all the children of God at liberty.

Our Savior in this place had now continued forty days without meat, and
yet he fasteth, and the devil tempts, and his belly aketh, and his stomach
hungreth, and Christ is still the same, both before his fast, and in his
fasting, and after his fasting, the same to day, and yesterday, and the same
for ever.

Let Christ teach us patience, to endure al crosses and temptations.

Make Patience thy Porter, and thou shall be strong enough to carry all
burdens.

This patience is like the hearty spies, that Number. 13
retourning from Canaan, toulde their brethren, it is nothing to overcome them:
so being armed with patience when thou bucklest with affliction or poverty,
hunger, or any cross soever thou can, say, it is nothing to overcome them.

So the Godly have taken courage to themselves, and in the very brunt of their
toubles, they have learned to triumph with Paul, in this we are more than
conquerers: Daniel waits six days in the lions den, and at length came
Abacucke, that never before knew Babylon, with an harvest dinner unto him.

So, whether after six days, or after xl. days sooner, or later, God will
succor thee, only be pacient, and think it not long: for though it be an old
saying, it is a true saying, man's extremity, is Gods opportunity.

Christ suffered his Disciples to be almost vnder-water, and their ship to be
covered with waves, before he rescued them from the Mat. 8. 23 24
seas rage: til then the history notes he slept: but when they cried out,
master, save us, or, we perish, he awaked and rebuked the winds, and al
troubles and dangers fled before him, like a troop of woolues before the
shepherd.

Help is never better welcome, then when we are most pinched with extremities;
as music after mourning has the sweeter melody, and best pleases the ear:
It is like David's warbling harp, to cure Saul his frenzy.

David, as it seems, made a Calendar of the Lords goodness toward his, where
he says: I have bin young, and now am old, yet never saw I the righteous
forsaken, nor his seed begging their bread.

David does not deny, but he saw the godly, and their children, hungry, and
wanting, and in misery, but he never saw young nor old, that they were quite
forsaken, and cast off in their misery, as we see, he suffered his own son,
to want, and to be hunger-bitten in this desert forty days together.

But at length, and all in good time, before he should faint, the Angels came
and ministered to his necessite.

^ona. 1. 17.
Jonah must not forthwith be delivered, he must be three days in the belly of
the whalefish, and the^^ ^ust Jonah be cast to the shore.

Lazarus must begin to stincke, having layen four days already in the grave,
and Ioh. 11. 39
then must Lazarus be raised up.

When Christ shall have abstained forty days, then is it time for the Angels
to come.

Whatsoever extremity then God shall lay upon us, be it ^euer so sharp and
vehement, if in it thou lose thy goods, thy children, thy liberty, thy health,
lose not patience too: and that shall help thee right soon to recover all
again.

I say, and Gods sacred truth avouches it to be true, rather then Eliah shall
starve, a raven shall feed him: rather then Jonah shall drown, a fish shall
save him: rather then Peter shall sink, Christ his hand shall stay him: rather
then Lazarus shall die unpitied, the dogs more merciful then their master,
shall take compassion.

Man shall not live by bread only.] Christ sees nothing but stones, and that
which cannot be eaten, and therefore he turns his mind from the external
objects to the word of God, and with that comforts himself, and foyles the
devil: which word every christian must fly unto when any temptation assaulteth
us, thenc^^^ out of David's Scripture, let us fetch that stone that may confound
Goliath: thence let us learn to answer Satan, when he temptes us to
distrustfulnes, if all the world were full of bread, if it were as plentiful as
stones, yet know Satan that man shall not live by bread only, but by every
word proceeding out of the mouth of God.

One thing is necessary, which is the word of God, and whosoever shall feed
his hungry soul therewith, shall receive full and perfect nourishment, and
shall be able to continue longer in the strength thereof, than Moses in the
Mount.

This is beetter then Manna, that was given the Israelites in the wilderness,
for they are dead, but this is the living bread that 10. 6.
came from heaven, and this feeds us up to eternal life.

This word is Christ his sword, and it has two edges, to cut both ways, and
with this sword does he encounter with Satan, and conquer him.

These words are borrowed from the eight of Deuter onomie, where the Lord
speaks thus to the Israelites: the Lord God has humbled thee, and suffered
thee to hunger, and has given thee Manna to eat, never known to thy fathers,
to the end he might teach thee, that man lives not by bread only, but by every
word proceeding out of the mouth of God.

As if he should have said, because he permitted thee to hunger, and yet
suffered thee not to perish, thou might hence easily have learned, that it is
God only who sustaineth thee with his word without bread.

That this doctrine is true, besides the infallible testimonies of the word,
your own experience can witness; for if we lived by bread only, it were
necessary that we should be continually, and at all times filled there with:
but it is indeed the word that feeds us, and the blessing of God lapt up in
the word that gives us strength, and makes us able to receive the good
creatures of God, I mean bread, and drink, and such necessary food, who also
makes our meat so received, to be nutritive to our bodies.

When we are healthie and strong, and able to receive our daily sustenance, why
then we must acknowledge that this strength proceeds from God. If contrarily
we be sick, and weak, and can neither receive our food, nor digest it:
after we have taken it, then we must know that God has taken our strength from
us, so that we are no longer capable of it: and he has also taken the gift of
nutrition from thy meat, that it shall not feed thee, and so thou art unfit
for thy meat, and thy meat for thee.

Therefore still acknowledge this reply of Christ in this place; man shall not
live by bread only, but by every word proceeding out of the mouth of the Lord.

Bread, flesh, and other provision, would seem but slender instruments to
work our health, and to nourish in us, that life which God has given us.

Because they are common things, we make no mystery of them: yet have they
matter of wonder and astonishment, if we weigh them aright. We could not live,
nor be increased by such weak means, if God had not given them a special
blessing to strengthen our bodies.

This, together with that which already has bin spoken, proclaims unto us,
that man lives not by bread only; and for this cause do we use to sanctify
our meats before we receive them, and after, which we call the saying of grace,
wherein we pray God by those his good gifts, our bodies may receive strength,
and withal, to teach us, that bread, without the word cannot feed us, for it
is sanctified by the word of God and prayer.

To draw toward an end, we learn two things by these words of Christ, he that
has faith shall taste of two things.

When he wantes sustenance and is hungry, he shall be so strengthened with the
word of God, as if he had stuffed himself with the abundance of all delicates.

The second is this, whosoever has a steadfast confidence in god, shall not be
left so destitute, but that God will undoubtedly supply all necessaries unto
him, as if he be pinched with extremity of hunger, rather than he shall perish
in his etremitie, God will give him bread at length, though he must rain bread
from heaven, as he did for the Israelites, when they lived in the desert, being
a place where no food could be gotten.

Let every Christian man promise himself undoubtedly these two things: for he
cannot be deceived of his hope, either he shall have sufficient to eat, or his
hunger shall be so tolerable unto him, that he may well endure it, without
fainting, for Gods word shall sustain him.

If thou be naked and have nothing to cover thee, rather than thou shall perish
so, God will convert the leaves falling from the trees, into coats, and
clokes, for his children, he can as well do this, as cause the Israelites Deuteronomy.
8. 4.
garments to continue fresh upon them the space of forty years together.

Their clothes waxed not old, nor did their feet swel the space of forty
years.

It is spoken, and I do partly believe it, that there are not so many sheaues
of corn, as there be people in the world: and it were not possible, I speak
after the manner of men, that there should be bread enough to suffice so many,
were it not so, that God does daily bless, and increase the corn in the
grain, and the meal in the dowe, and the bread upon the table, yea and in the
mouth too, when we eat, it: as was done by our Sanior Christ: and S. John
records it in the sixteenth Chapter.

Besides, we see poor men and their children, in as good liking, and as well to
see to, though they fare hardly and scant, as the rich and their children, who
glut themselves with abundance.

Dan. 1. 15
Daniel and his felows fed upon pulse, and yet they looked as ruddy and well
colored, as they that fed at the Kings trencher.

Thus you have seen Satan tempting, but not prevailing, fighting but yet
foyld, and so rendering to Christ both field, and victory: John 16
once the world combated with Christ, and he overcame the world and triumphed,
saying, I have overcome the world: here the devil the worlds partner, stands
as chalenger, and came furnished with many darts to encounter with Christ, and
Christ vanquisheth him too: so now he may make a second triumph, and say: as
before I overcame the world, so now I have overcome the devil, that red dragon, that with his tail drew down the third part of the stars of heaven.

Christ snared him in his own snares, and with his own swoorde cut off his
head, as David struck off the head of Goliath.

Christ entered into this battle with Satan, and overcame him, and all for
us; by the word he became victor, to show what munition we must use, if we
will look to overcome as he did.

1. Sam. 17 4^.
David used neither sword, nor spear, nor armor, but a sling and stone only.

This is the sling that must confound our spiritual Philistin, even the word:
we shall find our selves better guarded, and fenced with this single furniture,
than David was with Saules armor.

God grant we may so carry our selves, and so pass as strangers, through the
desert of this desolate world, that having fought like good soldiers, under
the banner of Christ, in this spiritual Combat, with sin and satan, and having
finished our faith in much patience, we may be translated to that promised land
in the generation to come, which I trust in Christ does approach apace: to him
with the father, and holy ghost, be rendered all honor, and power, and
majesty, with thanksgiving now and ever.

Amen.
The Sea-mans Card.
And when they were entered into the ship, his Disciples followed him: and
behold there arose a great tempest in the Sea, so that the ship was covered
with waves, but he was asleep: then his Disciples came, and awoke him, saying:
Master, save us, we perish: and he said unto them, why are ye fearful, O ye
of little faith? and he arose, and rebuked the winds, and the sea: so there
followed a great calm. Mat. 8. 13, etc.
CHrist being wonderful in his nativity, wonderful in his ascension, and
wonderful in his transfiguration, is wonderful here by his miracles.

In this Chapter are laid down four feuerall miracles.

1 The healing of a leprous man. 2 The healing of a woman troubled with a
fever. 3 The healing of the Ce^turians servant. 4 The strange appeasing of the
wind, as in my text: and therefore this may be called, Scriptura miraculosa,
the miraculous Scripture.
This miracle is recorded for such as are either sick, or troubled, or
oppressed, or beset with any danger, that whatsoever storm of adversity
shall strike our sails, or what trouble soever we shall sustain, we may
remember, others have tasted of the same whippe before us, and none can harbor
in the haven of bliss, that have not first bin weather-bitten with many rough
storms, and sharp tempests.

Though our ship happen to be covered with waves, like the ship in this
place, yet be not faithless, but have hope, and know that Christ fits at the
stern, and will not suffer us to miscarry.

This text contains six parts.

1 The Apostles fervent love: in following him by sea and land. 2 The Accident
happening, viz. a great tempest, applied to the casualties of this world, that
happen to the godly. 3 The time when this tempest happened, viz. when Christ
slept. 4 The Apostles only aid and help to run to Christ, Master, save us,
we perish. 5 Christ's reprehension: why are ye fearful, O ye of little faith?
6 Christ's helping hand in staying the wind.
First of their love in following Christ.] The felicity of the godly is to
stick to God, and to follow his will, and therefoee the Prophet David says,
it is good for me to cleave 1. Sam. 12 14
unto the Lord. Samuel also persuaded the Israelites, that they should follow
the Lord their God, and not depart from him.

The children of God ought to carry so great an affection to God, as Elishah
did to Eliah, who would not part from him, til the 2. King. 1
Lord divided them.

Such was the affection of the Apostles in this place, and at all times, they
followed the lamb whither soever he went, to the mountain, to the desert, to
the sea, and here to the ship.

This must teach us to follow Christ both by sea and land, in time of
persecution and else.

For as the separation of the soul from the body is the death of the body: so
the separation of Christ from the soul is the death of the soul: therefore we
must follow Christ even unto the sea.

What multitudes of people are recorded Luke. 5.
in the fifth of Luke, they pressed upon him in such sort, that for fear of the
throng, he was feign to enter into a ship.

The like throng of followers is mentioned 2. Chr. 9. 7.
in the eight of Luke. If the Queen of Sheba could say, of Salomons followers,
happy are thy men, and happy are these thy servants which stand always before
thee, and do hear thy wisdom.

Much rather may it be spoken, happy are Christ's followers and his attendants,
that stand ever in his presence, like the Apostles, to hear his heavenly
wisdom, since a greater then Solomon is here, for this is he that taught
Solomon his wisdom.

There is virtue in Christ, and it is an attractiue virtue, to draw us unto
himself like a lodestone.

He refuses no servant, that will come to his service, let us then be willing
to offer our selves to serve so good a master, for his burden is light, and
his yoke is easy.

Mat. 11. 28.
He calls upon us for our good, Come to me all ye that are heavy laden, and I
will refresh you.

Other masters use to load their servants: but Christ is such a master, that
takes the burden from his servants, and carries it upon his own shoulders to
ease them.

Joseph his brethren were glad to have Genesis 43. 21
corn for money, but Joseph returned them, both their corn and money too.

So if we will be the followers of Christ, and serve him, we shall find his
service no servitude, for he will give us our freedom, and our wages too.

In the eight of Luke, a certain scribe Luke. 8.
comes to Christ, and says: master I will follow thee, whither soever thou
go.

Lo this scribe, who before he knew Christ, had a whole common wealth in his
head, being a mere worldling, now began to leave the world, and to cast away
his old livery, as the blind-man threw away his patched cloak in running to
Christ, and betook himself to Christ his service.

In the ninteenth of Luke, we find Zacheus Luke. 19.
running to Christ, the world and Mammon did so hang upon his back till now,
that he could not travel to Christ: but now having come to the knowledge of
Christ, and Gods spirit calling upon him, he changes his former resolutions,
and shook from him his Exodus 3. 5
pillages, and his exactions, as Moses did put from him his shoes, when the
Angel called upon him out of the flaming bush, and now he was so light as Peter
when his shakles fell from him, and he runs to Christ hastily, who received
him joyfully.

Mark. 10
In the tenth of Mark, one comes running to Christ in like sort, asking him
what he might do to possess eternal life.

Matt. 20
In the twenty of Matthew, two blind men, though they could not see Christ, yet
they could follow him: and they gained that which they would not lose again
for more Mat. ^.
gold than Gehezie took from Naaman, even their sight: and now seeing him that
salued them, they follow him more egerly, returning Christ more praises, than
the wise men did presents.

All these are so many summons to cite us before the consistory of Christ, the
blind, and lame, and diseased, scribe, and publicane, sick, and whole, and all
do call upon us to follow Christ like his Apostles.

And behold, there arose, a great tempest in the sea: and the ship was covered,
etc.] Now we are to speak of the accidents happening in the great tempest but
even now Christ: and his Apostles had entered into the ship, and lo a storm
so prevails, that the ship that carried them, is now covered with waves.

Even now it was calm, when the ship ankered in the haven, and no sooner are
the sails hoist, and they launcht into the deep, but ship, and men, and all,
are in ieopardie of drowning, see an unexpected sudden alteration.

Here we may view the state of Christ's church militant: It is like the arc
floating upon the waters, like a lilly growing among the thrones, like the bush
that burnt and was not consumed, like Christ's ship in this place covered over
with waves, and yet not sunk: God suffers his Saints to be oftentimes in
danger, either to show his power in their deliverance, or to cause them by
tribulation to come to him for succor, and to make them the more thankful.

So he humbled the Israelites before Pharaoh Exodus 5
and his Egyptians.

So he humbled Jacob all the time he served Laban.

He humbled Job in a greater measure, Job. 1.
suffering Satan to discharge at him all his darts at once, thinking to make a
full end of him.

He humbled Heliah, in making him fly 1. Ki. 19.
from Iezabel, that sought his life.

How did he humble his own Apostles, that were so dear unto him, suffering
them to be imprisoned, racked, whipped, stoned, Heb. 11.
slain with the sword?

Nay Christ his own mother escaped not free: Simeon speaks that the sword of
tribulation Luke. 2. 35
should pearce her heart.

Christ himself entered not into his glory, but being consecrated through
afflictions.

The miracles that Christ wrought in healing others, did not so much move the
Apostles, as the miracle they felt in themselves.

Their faith had not such exercise nor trial, in s^ing the blind recover their
sight, the lame their limbs, the dumb their speech, and the Job. 2. 8.
deaf their hearing, but now that the ship under them is in danger, and is
violently tossed, and death is presented before them, their faith begins to
faint like Peter, and to look about, like Job for his patience, when he lay
scraping himself upon the dunghill.

The storm put them to a stagger, though Christ was in the ship with them.

This storm arose upon their entering into a ship; this ship is a figure of the
Church.

So soon as thou art received into the church and have given thy name to
Christ, thou must look for a storm or a tempest.

Satan will never bend his malice against thee till then.

When we are running, and in the ready way to Christ, then comes Satan, and
lays stumbling blocks in our way, tempting us with one bait or other, either
with wantons Iud. 16. Iosuah. 7. Acts. 12. 23
as Sampson, when he dalyed with Dalilah: or with covetousness, like Achan, and
Gehezy, or with pride, like Nabucad-nezzar: or with self-love, like Herod: or
with envy like Cain: and all to turn us aside quite out of the way from God,
as he cousoned Adam out of Paradise.

If these baits do not prevail, then he takes another course, (for Satan that
subtle serpent has more sleights in his budget, then David had stones in his
shepherds 1. Sam. 17, 40.
scrippe:) he will begin to rage and rail against thee like Rabshake, and
throw all his storms at thee as he threw a whole flood of Reu. 12. 13:
water against the woman in the Revelation, and as he thought to sink Christ
and his Apostles in the ship.

This of all the devils darts is most violent, even his fiery dart of
persecution.

There is a punishment executed by our magistracy upon silent malefactors,
which is called the pressing to death, and it is a torment of the greatest
tortures.

And the devil by his executioners exercises the same cruelty upon Gods
Saints: he has his pressing too, and we are forewarned to arm our selves
against that torment by our Savior.

In mundo pressuram sustinebitis. If thou Ioh. 16, 33
wilt not leave thy way thou art in, nor break thy course in running to Christ;
he will show the uttermost of his malice against thee, and put thee to the
rack, as he put Esaias to the saw.

And this has proved no small rub in the alley, for it has turned aside many
a forward runner.

Judas a great while ran well, but Satan Mat. 26. 15
stopped him in his race, and made him swallow a silver hook, as he beguiled Eve
with an apple; and so his end proved worse than his beginning: he again so
frighted Demas, a great professor a long time, with giving 2. Tim. 4
him but a small taste of the cup of affliction, that he forsook his way,
left Christ and his Apostles, and embraced this present world.

He so prevailed with King Agrippa, that though he gave himself to hear Paul's
preaching, yet Paul left him but almost a Christian, and could not make him a
Christian Act. 27. 28
altogether: not to dwell in particulars, this Satan has wrastled mightily,
even with the elect vessels of mercy, and with his storms had quite
overthrown them, if Christ had not rescued them, even then when the fatal
blow was coming, like the angel that stayed Genesis 25. 22
Abraham's hand, when he would have slain his son.

How long did he chain up Paul making him his instrument to persecute Gods
children, till Christ drew him by violence to himself, and afterward he
persecuted Satan, and had him in the chase, as before Satan chased him?

How strong was Satan, and how weak was Peter, that seemed to be the strongest
of the Apostles, but showed himself in this combat the weakest, when he denied
his master thrice together?

But though he received this foil from the devil, yet Christ raised him up
upon his feet, from the down fall of his sin, like Lazarus out of his grave.

He struck at the root, as well as the branches, and thought to have
disrooted with his violent blasts, the vine it self Christ Jesus: he tempted
him in the desert: he caused the Scribes and Pharasies to tempt him: he made
his own Disciple Peter to tempt him, when he would have dissuaded him from
going to lerusale^: he tempted Judas to betray him: he suborned falls witnesses
to accuse him, and Pilate to condemn him, being altogether innocent.

But all this wrought Satan's overthrow, for Christ by his death overcame the
devil, and triumphed like Sampson, when ^ud. 16.
he bowed himself, and died with the Philistines.

And this much shall briefly suffize concerning this tempest: now let us
consider of the time when it happened.

But he was asleep.] The wind blows, and the storm rages, and the
sea-swelleth, and the ship sincketh, and the Apostles cry out, and yet
Christ is asleep, as if he cared not for himself, nor his Disciples security.

Gods wisdom is not by man's wisdom to be examined.

Here Christ seems to be forgetful of his Disciples, of the ship, and of
himself: he slept, crossing these scriptures, He that watches Israel, shall
neither slumber nor sleep.

And yet here the watchman of Israel sleeps.

Again, can a woman forget the fruit of her womb? though she do, yet I
cannot forget thee: yet here Christ forgets. Esaias 49


God said to Jacob, I will go down with thee to Egypt, and bring thee back
again. Genesis 46.


And to all the godly Christ speaks, in the twenty eight of Matthew, Lo, I am
with Mat. 28, 20.
you to the end of the world: and yet here Christ sleeps: that I say unto
you, I say unto Mar. 13, 37
all, watch, and yet Christ sleeps, and watches not.

Joseph was in prison, and there the Lord was with him, yet here Christ being
with his Disciples in this great danger, sleeps.

This sleeping of Christ must not be so construed, that he should not be
careful of his Apostles, it rather notes, how we are tempted when Christ
sleeps.

We are not safe, longer than Christ awaketh over us, when he stretches his
hand over us, we are as well guarded as the Israelites were, when Moses held
up his hand.

Saint Austen writing upon the fifty six Psalm. 4.
Psalm, says: Tunc in te dormit Christus, cum oblitus fueris passionis
Christi: and then says he, Nauis tua turbatur: when thou for gettest the
passion of Christ, then Christ slepeth in thee, and then thy ship is troubled;
thy heart is worthelie troubled, because Excidit tibi in quem credideris: thou
forgettest him on whom thou should believe.

Thy passions are great, when thou forgettest Christ his passion.

Excita Christu^, fidem recole: raise up Christ and all storms shall vanish
away.

To have thy ship safe, and thy soul vntossed with the waves of sin, have
faith, and be watchful, take unto thee the buckler of Faith, as Paul speaks
in the fifth of the Ephesians.

As Nahas said to the men of Iubes Gilead, ^. Sam. 11
In this I will make a covenant with you, so that I shall pluck out all your
right eyes: so our spiritual Nahas the devil, will make a covenant with us,
so that he may take from us our right eyes, and so cause Christ to sleep.

Christ sleeps, to make the Disciples know what little help was in
themselves, that so they might the rather rely upon Christ.

In the twentieth of Judges we read, that the Israelites lost the field two
days together, although they fought in a good quarrel, and at the Lords
commandment: Forty thousand were slain by the Beniamites, but the third
day the Israelites prevailed, and gave their enemies an utter overthrow.

So Christ may seem for a time to sleep, for the trial of our faith and
patience, but he will not suffer us to perish.

Master, save us, we perish:] The Apostles only aid, is to run to Christ.
Anna in 1. Sam. 11
her barrenness ran to God, and obtained Samuel.

David in his peril ran to God, and obtained deiuerance. I cried (says he)
with my whole heart, and the Lord heard me. Psalm. 12.


Solomon having built that magnificent temple, ran to God, and prayed God to
hear whatsoever prayer should be offered in that Temple.

The same Solomon asked of God wisdom, 2. Chro. 1. 12.
and God gave it him. And the Apostles in this place fly to Christ, praying
Ioh. 14, 14.
him to awake and to help them, remembering that in John, Ask and you shall
receive: In the second of the Kings, and sixth chapter, the servant of Elizeus
being in fear, seeing an host compassing the city with horses and chariots
cried to his master Elisha, Alas master, what shall we do?

And the Disciples cry to Christ in like manner here, Alas master what shall
we do? save us, or we sink.

It was high time to awake him, when death was so near them: the Disciples
cry out unto Christ, saying: What meanest thou to slumber, since we are in
danger of drowning? as the shipmaister said to Jonas, What meanest thou O
sleeper?

When the tempest shook Jonas ship, it Iona. 5.
is said the mariners were afraid, and cried every man unto his God, they yet
knew not the true God: but here the Apostles cry out for help to no other,
but unto Christ: the tempest terrefied them, as troubles fright 1. Sa. 3, 5, 6.
the godly, and makes them run to Christ, faster then Samuel ran to Ely.

Troubles are like John Baptist, sending us to Christ.

When affliction comes and presses us down or beats us, as Satan buffeted
Paul, then we are careful to seek out Christ, as Saul 1 Samuel 9, 18
sought out the seer, and as the Apostles in this place run to Christ for
succor.

Why are ye fearful O ye of little faith?]

That which Christ commanded the Romans chapter fifteen, support one another,
is here practiced by Christ himself: he supporteth his disciples and bears
with them, not shaking them off, but mildely reprehending them, why are ye
fearful, O ye of little faith? being Christ's own followers, and having
Christ with them, yet they could not be confident, and therefore they are well
reproved for their weakness, O ye of little faith.

As we are not to be too confident and strong, like Peter, relying upon his
own strength too much, when he said he would never forsake Christ, and yet
was the first that shrunk from him: so let not us be too weak, nor too
fearful, like the Disciples here.

Fear is the mother of distrustfulnesse, as Peter distrusted himself, when he
began to sink: and as Paul and his company were out of hope they should be
saved in that dangerous voyage, when the ship that carried them shiuered in
pieces.

O ye of little faith:] Here is the cause added why they were so weak,
because they wanted faith.

If the disciples had had but as much faith, as a grain of mustard seed, they
might be strong enough to remove mountains: but they could not here remove the
storm, their faith was so small, no more than they could Mat. 17.
heal the lunatic man in the seventeenth of Matthew.

Though the disciples walked daily with Christ: and saw his miracles, and the
works he did, yet they could not draw faith from him, as the woman drew virtue
from him, though she touched but his hemme.

A little faith would have qualified this Mat. 9. 20.
great storm, and have pacified the waves, as a little oil and a little meal
could suffice the poor widow, and save her from perishing in the dearth.

Our sins are in an Ephah, but our graces 1. King. 17
are in a shekle: all our virtues are diminutiues, they are all little ones
like little Zoar A little wealth and a little pleasure seems nothing, but a
little faith is enough, though it be never so small a mite.

Christ says here, O ye of little faith: see our stature in religion is but
short and little, and we grow little and low like Zacheus, that we cannot see
Christ: but Christ will have us to have much faith, as he biddes us bring forth
much fruit.

Two things in this place must be noted.
First how the very faithful are now and then shaken in faith. Secondly, how
the faithful may be greatly tempted:
and yet continne still in the bosom of God.

Then he arose and rebuked the winds and waves, and there followed a great
calm.] Here is Christ's helping hand, in staying the tempest. The disciples
were not so importunate for help, as Christ was ready to comfort them.

It is written, ask and ye shall have, knock and it shall be opened unto you:
here is that scripture fulfilled, the Apostles cry unto Christ for succor,
and succor is given them. The great storm, how violent and raging soever, is
here in a moment qualified, when Christ arises and rebukes it.

All the storms and troubles that happen to the godly, they are but an
Interim, they are but of short continuance, and then shall Job have his
children and goods again: so Christ may sleep, but his providence ever
awaketh, and preserves them that belong unto him.

Foul wether lasts but a while; and then follows a great calm, like the
noise of Roue. 14, 2.
harpers, after the sound of thunders.

Heaviness may endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning, joy is
here presented in a moment to the Apostles.

Even now the sky was full of clouds, and now the sky is clear, and the
clouds vanished; and the calm is greater then the storm.

We may be in danger and trouble, when Christ sleeps, but when Christ awaketh
and sees the waves sowsing over our heads, and the water flashing into the
ship, he arises and rebukes the waves, as before he rebuked his Disciples,
and so the calm follows.

The winds blustred, and the water violently swelled, as long as Christ slept,
as if they had bin privy to his sleeping, but as soon as Christ awaked, and
considered of the tempest, the winds, and waves considered themselves, and
became quiet.

Here is a full president of Gods mercy and of his power, he exercises both
for the good of his Disciples, his will appears in reproving the waves, his
power in suppressing the rage thereof.

This made Tobit say thou scourgest, and Tobi. 13, 2.
yet take pity: thou leadest to hell, and back again.

And Gods own testimony proves the same, I kill, and I give life: I wound, and
I make whole, and in the sixteenth chap. of John, says Christ; ye are in
sorrow now, but your hearts shall rejoice, and your joy shall no man take
from you.

Let us pray unto God to increase our little faith, and our ship shall never
miscarrie.

Thus you have breefely seen the love of the Apostles, in following Christ to
the ship: you have also seen Satan tempting, the wether storming the winds
blowing, the Disciples trembling, and Christ sleeping, yet he being cried unto,
awaketh and arises, and appeaseth the rage of the sea, and so suffers not
his disciples to perish.

The Disciples love toward Christ, must arm us with like affection, toward
him, and their want of faith must stir up our weakness, and incredulity, and
make us fly to Christ, like the restless dove to the arc.

So we shall be sure to be safe amidst all storms, like his disciples when
Christ rebuked the winds.

Use this Card, it will the better direct thee in thy compass, as the Angel
lead Abraham's Genesis 24. 40
servant a straight path by land, so this will lead thee a right course by
sea, and if any storm beat against thy ship, thou shall be sure to come safe
to shore, when others for want of this guide, shall perish by shipwreck,

Amen.
The Sinners Bath.
If we acknowledge our sins, God is faithful and just, to forgive us our
sins: and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. John. 1. 9.
THis is a lesson for all, but Christ: al besides him* prince, Prophet, and
people: from the merchant to the porter, from him that sittes on the throane,
to him that grindes ^n the mill, all are weak, and feeble, and di^^ased, and
sick of one sore: and therefore ^ust all apply to themselves one, and the ^me
kind of cure.

None but Christ alone could say, which you can rebuke me of sin?

Since all have sinned, al had need to be ^eansed.

Luke 3. 12. 14.
The publicans and sinners, and soldiers come to John, craving to be salued.

And here a greater then John proclaims, that all sinners, that will be set
free from their sin, shall be so soundly salued, and cleansed, in this so
wholesome a Bath, that they shall never need a second cure, no more than the
lame cripple in the third of the Acts Acts 3.
being once restored to his feet by Peter, did ever any more betake himself to
his crutches.

And this Bath, as it is most precious, for it cures all diseases, even the
most putrified and exulcerat sores; so is it yet most highly to be reckoned,
because God offers it freely to all comers of all sorts: like the poole
Bethesda, Ioh. ^. 24
that freely healed all that washed in it.

Once God the father proclaimed to the thirsty: ho, every one that thirsts
come to the waters, and ye that have no silver, come buy wine and milk without
money.

And here God the son proclaims, speaking to the sick as he to the
thirstie^ come to be bathed, al ye that be leprous and sinful, come cleanse
your souls, and receive Esaias 55, 11
soundness to your selves without money.

Other baths do but wash and cleanse the bodies of men: but this is the
sovereign Bath of the soul, none but this can purify the soul, and take
away the maladies of it, by the secret virtues thereof.

The Disciples of Christ, though they had the gift of healing, and power given
them to work miracles, yet they could not cure all diseases: as they could not
cast the devil out of the lunaticke man, in the seventeenth of Matthew, Christ
alone did that: so in this place, though God has given power, and skill to
men, to heal diseases, God alone will have the prerogative in curing ^^e
diseases of the soul, none may do that but he.

Howsoever the Pope will seem by his counterfaite physic to purge men's
souls, and to cleanse their sins by his bulls, pardons, and indulgences, and
such trumpery: yet we know that his physic, has deceived all his patients,
and has wrought no more cure on the souls of men, then Elisha his staff, did
2. kin: 4, 31.
recover the Sunamites child, when Gehezie laid it upon the face thereof.

The Popes pacients are sick still, and still dead in their sins for all the
Popes drugge: as the Sunamites child was dead still, till Elisha came.

Not to amplify a large discourse in the commendation of this Bath, as Phillip
said to Nathanael, when he was desirous to see Christ, come and see: so say I
unto you come and see, come and prove this Bath.

I know, that if you wash in it, you must needs find the virtue of it: as
Naaman found the virtue of Jordan to heal that which all the rivers of
Damascu^ ^ould not cure.

When you shall have ^^actised it, I know you will say, as the Queen of Shebah
said to Solomon, I heard before of thy wisdom, but the one half has not bin
told me: so I have heard the praises and the virtues of this Bath before now,
and lo, the one half has not bin told me.

If we confess our sins, God is faithful to forgive.

Confession of sin must go before, and then forgiveness of sins will follow
after.

The text admits this short division.

The sinners salve, and the virtuous operation of it: the salve if we confess
the effect, or operation, God is faithful to forgive.

As Christ told Martha, one thing is necessary: so here he tells us, one
thing is necessary that sins may be forgiven.

We must note that there is a threefold confession: First, there is a
confession of faith, which is the act of religion. Secondly, there is a
confession of praise, an act of gratitude. Thirdly, there is a confession of
sin, as here, an act of contrition.

Confession of faith made by Peter when he said, thou art C^^^t.

The answer (...) flesh and blood have not revealed these ^^ngs unto thee.

Confession of praise is made by David, in the 106. Psalm: praise the Lord
because he is good.

Of confession of sins, we have many Exodus 32.
presidents in scripture, Moses confessed the sins of Israel. This people
has committed a great sin.

David confessed his adultery.

They that came to Christ, confessed their sins.

Most notable is the confession of the prodigal son, out of which we may
learn the manner of true confession: first he did meditate with himself, how
he should confess his sins unto his father, in that he said: thus will I say.

Secondly, he cried out, I have sinned: he does not excuse himself, nor hide
his sin, like Adam

Against heaven: because he esteemed Gene. 3.
earthly things, more than heavenly things, and against thee: he looks into
the weight and greatness of his sin, in offending so good a father, who had
given him so liberal a portion.

I am no more worcester(...): he was ashamed of himself, as Adam (...)hamed of his
nakedness, arguing a s(...)emorse.

And this confessio(...) as well accepted of the prodigal sons ^^ther: and
our confession will be accept(...) of our father, even of God, so often as we
confess as he did.

It must not pass without his note. In that this confessor says, he would
rise, and go to his father, that is, he that will confess aright, must rise
from sin, as Samuel rose from sleeping, and as Matthew rose from the
custome-seate, when Christ called him.

He that hides his sins, shall not be directed, Prou. 28.
but he that confesses, and forsakes them, shall have mercy.

God required conf^ssion of Adam and of Came, to show the necessity of it.

It is recorded of them, who were baptized of John, that they confessed first
their sins, and in the nineteenth of the Acts, Act^^. 1^.
they that believed, came and confessed.

Both we and our adversaries do hold confession to be lawful, but we differ
from them.

First, because we say, it must be made only to God, they say, it must be made
also to man, and so they have grounded their auricular confession.

Secondly, when we grant, that upon special occasion, as for the glory of
God, and the satisfaction of his church, it may be lawfully made to man, yet
they appoint it to be so necessary, that without it, is no repentance, no
salvation; and that necessity we deny.

This auricular confession came in about Theodosius his time, and was not from
Christ his time in the church, the history is to be read in Zozomenus 7. Book
Chap. 17. In which history we may read, how this confession was abused, and
how Nectarius in Constantinople caused it to be altered.

If we confess, etc.] God does not promise confession: but upon condition that
we first confess, we may not look for pardon, unless we make confession.

There is a proverb commonly used, confess and be hanged; and this is true
with men, for the malefactor his own mouth condemns him, and the law
proceeds to execute him; but with God it is otherwise, quite contrary:
confess, or not be saved

I will shut up this first part of my division, concerning the salve of
confession, with that president of confession made by Job in the 21. of his
book, amongst other things, that testified his innocence of life, he cites
this: if I have hid my sin as Adam, concealing mine iniquity in my bosom.

Our sins.] Sin is a spiritual leprozie, for in the thirteenth of
Leuiticus it written, the leprous ought to be severed from the rest of the
people and should accuse himself and say, he was polluted: so the sinful
should be severed from the Saints of God, and should condemn himself.

Sin is tirannicall, and brings the soul of Rom 6. 16.
man into bondage, and slavery: and therefore sinners are called, seru^peccati,
the slaves of sin.

Sin is called captivity, and it takes away the souls freedom: and so
sinners are called Romans 7, 23.
C^^^ui, captives.

It is compared to a serpent, because the infection of it secretly creepes into
the heart of man: and therefore it is said, she from sin as from a serpent.
Eccle. 21. Eccl. 21.


Since all these and infinite more inconveniences do issue from sin, let us
seek and sue to Christ to be cleansed, as Naaman sought to Elisha to be healed
of his leprozie.

Neither Abanah, nor Pharpar, nor all the 2. Kin. 5. 12.
rivers of Damascus could wash away Naamans leprozie, save the water of Iordane
only; nor can any water wash away the leprozie of sin, but the water of
contrition, running and streaming forth of the fountain of repentance.

Wash, and be cleansed, was all the physic, that Elisha gave to Naaman: and
all the 2. Kin. 5. 10.
cure that Christ uses in healing and cleansing sinners, is but this: confess
thy sins, and be pardoned.

If we confess our sins, God is faithful to forgive us.

The first reason, driving us to confess our sins, is derived from Gods
faithfulness.

As if he should say: hide not thy sins, for God knows them already: and he
is faithful to punish thee, if thou conceal them: Homo videt, quoe patent,
Deus vero intuetur cor^ an sees only the things that are op^n and ^^^ir^^t,
b^t God sees the heart. 2. ^^ng. 16. And again, I the Lord se^^^hing the
remes. ere. 27. And again, a^ things are open to mine eyes. Heb. 4.

God has spoken this, and therefore confess your sins, for he is faithful
and just, and this faithfulness of God made David to register and book up his
sins, acknowl^dg^ my sins says he, and my saults are ever before me.

The same David being repro^ed by Nathan, for murdering Vriah to possess his
wife, cried out, I have sinned, ^. Samuel 12. There we find David confessing
his sin, and in the next verse following, we find the Prophet Nathan
absoluing ^im: God has done away thy sin, thou shall not die.

God is faithful and will stand to his promise, in saluing our sins, if we
repent.

God charged Mo^es, not to press to the bush, til he had put off his shoes,
so we may not presume to come to God, till we have separated from us our
sins: as Christ bad (...) ^^ong man in the Gospel, put away his g^^^s, if he
would follow him.

(...) M^^daler sought Christ weeping in the ^harises house, and Christ did
appear (...) her: as he appeared unto her, so he will appear unto thee, when
thou confessest thy sins, and art sorrowful for them.

God is faithful: faithful in his word, his words are faithful and true:
faithful in his promises, all the promises of God are in him, yea, and Amen.
Speak the word only, Hebru. 10.
said the Centurion, and thy servant shall be whole.

Faithful in his mercies, for they never fail, but are renewed every morning.

Faithful in his judgments, they are termed righteous and true in the
nineteenth of the Revelation: faithful in all his ways, so proved by that
song of heavenly Angels, in the fifteenth of the Revelation. Just and true are
thy ways, king of Saints.

And the Prophet David ioynes with the^ Psalm. ^3
in like consent: the word of the Lord is righ teous, and all his works are
faithful.

And unto this faithfulness is another property annexed viz. Gods Justice.

Here is the second reason to induce us to acknowledge our sins, for God is
just.

He is just in his anger, and in his bountifulness: who shall stand, says
Nahum before the face of his wrathful indignation? and his anger is poured out
like fire, Ps. 85. And again, it is an horrible thing to fall into the hands of
the living God. Heb. 12. He is just to give every man according to his work,
Reave. 21. therefore confess; for he is just. He has promised free pardon,
if thou perform this confession: and of this pardon thou may assure thy
self, because God is just, and cannot break with thee.

To clear this with many words, were to point at the shining sun, and to
light a candle at noone day: therefore I will descend to that which follows.

That he may forgive us:] Though God be of power infinite, yet will he not save
man without faith, forgive sins without repentance, and a principal branch
of this repentance; is the confessing of sin. If thou treadest the path of
repentance thus far forth, viz. to confess thy sins, and to be ashamed of
them, and to be sorry for them, yet if thou have not faith, if thou believe not
that God is faithful and just to forgive, thou come short of true repentance.

For Judas proceeded so far as well as Mat. 27. 3. 4.
thou, yet he was damned, because he distrusted God: he could not persuade
himself that GOD would forgive him, and so he lost that which the thief found.

Note therefore that three things are necessary, that sins may be forgiven.

First, Infusio gratioe, the pouring of grace, or working of Gods grace in us,
as it wrought in Peter when he went to weep.

Secondly, the remorse of the soul, who fearing the danger of sin, flies to
god by repentance, like the publicanes and soldiers in the 3. of Luke: to
this belongs confession.

Thirdly, a change of mind, and casting off old affections, by putting a new
heart, like Saul, when a kingly spirit was given him.

The calling of sinners to repentance, is lively described by the calling of S.
Matthew, in whose calling we are to note four things.

First, he was sitting, noting the careless security of sinners.

Secondly, the place where he was, viz. the seat of custom, noting how this
worldly Mammon does draw men from God.

Thirdly, he rose up, showing, when grace is poured into us, then we rise
from sin.

It is not enough for us to hear Christ call, but we must rise up like Samuel,
and S. Matthew, leaving our former state and occupatio^.

Fourthly, he followed Christ: we must not leave sins only before
committed, but we must endeavor to lead a godly life ever afterward, framing
our selves to the example of Christ.

To furnish you yet with a coat of surer proof then Saules armor, every
soul that means to possess heavenly riches, must be qualified with these
properties.

He must first have voluntatis mutationem, a change of will.

2 Ad deum conuersionem, a turning unto God.

3 Peccati detestationem, a detestation of sin.

4 Ad me^orem vitam intentionem, an intention and earnest resolution to live
better afterward.

To forgive us our sins:] the certainty of this remission, is assured us by
many presidents in scripture. David sinned, but upon his confession, God being
faithful and just, forgave him.

Ahab confessed his sin, and humbled ^ ^in. 21, 29
himself before God, and he saw not the evil that was threatened in his daves.
And so did the Ninevites, and were not destroyed, though the hand of the Lord
were already stretched out within forty days to consume Luke 15, 22.
them. The prodigal son was received with great welcomes, upon his
confession.

Notwithstanding the invincible truth of this doctrine, yet Satan, whose
policy is ever to hinder man's salvation, thought to draw men from the
understanding hereof, and shuffled into men's heads diverse errors about
remission of sin.

First, that not God alone, but man also may forgive sins: whence the selling
of pardons, proceeded.

Secondly, that venial sin may be forgiven, with the infusion of divine, and
heavenly grace.

Thirdly that there is no remission, where there is not open confession to the
priest.

Fourthly, that remission of sins may be after this life, which opinion is
defended by, magister sententiarum: and this is the root of Purgatory.

The Pellagians affirmed, that when sin is forgiven, the punishment is also
forgiven, and therefore they say, the death of the body, is not the reward of
original sin.

And so they say Adam had died a bodily death, whether he had sinned or not,
but we know it to be otherwise.

And these are the Locusts, that creep Revel. ^.
forth of the bottomless pit.

The Pelagians in maintaining this erro^ cross these scriptures.

In ^udore vultus: in the sweat of thy face, shall thou eat thy bread: God
forgave the sin, but the punishment still remains.

God pronounced against Eve, in sorrow Genesis 3.
shall thou bring forth, God pardoned the sin, but the punishment yet
remains.

David by confession of his sin got pardon, yet the Prophet told him, he should
be humbled by his son.

But let these errors pass, and leave we them to him that devised them; which
is the devil, who has bin a lier from the beginning: truth will triumph over
falshoode, and the arc will stand when Dagon falls.

One drop remains behind vndistilled, the pure Quintessence whereof being
in due mixture added to this clear fountain of christalline water, will grace
the same with a matchless perfection.

When this is supplied, nothing will be wanting, as nothing was lacking to the
five Mat. 25, 4.
wise virgins, when their lamps were burning.

And to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.] God will not only remit sin,
but he will take it clean away: as Moses said he Exo. 10. 26
would not leave an hoof behind, so God in purging will not leave a spot
behind, but we shall be thoroughly cleansed and made white, like Abosolom, who
from the sole of his foot, to the top of his head had no blemish 2. Sam. 14.
25.
in him.

How filthy and polluted soever we were before, yet now we shall be clean
and white, whiter than Naaman after so many washings.

In the one and twentieth of the Revelation it is written, that the city of god
is founded upon precious stones: and in the end of the Chapter it is said,
there shall no unclean thing enter into it, showing that the soul of man must
be clean.

The Lord by Esaias says: I will blot out all thine iniquities.

And if the wicked man will turn from his wickedness, I will remember his sins
no more.

In the sixth of the Revelation mention is made of those that were under the
Altar, the Altar is said to be Christ, and the saints under the Altar are
said to have long robes, showing that nothing must be seen in the Saints of
God, which is stained or polluted, they must be all covered.

Their robes are said to be white, showing that the souls which rest in
Christ, must be clothed with innocence, after the perfection of Christ.

A roab was given to every oue of them, showing that one was not covered with
the robe of another: one soul might not be clothed with the perfection of
another, for the just shalliue by his own faith.

In the seventh chapter the fourtenth verse it is said, they had washed their
^obes, and made them white, showing there is no clensing of sin, but by his
blood that died for sin.

Being now made clean and white, let us not pullute our selves again, let us
not any more run to the vomit of sin, for then we grieve the spirit of
God, and our end is worse then our beginning.

Cant. 5, 3.
Let us rather learn the song of Christ's Spouse in the Canticles, I have
washed my feet, how shall I defile them again: I have put off my coat, how
shall I put it on?

And thus have you seen the sinner wouded and salued sick to death and yet
recovered to life again, like the Sunamites child: Be not like those 9.
Leapers, who being cle^sed, forgot him that cured them, and are noted ^o all
posterities of monstrous ingratitude.

Little will he yield, which will not yield John 8. 11.
thanks, which makes thee nothing the poorer, nor him the richer that
receives them.

As Christ said to the woman taken in adultery, Go away and sin no more,
lest a worse thing happen unto thee: so I say that you are washed now, and
purged and cleansed from all your sins, go and defile your selves no more,
lest some evil overtake Heb. 10. 26
you: and then no more sacrifice for sins shall prevail: as Christ said,
Remember Luke 17, 32.
Lots wife, so I say, remember Esau, who Gene. 27.
could not gain the blessing, though he sought it with tears.

All will be learned, if you think on this lesson that we have taught, or
rather which God has delivered unto you.

If we confess our sins, God is faithful and just, to forgive our sins,
and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.

The God of peace make us perfect in all good works, to do his will, working in
us that which is pleasant in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be
praise for ever

Amen.
The forming of Eve.
Also the Lord said, it is not good that man should be alone, I will make
him an help meet for man. There fore the Lord caused an heanie sleep to fall
upon the man, and he slept: and he took one of the ribs, and closed up the
flesh insteede thereof, and that ribbe which he had taken, made he a woman.
Genesis 18. 21, 22.
THe philosophers being but profane men such as never acquainted themselves
with Divinity, the true saving knowledge; yet could say, being guided by a
natural instinct of reason only, that contemplation is the chiefest felicity,
or the only good thing, whereunto all men of all sort, should sacrifice their
well bestowed labors.

This Idea was a continual insight or serious consideration, both of God and
of his creatures. And this in them was but a voice of humanity: but certainly
it conua^es unto us Christians my sticall matter of deepest divinity: for it
is the very loadestarre, that by a speedy and easy course, guides us along to
the haven of true felicity, like those Angels that led forth Lot to the place
of refuge, when others disdaining so good a guide, perished worthily in the
flames of Sodom.

This consideration we find to be first planted in God himself, and
secondarily from him derived unto men. It moved God when he did contemplate
his own glory, for the further promoting thereof, to create the world, the
heavens, and the earth, and the creatures therein, all to set forth his
glory, according to that in the nineteenth Psalm: The heavens declare the
glory of God, and the firmament shows his handy works, etc.

Divine speculation performed this, and the same in another sort, but far
inferior to this, must provoke us carefully to meditate and consider of the
Lords goodness in crea^ing us and governing us, which are so wonderfully made:
happy are we, and then do we show forth the shining majesty of God in us,
yea, and then are we come to the full period of this Summum bonum, this so
great felicity, when we meditate how to glorify God for his goodness.

And this holy lesson being indeed the Alpha and Omega of all perfection, we
can never have learned, till we can say as David says: I study always upon
thy laws, yea, and I make it my continual exercise: so holy a song could this
sweet singer sound^ forth, would all Christians could sing the like song with
the like spirit.

To press a little nearer to the matter in hand, as the creating of the world,
and after that, the creating of man does show the gracious care and providence
of God over us: so in this place we find a fresh president of the Lords like
goodness toward us, noted in the words of my text. Also the Lord said, it is
not good that man should be himself alone, I will make him a help.

The words do offer these three things to our consideration.

First the consultation, or conference had between God and his wisdom, for
the creating of the woman.

Secondly, the effect of his conference, in the 21. verse.

Thirdly, the manner of the woman's creation, in these words: God caused an
heavy sleep to fall upon the man.

In this consultation or conference, the love of God, and his provident care
under mankind, is most lively discovered. After he had made man the worlds
wonder, and the most excellent of all his creatures, being but a little
inferior to the Angels, and had made him Lord over the earth, and all things in
it contained, to govern the same by the divine wisdom, wherewith God had
endued him, having also placed him in Eden, that so glorious a seat, and so
full of majesty, so plentifully stored with infinite varieties of rauishing
pleasures.

For out of it made the Lord to grow every tree pleasant to the sight, and
good for meat, the tree of life also in the midst of the garden, and the tree
of knowledge of good and evil: all this felicity notwithstanding, that Adam
now possessed, and more might not seem to be required for the bettering of his
estate: for what can a man have more, then the whole world to command, as Adam
had, and after him Noah? yet the Lord abounding in mercy, as he is all
compounded of goodness and mercy, saw some thing wanting.

Adam had not yet a companion, that might partake with him in this his
felicity: al his joy and pleasure and solace seemed nothing, in regard of this
one defect, he had none like himself, that might converse with him, or to
whom he might communicate these his joys.

No man knew Adams state but himself, which made the sunshine of his glory, in
some sort eclipsed, yea, the unreasonable creatures, the beasts of the fields,
the fishes in the waters, and the fowls in the air, seemed to be in better
case then Adam, for that they were not solitary, every one being yoked with
his like, beasts, fowls, and fishes were multiplied in their kind, but for
Adam found he not an help meet for him.

The wisdom and learning of a man, which are the diuinest parts in man, al
these are nothing worth, if they be not communicated to others, what good
issues from them if a man keep them to himself: if one be wise to himself,
learned to himself, what profits it?

No profit is in these, more than in the having of them: for they lie dead
within us, not being drawn forth to the benefit of others, like fire that is
hid in a flint-stone without heat, or perfume in a pomander without smell,
except the one be stricken, and the other be pounded.

Man was borne for man, one man to help and support another; and therefore most
divinely spoke Tullie in this, though profanely in other matters: Non nobis
solum nati sumus: sed partem patria vendicat, partem parents, partem amici:
God has not given us life, to the end we should live only to our selves, and
be nothing helpefull to others: but our country does challenge a part of us,
and our friends a part of us, and our parents a part, and the least part is our
own. And therefore most wise is this consultation or conference of God in this
place.

It is not good that man should be alone.] God in regard of his praescience or
foreknowledge, knew it was not expendient: and we since by experience do find
it to beso, that it i^ not good for man to be alone.

It ^s not good.] As if we should say: man is not yet so well as I would have
him; I must yet perform somewhat more, for the bettering of his estate, as
Christ told the young rich man, one thing was lacking: so here God tells Adam,
one thing was lacking: Adam wanted a help-fellow.

This huge frame of the world, whereof under me, he is the alone supreme
Commander, would better content Adam, and the fruition of it would be reputed
more delightful, and gladsome unto him; if he might find a mate or companion
to participate with him, in this his Angel-like life and incomparable
happiness.

Adam was yet alone in Paradise, and therefore the world and the creatures
therein, the air, with the fowls, the earth with the beasts, trees, and
herbs; the sea, and al waters, with the fish and whatsoever lives therein,
being all good: for the good God made all things good; and himself having
finished the creation, surueyed all that he had made; and lo, it was exceeding
good.

Yet all these seemed not so good in a sort to Adam, being alone; for their
goodness became as it were clowded, and covered as with a veil, because the
pleasure and felicity of them descended only to one eue^ Adam But since the
word of God apeared in multiplying mankind, this goodness of Gods creatures
extended it self to a more general or universal co^munitie; so as every man
without exception; God that gave them make us thankful for them, from the
merchant to the porter; high and low of what degree soever, rich and poor, of
what ability soever, the weak, and potent, of what power soever may taste the
sweetness of them: all may stretch forth their hands to apprehend what soever
goodness is lapt up in them, as freely as Adam did, when scope was given him,
to eat of every tree in the garden, save the forbidden tree.

It is not good that man should be alone.] See the love of God and his care
over man, which no tongue, nor pen can amplify.

But even now as it were, God was carefully employed, (I speak after the
manner of men;) in that supernatural work of the frame of the world, and that
for Adam: lo, that being finished, he deuiseth yet again to augment Adams
felicity, in furnishing him with fresh matter of comfort: a greater comfort
than the creation of the world: I will says the Lord, make a companion for
Adam. For ^t is not good that man should be alone.

In beholding this great blessing, that God was ordaining for Adam: for in it
was the greater blessing shadowed, and of greatest comfort, even the continent
of all blessings, Christ the Messiah, the promised seed of the woman that
breaks the serpents head.

In taking a clear view of this inestimable benefit, a sight more glorious
than Moses saw, when he stood on mount Nebo, every man has cause to cry out
with David. O God what is man thou art so mindful of him? but looking upon our
selves, and sounding our consciences fraught with ingratitude, we have eause to
cry out: O man what is God thou art so unmindful of him?

O Adam, how was it possible thou should forget him so soon, that was so
careful of thy welfare, in pouring upon thee such an heap of unspeakable
felicities?

How could thou by transgression hazard the incurrence of his implacable
displeasure, as after this thou did, since he so bountifully brake up all the
treasures and riches of his goodness.

What blessing withheld he from thee, with the absolute indowment whereof he
did not in a more than fatherlike affection inuest ^hee?

He made this world for thee, this world which before was without form, void,
and wrapped up in obscurity, and darkness, till God had said, whose word was a
work, let there be a light.

He made the firmament that asurde sky, the beholding of whose christaline
clearnes, may well procure amazednes, and astonishment from a diligent
speculator, it does so graphically set forth the shining majesty of him that
created it.

And in this firmament has he placed two great lights, to distinguish times,
and seasons, days, and years: and yet he made the same more resplendent, and
glorious, by beutifying it with stars; and all this the firmament, the
greater lights, and lesser lights, the sun, moon, and stars, and all for
thee.

He made the earth also for thee, that it should bring forth cattle, and every
thing that has life, according to his kind, every green tree, and herb for
the service of man.

The heavens and the earth, withal the host of them being finished: last of
all, as the perfection of all, did he form thee, O Adam, out of the earth
even red earth, and gave thee a name answerable to the matter, whereof thou
wast made.

And for that all this was too little for thee, the Lord committed the whole
world to thy government that thou might rule over the fishes of the sea, and
over the fowls of the heaven, and over the beasts, and over all the earth, and
over every thing that creeps, and moves upon the earth.

And because thou wantedst a pincely throane, and Regal seat of Majesty,
whereon thou might sit triumphing as chief regent of the world, and to the
which all creatures might have recourse to do thee homage.

God gave a throne unto thee, more glorious than that of Solomon's, though it
were of Iuory, and covered with the best gold, even the garden of Eden, a place
of repose so magnificent, and of such matchless excellency, as no palace of
any potentate, King, or key^ar in the world may be compared unto it; being a
place that shined with supereminent beauty, and was stored with such infinite
varieties of inexpected pleasure; the trees yielding al kind of desired fruits,
and the fruits, as they were different in kind so they presented diversity of
tastes al peasant and toothsome to the receiver.

This garden was watered by a river, clear as any crystal, the resemblance of
that river of the water of life, described by S. John in the 22. of his
Revelation.

In a word, this goodly Eden, this glorious mansion of Adams regiment, seemed
no other than a most lively representation of the very city of God, filled with
the glory and majesty of the creator.

Ah Adam, what meanest thou to disfranchize thy self of so great a liberty,
and to lose the rich prerogatives of so ample a monarchy, in stretching forth
thy hand to the forbidden tree?

Could no apple but the forbidden fruit qualisie thine unbridled appetite, the
tasting whereof included thine exclusion and debarment for ever from Paradise,
yea, death it self also to thee and thy posterity.

Look back if thou will, for the shaking blade in the hands of the fiery
Cherubim, has cut off the hope of returning thither any more. Look back I
say, to that place of bliss, which by transgression thou have lost, and
reeount at once, if for grief thou can, all thy woeful infelicities.

Thou had the beasts, fowls, and fishes at thy command to call upon, the
earth under thee to tread upon, the fruits of the trees beside thee to feed
upon, yea, gold and pearl every where about thee to trample on; and what could
thine eyes lust after, or thy heart wish for more then this?

Notwithstanding all this that has been spoken, every part and tittle
whereof, does abundantly show forth the love of God toward Adam.

Lo yet for all this, God, whose mercy is beyond measure, and whose goodness
is infinite, exhibiteth to Adam further testimonies of his love, in drawing
from his own side a companion, when before he was solitary, for he saw it
was not good that he should be alone.

Adam little thought that the Lord was ordaining for him so acceptable a
supply, he knew not his own want.

Until God graced him with this new blessing, he conceived himself
sufficiently furnished, like the rich young man in the gospel, who supposed he
wanted nothing that might furnish him to the kingdom of God, till God made him
understand, that one principal thing was lacking, which was, that he must
sell all he had, and give it to the ^oore.

Adam so long as he was alone without the woman, seemed but as a maimed man,
that wanted his principal limb.

As Agrippa speaking of himself, said: Act. 26, 28.
thou perswadest me almost to be a Christian; so may I say of Adam, that he
was almost a man, being yet alone, but when the woman was formed out of his
rib, then he became an absolute and perfect man. And this much be spoken of
this first point of Gods consultation or conference: now of his resolution
noted in these following words: I will make him an help meet for him.

God having taken counsel with his wisdom, at length determines for Adams
good, an help meet from him: I shall not need to use many words, for the
clearing of this note, for it contains only the execution of that which in
the former words he interpleaded, and for the use of the doctrine, it is
little differing from that which has already been spoken, only it shows
the continuance of Gods mercy, and love toward Adam, in performing so
speedily what he before consulted upon. It is not good (says the Lord) in
the former part of the verse, that man should be alone, and in the latter part
he concludes, I will make him a help meet for him.

The reason that moved the Lord to be so friendly unto Adam, was this, because
it made for his good, it was profitable for him.

And the same reason should be of force by the example of God, to enforce us
so to deal one with another: we should imparte any thing to our neighbor that
makes for his good, if our friend want any thing that we can supply, we ought
not withhold it from him: for as the woman for the man, so men were made for
men, one to help an other.

God has made all his creatures to serve man, the sun to shine, the stars
to give light, the clouds to water the ground, the cattle to till the earth,
and the earth to yield her increase, and all this for man: shall these dumb
creatures with such voluntary obedience, and such cheerful alacrity,
perform their duties in their neuer-failing ministry, and shall not we
minister one to another necessity? shall man only, Gods own Image, and the
perfection of all creatures, whom God made but a little inferior to the Angels,
shall only man I say, be defective in his duty?

I will make, etc.] It was a sentence that was begun with words of sweet
consolation; It is not good that man should be alone, and with no less
harmony of like sweetenes continued to the period, concluding thus with an
heavenly consent: I will make man an help.

See how peremptorilye the love of God runs, Is it good for man? I will do it.

We should carrye like love one toward another, and we should learn to
speak as God speaks: Is it good for my neighbor?

I will do it. His will and his love did join both together, to further Adams
happiness. His love made the question: Is it good? and his will presently makes
answer like Samuel at the first call; I will do it for him.

This was Gods love toward us, O that ours toward him, were like his: for
then as Gods love procured Gods will, to work Adams good, so would our love,
being like his, draw forward our will, to execute in a careful obedience,
whatsoever God commands. Where this love of God has wrought in the children
of God, there has this willingness bin found co^curre^t with like effectual
operation; for the are nere separated from the children of God, but are
evermore united as it were by an inviolable league, like Jonathan and his armor
bearer, who were never divided.

The Prophet David says in the 119. Psalm: I love thy commandments above
gold, yea above most fine gold: there goes David's love; and this love made him
pronounce in the 32. verse of that Psalm: I will run the way of thy
commandments: there we see David's will running after: his love went first, and
his will followed after: and how did it follow? it came running, because his
love had gone before.

I will make, etc.] Here the Lord promises to give Adam an helpe-fellow, that
he may not be alone, and performs presently what he promised, as in the
following verses may be seen.

In this we are called upon by the example of God, not to forslowe, but
speedily to execute what good thing so er God commands, and our will
purposes to effect.

Its an old saying, a man can never do good too late: but it is a true saying,
a man can never do good too soon.

Isocrates an heathen man could give divine counsel, to condemn christians that
will not follow it, since he counsaileth that, which christianity commands:
(...). Take leisure in determining, but use celerity in performing what thou
have once determined.

Gods will had a present effect, for so soon as he was willing to give Adam a
companie^, he went imediatly about it, and in a moment as it were, while the
man slept, out of his rib formed he the woman.

Gods will must be a president to our wills, that they have the like present
effect; as soon as we be willing to do good, we must do it, many are willing
enough to do a good deed, but they are slack in performance.

They do it not presently, and so many times it comes to pass, that
neglecting todo it, when it ought to be done, they do it not at all: and so
the good turn dies with them, like a bird in the hand.

If only we show our selves will^ng to do good, and do it not: then we are
not like God, who was willing to do Adam good, and did it: but we are like the
Mat. 21. 30
unwilling son, who said he would go into his fathers vineyard, and did not.

An help meet for him.] Out of the word help may the wife spell one principal
duty, that she owes her husband, which is, to help him to thrive.

She was made to be an help, therefore she must not be idle, she may not look
to live only upon the sweat of her husbands brows, by unthriftily spending,
what he carefully brings in: but she must bear a part of the yoke, and her
part is to labor as busily at home, as he to travel painfully abroad.

If you will more fully and in a clearer vi^w surueigh your duties and the
practike obedience which God requires of you, in this behalf, you that be
wives, I speak to the good wives, them who do help their husbands in their
labors, peruse for your better instruction the last of the Proverbs of Solomon.

The King had too much experience of bad wives, of il huswiues; you shall hear
now what he speaks of good wives, he concludes both book and chap. with their
commendation.

Who shall find a virtuous woman? her price is far above the pearls: woeful
experience urged him to demand, who shall find a virtuous woman? for himself
among many could not find her, whom he in this place commends.

The heart of her husband trusts in her; and he shall have no need of
spoil, she will do him good, and not evil, all the days of her life.

She seeks wool and flax, and laboreth cheerfully with her hands, she is
like the ships of Merchaunts, she brings her food from far, she
considers a field and gets it, with the fruit of her hands she planteth
a vineyard; she ouerseeth the ways of her household, and eats not the bread of
idleness.

Her children rise up, and call her blessed, her husband also shall praise her,
saying: many daughters have don virtuously, but thou surmountest them all; and
after many more praises sounded there at large, which I refer the reader
unto, he closes up all with this passionate conclusion, as one that well
knew where the shoe wringed him: fau^ur is deceitful, and beauty is vanity,
but a good wife that fears the Lord. she shall be praised: as if he should
have said, fie on favor, that is not joined with the fear of the Lord, and
fie on beauty, not linked with virtue: it was favor that beguiled me, and
beauty that snared me, but a good wife that fears the Lord, she shall be
praised, for she surmounts them all, and that man shall have her to his
portion, whom the Lord has blessed.

There is no wife but will confess, it is her principal duty to help her
husband to thrive, and therefore I do only point at it: It follows.

Meet for man.] Things that be not meet, will not meet: if the man and wife
be not like, they will not like, and therefore says God, I will make him an
help.

Meet.] ^t is especially required in the holy kn^tt^ of marriage, that the
wife be meet for the man, and the man meet for the wife.

If their affections and their minds be not suitable, they will never agree; as
two oxen will not draw together unless they be equally yoake^* so m^n and wif^
will not draw together vn^^sse they be equ^lly yoaked.

This equality or fitness consistes in two things, equality of (...) and
equality of affections, where this equality holds in both: there are they no
longertwo but one flesh, and one mistical body acording to the saying of our
Savior: Erant vna caro.

This holy simpathy stays all iar^es, and it is like David's harp curing Saul's
frenzy.

It is like the band of perfection, linking man and wife together, in an
undivided union and firm truce, as there never can arise any odds between
them, but they shall so live and love together, like Elisha and Eliah, who
could never be sundred till God divided them.

The last point only remains concerning the manner of the woman's creation.

And the Lord caused an heavy sleep.] While Adam slept, out of his rib God
made woman.

It is a note worth the nothing to consider, how, while Adam slept God formed
Eve.

Comfort was prepared for Adam, when he least expected it, Adam did not think
that the Lord would so soon give him a companion.

And therefore securely he lad him down to sleep, but out of his ribbe God
made woman in that short space: Adam sleeps and thinks upon nothing less,
then what he finds waking. Learn here the watchful providence of God,
being careful of Adams good, even when Adam sleeps. Though we sleep or
slumber, yet God waketh over us.

Sampson found honey in the dead lion, when Judge. 14. 8.
he looked not for it: and the Israelites had water out of the rock little
expected, til they saw it streaming forth: and here is comfort presented to
Adam, even as he sleeps: and before he could consider of his want, he finds
such a comfortable supply, that he would not loose again for more talentes of
gold than Gehezi bought his leprosy with.

Whereas God took the ribbe, and of it formed the woman: this shows that man
is to esteem of his wife as of his companion, yea as of himself, for she is
part of his substance, he must love her as tenderly as the rib in his own
side. He is not to put her down to his heel: nor must she presume to his
head. She must not exercise the maistery, nor must the husband make her his
servant, remembering she was taken from his side:

The ribbe teaches them both, a lesson of continency: the man to like and
love none but his wife, and the wife none but her husband: she ought in
affection to be so near unto him, as his own ribbe.

Lastly, it teaches them both a lesson of unity, which is the band of love:
the man must not provoke his wife, nor the wife her husband: No bitter words
must pass between them, much less blows; for, will any man beat him self?
will any man frette his ribbe? no man says the apostle ever hated his own
flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it. Ephesians. 5. 29.

And thus you have breflie heard, the sum of this portion of scripture, in such
measure as god has opened unto me, I have revealed unto you. In the first
part you have heard god co^sulting: in the second, determining for Adam his
good an help meet for him: and thirdly the manner of the woman's creation: all
show forth gods love and care over mankind; and this love and care in God does
call for gratitude and thankfulness from us, by walking dutifully in our
callings and supporting one another after the example of God.

God that sormed us, so sanctify us by his good spirit of grace, that we
fashion our selves to his will, that we may ever be doing that which is
acceptable in his sight, to his glory, and the salvation of our souls in the
right o^s^e^ of Jesus Christ.

Amen.
A short Treatise upon the Commandments.
Blessed are they that do the Commandments. Revel. 22. 14.
THe Lord when he had made man, even Adam the father of all men, and the first
progenitour, out of the clay, he formed him, even red earth, which is also
figured in his name, and having invested him with all the ornaments of
excellency, and perfection, in making him but a little inferior to the Angels,
and crowning him with glory, and worship, as it is in the author to the
Hebrews: and having delivered unto him as his vicegerent, the sole and supreme
sovereignty ^uer the world and the creatures therein, and having for the more
increase of his feliciti^, seated him in that goodly Eden, and pleasant
Paradise: a place more rich and more excellent, then all the King of S^a^^es
golden Indies, for there is pure gold, and th^^^ are precious stones in great
about (...) may read in the 2. of Genesis.

Yet all this notwithstandin^ (...) would not have him to ^^^d^e, (...) only in
the secure co^^mp^^m^ion (...) ^^rthly paradise, but he tas^ed him, (...) him a
charge, to diesse garden, to ^ence it, and to keep it

He gave him a co^ma^^^ment also saying, thou shall eat freely of all the
trees in the garden, but of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, thou shall
not eat thereof. Lo here had Adam a commandment, which if he had not
viloated, he had yet holden Paradise; but he had no sooner tasted of the
forbidden apple, but the curse of God ouertooke him, and his posterity; and as
he became a slave to sin, so he became subject to death, the stipend of
sin.

And so was he driven, like an exile from Paradise, and could never enter in
thither annye more, for it is kept with a fiery cherubin, and with the shaking
blade of a sword, that no man since Adams fall da^e venture to have access in
thither.

Then had Adam a new task imposed him, not like the former, which was as you
have heard, to dress the garden, to fence it, and to keep it; but a labor of
sorer difficulty, and harder travel, even to dig and delue: he never knew
what labor was, nor what husbandry meant till now, but now he knew it to his
pain.

All ye husbandmen, when you till and occupy your ground with toyling and
moyling, in the sweat of your brows, think on Adams fall, and that this your
labor was inflicted you for a curse: for till Adam transgressed, it was never
pronounced, Genesis 3. 19.
In sudore vnltus ves^eris pane, In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat thy
bread. So then to descend to a particular application of that which hitherto
has been spoken.

As the Lord gave Adam a commandment, while he was yet in Paradise, which you
know, and I have partly touched, so has he given us Adams posterity
commandementes also, not one as Adam had, buteuen ten for one.

Wherein note what harm or inconueni^^ce our first (...) purchased us, by the
breaking of that one which first was given him: If he had carefully observed
that one, then had not these ten been imposed upon us, as if he should have
said in the severity of his justice, looking upon the guilt of Adams sin:
have I given thee but one, O Adam, and could thou not observe that? Know
that I will enjoin a greater matter unto thy seed after thee, I will charge
thee with ten.

And as I imposed a curse on thee for the breach of that one, so shall my hand
of judgment be upon them, and their children, if they break those ten: If
they transgress but in one, or a jot of any one: for he that offends but in
a tittle of the Law, is guilty of the whole law.

And as the sentence of death, and the exclusion of that earthly Paradise
passed against thee, so shall the sentence of death, and the exclusion, not
from that on earth, but from a better and a more glorious paradise pass upon
them, if they observe not my commandments.

Lo what an apple has brought us unto: we should not eat an apple, though our
own hands have planted it, without this consideration, but we should even then
recall to memory the curse contracted to himself, and us, by eating the
forbidden apple: and withal, we should advise our selves of the penalty that
must be inflicted us, when we offend the same God, in breaking the
commandments, which now are given us.

Let no man charge the Lord with severity in this case, for it was not so much
the eating of an apple, that God respected, when he plagued Adam, as the breach
of his commandment.

Adam testified the small love, and less reverence that he bare, both to God,
himself, and his commandments, when he would not stick to incur his
everlasting displeasure, only for qualifying his lust, in eating of an apple.

Whether it be a great matter or a small, that the Lord shall command, he will
look be kept: if thou offend in the smaller, the more beast thou, to provoke
God in so small a thing.

God looks not upon the matter, but upon our disobedience, which God reckons
as the sin of rebellion.

Vzzah did but touch the arc being realy 1. Chro. 1^
to fall, and he was stricken with death in the ^^^ce.

David his numbering the people caused 2. ^a. 24. 15
70. thousand to die of the pestilence.

The man of God in the 13, of the first of 1. King. 13.
Kings, for turning in to the old Prophet, was slain by a lion.

Moses was bid to speak to the rock, and it should gush forth water, but he
proceeded Nu. 20. 11.
beyond his commission, and struck the rock twice, and for that cause, he
never entered the land of promise.

See how the Lord spares not to punish, as well his own children as the
reprobate, and wicked, when they offend him, that all men may take heed, how
they provoke the Lord of hosts, or how they stir up the mighty lion of the
tribe of Judah, which deuoureth the wicked like bread, and the ungodly like
stubble.

Therefore let us follow the sage and wise counsel of the prophetical King,
and kingly Prophet David: kiss the son lest he be angry, and so ye perish in
his wrath, like Chorah.

A question may here be moved, why God should lay this heavy task upon us,
why he should charge us with ten, and Adam but with one?

Whereas we are far more insufficient to perform the same than Adam was: for
God armed him with power and ability to perform the same commandment, which
we have not.

The answer must be this: as Adam had ability, so we are not altogether
disabled, for god has given us a gracious supply, in that wecome short:
because Christ that imaculate just one, whom the father has sent unto us, he
has died for us, he has also satisfied for us, and whatsoever the justice of
God required of us, that has he abundantly performed even the whole law, for
in him dwells all Col. 1. 19.
fullness, and of his fullness have we al received: The Lord has charged us
with this hard task, to the end, that looking into our own imbecility and
weakness, we might have recourse unto Christ, flying to him for succor, as
the Iraelites fled to the brazen serpent, when they were stinged with
scorpions. Number. 21. 9


Blessed are they that do the Commandments.] To the end, no man should doubt
of the certainty of this blessing, it is often repeated in sundry places of
scripture.

If thou shall observe all my commandments, Deuter. 28.
and obey diligently the voice of the Lord, then the Lord will exalt thee above
al nations of the earth: blessed shall thou be in the city, and blessed in the
field, blessed in the fruit of thy body, and in the increase of thy kine, and
in the flocks of thy sheep: blessed when thou come in, and when thou go
out.

And in the eleventh of Deuteronomie: If you hearken to my Commandments, I
will give you rain to your land, early and late, in due season, that thou
may gather in thy corn, and thy wine and thine oil.

I will give grass also for thy cattle, that they may eat and be filled.

Consider this aright, and let it sincke into your hearts, as it soundes into
your ears, if you have not yet tasted, nor had your share in the aforesaid
blessings; If God has at any time stricken your fields, that they have
yielded no increase: or if he has sent the caterpiller to devour your
fruits, if he has laid a curse upon the ground, that no grass might be
found for your cattle; know that it is for the breach of his commandments,
as appears in the sixth chapter of the Prophet Michah.

For as they are blessed that do the Commandments, so are they cursed that
do them not, as you may read at large in the 28. of Deuteronomy.

In the tenth chapter of Mark, the man that would needs know, what he must
do to inherit eternal life, had this answer given him by our Savior, Keep
the commandments.

And in the 119. Psalm says the Prophet David, Blessed are they that keep
the testimonies, for sure there is no iniquity in their hands.

A special blessing is proclaimed by the Lord himself in the 19 chapter of
Exodus: If you keep my commandments, you shall be my chief treasure.

To quote all the places of Scripture, that speak of the rewards, and
blessings pronounced to them that walk in the commandments of God, were
infinite, and not necessary, seeing these may suffice which I have already
produced; yea if I urged no more than this one proof, even my present Text
only

Blessed are they that do the Comandements.]

What the Commandments are, we all know, and I know, which I grieve to
speak, they are every where better known, than practiced, viz. those ten
given by the Lord to Moses upon mount Sinah.

Exodus 19
As they were not lightly given, Exodus 19. so they must not lightly be
regarded: for salvation and destruction, life and death is in the keeping or
breaking of them.

It is worth the noting, to consider what a solemn preparation was used before
the publication of them; how the people were first to be sanctified two whole
days, how the Lord charged them to abstain from their wives, and to wash
their clothes, how it thundered, and lightened, and the Mount it self
trembled, and the Trumpet sounded. And last of all, which frighted the people
most of all, the Lord himself came down in fire, and then he spoke and
said: The Law being thus published on Mount Sinay with such terror, and other
circumstances of majesty, may greatly astonish the breakers thereof: for
undoubtedly the exaction of this Law must needs be with greater terror at
the day of judgment, seeing the publication of them was with such fear and
dreadfulnesse.

These mysteries in the delivery of t^^ Commandments must not be passed over
with silence, since they contain matter of moment.

The Commandments were given by God himself, noting that the Creator of man
is principally to govern man.

Delivered to the people by Moses, no^ng that God in his government uses the
ministry of man.

Delivered out of a flame cum tonitru and fulgore, noting the severe tortures
of those that shall violate this law. Published on the top of a mountain,
noting the high and heavenly authority, and divinity of this law. Written in
Tables of stone, noting the stony hearts of men, wherein these laws were to be
written.

They were given with promise, that they should be Gods chief treasure, noting
that they were given, not only for a burden, but for means to enter into
heaven.

And when the commandments were given, the people durst not come near the
mountain, noting, that no man is to dispute with God, and to enter into his
divine secrets.

The people that heard the law stood in ^he Desert of Sinay, noting the want
of virtue and piety in them. It is noted by a learned Divine, that the manner
of delivering the Law was this:

It was given by a voice, noting Blanditias promissionum.

In a clear lightning, noting Claritatem, operum.

In a thunder, noting Terrorem comminationum.

With sound of trumpets, noting Instantiam exhortationum.

The Law had his root in Paradise, his branches in the Desert, his fruit in
Christ: the roots bitter to Adam, the branches, heavy to the Israelites, the
fruits, death to Christ, because he died to fulfill the law.

This law is a Schoolemaister, sending us to Christ.

This law is like a glass, wherein we may behold two kinds of sights: we
may behold our own imperfections, and also we may see the absolute perfection
of Christ Jesus.

When the iron fell into the water, Elizeus 2. Kings 6
took a piece of woodde, and threw it in, and the iron came to the top of
the wate.

We were as iron, suncke unto the bottom of the waters of desperation, and our
heavenly Elizens, Christ Jesus with a piece of wood, that is, suffering for our
sins upon a wooden Cross, raised us up, and caused us to swim upon the
tops of the waters of despair.

But before we proceed to a particular view of the Commandments, I will
briefly acquaint you with the substance of them, which is this: They comprehend
the duty of man toward God, and the duty of man toward man; the duty of
one man toward another.

Our duties toward God are delivered in the four first Commandments, and
first table* our duties toward man in the six last, being the second table.

Will thou know how thou may perform all this that God requires of thee
in these his Commandments, why love God, and love thy neighbor, and thou have
done all. Do this, and thou shall be as free from the ^reach of these
commandments, or any of them, as Naaman was free from his leprosy, when he
had washed in Jordan.

The whole fulfilling of the law consists but in one word: but in this word
Love, it is ^ut a syllable.

But thou must know; that this love is more than a bare love, a naked love, a
cold love: for the wickedest and loosest liver in the world will say he loves
God, and he loves his neighbor too. But thou must love God entirely, and
purely, and as he will be loved: thou must love him with these circumst^^ces,
viz. with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy strength; and
then thou must love thy neighbor as thy self.

Thou must love God above al, thou must love him more than thy self, more than
thy father, that begat thee, or thy mother that bare thee, or thy brother, the
son of thy mother, or thy wife that lies in thy bosom he Mat. 10. 37
that loves father or mother, sister or brother, wife or children, or
kinsfolks morethan me, is not worthy to be my disciple.

We come short of this love, when we love the world, like Demas, or our
pleasures, like Belshazar, or our riches, like the young man in the Gospel,
who before he questioned with Christ, thought h^ had had this love we now
speak of: for he justified him Mat. 19. 22.
self, saying; All these have I kept from my youth up. But Christ knew ^ee
loved his riches, and possessions, and his lands better, and therefore he bade
him go, and sell all he had and give it to the poor, and he should have
treasure in Heaven: but he went away sorrowing, not sorrowing for that he came
short of this love we speak of, but for that he must part with his goods, if
he would inherit lift; for the text says, he was very rich.

If ye love the world, the love of GOD dwells not in you: but when ye begin
to love the Lord in the sincerity of your hearts, then, and never till then
will the love of the world fall from you with the vanities thereof, as the
white scales fell fro Tobias eyes.

Love, even this pure love whereof we speak, is the first lincke, that in an
holy union does join GOD and us together: and this one lincke draws two
others with it, fear and obedience: love looks upon Gods mercy, fear looks
upon his justice: the one stays us from presumption, the other keeps us from
desperation.

These two support our faith as the two Lions. supported Solomon's throne, and
to what soul soever these two shall have recourse, even thither shall
obedience comc also.

These three are better welcome unto God, than the three presents offered by
the wise men unto Christ.

These three graces, love, fear, and obedience, are like those robes of
righteousness to cover and beautify the Saints of God, which Saint John
extolleth with a threefold commendation; they were pure, fine, and shining.

This love holds me to it. like an adamant, and yet I may not part with it;
till I have planted it in you: for if I teach you this one lesson, I teach you
all, which is to love God above all. We must love him, for that he is merciful
in making us, when we were not, in protecting us being made, but most of all,
for saving us, when we had lost our selves, as Adam lost himself among the
fig trees: for giving us the air to breathe with, the Sun to give us
light, the rain to fructify the earth, the fire to warm us, the beasts and
fowls and fishes to feed us, all that is within, and without our bodies: This
world, and the goodly frame thereof.

This ought to make us love god, and in our love to exclaim, like David. O
Lord, what is man, that thou so graciously visitest him? but looking upon our
selves, and our ingratitude, that do not love god for all this: we have cause
to cry out upon our selves, and to say; O man, what is god, that thou so
lightly regardest him?

O Lord, says Augustine in Soliloquijs: if thou for this vile body give so
innumerable benefits, from the firmament from the air, from the earth, from
the sea, by light and by darkness, by heat, and shadow, by dewes, and
showers, by wind and rain, by birds and fishes, by beasts and trees, by
multitude of of herbs, and variety of plants, and by the ministry of all thy
creatures: O sweet Lord what gratitude what love and thankfulness should we
owe thee for all this? how should we honor thee, as thou deseruest?

All the creatures of God do call upon us to love God, and yet are we short of
this love; we praise him not, we thank him not for his benefits, we honor him
not for his goodness, so beyond al measure ungrateful are we like those nine
lepers, that being cleansed, forgot him that cleansed them.

Alas, what mean we to forget to be thankful to so gracious a God? what mean
we now after so many blessings that God still powers upon us, in a plentiful
measure, we have not yet learned to love him?

This is the A, B, C, of religion, and first Catechizing Principle for them to
learn, that will be trained in the school o Christ, and we have not learned
so much, such trowanting scholars are we: In this love is all the whole duty
of man consisting, and wilt not thou learn this one thing which teaches thee
all things?

O but you will say, if all the performance of my duty to God-wards, consist in
loving God, why it is a matter of no great difficulty, I can do so much: ever
from my youth have I loved God.

Indeed it may seem to be a lesson soon learned: but if thou discuss it
aright, if thou examine what this love is, and where in it consists, and how
many circumstances depend on it, being exposed, I say, to the uttermost herein,
as Christ exposed the rich young man in the Gospel, thou will go away
forrowfull, finding thine insufficiency as he did, and cry out upon thy self
clapping thy Luke 18. 13
breast, like the publicane God be merciful to me a sinner: will thou know then
what this love is, that God requires, that thou may see how far thou
wadest into the same, or how far short thou come of it, hearken a while,
and I will make a scrutiflie in to thy conscience, by sounding the very bottom
thereof: if possibly I may find that love there, which thou would seem to
brag of.

First, then and principally to proceed The first commandment.
from the first to the last, I will appose thee in the first table, and first
commandment thereof.

If thou love God, as thou should, thou will have no other gods but him; Thou will worship none but him; Thou will call on none but him; Thou will pray to
none but him; The worship of God stands in four points.

In fearing God above all. In honoring him above all. In praying to him alone.
In acknowledging him to be the giver of all things, and therefore to put our
trust only in him.
A son honoreth his father, and a servant his master: if then I be a father
where is my Malac. 1. ^
honor? if I be a master where is my fear, says the Lord of hosts? there
goes honor, and fear.

When ye pray, says our Savior Christ, to his Disciples, say on this manner:
Our Mat. 6. 9
Father with art in heaven, hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy will be
done in earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And
forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation. But deliver us from evil, Amen.

Acts 17. 25, 26.
Paul and Silas being in prison trusted in God, that he would deliver them, and
therefore at midnight they made their prayers unto him: there goes confidence
and prayer.

God is a jealous God, and will not have his glory communicated to any other,
thou must invoke no other, neither saint, Angel, nor any other creature.

Thou never love God as thou ought thou have learned to say with David,
whom have I in heaven but thee?

David knew that Abraham, Noah, and the Patriarchs were in heaven, yet he knew
that they in heaven did not know him being on earth, according to that in Esaias,
63. 16 Abraham has forgotten us, and Israel knows us not. It is a point, Ilc
not say of ridiculous folly, but of extreme madness to pray to them, that
cannot hear us.

The Saints themselves have no access to God but by Christ, the virgin Mary
her self calls Christ her Savior, what warrant have they then, that pray to
the virgin Mary, since she her self sends them unto Christ, look the first of
John 2. Christ is our only Ephe. 4. ^
advocate, there is one only mediator.

Why should we fly unto a Saint rather than unto Christ? unless we think,
that either Christ is not sufficient, or else that he is too severe: and in
thus thinking we rob him of his most glorious title of Mediator: that most
singular prerogative given him of the father, we obseure the glory of his
birth, we make his cross frustrate; in a word, what soever he has either done
or wrought for us, all is made vain and void by this derogatory kind of false
worship. And lastly, we rob God of his bountifulness, who exhibites himself
a Father unto us, how can God be our Father, when we will not have Christ for
our brother?

To be short: and to use the words of S. Austin, Christ is our only mouth,
through whom we speak unto the father, he is our eye, by whom we see the
father, he is our right hand, by whom we offer unto the father, who, if he
should leave to plead for us, neither should we, nor the saints, have ought to
do with God.

Notwithstanding this sunneshine of Gods truth, yet al are not lightened, al
open not their hearts, like Lydia, to receive this doctrine, especially the
elder sort, who have sucked this superstition, as it were from the dugge: and
they cannot leave it, because they have bin nuzled in it.

Thus, many that have eyes will not see, but do wander out of the truth, like
the blind Aramites, groping at noone day.

If when we should fly to Christ, we run to a Saint, we are not like the man
in the gospel, who threw away his cloak, to run to Christ, but we are like
Samuel, that ran to Eli when God called him.

^. kin. 2. 17
When Eliah was taken up into heaven, yet some sought for his body upon the
earth, but they found him not; No more shall they find Christ, that seek him in
the Saints, where he is not to be found: as the father and mother of Christ
could not find him, though they sought him three whole days, till they came to
the temple.

John. 1. 29. and 36
Look unto John Baptist: and we shall see him pointing, not to a Saint or an
Angel, but unto Christ the Lamb of God.

Let this be the conclusion of this one subject or principal matter of substance
contained in this first and greatest commandment, which concerns the true
worship of God.

None may be prayed unto but such as can both hear and grant the thing we
ask: none can do so but God only: most notable is that saying in Psalm. 65.
because thou hear the prayer, therefore unto thee shall al flesh come.

Neither Saints nor Angels, ought to be worshipped, Ergo not to be prayed
unto. Reave. 19


Since the Scripture therefore in the true worship of God, does especially
commend unto us, that we invoke God only, we may not without manifest
sacrilege direct our prayers to any other.

If we lift up our hands to any other, will not God require it: concerning the
office of intercession we see it peculiar to Christ only and that no prayer is
acceptable unto God, but that which our mediator does sanctify: for him has
God the father sealed.

I will shut up all with that in the seventh to the Hebrews. 25. God is able
perfectly to save them that come unto him, by his Son Christ: because he ever
lives to entreat for You have heard this error convinced by the word: therefore
as our Savior said to the woman taken in adultery; Go thy way and sin no
more, so I say unto you, that have been supersutiously affected; Now you know
it to be a sin, do it no more. We will now proceed to the second
Commandment.

The second commandment.
IF thou love God as thou ought, and as he requires thou will make no Image
of God; for so runs the commandment: Tbou shall not make to thy self any
graven Image.

And if thon may not make it, much less may thou worship it; no
Commandment Exe. 34, 14
throughout the Scripture is more pressed than this: thou shall bow down to no
other God, because the Lord whose name is Jealous, he is God.

This Commandment was greatly violated in the days of Jeremy; the prophet
charge Judah, that according to the number of their Cities were their gods;
they could say to a tree, thou art my father, and to a stone, thou have
begotten me.

Remember says Moses, when God spoke unto you out of the fire, you hard the
voice Deu. 4. 12.
of the words, but saw no similitude, save a voice only.

As we are forbidden in this commandment, to make the Image of God, so are we
likewise charged, not to make the Image of any other thing, either to worship
it, or god, saint, or angel by it, for God will not be worshipped after our
own fancies, but as his word commands.

God will be worshipped in spirit and truth, according to the pattern of the
word, as Moses did all things according to the pattern he saw in the mount.

In vain ye worship me, teaching for doctrine Mark. 7. 7.
the precepts of men.

This controules the vain and idle conceitednesse of ignorant people, who
being demanded why they maintain this or that superstition, they answer no
other thing but this; our fathers held the same before us, and we hold the
same too, by tradition from them: as if religion came by descent, so folishe
are some and ignorant, even as an horse or mule, which have no understanding.

Ambrose in his twenty ninth Epistle says, that the Jews are the rather
estranged from Christian religion, because they find Images erected in the
Papists Synagogues.

The Jews smarted many times for their Idolatrous worship and therefore now
detesting it in themselves, they abhor it in others also.

Osee tells the Jews, that because they counseled with their stock and
staff; and went a whoring from under their god, therefore their daughters
should be harlots, and their spouses whores.

What sencelesnesse is it says a learned divine, for the Image of God to fall
down before the Image of a man?

Danid painteth out the vanity of superstitious worshippers, when speaking of
Idols he says: the Idols of the heathen are silver and gold, even the work
of men's hands: they have mouths, and speak not; they have eyes, and see not;
they have ears and hear not; neither is there any breath in their mouth: they
that make them are like unto them; so are all they that put their trust in t^^m.

Liclantius peremptorily gives out this censure, there is no doubt says he,
but that no pure religion can be there, where any Image is received.

Again, if thou love God, thou will carry The third commandment.
such ar euerent estimation of him, as that thou will not abuse so much as his
name, thou will both speak and think reverently of him.

Thou do violate this commandment, so often as thou do blasphemously
apply the name of God to inchauntment, sorcery, cursing, and perjury.

The iniquity of these times, and the necessity of reforming the gross abuses
of men wilfully and wittingly incurring the breach of this commandment, would
require whole volumes of inuectiues, witchcraft, forceries, and charming, they
are sins too commonly practiced in this age.

If ones finger do but ache, or any part of thy body, be extraordinarily touched
with any infirmity, straight to the witch thou runnest or sendest, and so for
things that be lost or stolen, for the which, the wiseman, or the wise woman,
must be consulted with: alas beloved, is God as Baal, that he should not care
for your abuse, nor call you to an account for the breach of his commandments,
Or are you yet to be taught, whether this be a sin or not.

For so many shame not to answer, when they are challenged for going to a wise
man or woman; why, say they, we hope we do well, we find that good comes of it,
we get our health, we recover our goods that were lost, and so they cross S.
Paul his rule: Non facienda sunt mala, vt veniant bona: we may not do ill, that
good may come of it.

If thou have not yet heard the Lord condemning this sin, hear it now, and
henceforth condemn it in thy self.

Let none be found among you, that uses Leuiti. 20.
witchcraft, or that is a regarder of time, or a sorcerer, or a charmer, or
that councelleth with spirits, for all that do such things are an abomination
to the Lord.

The Canaanites for this cause were expelled Exo. 22. 18.
from their good land: let not a witch live.

In the sift of the Gallathians it is reckoned among the sins of the flesh, and
condemned.

Will thou behold the terror of the Lords wrath upon this sinful generation,
and ever after beware of a witch? look upon Saul, whom God did not spare,
though he were a King, for consulting with the witch at Endor, he was utterly
forsaken, and his kingdom taken 1. Sa. 31. 4. 6
from him: the next day following he and his three sons were slain.

Will ye have another president of Gods justice upon another who was a King too.

Achaziah being sick of a bruze taken with a fall, would needs send to
Beelzebub 2. King. ^.
of Ekron to know whether he should recover or no; but the Lord by the mouth
of Eliah sent back the messenger before he could come to the witch, and bade
him return this cold comfort to his master, is there no God in Israel, that
thou sendest to inquire of Beelzebub; wherefore thus says the Lord: thou
shall not rise up from the bed whereon thou art gone up, but shall die the
death. If you, or any other, when you go to a witch, should receive this or the
like sentence at the Lords mouth, I resolve you would be more wary.

I cannot part with this sin, because I would beat it down, and stamp it
into hell, from whence it came. Oh would I could find that stone that might kill
this Goliath! I would throw it at him, with all my might, and make it sincke into
the midst of his temples to return glory to Israel, and shame to the
Philistines.

Most notable is that place in Ezech. where God pronounces an heavy woe
against these wise-mongers.

Woe unto the women that sow pillowes Ezec. 13. 18
under every arme-hole, will ye hunt the souls of my people: will ye pollute me
among my people for handfulls of barley, and for pieces of bread, to stay the
souls of them that should not die: can you give life to the souls that come
unto you; why do ye hunt the souls of my people in lying to them?

But will thou receive. O thou sorcerer, be thou wise man, or wise woman: (alas
we call them wise but they are fools) for they destroy their own souls.

Will thou receive I say thy full fraught at once, and the total sum of all
thine infelicities, thou have no interest in God, no society with the Saints,
no fellowship with the believers, no part or portion in any the good creatures
of God: full of terror and astonishment, is that saying of Saint John; Reu. 21. 8
the fearful, and unbelieving, and abominable, and murderers, and
sorcerers, and all liars, shall have their portion in the lake that burns with
fire, and brimstone.

Cursing, and swearing I will but point at: and yet are these sins little
inferior to that which we have already spoken of: but what dare not profane
wretches commit when they may escape with immunity of punishment: our common
wealth looks not to the weight of these sins, nor does the magistrate care to
show his authority in suppressing them, which makes these sins to walk in
the high streets vncontrowled.

What heart is so stony like the Adamant, that would not bleed to think upon,
or what ear would not tingle to hear the wicked bannings and blasphemous
oaths of many a desperate wretch? heart, blood, nails, wounds, flesh, even by
all the parts of his glorious body: as if they would crucify Christ anew like
the Jews.

Who is it among us, that is not ginen in some measure to this sin, old, and
young, and all.

Children that have not learned to go, have learned to swear, and is this to
love God? nay is not this to hate God?

Let us leave this sin betimes, or God will have his day with thee too, O thou
swearer.

The wise man has spoken it, that the Ecclus. 23. 11.
plague shall never depart from the house of the swearer.

The son of a certain Israelitish woman, for blaspheming the name of the Lord,
and Leui. 24. 14
for cursing was stoned to death without the host.

Again, if this love of God be planted The fourth commandment.
in thy heart, thou will keep his Sabbath: thou will remember that as a
principal duty among the rest, thou will both rest thy self, and cause thy
family, and all that belongs unto thee, to cease from labor, and to sanctify
the same.

Thou must upon that day do holy things, for it is the Lords holy day: thou
must not do thine own ways, nor seek thine own will, nor speak a vain
word; that day must be bestowed upon exercises of holiness, as in hearing
the word read, and preached, in praying, receiving the Sacraments, singing of
Psalms, godly conference and meditation.

Thou must come to the church the house of prayer, keep my Sabbath, and
reverence my sanctuary.

There you are tied to come, and when you come, come with reverence: as you
carry with you, your holy day clothes, so must you carry with you your holiday
affections.

This Sabbath is called in Esaias the Lord Esa. 58. 13.
his day: but if you follow vanities upon that day, or do your own unnecessary
business on that day, you make it your own day, and not the Lords day, and so
you honor not God, but you honor your selves, as Ely honored his children.

The Lord has given us six whole days, and has reserved only one for
himself: and yet we would have that from him too; at the least we take the
greatest part of that from him, and do bestow it upon our lusts.

If we offer unto the Lord the morning sacrifice, yet we are not ready to give
him the evening incense, where God requires both, and will not be served by
peecemeales: If we give God but a piece of the day, we are like the unnatural
mother, who said of the child, let it be neither hirs nor min, 1. ^in. 3. ^^*
but ^et it be divided: so we seem to part stakes, as it were, with the Lord,
by dividing the Sabbath day, making it neither Gods wholly, nor our own.

This is the last Commandment of the first table, but it must be chief in
request, no commandment carries with it such a charge as this, for it runs
with a special Memento: Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day: as who
should say, in any case, see thou observe this commandment; for if thon
keep this, thou keep all.

For in coming to church to hear and learn the word of God, to praise and
glorify him, thou art taught thy whole duty, both how to observe this and
all the rest.

The second table expresses the duty The fifth commandment.
of one man toward another: it shows what love thou ought to bear thy
neighbor.

The principal duty braunching out of this love, is the duty to parents.
If thou love God, thou will also love thy parents: thou have one father in
heaven, who must especially be honored, in manner as thou have heard: thou
have an other father in earth, and God thy father in heaven commands thee to
honor him that is thy father on earth.

And this honor has God imprinted in his name, by giving them his own name,
the name of father.

He is thy father, therefore honor him, as God gave our fathers their
beginning, so have thou from thy father thy beginning: it has pleased God to
use them as instruments to beget us.

This love contaynes in it, honor, fear, obedience, and relief.

We read of the young stork, that he carries the old one upon his back, when
for age he is not able to fly.

This is recorded of the storke to condemn us men, that will not be careful to
relieve our parents, as they were careful to relieve us.

God, and nature, and reason, and common sense, do call upon us for this duty
to parents, therefore I will not discourse further upon it.

And in this commandment thou art, not only called upon to be dutiful to thy
natural parents, but also to the fathers of thy country, or of our houses,
the aged* and our fathers in Christ; and unto them that perform this honor, a
special blessing is promised, which is long life.

Further, if thou love thy neighbor, thou will ever be doing him good, and
not evil, all the days of thy life. Thou will procure all the means thou
can to work his safety: thou will defend him from injury offered him by
others; and if thou defend him, thou will much less seek to hurt him; and if
thou will not hurt him, much less will thou maliciously proceed to kill him;
for all this is charged in that commandment.

Thou shall not kill.] As the love of God appeared in creating us, so it
appears in preserving us, God that gave life, will have us preserve life.

The Lord will not have thee so much Leui. 19. 17 Mat. 5. 22.
as to be angry with thy brother unadvisedly, nor yet to have him: nor will he
have thee to mock or quarrel with thy neighbor.

Whosoever says unto his brother, Rachah shall be worthy of judgment, but
he that says, thou fool, shall be worthy to be punished with hel-fire: these
are the handmaides of murder, and are all here condemned.

But if thou shall, being over ruled by thine own corrupt will, and Satan his
suggestion at any time fall out with thy neighbor, to quarrel with him, and to
hate him in thine heart: oh, beware yet how thou proceed to shead his blood,
for then thou fallest into the extremity of the breach of this commandment.

Destroy not him whom God has made, and for whom Christ has died: for he that
sheadeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be, shead.

Gain proved not a wanderer til he became a murderer; he never despaired of
Gods Gene. 4. 14
mercy til he had slain his brother: but when his brothers blood beg^nne to
cry out for vengeance to the Lord, then he began to cry out also against
himself: mine iniquity is greater than Gods mercy.

Let this wanderer be a warning to al them that carry bloody minds that hate
their neighbors in their hearts; and by his judgment; let us grow wise, let
us learn, not to destroy life: for God charge thee to preserve life.

Christ commands us to love, even our Mat. 5. 44.
enemies.

The seueth commandment.
Again, if thou love thy neighbor thou will not corrupt thy neighbor, thou will not tempt him or her to any uncleanness, which is the matter of the
seventh commandment: for God will have us glorify him in our bodies and in
our souls.

God requires us to be so provident and careful in guiding our selves, as that
we suffer not so much as an vnpure thought or lust to pass from us.

In this commandment all unchaste demeanor, and loose carriage of our selves,
al idle talk, foolish and scurrilous ieasting wanton songs, garish or gaudy
apparel, and al lewd pastimes, inusing to such uncleanness, are here forbidden.

For our bodies are the temples of the holieghost, and God requires us to be
holy, as ^e is holy.

Know ye not, says Paul, that your bodies are the temples of the holieghost,
which is in you, whom ye have of God, and you are not your own; for ye are
dearly bought: therefore glorify God in your bodies, and in your souls, for
you are gods.

Behold the vialles of Gods wrath upon transgressors of this commandment, and
by their falls learn to stand: we read that Phineas in his zeal slew Zimry
and Cosby for this sin of adultery.

Five and twenty thousands of the Beniamites Iud. 20.
were slain for the forcing of the Levites wife.

The Sodomites for this sin among others were consumed with fire.

He that commits adultery is void of Pro. 6.
understanding, he that does it destroys his own soul.

In the eight commandment all stealing The eight commandment
and robbing, all violent wrongs, frauds; and al desire of other men's goods
are prohibited: so we read in Leu. 19. 11. Ephesians. 5. 9. 1. These. 4. 6.

The contrary to this is commanded, viz. to be content with the portion that
God has given us, in laboring for our own livings, and being helpefull to
them that need.

To proceed yet further: if thou love thy The ninth commandment.
neighbor, thou will not accuse thy neighbor falsely in any matter by bearing
false witness against him: God is a God of truth: and he requires truth in
his servants.

If at any time thou shall testify against him, loo^^e thy testimony be true.

All lying, flattering, and dissembling, are here forbidden, also all
backbiting, and slandering.

This commandment has many branches: it impeacheth the judge, if he give
false judgment: it impeacheth the counsailor, if he carry himself to his
clyent otherwise than he ought: it impleades the recorder, if he falsify the
record, most of al it concerns him, for the record being searched, if it be
false, an hundred years after it may do harm: it reaches to the jurors, if
they give not a true verdict, according to evidence: if these circumstances
were duly considered, there would be less swearing and forswearing than
commonly is used.

To instruct you yet a little further in this commandment, you must note there
be three sorts of testimonies.

Suggesti, Fori, Colloquij: of the Pulpit, of the Court, of Conference.

False witness of the Pulpit is, when the peacher delivers false doctrine:
if Christ be not risen, then is our preaching vain, and 1. Cor. 15 14, 15 Acts
5.
we are counted false witnesses of God.

False witnesse-bearing in the Court, is when one man shall falsely accuse an
other before the judge, as Tertullus accused Paul, calling him a pestilent
fellow, Act. 24^ or when the judge himself shall give corrupt judgment, as
Pilat pronounced sentence against Christ, though no crime could be produced
against him.

Testimony of conference is, when in private matters one accuses another
falsely, by way of slander.

Alas if false witness may be committed so many ways, who of us is not a
false witness.

We cannot certainly clear our selves, from the breach of this commandment,
no more than those jews could clear themselves, when they accused the
adulterous woman to Christ.

If thou have but told a lie, or have flattered, or have slaundered thy
neighbor, thou have violated this commandment: but how grossly do they
trangresse, and how heinous is their sin, that in the face of a Court, in the
sight of God, of Angels, and of men's being produced to try the truth in
matters of controversy, between neighbor and neighbor, will dare most
grossly, and irreligiously to swear an untruth upon their book-oathes

Most dangerous and full of honor is the state of such a profane wretch, for
it is a sin in the next degree to blasphemy.

Would thou but consider what an oath were, and what a burden or clogge this
is unto thy conscience, even a more grievous burden to thy soul, than the
leprozie of Naaman was unto Gehezie, thou should be better advised in laying
thine hand upon a book and bearing false witness against thy neighbor: if after
so many oaths thou have not yet learned what an oath is, learn it now, and be
ashamed of thine ignorance, as Adam was of his nakedness.

What an oath is.
Iuramentum est contestatio diuini numinis, cum oppigneratione boni, and
impr^catione mali. It is the calling of God the father, God the son, and God
the holy ghost to witness, with putting our salvation in gage, that our witness
is true, and wishing our condemnation, if it be false.

Out of this definition may we spell the substance of an oathe, and the
danger of it: if thou swear truly, thou have saved thy gage, salvation was
the pledge or pain of thine oaths trial: but if thou swearest falsely, thy
pawn, and thou thy self art forfeited, not unto God, whom thou have denied,
in denying his truth, but to him who is the father of lies, that tempted thee
to lie against thine own soul, as he tempted Ananiab and Saphira, that is the
devil; and I know not how thou will be dispensed with.

Will thou know then how to anoide the danger hereof, and withal; the breach
of this commandment, thou must do it thus: viz, in judgment, in
righteousness, and in truth: and so I conclude this commandment.

Many words need not to be spent in The tenth commandment
clearing the tenth and last, which reaches to the brideling of our affections.

If thou love thy neighbor thou will not transgress so much as in thought
against him, for the very motions of our hearts are able to separate us from
the love of God, Romans 7. 7.
and the love of our neigbour.

See how careful the Lord is over us; he would have us, not only to watch our
works, but our words also, and our thoughts.

The former commandment of witness bearing is called by the learned,
Prieceptu^ v^rborum, the precept of words and this last may be called, Man
latum cogitationum; the commandment of thoughts.

If God would have thee watch thy words, and thy thoughts, how much more
caref^lly would he have thee to watch thy deeds.

If God requires thee to glorify him in words, much rather does he require
thee to glorify him in deeds, and if in deeds, then most of al in charitable
deeds: if to speak well to thy neighbor, then to do well much rather.

And here fit occasion is ministered to put you in mind of your poor neighbors,
deny not them food and other necessities that they shall require: how do we
know but that God has sent this famine upon us, to try how we will carry our
selves to our brethren, ^^^ poor distressed members of Christ's body, we have
had many plentiful years, Gods name be praised for it: in regard whereof,
and in testimony of gratitude, let us not now shut our hands, nor shut up our
doors, lest it might be said, that Pharaohs lean kine, have eaten up all
the sutte kin^.

That which we give, it is not lost he that gives but a cup of cold water,
shall not loose his reward: remember how God blessed the dyle in the cruze and
the meal in the bag to 1. King. 17
the poor widow.

If thou give to the poor; thou do not give, but lend, and to whom do thou
lend, but to the Lord? he that gives to the poor, ^^ndoth to the Lord; and
look, what he lays o^t* it shall be paid him again: yea, h^ will pay it
thee again trebble in the double.

Consider thou give it unto him, who is (...) ^n^^^esh, who is the Image of
God as well as thou, who is made of the same ^o^^d with thee, who must be heir
of the same promises with thee.

If in other things thy love apeare not to thy neighbor; yet in this it must
needs appear, and show it self by releeuing him; so fulfilling the will of
God, who charge thee thus in the fifteenth of Deuteronomy. seventh verse.

Deuteronomy. 15, 7
If thy brother by thee be poor, thou shall not harden thy heart, nor shut up
thine hand, but shall relieve him in his need: he that despises the poor,
despises him that made him: if you shall thus do, and in the fear of God, I
exhort you so to do, to you then belongs that voice of comfort; come ye blessed
of my father, receive the kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the
world: for I was hungry, and you gave me meat; I was thirsty, and you gave
me drink; I was a stranger, and you lodged me; I was naked, and you clothed
me; I was sick, and you visited me; I was in prison, and you came unto me:
Know that Christ in the poor is hungry and thirsty, and a stranger, and
naked, and sick, and in prison; and in as much as you have done it unto one of
the least of these his brethren, you have done it unto him.

And now (beloved) that I have showed you all the circumstaunces in effect of
this love toward God, and toward your neigbour, which is all the duty
that the Lord requires of you in these his commandments enter into your
selves, sound yourselues, whether this love of God be in you, or not.

As S. Paul bade the Corinthians to prove 2 Cor. 13. 5
themselves, whether they stood in the faith: so I, not by way of commandment,
but by request, rather entreat you, prove, and examine your selves, whether
this love of God be in you, or not.

It shall soon appear by due examination, as a vessel is judged by the sound
thereof, to be either empty or full.

Happy is that man that can say: all these have I kept. The prodigal son
was never half so welcome to his father, as this man is to God.

(...)

