THE IOIEFVLL AND BLESSED Reuniting the two mighty and famous kingdoms,
England and Scotland into their ancient name of great Britain.

By JOHN BRISTOLL.

printer's device with the framed blazon or coat of arms of the University of
Oxford. McKerrow 285 SAPIENTIAE ET FELICITATIS

ACADEMIA OXONIENSIS



Printed at Oxford by JOSEPH BARNES, and are to be sold in Paul's Church yard
at the sign of the Crown by Simon Waterson.

TO THE KINGS MOST EXcellent Majesty, JAMES by the grace of God, King of great
Britain, France, and Ireland defender of the faith.
THE joyful; and happy proclaimed union of your Majesty's two famous
kingdoms, England and Scotland into the name of Great Britain, in one
dutiful obedience of all, to one Royal Rightful Sovereign over all, is the
very Treasury of the whole State; where your Majesty is sole, and high
Treasurer of weal public: and your sovereign authority, beautified with
Justice for executing laws: with wisdom for determining Right: with mercy,
and grace, for releeving distressed Subjects, is the glorious abundant Treasure
it self. And albeit I have in my two books, like the poor widdowe, offered
into your Treasury, but only two mites, yet I hope (and for that do most
humbly pray your gracious favor) that your highness will be pleased in
goodness to accept my humble service; and duty, and to lay up my two mites with
the rest of the rich Treasure, though in the account, they be scarcely reckoned
for a farthing. I have with that care, and caveat as is meet, only observed
the Tenor of your highness proclamation, and with dutiful, and due regard, left
all other incident circumstances, and great considerations to the wisdom of
the Honorable Commissioners, authorized by your Majesty in both your
Parliaments. As for all others, which dislike mine industry, and distaste my
zeal, esteeming my labors lost, and better left undone, then my reputation
left undone among them; I esteem them only tanquam Pedarios Censores
trampling on truth, and carrying their eyes in their heels, and not in their
head; nevertheless I desire (if may be) to avoid their kicking, and spurning:
if not, yet because I know my farthing good silver, able to endure touch, and
trial, I have without other respects in publishing this book, scattered
abroad the fire of my zeal, to show it felfe in its own shine, and placed my
happiness in your Majesty's approving mine endeavors, knowing that the king of
kings acknowledged the poor widdowe to have cast in more into the Teasury,
then all the rich men. Me self verily do cast in all that I have; and for my
part, do judge it every man's part, to depart from all, where he owes all.
To this I can only add my daily prayers, and do presently, and will still
power them forth to the God of all glory, and mercy, lifting up hands, and
heart, that his manifold, and daily blessings may be multiplied upon your
sacred person, upon our gracious Queen, and upon your Royal Seed for ever:
and that all your kingdoms may flourish to your own hearts desire, for terror
of foes, and endless comfort of all your loving Subjects.

Your Majesty's faithful Subject and humble servant: Io. BRISTOLL.

THE IOYFVLL AND HAPPY union of the two famous kingdoms England and Scotland
into the name of Great Britain.
THE State of England, and Scotland may be resembled to the condition of
Israel, and Judah, not only for emulation, who have most right to the Royal
person 2. Sam. 19.
of the Kings Majesty. for their defense, and government; but also for that
the two kingdoms were at first both but one. Besides, God, as he speaks by
his Prophet, did also at first alike lead both them, and us, with Gords of a
man, even with Hose. 11.
Bands of love. And as it pleased God, for sin of people to break those
Bands, even both the Staff of bands, and of beauty, to dissolve the
brotherhoode Zach. 11.
of Israel, and Judah, so, for the iniquity of our forefathers, God brake the
Staff of bands, signifying mutual love, and also Staff of beauty signifying
order of government, and brought in upon them, and upon their posterity, even
to these Is 9.
our latter days, a staff of division, and yoke of burden upon theirs, and
our shoulders; which now for all that, out of the riches of his mercy, he has
also broken in pieces, making al one again, as he spoke by his Prophet
Ezechiel, concerning Israel, Ezec. 37.
and Judah, saying, I will make them one people in the land, upon the mounetaines
of Israel, and one king shall be king to them all, and they shall be no more
two peoples, neither be divided, any more henceforth into two kingdoms.

This foundation laid, as project of our whole purpose.

The truth shows it self how two kingdoms, severed in place, not much
differing in laws, nor dissonant in language, but only disagreeing heretofore
in neighborhood, may be comprehended under notion of one name, specially
seeing, when one rules both, and both become Subject to one, they are no more
two, but one body, lincked in like duty, and knit together in one band of
obedience. To doubt this is in Strangers, ignorance, but in Subjects, a great
offense.

For who so considers that many Shires, with the principality of Wales,
heretofore made one England, cannot but confess, that likewise England, and
Scotland, with all their territories, Islands, Shires, and Countries make now one
great Britain, and all the people of both the mighty nations, Britains: and
that the Kings Majesty has done as princely an Act in uniting both the
kingdoms into one name, as he did in uniting the Arms of both the Realms
into one Scutchion having a like Right in both. For all great Britain being
his Majesty's inheritance, all his Subjects within that continent are
Britains.

Just, and reasonable was the demand of Annius, chief Governor of Latins,
in uniting Romans, and Latins, saying, Ex vtraque gente vnum Live. 1. Dec. 8.
lib.
oportet esse populum, vnam fieri rempub: eande^ imperij sedem, idemque omnibus
nomen. And albeit the Latins were content, for sake of Weal public, to
prefer Romans before themselves, and be called by their names (as the
History there farther reports) Quoniam ab alter vtra part concedi necesse
est (quod vtrisque been vertat) sit hat sane patria potior, and Romani omnes
vocemur: nevertheless the case not standing so with us, that Scottish should
be called by our name, nor we by theirs, me thinks, a third name of great
Britain might easily, and equally please both: otherwise as King Deiotarus
cut of al his children, saving one, Plut. 3. mor
because he would leave the kingdom but to one: so should English, swallowing
up name of Scottish, or Scottish drowning name of English, prove such a Vine,
which to bring but one grape to ripenes, is content that all Branches be cut
of, but one. But the question here is not, which of the branches should best
prosper, but how all the branches may flourish, which abide in the Vine: and
verily the question carries in it self, his answer. Abide in the Vine. This
Vine is but Ezec. 37. 19
one, though of many branches, and much fruit. And thanks be given to God,
that his Majesty by public Proclamation, has divulged the inserting and fast
grafting of each branch, and al fruit into his own Royal person, as into a
fruitful and flourishing vine, even into the head of the whole body, of how
many so ever parts consisting. Wherein his Highness has laid the first
stone, as he is the true and only foundation of happy union: and yet, as yet,
like Apelles fashioning only the exquisite and most excellent beauty of Venus
in the head, but I hope also and will pray for perfection in the rest: that the
saying may be true. Rex velit honesta, nemo non eadem volet: and that an
universal union may be as happy in successu, as it is most just by
proclamation in inceptu. That the head going before, the whole body may follow
after in imitation, to work out perfection of the desired happy union. That it
may be verified, quod diu parturivit tandem peperit; and what God had in his
providence long purposed is fulfilled in these our happy days. And that by no
means that of the Poet may be imputed to us, either by disobedience to our
head, or disagreeing among our selves, humano capiti vartas inducere formas.
Grammarians do observe, that Metallum, is so called, quasi, (...), that is
post, and (...), that is aliud, because there is scarcely found no vein of
Metal, where is not more of that sort adjoining to it: so among English and
Scottish, they are not to be thought of the true metalline Mine, but as
dross, and canker, corrupting, and consuming each other, which join not in
the universal name of great Britain, so to continue, and dwell together, to
grow up and agree together: seeing nature has made them all of one kind,
form, complexion, habit, and language growing together.

And verily divine is the mystery of union (whether the provident wisdom of
nature from God has engendered it, or the skill of man's reason has observed it)
where one of, and in it self, does out of it self power forth innumerable
forms of things; as Britain does, even two kingdoms, and the principality
of Wales, with many Shires, Rivers, Islands, and people, and yet contains them
all within it self: one having many, many making one; where one of many is not
divided against it self, and the many in one make no division to overthrow the
whole; but all are the same; whither we respect union, or division.

And this doubtless is a divine power, or celestial virtue, not only for our
purpose, but compassing, and passing through the whole world, making things
either simple, or coniunct, but one; subsisting, by, and under the divine
essence, which is one; and consisting in all his members, and parts united, but
one; where each, and every part of this universal world, respects the whole,
otherwise innumerable, but brought by union to a number, without number, even
beginning of numbers, which is but one.

And this is most agreeing to the conceipte of wisest Philosophers, skilful in
natures Secret: teaching, all (whatsoever is) to be but one: and that in the
universal nature of things there is an agreeing amity, and intermixed
affinity,: where all the parts of the whole world accord, by one transfused
continuat spirit among them, being compact together with one, and the
selfsame agreeing force, and forceable agreement of nature, proceeding from
one beginning, continued by one mean, and referred to one end; every
particular being knit together with the whole universality and diversity of
things, and wrapped up in one round orb together, that as parts of this world,
they may dwell in one Center, or Circle together.

To shut up many things in few, and to shevve how certainly all things are
contained in one, and one does comprehend all, verily in Schools of
Philosophers, it is an infallible Maxim, that all things are communicated in
one; Vnum hoc, praeque omnibus vnum. This one is al in all. Ruunt autem omnia,
vbi vnitas non firmamentum, diffluunt, vbi non coagulum. The demonstration in
our intended purpose, is plain. Many villages make one Shire, many Shires one
kingdom, many kingdoms one Imperial Monarchy: all which is Britain, and
Britain al these; and the Kings Majesty possessing, and governing Britain,
possesses, and governs al these: and the Subject, knovving Britain,
knows al, and every of these; for all these are one, and this one is al these.
That as this excellent workmanship of Union shows it self in the mighty
Mass, and fabric of the whole world, so much more particulerly, and
plainly does it appear in a model of the same, even in the name, and honor
of great Britain; where every Subject ought clearly to see in him self,
that though he be termed, the little world, and compact of infinite variety,
and multiplicity of things, yet is he not two, but one man.

Here let the near neighborhood, and conjunction of man, and man, in mutual
society, and participation of profits, which man has with man (where two
friends are but one, and not parting meum, and tuum) confess; that though they
are in person two, yet in deed do, with idem velle, and idem nolle, enjoy the
fruition of heaven, with the same aspect, and the commodities of the earth,
with the same mind; where all things are common to both, and yet proper to
each one.

All which things are alleged to show that as every kingdom, and State of
the world is vphelde with one, and the self same power, and life, wherewith
the universal world consists, So now it concerns al, and every one
Subject, both of England, and Scotland, to participat in the common obedience,
transfused into al, under the government of one: which duty is neglected of
him, who against the kings designement, and right, and against his own
incorporation, rejects his uniting into the name of Britain. And in this
union, qui non colligit, dispergit.

Where sacred unity is guide, and director, there, even from distinct of
nature, use of mutual society, and good of weal public, many are knit
together inseperably; and great, and infinite numbers of all Sorts of people,
are contained in one narrow compass of near coniuuction; for so the most
populous and powrefull kingdoms, though two, or mo, under one Sovereign,
seem to be, but as one whole body, And the whole body of Weal public in
subjection, and obedience, but as one man: sic enim omnes aquoiure parent
omnibus imperature. And as in all things, so specially in this, are we bound, to
render al praise, and thanksgiving to that thrice sacred Unity, from whom, as
from the first author, and fountain, is sown abroad in the world, that
fruitful seed of constant unity; whose force draws many of one household to
be of one mind, and is ever doing good, in its own nature, keeping Israel
together, like a flock of sheep.

Neither is it an hard matter to unite, and keep them together, who live under
the same climate of heaven, and are of like language, manners, countenance,
laws, customs, form of body, fashion of behavior, yea, and religion: a
religando: Rightly called the chiefest band of hearty union. For though the
Hand Salamis be controverted between Aelian. 7^
the Athenians, and Megarenses, yet must it be adjudged to the Athenians,
because they lived after the same fashion and laws; as now the skilful in the
laws of this land easily acknowledge what congruity and affinity is between
most of the ancient laws of both our kingdoms, more then is to be found
between those of any other two nations. And albeit the Town Sidas be
controverted Athene 1^
between the Athenians, and Beotians, yet Epominondas will adiudge it, to the
Beotians and not to the Athenians, because the Athenians called an apple malum
punicum, but the Beotians called it Sidas. There is between English, and
Scottish small, or no difference, nay now none at al, in union al being
Britains, not so much as between Gileadites and Ephraimites in pronouncing
Shibboleth, or Sibboleth, but al are of one language, and even of one Canaan
language, only a little River Twede is common limit, or rather imaginary bound
to both: and al from Twede Southward, is Britain within Twede, and al from
Twede Northward, is Britain beyond Twede, yet both on this side, and that,
al but one Britain ( non nos mare seperat ingens, exiqua prohibemur aqua) as
al France has formerly bin divided into two parts, the one beyond the Alps,
the other within the Alps: and all Jndia Westward within the River Gange, and
Eastward beyond Gange. And all Scithia within Imaus, and without Imaus. And
though the Island has bin long time divided into two kingdoms, yet England it
self has often times of diverse, bin called Britain, as by a Surname: and if
pars prototo, might have that denomination, much more ought the whole being now
made one. Therefore Linacre, and Grocinus of the one part called themselves
Britains, and Johannes Mayor of the other, affirmed that the kings of
England, and Scotland wanted good Council to advise them to marie together, so
to make of both one kingdom of Britain: and that only envious men, and they
who neglected the Weal publiq ue, did hinder this union of peace. Which thing
King Henry the seventh, and King Henry the eighth, wisely forsaw, seeking by
marriage to unite both kingdoms into one. Discordantis saepe patriae non aliud
est remedium, quam si ab vno regeretur.

Therefore the wise men have most religiously observed two beginnings of
things; one of evil, divisible, imperfect, manifold, called duallitie, or
Binarius numerus. Another of good, indivisible, perfect, and in name, and
nature, always one, called vnitas. If Duallitie, or Binarius, as cause
efficient bear sway, then in the air it breeds intemperature; if in
cities, families, or kingdoms, wars, and discord; if in the body, diseases;
if in the mind of men, vice, and wickedness. But where union possesses chief
place, her fruits are, to the air wholesome temper; to cities, families, and
kingdoms, mutual love, and joy; to the body health, and strength; and to the
mind, virtue, and godliness. For unity admits no duallity, knows no
contrariety, and by consequence no infirmity. But Duallitie seduced Adam in
disobedience, seeking to know, as well evil, as good; who before, was sole
Monarch of the whole earth, and was wholly good, and perfect, both in body,
and Soul, until he drew with a dubble twisted cord of contrarieties, unto
his body, in steed of health, sickness, and infirmities; and unto his soul,
in steed of Righteousness, sin, and misery; needing now to strengthen his
body, bread; and to repair his soul, grace; even for body, and soul Gods
mercy. For so he turned the Monarchy of perfect good, into a Monomachie, or
duellum of good, and evil, sin, and righteousness peace, and war, joy, and
sorrow, sickness, and health, yea life, and death. And now when the sole
Monarch of the whole earth, left of to abide in the common obedience, and
universal union of al things to his creator (albeit all the creatures were
before in voluntary subjection, united also to their sole Monarch Adam on
earth) yet now every creature lifts up himself against his sole earthly
Sovereign, and against his Succession for ever. The earth will not yield Adam
bread, but by the sweat of his brows; the beasts become wild, and cruel; yea
the earth opens her mouth against the succession of disobedient Adam, and
swalloweth up Corah, Dattan, and Abiram; the waters drown the whole world,
except eight persons; the poor fly, can, and does sometimes choke a man,
having before neither power, nor will, to do it; Lice can devour, and eat up
Herod; even the vilest, and weakest creatures, can, and often do destroy the
greatest Tirants of the earth.

And in opinion of some, the holy Ghost seems in mystery to open this matter
to a man of understanding, forbearing in the second days work, to say all was
good; as is plainly said of all the other five days, and he saw all things
good; not but that the work of this day, was also good, (for all his works,
are, and were exceeding good) but because of waters, which in many places of
the scripture signify troubles, yea intolerable afflictions, and because of
division of waters in that days work ( God, being a God, not of division, but
of peace) therefore the holy Ghost seems to forbear to say in that place, and
it was good. And yet would not these be mistaken in their curiosity, as if
they concluded the division of waters in that days work, not to be good,
(seeing that waters in the clouds divided from the Seas, are vpholden by Gods
providence, not to power down and over whelme the earth) for they approve
divisions of constructions to be good, as the dividing the light from darkness,
the day from night, and of whatsoever into parts, for ornament, and beauty of
the form divided; but utterly condemn divisions of destructions, or of
distractio^s, which is, frangere non dividere, comminuere non distinguere, to
part the body from the head, or the members from the body, to bring order to
confusion, unity to distraction, form to a Chaos, and ens to privation, such
division was that, whereof Caselius answered the merchant: Navem si dividis,
Macr. 2. sa^.
nec tu, nec socius habebit: and such diuifion the unnatural harlot intended,
requiring the living child to be cut into two parts, let it be neither 1.
King. 3.
mine nor thine, but divide it.

Where two, or three are made one, there is the image of God, of truth, of
peace, of fortitude, of praise, and of perfection: but where one is drawn,
divided, and torn a sunder, there breaks forth falsehood, war, fear,
dishonor, and confusion. They which are of God, embrace the one, and they which
are of the devil, the other. For God both in the Center, and Circumference of
truth, is in simplicity, and perfection, one: but the Devil, neither dwelling
in this Center, nor sitting in this Circle, is carried in duallitie, nay
contrariety of numbers, opposing evil against good, whose Ce^ter being
falsehood, the circumference cannot be truth: his is a kingdom divided, and
must fall, being not a Monarchy it cannot stand. And yet we reject not the
number of two, so they continue, and persist in union, as it is written, they
shall be two in one flesh: but reprobate is that duallitie, that makes war in
peace, begetting and ingendring division, and contrariety, controversy, and
confusion: and either of ambition, senslesnes, hatred, quarrel, open discord,
or rebellion, does hinder that sweet Harmony of union; most pleasing to God,
and most profitable for men, of whom says Tacitus, In publicum exitiosi, nihil
spei, nisi per discordias habent, tamen libert as, and praeciosa nomina
praetexuntur.

But do we not see by this unfolding of things, how the perpetual course of
truth, and unity, throughout al in the world, does even now conduct, and lead
me, by the hand, to the matter now in hand? And verily I will follow thee (
sacred union) whither soever thou leadest me, and into, what soever Region of
virtue, thou intendest; I will not leave thee, being never unlike thy self,
always well accompanied, adorned, and beautified with diversity of things, and
never alone, and yet still, but one. It is thy doing, that Prudence, the chief
head, and governor of virtues, the rule and direction of al well doings, and
prescribing to every virtuous action, the manner, order, and course, of doing
well, does so knit, and join together al moral virtues, as that by thy secret
influence they al may be found jointly in all wife Subjects, and in every one
particulerly with one heart to perform that duty, which both yields right
to the king, and maintains peace, and love among men. Siquidem communis vitae
societas, in union consistit.

And seeing it has pleased his Majesty by public proclamation to assume the
name and style of King of Great Britain, iure haereditario, it is meet that
al loving Subjects not only acknovvledge the clearenesse of his right, but
joyfully applaude and cheerfully follow him herein; least murmuring, they,
like evil, and base minded soldiers follow their Emperor, with an evil will,
according to that saying, malus miles imperatorem Senec.
sequitur gemens. We see some noble men, yea and the gentlemen in our State
daily to purchase, and unite Land, to Land, and Lordship, upon Lordship, and to
seek by all means to shake of the Tenure in Capite, and to hold al their Lands
in some other one more free Tenure. And it cannot be denied, that to al their
several Courts, al Tenants and free holders willingly perform their several
services: or else are fined by the Lord of the Manor, or by his Steward. And
may the inferior Lord expect more homage, from a Tenant, then a King require,
both of Lords, and Tenants, al Subjects to him, and holding al they have,
from, Tac. 1. Hist.
by, and under him? pacis interest omnem potestatem ad vnum referri. But al
gaine-sayers and murmurers, qui contumaciam potius cum pernicie, qua^ obsequium
cum securitate malunt, are not unlike Mesech, and Kedar, spoken of in the
Psalm, in respect of whom the good King complained to God, and to himself,
saying: woe that I dwell with Mesech, and Kedar: I labor for peace, and they
prepare them to battle, I studdy union, and they Live. 1. Dec. 2. lib.
strive to make division. Non placeo concordiae author, said that good
Valerius. But alas, why should Ephraim bear evil vvillto Judah, or Judah vex
Ephraim, fratres'enimsumus: should not they rather both together united now
into the name of Esa. 11.
Britains, as into the name of the beloved Israel of God, flee upon the
shoulders of the Philistines, and make spoil of their enemies, so that the
Idumites, Moabites, and Ammonites, even al their enemies might be subdued unto
them: Duo enim sunt, quibus omnis respub: servatur, in hosts fortitudo, and
domi concordia. And verily the uniting the two kingdoms into the name of
Britain, is not unlike that chariot, drawn, with two horsemen, Es. 21.
mentioned in Esaias; at sight whereof, the watchman cried, Babylon is fallen,
Babylon is fallen, and all the images of her Gods are smitten down to the
ground. For so' (except we will smother the child of Union in his first birth)
both English, and Scottish, will soon hear him sound allow de into the whole
world, that al great Britain is like Jerusalem, which is as a city, at
unity within it self; and Babylon, even divisio^, disorder, discord, and
confusion are confounded, and overthrown; and what King Egbert did write in
Sand, King James has blotted out, and trodden under foot all the dishonor
thereof, and engraven, as in a marble Srone, the perpetual honor of great
Britain by Royal restitution. This verily comes of the Lord of hosts, which
works with wonderful wisdom, and brings excellent things to pass.

Alexander asked King Porus his captive, how he would be entertained, and Porus
answered, like a King, Alexander demands again: Porus answers again, in
Kingly manner. Alexander asks what else, Porus answers nothing else: for in
this, kingly manner, every thing else, is contained. And though (God be praised
for it) the cause be not, between English, and Scottish in Conquest, and
captivity, as between Alexander, and Porus (but two famous kingdoms in right
of blood, under one mighty Monarch) yet our great Alexander in his high wisdom
considering, how these two might best be governed, has in his own roial
heart best resolved it, namely by uniting them into one Monarchy, into one
government, and into one name; and if any demand, how else, verily he must be
answered no way else, for in this union whatsoever else is contained. Na^ in
istoc sunt omnia: even, as the Stoiks, (who I think neither were in jest, nor
arrogantly conceited) contained under Prudence, both justice, and fortitude,
and temperance, and whatsoever virtue else, accounting also him, who was
perfectly wise, an Orator, a Poet, a rich man, a very King and an Emperor.

All blessings, and graces, may be thought attendants, and companions to union,
who alone knows, how to order al things in government: and is a princely
commander of Subjects obedience, and subduer of gainsaiers, ordering unruly
affections, bridling untamed lusts, restraining swelling pride, composing
rebellious appetites, determining al doubts, and rights, within the compass of
her judgment, and yet giving to every one, his due, by her discretion: And
therefore is like the Sun in the midst of heaven, among the Stars; and as
the Stars take light of the Sun, so al blessings of Weal public proceed
from this sacred, and thrice happy union into the name of great Britain,
whose glorious light shines to all, and every one has comfort thereby. It is
also not unlike the Soul in the body of man; for in the whole common Weal, it
is wholly, and in every part thereof, whither it be of English, or Scottish
entire. Tota in toto, and tota in qualibet part. As a shining light, it
shows a way for common good, and as a reasonable soul, gives understanding
to the blindest body, to see the full fruition of al worldly happiness: let no
man shut his eyes against the Sun, nor refuse, a living soul, for his Carcas.

If I could express the image of this union in lively colors, I would surely
make her a Gods, fair, and beautiful, having a garland, and crown of al
blessings upon her head, and sitting in a Chair of State, with all good
fortunes, virtues and graces attending her, and as a Gods in triumphant
chariot going into the capitol, or temple of mighty Jupiter: where also the
Poets have found her, but called by another name, even Pallas, who is also
named Monas, that is, unity: because having Macrob.
one only parent, she resideth in Jupiters brain, even in the chief seat of
his wisdom; where all the Muses are her companions, so called Musae, quasi
(...), that is altogether in one; where all the Graces go hand in hand,
congratulating to union their mutual society; where al virtue, and knowledge,
are near of affinity, but Justice, and government of co^sanguinity to her,
her self still holding primacy over al; as England, and Scotland, are
cheerfully looking one toward the other in the name of great Britain, and
as the two Cherubins did look one toward the other, in one propitiatory. And
thy royal state o great Ezech. 28.
Britain is as the anointed Cherub.

And as in the heart of man is placed fortitude, in his liver temperance, and in
his mind Justice, and yet al these, with all other virtues are annexed to
Prudence, the common ligament of al; so is great Britain, by uniting al his
kingdoms principalities, countries, and honors the complete proportioned
form of al, and al in it both universally and particulerly, are fashioned and
made fit on every side for happy conjunction and mutual correspondence. For
this renowned name of great Britain stands in steed of a Loadstone drawing
al into one, chaining them together with links of love, as Lisippus made an
image of four metals mixed together, gold, silver, brass, and iron;
expressing hereby absolute perfection of virtue, putting in gold, to signify
Prudence; silver, Justice; brass, Fortitude; and iron, Temperance: whereof
they are altogether ignorant, as if they had never seen virtue, so much as
painted, who, to overthrow vnio^ in the name of great Britain, bring no union
of virtues, even excellencies of many Countries, to this so excellent work.
But skilful Zeuxes going about to depaint an absolute work of a perfect virgin,
took not only view of one woman's beauty, but had variety of many the
fairest, to accomplish out of al these a more excellent, and consummate form
of body.

Shall we not think the kingdom of France, containing Pickardy, Normandy,
the I Will of France, Champaigne, Averne, Dalphenie, Bry, Bloys, Turin, the
Duchy of Aniow, Xantoin, Burgundy, and uniting to it little Britain, to be
more glorious, in all these, being made one, then if but one only of al these
were that kingdom? Do we not see that the enlarging of the dominions of
Spain, in uniting, and establishing diverse kingdoms, and territories, as
those of Aragon, Castile, and that of Portugal with others, has so enlarged
that kingdom, as that the like has not befallen other Christian Potentates?
Has not the King of Denmark, beside the Cimbrian Chersonese (where Holsatia,
Theutomartia, the Dukedom of Sletia, Flensburgh, Friesland, and Iuthland do
lie) other spacious Islands, fifteen in number, all comprehended under the name
Denmark, and united to that Crown? Did not Iagello, taking to wife in the
year, 1380. the princes Hedingee the last of the blud Royal of Polonia, after
he was installed king there, unite al his own principalities of Lithuania, and
Samotgathia Provinces of Russia, to the kingdom and Esth 1.
Crown of Poland? Did not Ahasuerus reign from India to Ethiopia, over an
hundred, twenty and seven diverse Provinces? And was not he so mighty (by
reason of this variety, subjected, and united to his sole government) that he
was, an hundredth, and fowrescore days, showing the riches, and glory of his
Greatness, to al his Princes, and to the mighty men of Persia, and Media? But
to take example of one only Rome for all. How has it been renowned through
the whole world, by joining all the nations of the world into one, even to it
self? Herehence it was called terrarum dea gentiumque Roma, communis patria,
mundi compendium.

Omnia Romanae cedant miracula terrae,
Propertius
Natura hic posuit quicquid in orb fuit.
But the Majesty of this Empire grew so great by adioining other nations, and
bringing them all into one:

Haec est, in gremium quae victos sola recepit,
Humanumque genus communi nomine fovit
Matris non dominaeritu, civesque vocavit
Quos domuit, nexuque pio longinqua revinxit.
And again,

Fecisti patriam diversis gentibus vnam,
Dumque offers victis proprij consortia iuris,
Vrbem fecisti quod prius orbis erat.
And so may we say of this renowned name of great Britain comprehending us
all of diverse nations in one, under our gracious King.

Huius pacificis debemus moribus omnes,
Quod cuncti gens vna sumus.
I could set forth, and confirm by sundry examples, this uniting of many into
one, and thereby show, that the enlarging of dominion consists in uniting
altogether into one name, and establishing diverse Territories under one
Soveraignetie, and government; and that the greater states, and Imperial powers
of larger extent and far spreading domination are the more durable; Arist. Pol.
and that the Monarchy of great Britain is like to be hereafter of more
durance, strength, and honor as partly (coming under our Kings government
without conquest or constraint: nam errat long mea quidem sententia, qui
credat imperium stabilius aut firmius quod vi adiungitur quam quod facilitate
and clementia) so now especially it being united in the whole, then heretofore
divided in parts; his contexture being of a greater frame the^ before, holding
by more then one nail, and vp-holding its own greatness: even as great
buildings endure and subsist by their own weight, as the Poet speaks,
Pondere tuta suo est. But I think it here, as needeful, to lay open that great
fault, imputed to Constantine, dividing the Empire among his Children; whereby
of one Empire, he made three, and withal a memorable diminution of his
authority, and forces: which part Brutus also played, dividing this whole
Empire of great Britain among his three Sons: of which, though two parts
afterward, namely England, and Wales, were again in good time united: yet
Scotland stood, till now divided from the rest, and the rest from it, till God
in special goodness, now restored to former name, and government, al into one
again: for which our King James may challendge more glory by uniting al into
one, the^ Brutus or Constantine dividing it from one: and though Constantine
the great, was counted the glory of Britain as being borne and made Emperor
here: yet may that commendation better fit our King James then Constantine: Tu
nobiles fecisti Britanias, quod illic ortus factusquees imperator.

The Platan tree has many goodly Branches, and boughs, and leaves in one
body: and therefore Xerxes in Herodotus, crowned him with a golden Garlande:
doubtless there is a deserved glorious garland due to the name of great
Britain, bringing forth many goodly boughs, and branches, like to the fair,
and well spread Platan tree; or rather for the height of his honor, like the
tall, and goodly Cedar, in whom, the dream of Nabuchodonoser has been
verified: for he saw a tree in the midst of the earth, great, and strong,
whose height reached unto the heaven, and the sight thereof to the end of the
earth: whose leaves were fair, and the fruit thereof, much: in which was meat
for all, yea the beasts of the field had Dan. 4.
shadow under it, the fowls of the air dwelt in the boughs thereof, and al
flesh fed of it. But Nabuchodonosor heard also a watch crying out mightily, hew
down this tree, break of his branches, shake of his leaves, scatter his
fruit, that both beasts, and fowls may be put from him: nevertheless leave
the stumpe of his roots still in the earth. So was the ancient honor, and
glory, of great Britain: great, and mighty, high to heaven, fair, and
fruitful, and of power over the whole Land from one end to the other: but the
highest, who has power over al, did (for the sin of the inhabitants) hew down
this goodly tree; yet left the Stumpe of the roots in the earth. And out of it
the tree is grown up again to former beauty, that we might learn to
magnify the King of heaven, as did Nabuchodonosor restored to the honor of his
kingdom, to his glory, and beauty again, to his Counsailours, and Princes,
and to the establishment of his Throne with augmented glory.

And here let us now consecrate to al eternity the ancient name of famous
great Britain, as a Pantheon of al blessings in peace, prosperity, and
honor: for as Pantheon was a Temple at Rome, round, and like to the capacity
of heaven, wherein were put all the images of their Gods. So, I say, in the name
and style of great Britain, as in a Pantheon, are placed al worldly
blessings, like stars shining from heaven, and having their influence into the
whole body of common weal, eue^ perfection of beauty in Sion.

Superstitious antiquity framed false Gods, one endued with this virtue, and
another with that: this a wise, that a warlike, and another a just God: yea for
so many virtues, they framed so many Goddesses, where one Temple might not be
consecrated to two Goddesses, but distinct virtues must be worshipped with
distinct worship. So Val. Max. 1
as Marcellus dedicating one, and the same Temple, to honor, and virtue, was
thought to offend against religion. But our happy, and better instructed age,
reducing al to one, as it teaches us in religion both nations to be one,
truly to worship one true, and only God; so in civil things, and government,
it offers only one above and for all, that whatsoever is separate, and
distracted from it, may be counted, as anathema, excommunicate, divorced, or as
a barren handmaide to be sold to the usurer, unprofitable, imperfit, or as it
were not at all.

And now, as vnio^ into the name of great Britain, is like a Pantheon, and
brings manifold abundant blessings meeting together, and concurring in one,
so let us account our selves most blessed in our sovereign vnitor, in whose
Royal person, and princely Succession, is laid up al our obedience, and
dwells al our happynes; even as that worthy Scipio, is said therefore to be
borne, that there might be one, in who^ al virtue should show it self
effectually, and absolutely perfect: hic est Scipio, que^ dij immortales nasci
voluerunt, Val. Max. 6 9.
vt esset in quo se virtus per omnes numeros efficaciter ostenderet.

This is the voice of truth it self; England, and Scotland are so naturally
united in the name of great Britain, that the one nearly alyed to the other,
can no longer be an alian, or stranger, one, to the other, except it may be
said, that, Quia meus est, non est meus, ipsaque damno est mihi proximitas. So
this natural conjunction should be no union, because it is both natural in the
Soil, and real in the Subject. But albeit the Romans put into the Temple
called Pantheon that precious Macrob. 3.
gemme named Vnio, divided and cut in two, yet we with all our goods and gear,
ought willingly be borne into the bosom of great Britain, quae fundit in
omnes imperium, not distributing union into parts, but knitting up al parts
into one, as Ciceroes orator had al sciences, and Aristotle's good man al
virtues, as Cato was counted like perfect in all virtues, or as the divine Plato
sealed up in man, the lesser world, whatsoever virtue was in the whole world,
or rather as Eden the plentiful Ezech. 28.
garden of God sealing up the sum of all perfection and glory, was freight
and decked with all manner of precious stones, the Rubie, the Topaze, and the
Diamond, the Chrysolice, the Onix, and the Jasper, the Saphir, the Emeraude,
and the Carbuncle, and gold. Even now may it be said of this universal name of
Britain, as it was said of Rome. Imperij virtutumque omnium lar, and
virtutum omnium latissimum templum.

In ancient time it was counted ominous, if a stone fell, or a dog came among
brethren. And Cic. Off. 3.
Socrates was wont to curse those, who by self co^ceipts, and headstrong
opinion attempted to set a sunder those things, which nature coupled together.
And now if any factious Tribune of the people interpose himself to divide us,
and to disturb the peace of Israel, thinking there is good fishing in troubled
waters, and that the honors, and benefits, they hunt after, are attained in
perturbata Republica: whereof they utterly despair in a peaceable State, quia
in concordia ordinum, nullos se vsquam esse vident: verily such are not unlike
Medea, who so dispersed her brothers limbs, that they could not be gathered
again: cuius etiam vultu laeditu pietas: as the Mariners at Sea well observe in
the two stars Castor, and Pollux, that if one without the other, appear, they
foresee a troubled Sea: but peaceable, and quiet without storm, and without
danger in the sight of both together.

The principality of Wales shall witness this truth, which never received any
thing more beneficial for the people there, then uniting that Country to the
crown and kingdom of England. For whilst it was alone without his brother, it
was subject to storm, full of contentions, war, and shedding of blood but
joined with his brother, it flourished with peace, and at this day is blessed
in the uniformity of government there established. And in mine opinion, it is
well observed in the Cronicle of Wales, how God was not pleased with the first
change of the name of Britain into the name of England; for presently
followed the terrible and cruel invasion of the Danes, and after that the
conquest of the Normans. But memorable is it, that the Britains ruled all the
whole I Will together, with the out Isles of VVight, Mon, in English Anglisee,
Manaw in English Man, Orkney, and Ewyst, 1137. years before Christ, and after
the year of his incarnation 688. even to the death of Cadwallader, the last
King of Britains, and of the noble race of Trojans. Which when in succeeding
age many mighty and famous Kings of England, considered, they labored by all
means to recover and resume the name and style of Kings of great Britain,
accounting it dishonorable, to leese any jot of the honor of there most
princely progenitors. And therefore King Knute, King of England, mighty in his
dominions of Swethen, from Germany to the North poles, with Norway and
Denmark, having obtained prosperous success in warring against Scotland, is
recorded after his death, the mightiest prince in the West parts of the world,
and of all the noble Jle of Britain. And so William the Conqueror, for the
good success he likewise had in Scotland, is recorded king of al Britain;
and Henry the second, surnamed Curtmantle, is also for like success, recorded
king of al Britain. And if they be Renowned and honored with name and style
of Britain, which by rightful descent, or by conquest, were inheritours but
to one part only, though by their fortunes in war, they also claimed the
other; what rightful title, must we then acknowledge, most justly now to belong
to his most excellent Majesty, in the imperial crown of both, who by lineal
descent inheriteth both. Which thing seems in his highness late proclamation
to be strongly and truly enforced: for that his Majesty does not covet any new
affected name, but assumeth a title warranted by authentical charter, and
records of great antiquity, not borrowed of foreign nations, but from the
acts of his progenitors, both before and sithence the conquest, who had not
so just, nor great cause, as his Majesty has:

Causa iubet superos melior sperare secundos. Here I wish I had as many eyes,
as Argos, to look into their devises, who seek to divide England from
Scotland, and Scotland from England, renouncing the name of great Britain,
least joined in one, they might as the forenamed stars, appear together, shine
together, and bring joy together. I would then not spare to lay open, (as
Cneius Flavius did reveal to the world the tricks and mysteries of Lawyers of
that time, and therefore was said to put out their eyes, and to cut their
purses) how also these Adamants hinder the natural power, and virtue of the
load stone: whom I call Adamants, as well for repugnant qualities, as that they be
truly Adamants, even Sons of Adam, practicing rather in disobedience,
dissension, and ruin of al, to lay hands upon that is forbidden, then to draw
the iron, nay golden chain of lincks of love, in obedience to the king, and
for common peace, and preservation of men.

But herein such imitate the devise of Q Fabius Labeo, Val. 3. 3.
seeking to have the ship of common weal divided in parts; as when by compact
of league with Antiochus he ought to receive half part of Antiochus ships,
cut them al in the midst, craftily, so to defraude Antiochus of his whole
Navy: or else imitate they Cyrus, Herod. 1.
dividing great Rivers into many little Brooks, til they be not only passable,
but even dried up: for so these seek to stay the maine and mighty Stream of
great Britain by dividing it, and in dividing, to make it of sundry kinds,
unlike it self. Such dividing, into parts, is disioyning of the parts, by
disioyning dismembring, and by dismembring, spoiling, making Plin. 36. 17.
the stone Scyros, which whole and firmly compacted, does swim and floate
above the waters, to sincke, and be drowned, because it is divided. But our two
famous kingdoms with all their provinces, shires, and Countries united into the
name of great Britain, are like the goodly and pleasant river Danubius, which
passing by many Countries keeps his name, til it enter into Illiricum: where
receiving into it sixty other rivers of diverse other names, leeseth not only
his own and al their other names of parts, but is called Ister, one for all
containing al.

Here I require both of English, and Scottish, is either of them now, as a
people disiointed one from the other? Or as Sand without Lime? Or scattered
straw without binding? Or as Sampsons Foxes running diverse and contrary ways,
with firebrarnds of dissension among them? Nay here in the glory of great
Britain is renowned, that King James, and his Royal issue do gather together
that, which was scattered, and unite that, which was divided, and restore that,
which was lost, and save that, which was endangered even by this means,
uniting al in one name of Britain, as it was said of Rome, uniting so many
Countries into it self, al parts which disagreed heretofore are now well
agreeing. Heerevpon Rome was said to be anchora a fluctuanti mundo: and as he
faith in Tacitus, regnae bellag, per Gallias semper fuere donec in nostrum ius
co^cederetis. So happily does this universal conjunction of all under one
head, take away al discord, and maintain conjunction of love for everlasting
continuance. Only they, which will be alone, and not contained under one name
of great Britain, are not bound up with the sheaues, nor carried home into
the Barn, and therefore are like gleanings after harvest, left behind in the
field, subject to storm, they come not two and two into this arc, and
whatsoever remains alone, extra arcam, perit.

Such are not unlike that captain, whom Xerxes Herod. ^.
rewarded with a garland, for escaping alive, when al other Soldiers were
slain, and yet because he came alone without the rest, he hanged him: and as
the Athenians in the war with the Herod. 5.
Aeginetae, when one returned, without his fellows, ran al upon him, and
killed him, asking where were the rest? And what can such (I pray you) as
separate themselves from the happy union of al Britains answer for
themselves, if they be called to account. Can any be English, and not Scottish,
can any be Scottish, and not English? Let that outcry against the Romans be
ingeminated against such, saying: Quintilius Varus, restore us our Legions,
where are our soldiers, what is become of them? Where are the English where
are our Scottish, let al restore themselves, and each one the other to the name
of Britains. And so I say to al, and every one of both nations, Cedo
alterum. (For I fear least this name Cedo alterum, mentioned in Tacitus, be
yet scarcely found among many: but I call alowde where art thou, Cedo alterum,
give us thy self, bring in thy friend, yea yet another, and another, be not
wanting to the weal public; vna navis bonorum omnium, al good Subjects are
contained in one Ship of common Weal, numerum non habet illa suum, one is
not perfect without the other: for Britains Subject ought maintain mutual
society for common good. As for others disclayming us, and disioyning
themselves, only I wish they may all be of the same consort, and society with
us, for, victrix causa dijs placuit, though, victa Catoni.

And albeit many great, and mighty Potentates one earth make a great Show of
copia verborum, by copious recital of many Provinces, and kingdoms; as if his
Majesty should entitle himself by all the several Shires under his dominions,
and not by one honorable Title of great Britain comprehending al: yet to show
how this misliked some, it is recorded when the Emperors Ambassador coming to
the French King rehearsed the Emperors style at large, which consisted of many
dominions and names of countries; the French king willed his Herralde to
repeat and say over the name of France as many times as the other had
rehearsed the several titles of his masters dominions: intimating that one name
of France well compacted and united of many particulers into one general name,
was better then diverse particular names of many countries. And when Quintius
Live. 4. Dec. 5. lib.
Flaminius heard how his army was terrified, at the recital of many his enemies
forces, of their diversity of names, of countries, of Armor, and of
multitudes, Dahae, Maedi, Caedu sij, Elemei, Cataphracti, etc. Spear men,
Horse men, Foot men, Archers, etc. Oh says he, what a do is here, with
numbers, and diversity of numbers: al these are but only Sirians, and make a
great show, like that great Supper, which mine host at Chalcis dressed for me,
and for my followers, with much variety, and marveile at the diversity of the
dishes, and yet al was but of one flesh, though of so many diverse dressings.
The River Peneus may better serve Herod. 7.
for instance: it divides it self, and flows into many diverse Rivers, and
every one of these Rivers in his division, has a proper name to himself, one
after this name, and another after that: but al these meeting in one, and
becoming again one great, and mighty River, do, now loose the particular
names, which they held being divided, and are called by one general name, as
before, namely Peneus. Non sunt multiplicanda entia sine necessitate.

It is not reasonable that brethren from one parent, should be divided in one
house, though they be severed in distinct place: but be as fingers to one hand,
knit together by common iointes for mutual offices: even as the brethren
Molionides, are poetically imagined to have but one body: or rather the three
Gerio^s, to have many bodies, but one soul, and one mind; not unlike to that
of Pithagoras, vt vnum ex pluribus fiat, many in name, but one in deed. And as
when Piso was commended to posterity for frugalitie, I doubt not, but he was
wise withal; and as when Lelius was renowned for wisdom, I doubt not, but he
was just withal: and Metellus for piety, I doubt not, but he was temperate
withal: and Aristides for Justice, I doubt not but he was valiant withal: yet I
know that the denomination, is ever but of one, though it contain things two,
and more: as the Temple consecrated to two brethren Castor, Suet. Julius.
and Pollux, was named only Castors Temple: and the munificencie of two
Consuls, Caesar, and Bibulus, was called only Caesar's munificencie: and even
many imaginary shows, and shadows have seemed complete, in deciphering one
thing only: yea the very images of excellent men, have been patterns, and
resemblances of many consummat virtues in one: as Plutarchs Alexander,
Xenophons Cirus, Homers Ulysses, Virgils Aeneas, and Lucians Imagines, in
steed of al.

And as there is a common Idea, and infolded notion of al things in the mind
of man, so the overviewing the whole race and tract of things in the world,
does tell us, that as many peculiar excellent properties, may be, and are in one
man, and he over them, as sole Monarch over all the diversities of worthiest
virtues; so a king under his imperial power has to him subjected many Shires,
States, Cities, Honors, Provinces, and kingdoms himself being sole
Sovereign, and Lord over al. Therefore though magnanimity only, was attributed
to Cirus, only modesty to Agesilans, only wisdom to Themistocles, skill to
Phillip, and boldness to Brasidas: yet Alexander, as Plutarch reports, was
furnished, and ful-fraight with all these. And Quintus Metellus is reported to
attain, Pet Crin. 13. 5.
and possess together, ten of the chiefest, and greatest things, that ever he
desired (as if he had at once ten Provinces under his command) and was known
a mighty warrier, a sweet orator, a great commander, to prosper in his
greatest affairs, to be in greatest honor, of great wisdom, a chief
Senator, plentiful in children, rich of substance, and most renowned in the
City. So copiously has one man been stored with plentiful variety of
manifold graces, al these at once dwelling in him, and he well ordering them;
even as one free, and absolute Monarch may, and does rule many mighty, and
diverse Nations, knit in one by obedience, and love among themselves, and by
law, and lustice from the king, who by his laws speaks alike to al, is heard
of al, and understood of al: vna, eademque communi voce.

I confess the name of great Britain has been long time eclipsed, or
rather like those voices, Plut.
which Antiphon said were kept close, and frozen up in the Winter, until the
heat of Summers shining Sun resolved the frozen, and fast bound air, that
they might be again disclosed. Comfortable is the warmth of this blessing, in
the Sunshining day of our sovereign king; wherein not only clouds are
scattered, but the renowned name of great Britain breaks forth as a
gladsome voice from frozened air, and comes forth, as a Bridegroom out of
his chamber, long time before locked up like a prisoner. Doubtless this is our
year of Iubile, a year of delivering the Captive, of making the bond, free,
and of joy, even in sort, and true sense to us, Annus Platonicus, wherein
things are come about again to be as they were, ( Iure Postliminij) to recover
our selves, and be restored to name, and fame of great, and glorious Britain,
long, and lately divided into two kingdoms, but now most happily, and
ioiefully subjected, and reunited in all the government thereof unto one only
Sovereign, most wise, and most religious governor of the same.

Deus haec benigna restituit in sedem vice. Doubtless this is the Lords doing
and it is marveilous in our eyes, this is the day the Lord has made for us to
rejoice, and be glad therein. For as it is said, we owe to God our selves, for
creating us, when we were not; and more then our selves, for re-creating, and
restoring us, when we were lost: So ought al good Subjects think the days
more happy, and joyful, in which they are now, as it were newborn, then
those, in which they were first borne, as is well said; non minus illustres,
atque iucundi sunt illi dies, quibus conservamur, quam quibus nascimur. Happy
art thou, o Israel, o people saved by the Lord, who is like unto thee? Thou
were lost, and art found, bond, and art free, Eclipsed, and art glorious, dead,
and art alive, thy name forgotten, and behold, it resoundeth even among hard
rocks, and in the hollownes of mountains; thy beauty withered, and behold thy
vallaies stand thick, replenished, and adorned, with fairest varieties of al
good; thy years forgotten, thy feathers plucked, and thy strength weakened, and
behold thou waxest young, and lusty like the Eagle; yea thine honor, the honor
of thine ancient name ruined like an old house, but behold it is now repaired,
and called after his own, and old name; even as deliaca navis, torn, and
taken in pieces, was renewed, and built again, to his most ancient form, and
called still deliaca navis. Sic rerum summa navatur.

And albeit worldly kingdoms and civil states seem subject to alteration, and
do carry in their outward appearance, faces sometime shining, and glorious as
the Sun, and sometime defaced, darkened, and deformed, conquering, and
conquered, triumphing, and enthralled; yet the common weal it self like the
ship before mentioned, ruinated and repaired, is still the same; even as the
Sun though eclipsed is still the same; and a river sometime shallow, sometime
deep, still the same; and a man now sick, now in health, still the same.
Respublica, enim semper vt ciuitas, est contigua, vna, perpetuaque serie
compacta, and though admit it mutation, as our state did long time, ever since
the first division, til this blessed day; yet Britains common weal, was but
sick for a season, til health returned into the whole body, by the glory of
the head. So as now the first and Ancient common weal of great Britain is
again co^formed to his prime estate, sound, the same, and like it self; and
is likely so to continue and flourish, so long as it retains the common band
of community, and individual knot of unity. As Socrates is said, as long as
he is Socrates, to be one and the same. Whither in childhoode, or manhood, in
infancy, or in age, the same Socrates. But Heraclitus denied, because of the
sudden change of men and things, that one man could go into the same river
twice: and ill debtors borrowing money heretofore, refuse payment, because they
think them selves not the same men, and plead the day is past, and cannot be
again; deluding with that saying: Ego non sum ego: hodie and heri. But such
conclusions or rather collusions are simple rustical follies; as he says,
rusticus expectat dum defluat amnis, at ille labitur and labetur in omne
volubilis aevum. For howsoever times alter, yet truth ever shows it self; as
the river Lycus, running a long under the earth for a long space, breaks
fourth again, and as is said, alioque renascitur orb.

The sleepers in Sardos, when they awaked, Arist. Phys
thought they had passed no time: but we shall be more drowsy, and sottish then
they, if now rowsed from our long sleep, wherein the honorable name of great
Britain was forgotten, we now not open our eyes to acknowledge the happynes
of these our days: wherein our hearts may leap for joy, to see our most
gracious king, as a father of peace, and procreator, protector, and perfitour
of Subjects joy, sit in Royal seat of great Britains most ancient, and most
absolute Monarchy: whereby our strength, peace, wealth, and honor is the more
increased, in that our Sovereign is the more universally obeyed, and we are
doubtless hereby more blessed, the^ al our fore fathers: of whom we say, as
Demaratus the Corinthian said, that al dead Grecians are deprived of great
joy, in that they lived not to see Alexander in Darius Chair. But comfortably
spoke he in the Comedy: gaudeo, cum video huius generis reliquias; and how
joyful is it for us to acknowledge one an other Britains, as it was for them
brethren in the Comedy which after so long time came to knowledge one of an
other: yea now for us to know one an other to be Britains by all signs and
tokens, non naevo aliquo aut crepundijs sed corpore omni. And though he may be
pitied, which sits alone mourning, and crying: nec mihi cognatus quisquam
fuit isto nomine: yet may both English, and Scottish rejoice, because neither
Sister is a widow, but all their legitimate children are now of one name, and
one blood, become, and borne again Britains, as it were by a Pithagorical
Palingenesia, even twice Britains, as Hippolitus was called Virbius, because
he lived again; and was twice the same man. Aeson miratur; and olim ante
quater denos hunc se reminiscitur annos. And surely (as Pliny says) sparsas
and laceras gentilitates colligere and connectere, est, vt it a dicam, rena sci
iubere.

Thus we say, and thus we sing, Redeunt Saturnia Regna, even the golden age of
Britains Monarchy is come again: Alter Tiphis, and altera, quae vehat Argo.
delectos Heroas: atque iterum ad Troiam magnus mittetur Achilles: another
governor, and chief Master, of the commonweals Ship, and another Arc, or
Argosie, as before, does transport the Nobles, and Commons both of England, and
Scotland, to fetch the golden fleece, which Egbert that Dragon held so long
time in his jaws. Quondam etiam victis redit in proecordia virtus. Now then,
siquid patriae virtutis, if there be in us valor, of men stirred up, with
remembrance of the name, and honor of our Country: Si quid antiquorum hominum:
if any drop of our Ancestors blood live in us: Si quid humanitatis: if any
touch of brotherly kindness, we cannot, but readily embrace each other, as the
ancient Romans reconciled after long civil war, and shedding much blood
Iungebant Castra, and consalut Tac. Hist.
abant Cives: yea and triumph also as they did, saying, exurgere, and
reviviscere Romani nominis memoria incipit, and gloria: unless it may be said
of us, as of that base minded Vitellius: tant a torpedo invasit animum, vt si
eum principem fuisse Caeteri non meminissent, ipse oblivisceretur: or it may be
said to us Britains descended from Erutus, as sometimes to another Brutus, in
an other sense, not here intended: Dormis Brute, and nones Brutus.

Our Country men, and neighbors of Wales, as Chronicles report, derive them
selves, from ancient true Britains: and do retain the British tongue,
though somewhat mixed, called Camberaec, which could never be extinguished by
any attempts of Romans, Saxons, Danes, Normans: and that famous City London,
is still by them called Trenwith, of Brutus first named Trenovanto^. And the
Country it self is called Cambria, of Camber, Brutus Son, though we call it
Wales, a word imposed by Saxons, naming the^ VValshe, which is strange; and
many mountains, rivers and cities are among the^ still retaining British names:
extremos pudeat redijsse: let us be ashamed to be last, or backward, seeing
another Arthur king of all great Britain reigns; least we still seem
overawed, and captivated to the Conqueror Egbert his will, and by his beating
us, to be made, as base vassals, forgetting our selves, our names, and our
Country, and not daring to challendge, or acknowledge them: even as that base
Slave Sosia was enforced to yield to his Master Mercury, Plau. Amph.
and say, pugnis me fecisti tuum, etsi sum ego, tamen non credomihi, nomen
simul abstulit cum forma.

Neither do I esteem the change of name, a matter of indifferency, as if it
were all one, whither we were called Britains, or continued English, and
Scotts. But in my Judgment it is reason to alter all into Britains, because
it was our most ancient, and is the more honorable name, except we will wear
the Badge of slaverie on our sleeue, to brag to the world, that we are not
ashamed, to be conquered, so to show our nakedness, and shame, which Adam
sought to cover, when he once saw it. Neither in mine opinion is it reason,
that the now Nobles or Gentlemen of England, should delight in name imposed by
that Saxon; seeing the whole race of Saxons is for the most part rooted out by
the Danes and Normanes, and none of Saxons blood that was Noble, or almost but
Gentil is left; and seeing (as Chronicle reports) it was counted in the days
of the Conqueror, a reproach to be called an English man, or to join in
marriage with any of the English (which in my understanding is Saxons nation.)
Redit ad authors genus, and generosa in ortus exurgunt semina suos.

And verily names, and titles, are matters of great consideration: unless,
like Varro, not caring Aug. de civ. 1. 22.
for name, we should also say, that the God, whom the Jews worshipped, was but
the same Jupiter, and common God of other Countries, though otherwise called,
nihil interesse censens quo nomine nuncupetur, dum eadem res intelligatur. But
in the union of the Sabins and Romans, (as Eutropius reports) this was
especially agreed upon, that the Sabins and Romans should assume one an
others name promiscuously: so that by no means they should be distinguished
by name. Andalbeit among us, custom has begotten prescription, yet we may
remember, what is well said in the Commedie: nunquam it a quisquam, been subduct
a ratione fuit, quin res, at as, vsus, aliquid apportet novi, vt quae prima
putes, post in experiendo, repudias. As in the Roman story, (when it was
objected that innovations, were dangerous to the state, and nothing was to be
done, whereof formerly there was no president) says Livi. 1. Dec. 4. lib
Canuleius. Quid postea? nullane res nova institui debet? and quod nondum est
factum (multa enim non dum sunt facta, in novo populo) ea, ne (sivtilia quidem
sint) fieri oportet?

Whilst we of England were put a part from Scotland, it was reason we should
have a name divided, and distinguished from them, and retain that name, and
condition, as pleased fortune to impose, as Andromache says to her Son,
sum, quod casus dedit: but being restored in integrum, and every part knit
together, it is a like reason we return to our old name, and say, as in the
Prophet, Hose 2.
I will go, and return to my former husband, for at that time, it was better
for me, then now. And no man, when he has tasted the new wine, but says the
old is better. So that as the Roman Empire first was a Monarchy, afterward
governed by two Consuls, and so a long passing through diverse kinds of
governments, til it returned to his former state of Monarchy, to be as it was
at first: even so the state of great Britain, first was as a Monarchy al
governed by one; since it was divided, but now it returns to his Monarchy
again. Moribus antiquii res stat Romana virisque.

For men wax weary, in time, of their present condition: and Rome mole
laboravit sua: or rather, and more truly, God sets bounds to al things,
which they cannot pass: even the mightiest powers have their periods. And al
worldly kingdoms thus changing, (after long experience) say, the first is
best; and so likewise, vt rerum, it a verborum interit vsus, quem penes est
rerum, and vis, and norma loquendi. But in this case neither the thing, nor the
name, being changed: but we lawfully recovering that, which was lost, renewing
the title of great Britain, enjoying our Country (as we did before) calling
al Britains, and holding al things in the same safety, and security under
name of great Britain (as before under names of England and Scotland) say
all and each one to other, pascite, vt ante, boues, pueri submittite tauros.

It is a good, and gracious deed to provide for real agreement in all equal
conjunction, and mutual participation. But, in my simple opinion, it had been
verbo tollere, and reipsa relinquere, only in show to take away difference, but
not in deed, without uniting both kingdoms into the name and style of great
Britain; for, as he complained, Cic. Ep. ad At.
Tirannis occidit? Tirannis vivit? So if the old enmity of English, and
Scottish be removed, and yet the names still remain, I fear that the very
names would ever put ill men in mind of old grudge, and incite new variance:
as is said of one, that he was Romani nominis inimicus, at deadly hatred with
the very name: where the name is taken for the very cause of hatred. As, eo
nomine hostis, for that cause, even for name sake he is an enemy: even as in
Rome, when all things were accorded, and all parties pleased, only a name,
which was in dislike among them, was thought hinderance to their mutual
Concord, and content, Live. 1. Dec. 2. lib
saying, no^ placere nomen, id pericule sum esse, id officere, id obstare
libertati: and therefore the Senate persuaded, Lucius, Tarquinius, Collatinus
otherwise in all respects approved, and beloved of al, even for his names sake,
to forsake his office, saying, absolve beneficium, amicus abi, exonera
civitatem vano (for san) metu. This I speak, least retaining former name of
English, and Scottish, which heretofore has been offensive to each other, we
call (as before is spoken) the ill disposed to former opposition, as between
fire, and water, even to kindle such a fire in Jacob, as will devour in Israel,
and no water shall be able to quench it in Bethell. Where it may be thought
more fit, to set aside al difference of former names: vt exoneremus rempub.
vano (for san) metu; as it is said of one quod nihil est metuit, metuit, sine
corpore nome^. And if any account, the fear of name, nothing, (be it also say
I nothing) yet a man cannot be to careful, or fearful of that which is counted
even nothing, seeing it is said. Qui cavet, vix etiam cavet, dum cavet.

Let former destructions be present instructions. Offensive distinction of
names has bred much woe. In Italy faction of Guelphs and Gibelines arose for
name sake. In England much blood for the white and red Rose. In Justinians
time fearful division between the Veneti and Prasini about colors blew and
green. In which grievous contentions, arising first of small or no cause but
only of difference in name and diversity of colors, deadly hatred is often
times kindled among former friends, as against sworn enemies. After Phalarides
death, the Agrigentini made a decree that none should use glauca vest, because
the Tirants did use glaucis subligaculis: for they hated whatsoever, might
remember them of former Tyranny. And the Romans publicly ordained, that no
Roman should be ever called after the name of Manlius; for, because his
remembrance Live. 1. Dec. 6. lib
was displeasing, they would have his name utterly perish. I wish that nomen,
or mentio ipsa, the names English, and Scottish, borders, former feud, wars
and bloodshed between the two nations, were not once mentioned within our
lips, but as nomen Pelopidarum utterly put out, abolished, and never heard of,
as that which is laid up in silence in the Grave: even now that not the least
occasion be left, no not in sport or inter ludicra certamina (as we have a name
of play amongst us called prison base, one part striving for England, and an
other for Scotland, representing unto us the variance betwixt both nations)
lest it prove, as that betwixt them two brethren, Demetrius and Perseus, king
Phillips sons; who in ludicio certamine, opposite one to the other, with
their companies divided on both sides, fell in earnest unto a maine deadly
war one against the other. I say, as near as may be, these opposite terms
of Scottish and English should cease; except they remain, as only they ought
remain, Epithits pertaining to one name of great Britain, and to one people
Britains, as all the Jews of all the several Tribes, were called Jacob Gods
people, and Israel his inheritance.

And herein (seeing as Vegetius says) principis est pro salute Reipublicae,
and nova excogitare, and antiqua restituere) both nations ought joyfully
applaud the late proclamation, and in all humblenes of duty, submit themselves
to the kings Majesty's good pleasure, seeking thereby the common good of Weal
public, and not his own glory (as they do, who call their lands after their
own name, to get a name upon earth: and as Valens the Emperor desired,
(according to his ambitious, and vainglorious humor,) to call this whole
Continent Valentia, after his own name: for which thing also Henoch the Son of
Caine, building Genesis 4.
a City, was first noted,) but as a king most gracious, not natus sibi
sedpatriae (as Hadrian the Emperor professed before al: ita se rempublica^
gesturum, vt sciret populi rem esse non propriam) thinks only on the ancient
name, non tam mutans, quam aptans, so to root out remembrance of former
hatred, and to unite both into one. Pastor populi non suum ipsius, sed
Subditorum quaerit commodum: and officio suo semper fungitur, vtilitati
consulens, and societati.

Change of names has ever been thought meet in policy, even where men
formerlye Strangers, and of diverse kingdoms were to be trained up together,
and framed in fashion one to the other: as were given to Daniell, Hananiah, Dan
1.
Mishaell, and Azariah, new, and other names. And Daniell was called Baltasar,
and Hananiah, Shadrah, and Mishaell Mesach and Azariah Abegnego of purpose, by
changing their names, to make these forget themselves, their country, and if it
were possible, the God of their fathers. And so the Turks have, from time, to
time, in their policy changed the old names of those places, they now
possess, which before professed Christianity, and when upon any Conquest, they
take into their government Christians, they impose on them new names, to live
like them, and as one people among them: and shall we think it a wrong or
inconvenience, that, if a Grecian Prince or other Christian king recover
against the Turk, they afterward abolish a name imposed on them, and calany
province, people or city after their old and ancient name? Et si hoc in arido,
quid in viridi? If this be done ( ex facto) by the children of this world, unto
an evil end: may not his Maieiestie in his princely wisdom (fas estet ab
host doceri) (exiure) for the undoubted good of the children of light call to
remembrance, and put in Dio. 52.
execution the wise council of Maecenas to Augustus: to take away al
differences, whatsoever, even of the meanest things, which might be thought
on, whither of name or apparel, or any thing else, to the intent all things
might be thoroughly composed in one uniform fashion, and conformity among al
his Subjects, to their undoubted good?

It has been often observed, that parva scintilla neglecta magnum saepe
excitavit incendium. And sores slightly cured, break forth into greater
danger. And, if I might boldly write my mind without mistake, I would undertake
sufficiently to prove, that if the name had not been changed into great
Britain, it might be feared we should not long (as we ought ever) continue
one; and that (love being not without dissimulation) we would among our selves,
as is vpbraided to the inconstancy of another nation (now not to be here
named) Ridendo fidem frangere, and so love, as that we would hate again. For
as a chief inhabitant, and commander in privernum, being asked in the Senate
at Rome, what peace they should expect, Livi. 1. Dee. 8. lib
auswered, sibonam dederitis, fidam, and perpetuam: simalam, haud diuturnam. So
here may it be said, if union in name, bring also in deed, a good composition,
and faithful conjunction bona fide, it will doubtless by Gods goodness, last
ever: but otherwise I fear (which God forbid) may again rent in sunder, and
make the new breach worse then the former. And therefore wise was that saying;
eiusdem iuris esse debent qui sub eodem rege victuri Curt. 10.
sunt, and that practice of Romulus renowned, who by union of diverse nations,
eodem nomine et Live. 1. Dec. 1. lib
eodem iure latinos vocavit. And hereof grew the Italicum bellum, because the
Latins united in other respects, were not joined eodem iure with the Romans.
To speak plain, we al confess our union in our obedience to the King, as to
the head: but yet without that union also in the name of great Britain
already concluded, and of other things thereto requisite (to be farther by the
Honorable Commissioners considered.) I fear we shall prove, as imperfect, if
not deformed body, as Apelles (before noted) painted Venus only perfect in the
head, and left all the parts of the body imperfect. Neither can I, for my
part, imagine that part of the body well united to his head, which does not
concur withal the body in all his parts perfect with the head. Vt nec pes nec
caput vni reddatur formae.

Herein let natures workmanship in our natural bodies lead us to the imitation
of her wisdom, in the government of bodies civil: and as she has in natural
mixtion reduced the four contrary Elements into a temperate and agreeing
conformity, by taking away suspicion of emulation, making them loose their
proper names, and jointly called mistionis forma: so should we by temperate
discretion be willingly united with our neighbor friends into one
corporation: especially seeing the reality of every thing we enjoy is to
continue in all respects the same, and only a formality of appellation a little
changed. Naturam ducem dum sequimur non aberrabimus, said he: and the God of
nature has spoken it, so that we must believe, that a kingdom divided cannot
stand, howsoever it may glory in the multitude of his parts: wherein a common
weal may fitly be resembled to musical instruments; which howsoever consisting
of the multitude of strings, yet the harmony is in the unity of proportion with
agreeable consent of distinct sounds. Now as a little jar in music, a
little intention or remission of any one string discordeth all the harmony: so
in this excellent musical concord of a wel-ordered kingdom, never so small
difference, though it be but titular between the several parts of one common
weal, sometimes breeds hatred, oftentimes envy, but always emulation.
Whereupon Phillip Comines well observed, finitimorum amulationem nativam esse:
that it was essential for neighbor regions to emulate one the other: which is
only remedied by taking away the frets and by incorporation making them not now
our neighbors, but al one with our selves. And herein consists the nature of
true mixtion (whereat al commonweals should tend) when every thing
remains that was, yet nothing as it was; when many contrary things yield up
their contrariety and plurality unto one, consisting of all; which
participating of al their reconciled natures, imposes only a new name, to
their new manner of being, which is to be one insteede of many; and that not by
coacervation or apposition of things without farther mixtion, remaining still
distinct within themselves, but by union of consociation, which takes nothing
away. from these things that were before distinct, but their distinction. Out
of which mistion will arise excellent temperature, which we hope long to see in
our British; Common weal, wherein no humor either of English or Scottish, may
be predominant, but temperamentum aequabile, and that ad pondus too. Which as
it is seldom found any where, so it is alvvaies found where it is found with
perennity. And concerning such mistion was that said of Romulus and Traianus,
and now may it be said of our King James; diversas gentes it a commercio
miscuit vt quod genitum esset vsquam id apud omnes natu^ esse viderctur. And of
such mixtion may that of Zeno be said, alterius chorus mayor, meus autem
concinnior: an other Kings Empire may be greater, consisting of diversity of
nations, but ours more compact and united in one. And this mixtion of both our
nations so mixed in one, brings forth but one titel of GREAT BRITAIN. Vnu^,
sedleonem, as the proverb has.

Which I the rather urge here, against Politeans (if any such be) of this age,
who seek to nourish faction and opposition in the State, and common Weal, and
think nothing better; quam si in commune non consulant; who ever have a
Rowland, for an Oliver; where fearful experience does often show the fruits
of that Axiom; contraria contrarijs curantur. Which manner of keeping Subjects
one opposite, and offensive to the other, is a flinty, and fiery society,
even societas lapidum, fornicationi similima, quae casura, nisi invicem
obstarent, hoc enim ip so continetur. And this practice, wheresoever
prevailing, is more then Machivelian, even divellish sowing seed of dissension
in parts, to destroy the whole. Therefore it being an infallible, but woeful
ground of truth: nulla salus bello: It is meet that all and every Subject of
great Britain, understand, and profess the other part of that verse, pacem
te poscimus omnes. For so I think this Axiom in a State, is better for
preservation of Weal public: similima similimis nutriuntur.

And if I were worthy, here would I advise all the Magistrates of great
Britain, which either now do, or hereafter shall bear rule under their high
Sovereign, in any parts of his dominions, to remember in all their high
honors, that Cleo, and Themistocles took contrary courses, and were both
misliked in time of their Magistracy. For Cleo called al his friends, and old
acquaintance together, and renounced them openly, giving the^ to understand,
that now he was so advanced, they should expect nothing from him for former
friendships sake. And Themistocles answered one, wishing him to be alike to al,
and not partial, that he would not sit in Seat of honor, and not do more
good to former friends, then to others. But truth is, in a common wealth, nor
disdain of former friends becomes Cleo, nor partial favors Themistocles;
for community regards neither any man, neither any cause for private
respects, but is as the Sun, yielding alike common Pli. paneg.
comfort to al: which thing I wish al, as one man, wisely to perceive, and
willingly perform. And Zenop.
yet may Cirus have in remembrance, the very meanest of them, with whom
sometimes he lived. and Ahasuerus looking into the Chronicles may remember
those, which have saved the king, from any, who sought to lay violent hands
upon him. And the Macedonians may not either grudge, or disdain that Alexander
prefer the Persians before them of his own Country. Ecquis est qui vestra Live.
1. Dec. 6. lib.
necessaria suffragia pro voluntarijs, and serva pro liberis faciat?

But to return into the kings high way for the name of Britain: seeing his
Majesty may say, non me Troia capit, Scotland alone does not contain my
greatness: and therefore speaks also to England: salve fatis mihi debita
tellus: England is also the lot of mine inheritance: and both England, and
Scotland, will I make one Empire, and renew their names into first title of
great Britain, as it were Ilium in Italiam portans: (though in removing all
the Gods out of Temple, to give place to Jupiter, only that petty God Terminus
refused, and would not move) yet let the Termini, and bounds of both our
nations, and all the people therein contained, willingly give place to the just
pleasure of their sole Monarch, and even in this also, acknowledge King James
their supreme head, and governor: where obedience in each Subject, is like
reconciled Genius, vtriusque Regni: which though before was as angry Juno,
much adverse to the Romans, yet now like Juno, out of her very image seems
to speak alowd, Romam se velle ire: Anger is appeased, displeasure forgotten,
and discord come to a perpetual end.

Nec quenqua^ incuso, potuit quae plurima virtus
Esse, fuit: toto certatum est corpore regni:
And now the whole common weal, odijs saturate, quiescit.

Neither may contention, either of antiquity, or any other dignity (whereabout
Albanes, and Dionys Ha licar. 3.
Romans, so much contended, and would not yield one to the other) break this
common band of love among our selves, or loyalty to our Sovereign, who
imbraceth both nations with equal and indifferent love. But we ought to
consider, that both English and Scottish ( quis mayor? aeque Plau. Menec
ambo pares) making no question of difference for common good sake, without
difference may challendge like interest in his Majesty's favor (and vitula tu
dignus and hic) to be divided equally, and graciously among al, by Geometrical
proportion as his Majesty shall be pleased to deem meet. Which thing may
move al to mutual kindness, and reciprocate love one toward the other, with an
orderly conformity of both to live together in all peace, and Christian
charity, affectioned to love one another, with brotherly love, and in giving
honores Romans 12.
go one before the other; as it is said of Scipio and Lelius; actuo
savitaeiter aequali graedu exequebantur: not grudgingly, nor contentiously,
striving for prerogative of blessing; and birthright, in his Majesty's favor;
as if it might be said to Genesis 27.
his highness, have thou but one blessing my father? for his Majesty's
abundance, and overstowing measure of honor powers fourth, as out of a
fountain, streams to fill up every empty channel, nemo ex hoc numero mihi non
donatus abibit; and where every one may be contented: cuncta aderunt; animus,
site non deficit aequus. Herein let us take example from the Roman common
weal (and surely for our instruction may it be said, nulla vnquam resp. nec
mayor, nec sanctior, nec bonis exemplis ditior fuit) where Dyonisius
Halicarnasseus Lib. 5.
gives us a strange show of two Consuls Largius and Claelius, who both
strove to give precedence one to the other, preferring each other before
himself, and reckning one an others worth before his own: and this done, two
or three several times, neither presuming to go before the other, but still
refusing, and could by no means either be persuaded to take the pre-eminence
one before the other. But is any man's eye evil, because the Kings eye in
special and gracious aspect is good? Doubtless when a king does not all
things ad voluntatem, sed ad vtilitatem omnium: they which mislike (and yet
seem of the same league, and society with others) do notwithstanding like
Nahaz the Ammonite, join in common 1. Sam. 11.
covenant, with others, but on condition only, that they may thrust out the
others right eyes. Hoccine Live. 1. Dec: 6. lib
est in commune honores vocare? quaenam ista societ as? quaenam censortio est?

But whosoever entendeth truly the common good, let him remember, that Solon
said: the only way to keep Subjects in unity, is to mainetaine an equality
for all: for motus, as Plato says, is in inequalitate; but status, and quies in
aequalitate: which thing is spoken, not to breed, or maintain parity in
condition of men, for that equality were true inequality, nay iniquity, so to
confound the world. But these things are alleged to show that our gracious
Sovereign may herein (I speak under favor) be resembled to IANVS, who had two
faces, to look forward, to look backward: for so his Majesty is set in the
midst, sole Sovereign of al great Britain, to look on England, to look
back to Scotland, and with princely and favorable aspect to countenance both,
Tros Rutulusve fuat, nullo discrimine habebo: where both being made one common
Country, that saying may well befit our common Emperor. Hostem qui feriet, mihi
erit Carthaginensis, quisquis erit. And there is that equality, before
mentioned, distilling from his Grace and Majesty in honoring, and defending
both alike* ( Iusta pari premitur, Tib, ^
veluti cum pondere libra, prona nec hac plus part sedet nec surgit ab illa.)
where none ought strive contentiously, least they seem to offer violence to
the kings Grace, or to his honor, or to both: as the Mid wife charged Pharez in
making the breach between him, and his brother, by forcing his birth before his
brothers, through strife in his mothers womb: whose name therefore, was called
Pharez, which signifies division.

But our brotherhood is not in strife, as that of Caine and Abell, Esau and
Jacob, Ismael and Isaac, nor as that of Geta and Antoninus, Sons to the
Emperor Severus: after whose death, their mother Herodia. 4.
Iulia was forced to divide the Empire betwixt her sons, severing and setting
them a sunder into separate governments with a sea betwixt them, because of
their hot contentions and implacable hatred. And God forbid, that we should by
opposite contentions one against another, provoke the common parent of both our
nations, as those two brethren did their parent Iulia, to cry out against us,
as she did against them: O my sons, you have found the way, how to be
severed and divided by sea and land, into distinct regiments, and as you say,
the water diuides you one from the other: but how will you divide me your
mother? How shall I be divided between you both? Will you distract me into
parts also? As them two lovers (mentioned by Plutarke) striving for their love,
dum vterque ad se certatim rapere conatur, rent her in pieces? Let our strife
rather be like that of Ephestien and Craterus, who Diodor. 17
contended whither should love their king Alexander most; in so much that
Alexander was enforced to decide the controversy, adiudging that Ephestion
loved the king best, and Craterus Alexander best. So it pleased the king in his
sentence equally to divide his love, and so did they both equally strine to
love: and after this manner did the Jones and Chij contend in love to
Hercules: Paus. 7.
and Judah and Israel for David. And so I doubt not but our contention is of
the like love, and duty toward our Sovereign: but as for hatred and malice
amongst our selves, so seperating us that we cannot be mixed together, Dij
talia Graijs, erroremque hostibus illum. Seeing (as he said) no greater Tacit.
de Germ.
hurt can be wished to our enemies then to be disunited among themselves, and
if they will not be at one with us, that they may be at odds between
themselves: mane at quaeso duretque gentibus si non amor nostri at certe odium
sui. Quando nihiliam praestare fortuna maius potest, quam hostium discordiam.

And now farther to enforce this union into both nations, the rather, because
we are both alike under one head and governor: has not his Majesty two eyes,
to respect both kingdoms; two ears, to hear a like the cause of both: two
shoulders to bear alike the burden, and care of both; two hands, to distribute
honors alike to both; and two feet, to go, one before the other, yet both
alike to support but one body? The inequality only is, if we are not alike
duetifull, and thankeful; neither do we, as the Apostle Romans 12.
exhorts, carry like minds one toward another; nor make our selves in our
own conceits, equal to them of the lower sort. And where Xenophon calls
Magistrates, and mighty men, the kings eyes, the kings ears, the kings
shoulders, yea also his hands, and his feet, it is not thereby meant, that
they should think, they also had two eyes, to envy one the other; two ears,
to listen after advantages, or offenses, one against the other; two shoulders,
to shoue at, and shoulder out one the other; two feet, to outrunne, and
prevent one the other; to hands, two catch, and snatch, one from the other, or
to carry fire in one hand, and water in the other, or to build with the one,
and to pull down with the other, or with the one to offer a gift, and with
the other a stab; altera manu panem, altera lapidem; but that their eyes,
ears, shoulders, feet, and hands, are, or should be mutual helpers one to
the other, for the common good, and public service of the whole State. And I
persuade my self, that all Magistrates under his Majesty, of the one, or
other nation, united now in one common name of Britains will for public
Administration of the common Weal, so see with their eyes, hear with their
ears, bear up the head with their shoulders, and walk uprightly, having
pure, and clean hands, that as the fingers in the hand are distinctly
divided, and yet do clap, and claspe themselves together, for more strength;
so all of command and in authority within great Britain, though they have
distinct offices, yet will so concur, and agree together, that though there
appear among Aug. de Chatizandisrudibus.
them, and their distinct public services, as, in digitis, divisio, it shall
not be, ab vnitate praecisio.

And verily the two kingdoms, are like two hands warming and enfolding each
other, continuing two, yet in one body: where if the right hand challendge
more necessary use, and service in the body, then the left, or the left
hand, more then the right, and one not readyly yield to join with the other,
as is meet, the head may in his good pleasure, make choice and use of either:
as in the Roman Story, when Tribunes Live. 1. Dec* 4. lib
disagreed for chiefest honor, Quintus Servilius, Consul, of much less
dignity, and authority, then a king, took the matter into his own hands,
saying, patria may as altercationem istam dirimet.

Here Prudence among Subjects has need intermeddle with all other virtues,
and show the power of union in her self; where Justice demands right,
fortitude tollerateth, what ought be borne, temperance reformeth will, subdueth
anger, moderateth passion, and represseth ambition; and al in unity of
obedience coupled together, bring forth plentiful fruit, for society, honor,
and joy. Which thing well pleased Marcus Furius Camillus, Dictator of Rome,
seeing all the Senate, and Subjects of Rome, not only accord in the common
execution of each office for common good of al, but willingly, and lovingly,
both highest, and meanest to embrace one the other, saying, that the common
Weal, was flourishing, Live. 1. Dec. 6. lib
and most happy: sitales viros in magistratu habeat tam concordibus iunctos
animis, parere, atque imperare iuxtaparates, laudemque conferentes potius in
medium, quam excommuni ad se trahentes: whereof the Senate, Consuls, and
Tribunes gave testimony, and good proof, when they all submitted, all
authorie to Camillus, persuaded in themselves, nec quicquam de may ate sua
detractum, quod may statieius viri concessissent.

In Britains vnio^, England may not exalt it self above Scotland, nor
Scotland strive against England, but both as members of one body under one
head, ought to have the same care one for the other, as if one member suffer,
all suffer with it, and if one be honored, all the members rejoice with and as
in the church, so in the common Weal, one is my dove, one is my darling, she
is the only beloved of her mother, and dear to her, that bare her; so I know
there are diversities of gifts, and differences of administrations, and
diverse manners of operations in both; and God has set the members of the
whole body, every one of them, several in the body, as it has pleased him,
but, omnia ab vno ad vnum: All from one head, and to one end. He that is wise
will consider this. Qui Aug. de co^sensu. eva^g
vero curiosiores sunt, quam capaciores, quaedam magis contentiose obiectanda,
quam prudenter consideranda esse arbitrantur.

And now seeing I have waded so far in the union of Britains; English may
not mislike, that Scottish bear office among, and with them, as if they were
of a far Country, hunting after others Treasures, serving the king of
Babylon, and not as the same Subjects to Hezechias; for they are of, and for
England, as we, and we of, and for Scotland, as they, and both for both, being
made one. Nay rather we ought desire their society, and rejoice in this
community, setting before our eyes for example, that saying of Austin of the
communion of Saints, made fellow heirs with Christ through the mercy of our
good God: Deus, cum haberet vnicum, noluit esse vnum, sed habere fratres. And,
(if in humane matters, humane examples more move) remembering that Scipio was
as glad of his Brothers preferment as of his own; and that Castor, would not
be a God without his brother Pollux, but would be only Semideus, that his
brother might partake with him; as Aug. de bo. no viduit.
is well said: habent oculi in corpore magnum honorem, sedminorem haberent si
soli essent.

Tac. 11. An.
In the time of Claudeus, the Emperor, when it was consulted that the Senate
should be supplied with more Senators, the Peires and Nobles of France, long
before enfranchised free denisons of Rome, sought also to participate in
honors, magistracies, and dignities with Romans: and the matter being
handled on both sides with great consideration, the Romans alleged against
the French, that Italy wanted no sufficient men within it self, for it self.
And that there was no reason to incorporate others with them, who had been at
so deadly hatred, and bloody wars against them. What? not private men, not
the common people, not strangers, but enemies taken into the Senate? Was it not
counted for a wonder that the Athenians did take only Anacharsis into their
City? Would the Lacedaemonians admit it the Tyrrheni to participate in their
honors, though they had done them service? And had their mothers also Athenian
women? But the good Emperor replying, said to the Senators, that he would
assume into the Senate, of all his Subjects, such as he found most worthy, of
what Country soever, alleging, that his own Ancestors were descended from the
Sabini, and made of Nobility and Senate of Rome, and that the Iulij were taken
from Alba, Coruncani from Camerium, the Porcij from Tusculum, Etruria, and Cic.
pro Balbo.
Lucania, and from al parts of Italy chosen into the Senate. And that by this
means Italy was extended, and greatly enlarged, so as not only, the people,
but al their possessions, had their dependence upon the state of Rome, and grew
into one nation and people of Rome. And that a settled state chiefly flourished,
when the people in habiting even beyond the river Padus were received into the
community of Roman Citizens. And lastly, that nothing was more hurtful to
the Lacedaemonians and Athenians, then their refusal to increase the common
weal by access of new and other people. What? Shall not they be admitted
because they and Romans have had deadly feud one against the other? So the
Aequi, so the Volsci. And yet are now al one and the same people of Rome. This
forcible speech pierced their hearts, and prevailed so, as that al submitted
their judgment to the Emperors wisdom. Which thing I thought good here to
remember, not forgetting also what Anna said to Dido.

Qua^tuvrbe^ soror hanc cernes? quae surgere regna, Connubio tali, Troum
Comitantibus armis? Punica se quantis attollet gloria rebus?

Which if we consider, as we should, we cannot then but ingenuously
acknowledge, that good and praise worthy was the speech of Paedaretus, who
understanding he was not chosen into the number of the Trecenti, who chiefly
bare rule, said, he did glory there were so many, his betters in the common
Weal. And no less commendable was his saying, who wished, he could raise from
the dead many more, such excellent Citizens; as Quintus Fabius well advertised,
Titus Octacilius, Live. 3. Dec. 4. lib.
nec tu id indignari possis aliquem in civitate Romana, meliorem haberiquamte.
Doubtless the common weal is more happy, and does there more flourish, where
is more choice of worthy honorable men, to be employed in public affairs,
as need, and occasion require. And as arrows in the hand of the strong man,
so are the succession, and children of such: blessed is King James that has
many kingdoms, like many quivers full of them: but as for the arrows, which
of them shall abide in the quiver, and which of them shall be taken forth, and
sent, or shot abroad, that is in the power of the Archer: neither may one say,
why have thou taken me; nor the other, why am I left with the rest: an non in
caelo ipso sualuce Aug. de bono viduitat
sol Lunam superat, non vituperat? Et stella a stella differt in gloria non
dissidet in superbia?

And albeit there be a kind of jealousy, and natural strangeness among men,
until they better grow in knowledge one of the other, and do eat, (as our
English Prover be has) a Bushel of Salt together: yet have we long since
shaken of that infamy, which Horace laid unjustly upon us, that Britains
were discourteous, and vnhospitall to strangers: and have learned to grant
Incorporations, and immunities even to strangers in deed, and to enfranches
strange nations for trade with us, making them partakers of our Rights: much
more then should we be less nice of al immunitie, and natural community with
us toward those, who now are one with us; that though in the Comedy, cause
of strangeness among men be alleged, quianec ille te novit, nec tu illum:
yet we should be ashamed, quasi Canes, latratu accipere quem non agno scimus.

Yea rather should we rejoice to hear by this union, how that Lacedemonij
Medizant, and Medi Plut Arta^
Lacedemonizant, both Scot and English, so familiarly converse together, and
are grown into one another natures and manners, that like Servilij fratres,
they are all one. And should we wish by reason of the neighborhood, and
nerenesse of both nations, as also for likeness of language we should be
alone: even as the historian discourses of the Phryges and Troiani, and
likewise Dionys. 1.
other nations, how they were taken for the same, and called by one another
names promiscuously, because they were so near one to the other; and the same
also were counted but one nation, and of one kind, by reason they were of the
same language: a most sure argument (says he) that they be but one people, who
agree in one language; as it is most absurd, the inhabitants of the same
places should differ in language, if they be of the same kind. Why then (as he
says) iube hanc Ter. Adel.
maceriam dirui, quantum potest, huc transfer, vna^ fac domum. And according to
that resolution.

-- foederis aequas
Iungamus leges, socio sque in regna vocemus.
Especially seeing they may challendge with Livi. 1. Dec. 4. lib.
us: cives esse, and licet non easdem opes habere, eandem tamen patriam
incolere: quare connubium petimus, and societatem, quod finitimis, externisque
dari solet: nihil novi ferimus, sedid, quod populiest, petimus: Vt quibus velit
populus Romanus honores mandet. Was not Numa Pompilius though no Roman, fetched
from Sabins, and made king of Rome? Was not also Lucius Tarquinius, not so much
as of Roman blood, made king there? And was not Servius Tullius, though borne
basely, and Live. ibid.
of a bond woman also made king there? Et dum nullum fastiditur genus, in quo
eniteret virtus, Romanum crevit imperium. but no such exception of Scottish
blood, his Majesty being rightly, and anciently descended of royal English
blood, and his nobles hence forth in their posterity, being with us, and we
with them, al of British blood: an esse vlla mayor, out in signior contumelia
potest, quam partem civitatis, velut contaminatam, indignam connubio haberi?
Quid est aliud, quam exilium intra eadem moenia, quam relegationem pati? ne
propinquitatibus, ne affinitatibus immisceamur, ne societur sanguis?

What may we say more, but render all possible praise, and thanks to our
good, and gracious God, who by his servant our Sovereign, has reduced, and
restored the whole Island of great Britain, answerable to his first
beginning, and ancient former being; like to one City, even one Jerusalem,
which is a City, at unity within it self. Hoc vere Regium, duos populos
vnum efficere. As the king of kings has in mercy done to Jew and Gentile, to
Grecian, and Barbarian, fecit vtraque vnum: he brake down the partition Wall,
and has gathered the people, and kingdoms together to serve him, dissociata
locis concordi pace ligavit. And why should not many, and more then two
kingdoms, as well civilie abide in unity of Subjection, as many Christian
nations continue in unity of faith? But that the one has the spirit of God,
which is author of peace, and lover of concord, directing them: and the other
the spirit of Satan, author of contention, and cause of confusion, perverting
them, Which thing King David well perceaved praying God for his Son Solomon,
that he might enjoy the fuil possession of the whole dominion from sea, to
sea, promised to Israel under Moses, but not fully obtained till then, because
of the peoples sins. And albeit for our manifold, and great sins, this whole
Island has been overlong divided into two, and forced by former division to
many battles, and much shedding of blood; yet we praise God, that in these our
days, the full possession thereof is restored, and given to our peaceable
Solomon; so as not only al his own subjects even from Sea, to Sea, of both the
kingdoms, are in him united into one; but even the potent, and powerful
neighbor kings seek peace, and make league with Israel even the kings of
Tharsis, and of the Isles, bring presents, the kings of Sheba, and Seba brings
gifts, as in the days of Solomon.

This change (even the happiest change that ever was) from a people so divided
from one, by Gods eternal decree, and special mercy, to be made one, bids
us open our eyes, and calls us a loud, come, and see; speque, fideque inquit,
maiora videbis. For our Island, formerly for sin divided (as the Echinades
Insulae, were fained by Poets, once far separate, and distracted, for contempt
of their Gods) is now become like that Island Delos, which though it floated,
and was tossed sometimes upon the waters, agente in gente^, as one wave forces
another; was nevertheless reported to be afterward, truly firm, and stable.
Doubtless that God which has written in the waters, and the Sea, legible for
every eye to see, and read Mare Britannicu^: and who has continually carried
in directing the pens, and pe^sils of al Cosmographers, Mapmakers, or
whatsoever Historiographers) who^ Alphon sus Siciliae calls optimos
Consiliarios mortuos) not to alter the first, and old name, but to call it in
all their writings, and descriptions, Mare Britannicu^; has graciously, and
miraculously effected for the land also, that out of the dead ashes of old
great Britain, should be raised eve^ the self same Britain, as the Phoenix
living, and dying, est cadem, sednon Lactan.
eadem, quia ipsa nec ipsa est. O admirable Metamorphosis, and happy change:
England, and Scotland have left, though not lost, their names, both being
preserved in the Bosom of great Britain: no^ duo sunt, nec forma duplex,
but, neutru^que and vtru^que videtur: and of both us English and Scottish being
now Britains may it be said, as of the^ two brethren, altervter and vterque;
altervter est vterque vterque autem neuter. Which I again call that fair
Phoenix, dying, and living, eadem, and non eadem, quia ipsa nec ipsa est.

In which excellent, and wonderful work, the rather, and better to bring to
pass the good purpose of uniting the two kingdoms and people into one, it has
seemed best to the godly wisdom of divine providence, first, and long since
to knit all our hearts in one holy religion, and in the same service, and godly
worship, to make us al like Citizens with the Saints, and of the household of
God, renewed in Christ, and reconciled into one body, acknowledging but one
God, and professing but one faith, and religion, the hope of our vocation.
Whereby we learn, and cannot but confess, (if, as Ciprian says, consilioru^
gubernaculum, lex sit divina) that, that common Weal best pleases God, which
comes nearest to the Church of God, that wisest Politeans, are best
Christians, that best governments have correspondence with Gods laws; and that
those kingdoms are best ruled, and the more blessed, which are of one heart
and one obedience, even as al are one in Christ, who is the head, and al under
his government, are by one spirit, but one body.

Wherefore the good Emperors Theodosius, and Valentinianus writing to Cipria^
Bishop of Alexandria, were bold to commend their government, according to the
platform, before described, saying: A pietate quae in deu^ est, Reipublicae
nostrae co^stitutio pendet, and multa vtrinque est cognatio, and societ as,
etc. Which most excellent pattern, and form of government, is after the
example of Christ, uniting al into one: and this the Psalmist resembles to
that precious ointment, powredon the head of Aaron, and running down his beard,
even to the skirts of his clothing: for so does sweet, and precious union
rest chiefly in the head, which is but one, and from thence run al along, and
alike to all the parts of the people, which are but one.

But shame on Schism, whither it be civil, or ecclesiastical; for it renteth
the seamlesse Coat of Christ, both in the Church and in the Civil state, even
in the doctrine, and ceremonies of the one against the truth of God; and in
christian charity, and common civillity of the other against the peace of me^.
Wherefore whosoever opposes himself against the one, or other, is more
unreasonable, and may be thought more cruel, then the soldiers, which would
not divide Christ's seamlesse Coat, but castlots, whose it should be, saying:
sortiamur cuius sit. For it caunot be denied, but that they; which divide great
Britain, to have it divided within and against it self, divide that, for
which they cannot say, sortiamur; seeing cuius is known, and sit cannot be
denied: but sortiamur, and cuius, and sit, must wholly, and only be left to
king James, and to his royal succession for ever.

Only let our contention be, as was that of Israel and Judah, who should be
forwardest in bringing our king unto the seat of his kingdom, so now to
preserve the possession of his kingdom, sartum and tectum, inseperably united
to the king, and jointly united and undivided within it self. Vnus rex, vna
lex; vnus pater, vna communis patria; vnum caput, vnum corpus. Let not private
respects hinder a common good: let every man be as one man, of one heart and one
soul, united to the kings design, for the everlasting good of every one. If
the king had commanded thee a great thing, would not thou have done it? How
much more then, when he says, be you all of one mind to live agreeably
together, in one uniform government, for your own undoubted good. Cedat ius
proprium regi, patriaeque remittat.

And to conclude in nomine, and omine Concordiae: to consummat this structure
of union, and to consecrate it to all eternity, as the Romans did their Temple
of concord. Behold, now is the time Live. 8.
of uniting both nations together; (as he said) Si quando vnquam consociandi
imperij tempus eptastis, en hoc tempus adest, and virtute vestra, and deum
benignitate vobis datum. Heretofore, as C. Marius said he could not audire ius
prae strepitu armorum; so by reason of civil discord betwixt both nations the
name of unity was but as a pleasant song, touching the ear, but not entering
into the heart or serious consideration of either part. And so until this day
this contagio^ has crept in every where. The name of Britain seemed as a
brutish name, al commixtion betwixt us seemed confusion, any mutation for union
sake an utter subversion of all the state. But now the matter is come extra
Rubiconem: iacta est alea: the matter is proceeded in: aut nunquam tents aut
perfice. Such a matter of state is not slightly to be intended. And I know that
all the honorable Commisioners on both sides think every one of them selves
not to be employed in this so great business, only as pro Consule and in his own
person, but pro Consulibus, and in commune omnium; and therefore will be
assembled like wise Romans, who after long dissension, and part takings, made
full reconcilement and concord perpetual for all matters in Aede Concordiae.
And I doubt not, but al Subjects will in all places, as the Graecians did after
long variaunce embrace that joyful (...) agreed on, for good of al, not for
fashion sake, as among heathen, but for conscience sake, as among such, which
truly know, and fear God, who is author of Unity, and but one God: that so
there be henceforth, a perfect, and perpetual establishment, according to the
laws of Medes, and Persians, which may not, nor cannot be altered; remembering,
inimicitias mortales, amicitias immortales esse debere.

Only yet I would set before all men's eyes that worthy speech of the renowned
Tullus Hostilius king of Romans, in the reconcilement of Rome, and Alba, and
represented unto us in uniting England, and Scotland by our gracious king. Quod
bonu^ Live. 1. Dec. 1. lib
faustum felixque sit populo Romano, ac mihi vobisque Albani, populum omnem
Albanum, Roman traducere in animo est* Civitatem dare plebi: primores in patres
legere: vnam vrbem: vnam Rempublicam facere: and, vt exvno quondam in duos
populos divisa Albanares est, sic nanc in vnum redeat. And now also concerning
the name I recite only a poetical fable, yet moralized no fable: that when
Neptune. and Pallas did strive, whether of them should give name to Athens, it
was agreed, that he, or she should name the City, who could bring the best
gift for common good. Wherefore Neptune did strike the Shore, and it brought
forth an horse, fore showing that Athens should be warlike: but Pallas gave the
City an Olive, signifying peace, and that the City should flourish by peace:
where upon, peace being more profitable, then war, Neptune was enforced to
yield his interest; and Pallas gave the name. Oh how blessed are the peace
makers? How beautiful are their feet? How glorious, and joyful the light of
their countenance?

-- pax optima rerum,
Quas homini novisse datu^ est pax vna triumphis
Innumeris potior.
King James doue-like brings the Olive branch, shows that the waters are
abated, anger a ppeased, dangers escaped, forrows fled, and that salvation, and
joy enters the Arc of great Britain.

God save the King. JOHN BRISTOLL.


