LAVRA. The Toys of a Traveler. OR The Feast of Fancy. Divided into three
Parts. By R. T. Gentleman.

Poca fauilla gran fiamma seconda. LONDON, Printed by Valentine Sims. 1597.

To the no less virtuous, than fair, the honorable Lady Lucie, sister to
the thrice renowned and noble Lord, Henry Earl of Northumberland, etc.
GOod Madam, I make bold to present unto you a few Toys of mine own travel,
most part conceived in Italy, and some of them brought forth in England: by
which my imperfections you may see (as in a lively Mirror) your own
perfections; and by the follies of my rechlesse youth, behold plainly the
virtues of your flowring age, hoping your Ladyship will keep them as privately,
as I send them unto you most willingly; neither doubt I at all, but that your
excellent spirit will judge graciously of this my bare, yet bounden Conceit,
and to accept the same (as a mean at idle times) to drive away that
selfe-pleasing, yet ill-easing humor of never glad melancholy: which
spiteful Fortune (seeking, though in vain, most injuriously to insult over
you) labors by all means possible to inflict upon you, the virtuous
behavior of your self being such, as even in the midst of all your crosses,
you cross her designs with an invincible heart, and with your honorable
carriage carry her with all her devises as a slave to follow you, in all your
generous and thrice noble actions, mangre the intricate Laborinth of so many
and infinite troubles allotted (most unworthily) unto you, by the inerreuocable
doom of your too partial and fli^tie Destiny. All which notwithstanding, you
bear and ore-beare with a most resolute staiednes* and a resolved courage of a
right PERCIE, and of a mind A per se. But additions breed suspicions, and
fair words (for the most part) are counted the blazons of flattery; wherefore
I will leave to the temperate judgment of the wise, and to the vncorrupt
censure of the worthier sort, your heroical and undaunted mind, and the
integrity and never staind proceedings of your spotless self. Only this
with submission will I say, that if the richnes of the ground is known (...)
the Corn, the daintiness of the Water by the sweetness of the fish, and the
goodness of the tree by the rareness of the frutte; then may every man give
a guess of the internal habit and excelent qualities of your inward mind, by
the outward behavior and apparent semblance of your exceeding chaste and more
than admirable demeanor in every respect. And thus, hoping your Honor will as
debonairly accept of these trifles, as I dutifully bequeath them unto you, and
with the Sun-shining favor of your gracious aspect deign to read these few
lines: craving both privilege and pardon for all such faults and defects as
shall happen to be discovered in the same; I humbly deuote my self unto your
Ladyships thrice virtuous and immaculate disposition and command whatsoever.
Who am

Bound as a vassal to do homage unto the same for ever. R. T.

To the gentle, and Gentlemen Readers whatsoever.
GEntlemen; as the Fencer first makes a flourish with his weapon, before he
comes to strokes, in playing his prize: So I thought good (pro forma only)
to use these few lines unto you before you come to the pith of the matter. What
the Gentleman was that wrote these Verses, I know not; and what she is for
whom they are devised, I cannot guess: but thus much I can say, that as they
came into the hands of a friend of mine by mere fortune; so happened I upon them
by as great a chance. Only in this I must confess we are both too blame,
that whereas he having promised to keep private the original, and I the copy,
secret: we both have consented to send it abroad, as common: presuming chiefly
upon your accustomed courtesies; assuring our selves if we may have your
protections, we shall think our selves as safe as Ulysses did, when he was
shadowed under the shield of Pallas against furious Ajax; so we by your
cou^tenances, shall be sufficiently furnished to encounter against any
foule-mouthed Iackes whatsoever. To censure of this work, is for better wits
than mine own; and it is for Poets, not for Printers, to give judgment of
this matter: yet if I may be bold to report what I have heard other Gentlemen
affirm; many have written worse, some better, few so well: the work being so
full of choice and change, as it is thought it will rather delight every way,
than dislike any way. Thus courteous Gentlemen, building upon my woonted
foundation of your friendly acceptance, I rest your debtors, and will study in
what I can daily to make you amends.

Yours always.

Alla bellissima sua Signora. E. C.
THrough thee (not of thee) Lady fair I write,
Through power of Beauty, not of Virtues thine:
With zealous will, though slender be my might,
I weakling seek, an Eagles nest to clime.
Then guide my feet, and if to slip I chance,
Uphold me by the favor of thy glaunce.
Accept in gree these Verses rudely pend,
(A sign of duty, which to thee I owe)
And deigne with sweet regard them to defend,
Which as condemned else are like to go.
In thee it rests the stamp on them to set,
If current, Pass: suppressed, if Counterfeit.
And though the note (thy praises only fit)
Of sweetest Bird, the dulcet Nightingale:
Disdain not little Roben Red-bres T yet,
What he does want in learning or in skill,
He does supply with zeal of his goodwill.
For only Thee they were deuisde alone,
And unto Thee they dedicated are.
Who knows? Perhaps this kindness by thee shown,
Shall make this glimpse shine like a glistering star:
Such is thy virtue in the World his sight,
Thy Crow though black, may go for Swan most white.
Then doubt me not, though parted we remain,
In England thou, and I in Italy:
As I did part I will return again,
Loyal to thee, or else with shame I Will dye.
True Lovers when they travail Countries strange,
The air, and not their constant minds do change,
Coelum, non animum mutant, qui trans mare currunt
Affettionatissimo seruid. della diuina Bellezza sua. R. T.

LAVRA.
The first Part.
I.
FOrtune (cross friend to euer-co^quring Love)
Our bodies (Lady) has divided far,
But yet our constant minds she cannot move,
Which over strong for her devises are:
Woe's me, in England thou do bide, and I
(Scarce shadow of my self) in Italy.
But let her do her worst, and what is frail
And mortal seek to separate and undo,
Yet what immortal is, she never shall:
A string too high for her to reach unto.
In spite of envious seeds (by Malice sown)
My heart shall ay be thine, and mine thine own.
Padoa.
II.
Though I do part, my Heart yet does not part;
My poor afflicted body parts in twain,
And does in pieces two divide my Heart:
One piece my fainting spirit does sustain,
The other part I leave with thee behind,
(The better part, and of my heart most dear)
Then to that part so parted, be thou kind,
And to the same impart thy loving cheer:
That I (returning) may again unite
This parted Heart, and find for grief, delight.
London.
III.
Like to the blacksome night I may compare
My Mistres gown, when darkness plays his prise:
But her sweet face, like to the Sun most fair,
When he in glory ginneth to arise.
Yet this no whit the other does disgrace,
But rather dubleth Beauty in the place.
Contraries like to these set opposite,
So dainty and so pleasing in their show
To lookers on, do breed no small delight,
And pleasure great thereby to them does grow.
Oh wonder strange, oh sollace sweet to see,
In one self subject Night and Day to be.
IIII.
In the AEgean dangerous sea of Love,
In midst of faithless waves and wicked wind,
Where (to my cost) most bitter brunts I prove,
A new Arion (there) my self I find.
And though (as he) I play on Harp, and sing,
Yet cannot cunning mine so high aspire,
As for to make the skipping fish me bring
Unto that wished shore I so desire:
Only my Laura (peerlesse for to see)
May in this troubled flood my Dolphin be.
V.
Great was the strife between the Sun on (...)
And my fair Sun, when first she began to peer,
Who should exceed in brightest Majesty,
And show in fight of spacious world most clear:
The Sun did shine, but she did lighten bright,
And so his burning beams extinguished quite.
Nay more, my Sun on sudden to the Sun
Lent light, and yet no light at all did want:
Where else the other had been quite undone
For lack of brightness, which with him was scant:
The beauty then the Sun does use to show
My Sun does give, and from her it does grow.
VI.
Turned to a stone was he that did bewray
(Unwitting) to the crafty I heife himself
The theft; not thinking he had stolen the pray,
In hope to gain a little paltrie pelf:
So I, who unawares to cruel Thee
(The robber of my heart) confessed the theft,
A senseless Stone like Battus am to see:
Only in this, unlike that shape berest:
That where to worthless Stone he turned was,
I for a Touchstone true of Love do pass,
VII.
Down from the neck unto that dainty Breast,
(Which Nature made a myrrour of delight)
And where a world of beauties sweet do rest,
Does hang a costly Chain of Pearl most bright;
And of proportion are so just and round,
That such in India rich cannot be found.
Besides, their orient brightness is alike;
So that mine eyes are dazzled with the same,
And not much used to see so fair a sight,
(A sight which does the Sun in glory stain)
Can well discern though them they both do see,
If Breast be Pearl, or Pearl in Bosom be.
VIII.
To give that life which had not breath before,
Prometheus (from above) stole heavenly fire;
For which his boldness he was plagued sore,
A just reward for such an high aspire.
So whilst I steal from thee (my Heaven above)
The heat which does revive my dying sprite:
For rashness mine eternal grief I prove.
Yet though our fault's all one, the plague's not like:
He feels of Vulture one (alone) the smart;
But I have thousands which still gnaw my heart.
IX.
Love (being blind) has wrought me damage sore,
Thou (blind in this my loving) evil wast,
Nor would I see the snare (being blind far more)
Wherein my self I did entangle fast:
Yet has this blindness harm done unto none,
But unto Beauties Buzzard, me alone.
When blinded Boy did catch my harmless Heart,
Thou did not see the net so intricate
Which bound me (being blind, blind as thou art)
To be a thrall, in this most wretched state:
So that (alone to work my misery)
Love blind is, blind were Thou, and blinder I.
X.
If (Laura) thou do burn against me in hate,
Then me such busses sweet why do thou give?
Why checkst thou not the Cheeks which give the mate,
(The vital cause whereby I breathe and live)?
Perhaps it is, because through too much joy
(As in sweet swound) I might away depart:
If so thou do, and think me so to noy;
Kiss hardly, and with kissing breed my smart.
Content am I to loose this life of mine,
Whilst I do kiss that lovely lip of thine.
XI.
Upon triumphant Chariot, passing rare,
In which my Sun does sit like Majesty,
And makes the day show unto us more fair,
Whose cheerfulnes delights each mortal eye^
I rash, like to another Phaeton,
With hare-braine have too hasty lept thereon.
But for my boldness deerly did I pay,
And had like plague (as he) for being ore-braue.
Yet though in equal fortune both did stay,
(For life he lost, and death she to me gave)
The punisher of both was not the same:
For he by I^^^, and I by Love was slain.
XII.
The Beauty that in Paradise does grow,
Lively appears in my sweet Goddess face,
From whence (as from a crystal River) flow
Favor divine, and comelines of grace.
But in her dainty (yet too cruel) Breast
More cruelty and hardness does abound,
Than does in painful Purgatory rest:
So that (at once) she is fair and cruel found,
When in her face and breast, (ah grief to tell)
Bright Heaven she shows, and crafty ^ides dark hell.
XIII.
Whilst angry Juno from the scowling Skies
Thick swinging showers did downward send amain,
My Lady mounting up in stately wise,
From heaven more fast did fiery lightning rain:
So that the people (passing) had less harm
By water^wet, than by the fire ore-warme.
The water onely^wet their outward skin,
A matter small, in which was danger none;
But this her fire did burn their hearts within,
And forced them as they went to sigh and groan:
So that their grief was greater (sauns all doubt)
To have within fire, than water without.
XIIII.
The swift Menander turning, winds so fast,
And with his stream in circle wise so ^uns;
That wanton-like (from whence he springs) at last
Back to his fountain head again he comes.
In me a river huge of tears from heart
To watrie eyes ascend, from whence they flow,
And running down do from mine eyes depart,
Descending to my heart again below:
So that through virtue of most mighty Love,
In heart a new Menander I do prove.
XV.
Thou stranger who with wandering steps do wend,
Thy gazing eyes turn quickly unto me:
And to my speech with listening ear attend,
In whom four Elements united be.
Mark well, and as a wonder tell the same
Of Cupids force, poor Louer^ I^mburlane.
First this my body's earth, and earth most cold*
The fire within my heart in covert lies,
The aire's my sighs, mine eyes do waters hold:
Thus for my Saint be does me marteri^e.
Earth is my body, strange seems not this same*
The air my sighs, eyes water, heart the flame.
XVI.
If lovely Less for Fairing thine of me*
Gold in this Fair thou meanest for to have:
Then give me of thy Hairs which golden be,
Give unto me, since thou of me do crave.
Nor by this bargain shall thou loss sustain,
Or ought hereby shall hindered be (sweet VVench)
Since I (to courteous thee) do give again:
(As thankful) gold, for gold in recompense.
Thy treasure, so shall mine be, mine as thine,
Nor shall the exchange be worse than gold most fine.
XVII.
Rockt in a cradle (like as Infants be)
When I was young, a little wanton child,
Two dainty dugs did nourish life in me,
Whilst often on them with teate in mouth I smilde:
Ah happy I, thrice happy might I say,
Whilst in that harmless state I then did stay.
But now that I am come to man's estate,
Such dugs as nursed me in delight and joy
Do seek my death, by poisonous sugared ba^,
Whose sight without possession breeds me noy.
So what in childhood caused me to live,
Now in my youth does death unto me give.
XVIII.
If Sea no other thing does show to be
Than most unstable waters moving often,
With pardon (Lady) you this seem to me.
So most unstable is your changing thought
I likewise hold a river that orevvhelmes
With vvatrie salt within these eyes of mine:
Then let us make a mixture among our selves
Of this unsteadfastness and vvatrie brine.
Lets fashion both of us a novel Sea,
So heaven the haven, and love the bay shall be.
XIX.
Lady, the Sun was in Aquarius*
When thou were borne, which is the reason why
The water of my plains delight thee thur,
Without once viewing me with piteous eye:
But when as I was borne, the Sign I guess
In Cancer was, a show of my distress.
This is the cause within my boiling breast
Does burn a hot and vnextinguishe fire:
But contrary these Signs in us do rest,
Nor do they well accord to my desire;
Far better had it been, Aquarius Sign
Had hapt to me, and Cancer had been thine.
XX.
What time with brow the Loueliest give to scowle,
Showing disdain and fury in her face;
Me thinks I see the clouds were dark and foul,
And gloomie night begins to run his race.
But then again, when she to show begins
Her smiling chere adornd with (...) rare,
Straight ways the Sun in charies bright forth springs,
Clear are the skies, the gladsome day most fair:
Thus in one face I see against my will,
The rising of the Sun and falling still.
XXI.
Ranckle the wound did in my head apace
When fairest She to play the (...) came,
And whilst her snow white hand did me the grace
To lay the plaster (...) which heald the same:
A wonder strange, no sooner did she tuch
The hurt, but it appeard to be (...) such*
Yet woe is me, no sooner by their hand
Was heald in head my outward fe^^ring wound,
But that in sted of that as (...),
One mortal sear at inward heart I found.
Thus (Love) thou see is changed my estate,
She checkes with death, that ^ore gave life for mate.
Venice.
XXII.
If in the midst of kindled burning fire
That worthy Roman burnt his valiant hand,
I like an other Mutius in desire,
Have scorcht my fi^t likewise through Loves, command
In freshest moisture, where my Lady svveet
Her lilly hands for coolnes diued often.
But though desire betvveene us was alike,
Yet was the matter diverse which we sought.
He chose to burn his hand with courage bold
In flaming fire, and I in water cold.
XXIII.
The Gentiles (...) (in sign of sacrifice)
The blood of men to offer, to appease
The warlike Goddess wrath in humble wise,
And through the same her angry mind did please:
But thou (more wicked Warrier far than she)
In reason may more cruel termed be.
On Beauties altar (to thee dedicate)
Thousands of Lovers (mustering on a row)
Offer their blood and hearts: yet mitigate
Thy hardened mind cannot, which flint does show.
Then is she cruel less than thou art now,
Since blood her pleased, and thee hearts cannot bow.
XXIIII.
For to behold, my Sun, I from the Sun
Did seek my face to shadow with my hand,
To shield me from the heat that began to come
In place, where gazing on her I did stand:
But I no sooner from that Sun was free,
But that in that self instant and that time,
I of mine own Sun found myself to be
Burnt with the heat (a most unlucky sign).
So, whilst a shade from sun did me defend,
A Sun more hot did hurt me in the end.
XXV.
White was the orient pearl, which on a day
That hand me gave, which scorns the proud compare
Of purest white, and bears the palm away,
As of all pearly faires the orientst fair:
And whilst she offered unto me the same,
I knew not which the pearl was of the twain.
So white the hand was of my peerlesse Pearl,
As it did dazzle with delight mine eyes,
And pearl seemd to me, giving me the pearl:
Which made me sighing say (in whispring wise)
Ah why once may I not so happy be
This Pearl to have, which the other gives to me?
XXVI.
When you appear, appears the break of day,
And shows to be most fair, and passing bright:
But if you keep your self unseen away,
The day shows not, but keeps out of sight.
Then if again you gin your self to show,
Behold the Day to show it self afresh
With sky most clear: so both of you do grow
In beauty like, in heat nor are you less.
Thus if your beams you open, or hidden been,
The break of day appears, else nere is seen.
XXVII.
Justly of thee (Love partial) I complain,
That at one instant, and with one self stroke,
Thou darted have into my heart with pain
Cold chilly frost, and fiery flaming smoke,
Ay me, within me (both) I secret hold,
And whilst the one bornes me, the other makes me cold.
Then Cruel, since thou will two contraries
(Against my soul) within my heart shall rest,
Ah yet make peace twixt them in loving wise,
Or else (sweet Love) do promise this at least;
Flame to my frost and water to my fire,
Life to my heart, to comfort my desire.
XXVIII.
Diana shines in the heavens clear,
Because from purest Sun she takes her light,
And Fair, she shows that of Diana here
On earth, does borrow beauty passing bright.
The virtue then that is infusde in her,
She from Diana has, or else from none;
For other thewes do all in her (...),
And unto her beholding are alone:
Oh wonder strange of Nature to reveal,
She Dian gives, yet does from Dian steal.
Siena.
XXIX.
As burnisht gold, such are my Souereignes hears;
A brace of startes divine, her blackish eyes,
Like to the fairest black the Raven bears,
Or fairer, if you fairer can deuile:
So likewise faire's the beauty of her breasts,
Where pleasure lurkes, where joy still dallying rests.
This Venus bower, you rightly may compare
To whitest snow that ere from heaven fell,
Or to the mines of alabaster fair:
(Woe's me, it is sweet to sleep in Cupids cell)
Whilst he the heart makes surfeit with delight
Through golden hair, black eyes, and breast most white.
XXX.
Unto thy favor (which when Nature formd,
She went beyond her self with cunning hand)
I may compare what is in world adornd
With beauty most, and with most grace does stand:
But every mortal whitenes nere so white,
The yuorie white of thy white hand exceeds.
So that my Soul (which does fair whitenes like)
Rests on fair whitenes, and on whitenes feeds:
For this is thought and hoped of from thee,
White as thy hands, so white thy faith shall be.
XXXI.
Lady, thou seem Fortune unto me
When I most wistly mark, how thou do go
With golden tresses loose, (a joy to see)
Which gentle wind about thy ears does ble^:
And as thou her resemblest in this sort,
So do thou in attire and all thy port.
Only thou want for thy swift right hand
The rolling wheel, and shadowing veil to hide
Those eyes, which like controllers do command:
But if thou longst of these to be supplide,
Take me (thy prisoner) for to play this part,
For my Desire's the wheel, the Vaile's my HEART.
XXXII.
Thou, merry laughst, and pleasantly do smile,
I woeful weep, and (mestfull) sorrow still,
Left this thy mirth increasing, me beguile,
And weaue a web for me of greater ill:
Too well perceive I, this thy deep disdain,
By this thy fained looks, and cloaked glee,
Thou of disaster mine art glad and feign,
And feign my death as Basiliske would see,
Since that of warte and bate this laughter is,
And not of gentle peace or calmy bliss.
XXXIII.
Since thou have changde thy gown and thine attire,
Ah change thy thoughts, not always cruel be:
And with new clothes, put on a new Desire,
That new in every point I may thee see.
And if thou heretofore unkind have been,
Be courteous now, and gentle be thou seen.
Thy glory great, thy praise more shall thou find,
If, of unconstant, constant thou become,
And of a foe, a faithful friend and kind,
Then change henceforth thy thoughts, else I undone:
Give me that color which so likes mine eine,
If death, then black, if life, then Carnatine.
XXXIIII.
Changde is my nature in me, where before
I like was to a chilly freesing ice:
I now a flame am, burning inward sore,
And such a flame that burns in such wise,
That if Love and my Mistress take no care
For this my hurt, my soul must quickly die,
Yet one does see (for both not blinded are)
The fire so hot does burn wherein I fry,
That fierce Perillus boiling Bull of brass
May unto this for icie substance pass.
XXXV.
Far be^et had it been I had been dead,
And laid full low in latest home, (my grave)
Than with that drink my self for to have fed
Which Laura mine in Crystal glass (...) gave:
The licor pleased me I must needs confess,
Yet to my heart it was poison nerthelesse.
So that I had contrary quiet effect
To my desire, which I so much did wish
Love was in fault, who Reason does reject:
And see my cruel luck, what hapt in this;
The wine was sweet, yet did his nature turn,
It coold my mouth, but heart within did burn.
XXXVI.
Sweet sung thy Bird in Ebon cage shut fast,
And did delight thy dainty ears so much,
As thou vouchsafdst to give him meat atlast,
And gently did his feathers stroke and tuch.
So Lady, I likewise in the Ebonie
Of thy bright eyes am prisoner, and do sing
Thy Beauties praise; and yet not fed am I
By thee, yet live through thee: a wondrous thing.
Love to my heart thy Beauty does supply
For food, which else (through famine starud) would die.
XXXVII.
If white's the Moon, thou Laura seemst as white,
And white's the gown which you on body wear;
And if her whitely horns in calmie night
She smoothly glyding shows to us most clear:
You in the day time more and brighter far,
Your Beauty show like bright (...) star.
Like brightness both of you abroad do east,
Though not effect alike par (...);
You shine, she shines, your powers eternal last:
But yet between you is great difference,
Her brightness freezeth, causing deadly cold,
Yours does inflame, and lively fire does hold.
XXXVIII.
Even as the lamp goes out that oil does (...),
Or as the Sun does fall in the occident,
So did my heart within me gin to pant,
My vital spirnes away by little went:
When (taking on me pity) graciously
My Mistres hem of garment trailing down
Touched me, and me revived suddenly:
Then if such virtue be within her gown,
Imagine what does stay her corpse within,
Which who sees, through sweetness needs must (...).
XXXIX.
Seated on marble was my Lady blythe,
Holding in hand a crystal looking Glass,
Marking of Lovers thousands (who alive
Thanks only to her Beauty (...) did pass).
To pry in glass likes her: but afterward
She takes the (...) of the stone must hard,
For whilst she (...) does fix her eyes
Gazing upon the (...) of the (...),
Her heart by the other made (instrangle)
Hard as a rock, and senseless as a stone:
So that if Love this breaks not in (...),
It will a flint become, to others pain.
XL.
No more a man (as once I was) am I
Since this new Circes (moo^'d by fierce disdain)
Has changd me to a fountain never dry
Wherein my self with bitter tears I (...).
Then am I one, who always eyes do bear,
And breast of water flowing only full:
Take heed you Lovers all of her, and fear
The sugared baits of this deceitful (...).
Least by this Circe new you be deceau'd
As I have been, and be of shape bereaved.
The Conclusion of the first Part.
THe Macedonian Monarch once did deigne
(In cheerful sort, in kind and loving wise)
To feast in Village with a homely Swain,
Who entertaind him (as is country guise)
With curds and cream, and such like knackes he had:
Whereof the courteous Prince accepted glad.
So Lady, boldly I pr^sumed have
To enuite you to a sorry Banquet base:
Nor to disdain the same of you I crave,
Though eats too course for you, too poor the place.
I cannot (as I would) give curds and cream,
But milk and whey, my fortune is so mean.
Yet if you shall accept it graciously,
And with your Favor sweet this Bonrd adorn,
The virtue which is in you, presently
The whey to curds, and milk to cream shall turn:
But if your look you angry turn away,
The milk shall still be milk, the whay still whay.
Then as the Sun in glorious wise does shine
As well on valley low as mountain hie,
Vouchsafe one cheerful glimse of favor thine
On pouer me, from out that heavenly eye:
Unworthy I such grace (I do confess)
Yet worthy thou to do so, ^erthelesse.
R. T.

The scond part
I.
IF I somewhile look up into the skies,
I see (fair Lady) that same cheerful light
Which like to you does shine, in glorious wise:
And if on the earth I chance to cast my sight,
The moouelesse Center firm to me does show,
The hardness which within your heart does grow.
If seas I view the flowing waves most plain
Your fickle faith do represent to me:
So as I still behold you to my pain,
Whenas the skies, or the earth, or seas I see:
For in your seemly self does plain appear.
Like faith like hardness, and like brightness clear.
II.
Marvel I do not, though thou do not see
My griefs, and martires, which I still sustain,
For thou the Mole of love do seem to me;
But if a Mole, thou art only to my pain.
How comes it then that seeing thou art blind,
Thou me consumst, as if thou had thy sight?
Why, as thy nature by instinct does bind
Stayest not below? pack hence, and leave this light,
Either those eyes still shut, not me to grieve.
Or under ground, in darkness always live.
III.
If whilome (in times past) that Spartane Less
(The Flower of Greece, Dan Paris costly joy)
Through her fair feature the only causer was,
So many Knights were slain at Siedge of Troy:
Thou Laura art unlike unto her far,
In this our Age a much more blessed Star.
For she brought wars, strife, death, and cruelty;
Where thou (alone) bringst peace and pleasure still.
Ah happy thrice that liggs in love with thee:
And if by chance (unawares) thou sometime kill,
Thou (with thy smile) the wound can heal again,
And give him life, whom thou before had slain.
Pisae.
IIII.
Shoot forth no more those darts from lightning eyes,
(Unkind) why seekst to stop my fainting breath?
Go, and invent some new kind exercise,
Play the right Tyrant, choyces use in death:
New weapons seek wherewith me to offend;
Whereby I dying, content may rest thy will.
But tell me? would so feign my life should end?
And know not, sweet extremes do sudden kill?
Cruel, kiss me but once, and thou shall see
Ended my life with that same Kiss to be.
V.
If what is heavy craves the Center base,
(The earth below) as nature wills the same,
Heavy the woeful griefs are in this case,
Which inward in my heart I do sustain.
And if what is light, by kind aloft does mount,
Then light's my Love with thee, of light account.
So that in doubtful dangerous extreme,
Wretch that I am, my self am sore afraid
And doubt of thee, so far from golden mean,
Nor know I well out of this depth to wade.
Lest that my life be shortened, or I die,
Whether it heavy, falls; or light, ascends on hie.
VI.
Lady what time I seek in mournful note
To show mine agonies and bloody moan.
My voice does fail, and hoarse and harsh my throat,
And this does come through you, through you alone.
For whilst I think by means of you in song
To mittigate some part of this my smart,
Insteede thereof you do me double wrong,
And with a glaunce you take away my heart:
So that I find great hurt by this your theft,
Since where before but voice, now hart's bereft.
VII.
As rocks become exposde against waves and wind
More hard; such is thy nature (stubborn Dame)
Opposde against waters of my plaints most kind,
And winds of mine hot sighs which inward flame;
That hardness such to increase bout heart is found,
As (...), soft might seem the Diamond.
Hence forward then let no man think to move
By weeping or lamenting, to his will
This self willd saint, which too too well I prove,
A senseless stone to be unto ^e still:
Since to my grief, from all good luck debard
With plaints, and sighs, she does become more hard.
VIII.
Hark lovers, hark, a strangie miracle,
Of one depriude of heart, yet death does escape
Mine ^ a flower gave me, which sweet did smell*
And for the same away my life did take:
So that I only breathe through sent of flower,
And without heart, not without life I live,
Then is not this of mighty Love his power
A wonder strange, which he for sport does give?
When that a flower sustaineth me alone
With life, who in my body heart have none.
IX.
When I did part from thee the other night,
Me thought a soul black Dog with ugly shape
Did follow me, and did me sore affright,
And all the way did greedy on me gape:
Nor I this curre how he at me did howl
Can well as yet forget, with chaps most foul.
Then thinking of his color hateful black,
Me thought some ill, my Thought did fear to come,
And said within me, turn again, turn back,
If forward thou do go, thou art undone.
Then pardon Lady, if I back again
Am come this night with you for to remain.
X.
My mourning mistress garments black does bear,
And I in black like her attired am:
Yet diverse is the cause why black we wear,
She for another death does show the same:
I for another reason bear this su^e,
Only to show by this my outward weed
Mine inward grief, although my tongue be mute,
Of tender heart which deadly sighs does bleed.
Thri^e happy I, if (as in habit we
Are both in one) our minds both one might be.
XI.
If April fresh, does kindly give us flowers,
September yeeldes with more increase the fruit:
(Sweetest) you have in bosom (Beauties Bowers)
Both these sweet tides, whence forth they always shute
Both flower and fruit alonely you alone
Can give me when you please, or else can none.
Oh dainty bosom, bosom rich in prise,
Surmounting mountains huge of beaten gold*
Whose whitenes braues the whitest snow that lies
On highest hills, whose height none can behold:
In you my soul does hope without annoy,
Both spring and harvest, one day to enjoy.
Roma.
XII.
Drawn (cunning Painter) have thou with great (...),
The shadow of my lovely Laura fair;
Which object sweet not smally joys my heart,
But little did thou think, nor wait thou ware,
That where thou thoughtst my fancy for to please,
Effect contrary sorts to my Desire,
So that it breeds in body ^^ine, unease
And (senseless) burns my heart with feeling fire:
Oh strange success, what made was for Content,
Does most displease, and (liuelesse) does ^orment.
XIII.
When first the cruel Fair deignd graciously
To look on me with kind and courteous view,
And cast on me a lovely glauncing eye,
She knew not that I was her servant true:
But she no sooner ware was of the same,
But that she turned her back with great disdain.
So as the wound I (then) close bare in breast,
I (now) through grief, show outward in my face:
But if that she by whom I wounded rest,
Lives in compassion cold toward me sanz grace:
Hard hearted is she, cruel was she to her friend,
And wicked shall be world withouten end.
XIIII.
When first the Sun did shine upon her eyes,
Who fairest among her beauteous Sex does show,
The Heavens her dainty corpse (in courteous wise)
Couerd with chilly cold, and whitest snow.
She (through the nature of that Humor cold)
Both coldest Ice (at once) and purest White
Draws to her self: then none for strange should hold
Though to me fair and cruel is her sight,
Since that the Heavens (for favors) did impart
A snow-white corpse to her, and frozen heart.
XV.
The duskie cloud in sky (with shadow dark)
Does cover often the Suns most cleerest light,
So as his beams we cannot see nor mark,
And he himself does play at least in fight:
Ah were I such a clowd on earth to cover
My sweetest Sun, as does that clowd the other.
But if that clowd do vanish soon away,
And does as momentarie pass and vade;
Eternal would I be, to hide her ay,
And of a harder mixture would be made.
Oh happy I, oh fortunate Eclips,
With kissing so to darken those fair lips.
XVI.
From milk of Juno (as the Poets feign)
The Lilly had his whitenes passing white,
And from Adonis blood (that lovely Swain)
The Rose his colourred, which does delight.
Thou (pretty Soul) have both the colors rare
Of these sweet flowers, which others all exceed;
Thy Brest's a bed of beauteous Lillies fair,
Thy dainty cheeks pure damask Roses breed.
O fruitful Garden flowring, where appear
The Rose and Lilly, at all times of year.
XVII.
Of constant Love I am the wasted fire,
The furious winde's my Ladies angry eye,
Who whilst she kindles both through wrathfullire,
The flame increases, mounting to the sky.
In midst is Love, half dead of greedous pain,
And (doubtful) wyndes about like sparkling flame.
He fears the heat, and trembles, being turned
Unto this blast, which still more sharp does rise;
Nor is his fear in vain, when so he is burnd:
For one of these must hap in sudden wise,
Either the fire must spoil him as his pray,
Or whirling wind else blow him quite away.
XVIII.
My Laura wonders that in visage pale
I bear of death it self the lively show,
But if she muse at this, her musing's stale,
For this sad color had I long ago.
The fire (close burning in my veins) does make
That outward ashes in my face you view:
But if that she would on me pime take
Who is the cause of this my palish ^iew,
This kindled heat shall die, which now does burn,
And my first color shall again return.
XIX.
Whilst foming Steed I spur unto the quick,
To make him gallop to my Love amain,
Love does my thoughts (through fancy) forward prick,
The end of wished journey mine to gain:
But light's his hurt, it is but a little smart;
Where mine is m^rtall, sounding to the heart.
Run then (my Gelding swift) like Pegasus,
Fly hence with wings, for wings has my desire;
Both of us (forced amain) are forward thus,
And kindled in us is a burning fire:
Thou through two spurs in flank prouokd art sore,
But thousands inwardly my heart do gore,
XX.
Rich is the Diamond, a iemme of prise,
Yet such the nature strange is of the same,
That who the powder thereof drinks, straight dies*
And as (if poison twere) does take his ba^e:
So thou another precious jewel art,
In name and nature not vnmuch alike,
Since death thou give unto the loving heart;
If but a kiss one suckes from thee most sweet,
Whilst he does swallow down (...) is sugared bait,
The ioy's so great, it kills him through concaite.
XXI.
The Grecla^^ used to offer up their (...)
Unto their Rivers, whom they did esteem
As mighty Gods, and them great honor (...),
As if no virtue small in them had been:
Do thou the like (sweet Laura) unto me,
Who for my love deserve a greater fee.
Thy golden tresses on me do bestow,
Who hold whole Rivers flowing in mine eyes:
Yet would not I thou off should cut them tho.
Do muse, and ask how this thou may devise?
I Will tell thee: Give thy self to me for mine,
So shall thou give uncut thy tresses (...).
XXII.
One lovely glaunee which from the eyes did pass
Of Lady mine, has changd my gentle heart
From hardest Diamond to brittle glass:
And now again (unto my bitter smart
Through dreadful frown) she turns it suddenly
As it was before, from glass to Diamond.
So if she will she may, (and presently
As likes her) change me, who to her a^^ bound:
If cruel she, my heart is hard to breaks
If pirtifull, it is gentle, brittle, weak.
XXIII.
Two winds, one (...), another fierce to see,
The One of the Spring, of Winter the other right
I plainly (Laid) do^ discern in thee:
The first (which makes me joy) breathes from thy sight
Such (...) flowers in diverse colored show,
As makes to blush Dame Iris raynie Bow.
The second (which makes me to pine away)
Blows from thine inward breast a deadly blast,
Where does eternal hardness always stay,
Which (...) eternal ay to last:
So as (...) in face thou art,
But rough as (...) in thine heart.
XXIIII.
No sooner do I earnest fix mine eyes
On my fair Sun, but that I her perceive
To vanish like a clowd in darkest wise,
As if (eclypst) her light it did bereave:
I know not if she is troubled thus, because
She does disdain I should behold her so;
Or if for fear this shadow to her draws,
Least me (...) should hurt, which glistring snow.
Say then sweet Love (for thou know best) if still
I shall behold her, or no more, (...)
XXV.
Oh that I were fly Proteus, for to take
On me that form, which most I like or wish;
Then would I change my self into the shape
Of that thy little whelpe, thy joy and bliss,
Into that little worm thou ^o do like,
And dallying plaist with him both day and night.
Those sauerie smackes, those busses, sweet which be,
Which thou to him do give, should all be mine;
And I would make my heart to leap for glee,
Whilst I did lick that bosom fair of thine:
But since I (...) despair of this am brought,
My w^^h shall (...) be, thy D^g my thought.
XXVI.
Say (gentle friend) tell me in courtesy
Before what was I? and what am I now?
A senseless shadow? or a body, I?
Neither of both: mark, and I Will tell thee how.
No body now, for that by proud disdain
Of scornful She, disliu'd was: shadow none,
For that did vnder-gro^^d go with the same,
Unwilling it should wander all alone.
What am I the^* Even one that ^oth not know
What now he is, or what he was can show.
XXVII.
The blazing Star foretells the hapless fall
And sudden death of others, soon to come:
To me a Face (brighter than Comets all)
Does with her looks my fortune hard foretu^^e:
And with her shooting darts from glauncing eye,
Presageth that ere long I needs must dye.
The blazing Star death only prophecies,
This does foreshew to me a harder fate,
And dares me to mine end in warlike wise,
Not how this Challenge know I to escape.
Ah cruel Star, of death not only sign,
But murderer thou art of this poor life of (...).
XXVIII.
The Crow makes war with the Camele^n,
And being hurt to th'Laurell straight does (...),
And through the fruit he finds thereupon
Is heald of hurt, finds food, and lives thereby.
Love the Cameleon is, the Crow am I,
And battle wage with him unto the death*
He wounds me deadly, whereupon hie
To thee (my Laurall) to restore my breath.
Thou me reuiu'st, such virtue's in thee rise,
As thou at once do give me food and life.
XXIX.
Amongst the Parthians is a kind of ground
Of nature such, as though it far does stand
From fire, yet fire to take it straight is found,
And flying thethe^, burns it out of hand:
This pray so sure of Love, am I fair Dame,
And you to me (which burns me) the flame.
So that if I to you far off do show,
You kindle straight in me a quenchlesse fire:
And yet although within it burn me so,
Sweet is the heat whose fuel is Desire:
For rather I in fire near you would be,
Than freed from flame you farther off to see.
XXX.
Love, open my heart, hot fire thou forth shall take:
Open my Lauras, in it thou shall find
Cold frost: then of these two contraries make
But one, and that same one frame thou more kind.
Of both our hearts, make but one loving heart,
And give it unto which thou please of twain:
Give it to her, to her do it impart,
Or unto me: it skills not much the same.
I Will doubt no more, when but one heart we have
Between us both: for this is all I crave.
XXXI.
Unto an Image may I right compare
My Mistres, since so cruel she is to me;
Which stands for a sign or shadow fair,
To which the simple ignorant bow with knee:
And though with eyes, mouth, ears, and feet it show,
Yet does it neither set, talk, hear or go.
So plays my Choice, when I appear in sight,
Nor see, nor speak, nor hear, nor stay she will,
So as an Idol she resembles right,
Blind, mu^^, deaf, mouelesse, senseless standing still:
Then am not I worse than a liuelesse Block,
To worship such a painted colored Stock.
Fiorenza.
XXXII.
Both iemmes and pearl their proper value have,
But yet unlike, for nor alike's their prise;
Some sought for are, and each one does them crave,
Others (more base) do pass in worthless wise.
A Iuell rich and princelike Iemme is she
Whom I esteem, and such account of make,
Yet in her self no price has for to see,
For it is holden at so high a rate:
As all the gold nor silver which dothly
In the earth or sea, the same (at worth) can by.
XXXIII.
If love (wherein I burn) were but a fire,
I quenched it had with water of my tears;
If water, these my plaints, I this Desire
Had dryde through inward heat, my heart that taints:
But Love that in my griefs does take delight,
Both fire and water turns to work me spite.
Fly then this Love, since such is his great power,
As waves to fire, and fire to waves he turns,
And with an absent Beauty every hour,
My fainting heart with Fancies fuel burns,
And against all sense makes me of C A Re and I ^,
More than of good and ComfoRT to have will.
XXXIIII.
Rivers unto the Sea do tribute pay:
A most unconstant moving Sea art thou,
And I within mine eyes (be deawed ay)
A River hold of bitter tears as now.
Receive then from these moystned cheeks of mine
Into thy lap the water I forth power,
Of duty mine and of thy Debt a sign,
And mixed together with my sweet thy sour:
So shall the water to the water be
More precious, and the Sea more rich to th'Sea.
XXXV.
Such is the virtue of the Sunnie heat,
As seazing on the cockle shell, which lies
On seaish shore, whereon his beams do beat
It makes it brightly shine, in orient wise:
So that through secret power of radiant Sun,
Of worthless shell, a Pearl it does become.
So Lady, you through force of Beauties power,
If you shall deigne to glaunce on me your eye,
And rain with grace on me a smiling shower,
A Jewel rich you make me by and by:
And if no Pearl, at least a precious Stone;
This (only) can you do, or else can none.
XXXVI.
The blood of fair Adonis, Venus changd
Into a Flower; who, whilst he did pursue
(In Forest thick, whereas he hunting rangd)
The savage Boar to kill, the Boa^e him slew:
Do thou the like, sweet Love do thou the same,
Whilst now my life does languish through thy power,
And whilst my wound makes me for to remain
Withouten blood, transform to a flower:
That where I living cannot, dead I may
A loved Flower in Lauras bosom stay.
XXXVII.
An Ocean sea of water calm am I,
Wherein kind Love the form of fish does take,
Leaping along the shore most wantonly:
Then Lady, of a Fisher d'on the shape;
Ah, what sweet fishing shall you have to like,
If Love you chance to catch, while he does bite?
Come then, and nak't into this water hie,
He cannot escape, but (here) perforce must bide,
(Less to my heart to save himself he fly)
Then quickly strip thy self, lay fear aside:
For of this dainty pray, which thou shall take,
Both Sea, Fish, and thy Self, thou glad shall make.
XXXVIII.
Rich Damask Roses in fair cheeks do bide
Of my sweet Girl, like April in his prime:
But her hard Heart cold chilly snow does hide,
Of bitter Ia^^^er the perfect sign.
Her Hair of gold, shows yealow like the Corn
In July, when the Sun does scortch the ground;
And her fair Breast ripe fruit, which does adorn
September rich: so as in her is found
Both Harvest, Summer, Winter, Spring to be;
Which you in Breast, Hair, Heart, and Face may see.
XXXIX.
The Immortal Pa^^^ (fatal Sisters three)
Of mortal men do sing the shunlesse fate,
What once was, what is now, and what shall be,
Their life, their death, their fortune, and their state*
Our Song let be like theirs, Three they were;
And so our number is, Three are we here.
Sing Laura then, sing Love, and sing will I
Of dreery fortune mine, sing let us all,
Let Us sing in doleful tune most mournfully,
How it is, how it was, and hapless still shall fall,
The Present, Pas^ed, and (which none can mend)
What shall be world to come withouten end.
XL.
The Heavens their restless Sphere do always move,
In thee does move the faith which thou did plight:
And I I^^^ like still in my love,
Do roll, and yet I roll my wheel aright*
So that twixt us continual motions wend.
But which is worse (unconstant Wench) I see
The Heavens will have their motions without end,
Which (never ceasing) roll continually:
And thou like them to roll do mean thy fill,
And since it is so, I Will roll too, against my will.
The Conclusion of the second Part.
THus is the second Course now served in,
A Course too course for such a dainty Dame;
Yet (Lady) though the cheer be bad and thin,
Because it comes of Zeal, accept the same:
And though not worthy of your grace it be,
Yet make it gracious through your courtesy.
Great sumptuous Feasts the stomach does dislike,
Which often in body dangerous surfets breed:
Where dishes few revive our sense and spright,
And Nature's pleased on little for to feed.
This as a sauce (your appetite to move)
Accept, where meate's the Heart, where Cook is Love,
Nor think the worse, though I have spun a thread
So fine (I mean your praise) I cannot mend,
Since it is a work to ground the wisest He^,
And mar I should this loome, the Cloth not mend*
So Venus matchless shape Apelles drew,
But how to finish it he never knew.
Far more's my mind, than is my feeble might,
My pensill for thy pict^re is too weak:
The Sun is only for the Eagles sight,
My strength's too small, this hardened ye to break.
Not painted scarce I thee have shadowed here:
This taske's for such as have in skill no peer.
R. T.

The third Part.
I.
WHo joys in Love? the Heart alone, to see.
Who languisheth in Love? the Heart alone.
Then is it a thing impossible for me
To joy or languish, since I Heart have none.
Withouten Heart? then tell me, what am I?
Even bones and flesh united cunningly.
The Soul, where is it? Love that hathtane away,
My Body only rests in his place.
Deprived of Soul and Heart, how live? I say,
I live (maintaind by Love) in this strange case.
O wonder strange, the Body live to see,
The Heart and Soul in other place to be.
Napoli.
II.
That Crimson Gown (with drops of blood ywrought)
Which Laura wears, a token is most true;
How that of blood desirous is her Thought,
And that it is so, I best can tell to you.
My wronged Heart too well does find the same,
Who thousand times, not once has wronged been
By her; and now, to aggrauate my pain,
(More cruel in desire for to be seen
By outward habit) couets she to show,
What (inward) in her mind she hides below.
III.
The flaming Torch (a shadow of the light)
Put out by hasty hand, does color change,
And black becomes, which seemd before most bright:
Nor so to show is any marvel strange:
So was I long a lively fire of love,
The heat whereof my Body often did prove,
But I, at last (by one who moand my woe)
Extinguished was, by Pitiful Disdain:
Then if my color black in face do show,
You need not much to wonder (...) the same,
Since it is a Sign (by part to know the whole)
That Love made me a Fire, Disdain a Cole.
IIII.
Pardned of every wicked fact was he
To Hebes Temple that with prayers came,
And of such grace (in sign) his Bonds (as free)
He left hung up on high within the same.
I (Lady) erred have, and humbly come
To thee, who art the Temple fair of love,
Offering to thee my prayers all and some,
To free me from my faults thy heart let move:
In token of which Gift, with thee I Will leave
My ielous thoughts, wherewith I did thee grieve.
V.
If thou art cold as is the winters snow,
I as the Summer hot am, most extreme:
Then lets unite thy heart which cold is so
To mine so warm, and make of both a Mean:
So the one a help to the other still shall be:
And linckt in Concord, as two Doves shall gree.
To form this Frame, Love shall the workman play,
Then lets with July January mix
Lets make between us an eternal May,
An everlasting truce us twain betwix:
Thy Winter with my Summer let us join:
My fire so warm, with frost so cold of thine.
VI.
The cruel New used on golden hook
The harmless fish to catch with sugared bait:
So, courteous Love, fishing me quickly took,
Whilst he with dainty pray for me did wait:
Yet far more fortunate am I in this,
For whereas Neroes hooks most sharp did kill,
The other hooks revive the taken fish,
Whilst they do hold him gently by the gylls.
But hooks they are none, for hooks they are too fair,
Two golden tresses be they of fine hair.
VII.
When She was borne, she came with smiling eye
Laughing into the world, a sign of glee;
When I was borne (to her quite contrary)
Wayling I came into the world to see.
Then mark this wonder strange: what Nature gave
From first to th'last this fashion kept we have.
She in my sad laments does take great joy,
I through her laughing die, and languish must,
Unless that Love (to save me from this noy)
Do unto me (unworthy) show so just
As for to change her laughter into pain,
And my complaints into her joy again.
VIII.
In Love his Kingdom great, two Fools there be*
My Lady's one, my self the other am:
The fond behavior of both which to see,
Who so but nicely marks, will say the same:
Foolish our thoughts are, foolish our desire,
Foolish our hearts in Fancies flame to fry,
Foolish to burn in Loves hot scortching fire.
But what? Fools are we none, my tung do^th lie:
For who most foolish is and fond in love,
More wiser far than others, often does prove.
IX.
No sooner Laura mine appears to me,
But that a dainty Dye, a blushing Red,
In both our faces shows for to be:
But who (alas) does mine so ouer-spred?
Ore-feruent love does draw this shadow pure,
Like cunningst Painter long for to endure.
Who painteth hers? Disdain with pencill hard,
Which turns all my sweetness into sower:
So that all my designs are quickly mard,
Except Love bind love (by his awful power)
In Faiths firm bands: too hie the exchange will grow,
When love for hate, and not for like shall go.
X.
Phoebus had once a Bird, (his chief delight)
Which (only cause he had an evil tung)
He made him black, who was before most white:
So if all those who lovers true have stung
With spiteful speech, and have their loves betrayed,
Or to their ladies false be and untrue,
(Setting at naught the promise they have made)
Love would but change into this cole-blacke hieu:
Thousands abroad like sea-cole Crows should show,
Who (now unknown) for snowie Swannes do go.
XI.
In silver stream, on shallow fountains shelfe,
The lively image saw he in the same,
Who was in love with shadow of himself,
Through pride, forgetful how his likeness came:
Such one my self (by chance) I see to be,
When as in River I myself did see.
Yet I, my self insted of loving hate,
And such strange hatred is this, and so strong,
That while he (loving) did by iustest ^ate
Himself by seeing, (whilst he himself did wrong):
I die will unto him contrary cleene,
Cause I (hating my self) my self too much have seen.
XII.
Joy of my soul, my blindfold eyes clear light,
Cordial of heart right Methridate of love,
Fai^e orient Pearl, bright shining Margarite,
Pure Quintessence of heavens delight above,
When shall I taste what favor graunts me tuch,
And ease the rage of nune so sharp desire?
When shall I free enjoy what ^ so much
Do cover, (but I doubt in vain) to aspire?
Ah do not still my Soul thus Tantalize,
But once (through grace) the same imparadize.
XIII.
Painter, in lively colors draw Disdain.
Do ask how that may rightly shadowed be?
I Will tell thee, if thou (fine) wilt do the same
My Lady paint, and thou Disdain shall see.
Fond man, do not believe? or think I jest?
If doubtful thou remain, then hear the rest.
Mark her but well, and thou shall in her face
See right Disdain, which coming from her eyes,
Makes her to look with most disdainful grace:
Then if thou see it in so plain a guise,
Straight shadow her: for this one Counterfaite
Of her and of Disdain shall show the shape.
XIIII.
With gold and rubies glistereth her small hand:
But if you match them with her lips or hair,
They seem withouten brightness to stand,
The other have such lively colors fair.
O worthy Beauty, peerlesse A PER SE,
To whom all other Beauties are most vile*
O fairnes such, as fairer none can be,
Thou Grace it self of graciousnes do spoil.
With Rubies, thou right Rubies do disgrace,
With Gold bright Gold thou stainest in his place.
XV.
A gentle tame Dear am I, called a HEART,
The cruel Huntresse fierce my Mistres is:
With crosse-bow bent she comes to me in Park,
Palde in with pleasant thoughts of wanton wish:
She shootes and hits me, takes me for her pray;
And having shot, hit, taken, flies her way.
Back she retires from me with pleasant smile,
Unloosing me, and heales my wound and pain;
When as afresh incenst (alack the while)
Against me, desirous me to plague again:
She turns toward me, ore-takes me, strikes me sore;
And binding up my wounds, makes deadly more.
XVI.
The golden tresses of a lady fair
At first beginning were of this my love:
But now at last unto my dubble care,
To be the end of my sad life I prove.
Then did my doubtful spirit live in hope,
But now he fears, despairing as it were,
Because he does perceive in sudden broke
His hope, which dying heart did help and bear:
Since that the Hair, that Alpha me did bind
In love, of life Omega I do find.
XVII.
Sweet Laura, in the water look no more,
To see if feature thine be fair or no:
Look in mine eyes, which tears rain streamings so^e
Of bitter plaints, whose water clear does show,
As in a looking Glass most bright to thee,
Those favors which in that sweet visage be.
So said I to her, when she answered bliue:
And thou my love, say, do thou likewise wish
To see thy self in one that is alive?
Then in this Breast, look where thine Image is:
Love shall alike in both our bodies rest,
Bear thou me in thine eyes, I Will thee in breast.
XVIII.
If (Cruel) thou desirous art of blood,
Behold how I do bleed in streaming wise:
Glut then thy self therewith if thou think good,
And do content with blood thy bloody eyes.
From breast it comes, where fainting heart does lie,
And (for a gift) I it present to thee,
Although I know (through this) I soon shall dye:
(And yet to die it little grieueth me)
Since it is my wish, my blood with soul as one
May rest, and that is with thee, or else with none.
XIX.
That Iuorie hand a Fan most white does hold,
And to the milkie Breast blows wind apace:
(And yet is full of chilly ye most cold)
Disgrace to others, to her self a grace.
But I who wistly mark these whitenes three,
Vouchsafe (sweet love) this boon to grant to me.
Distill within the rouling of mine eyes
(By virtue of thy power) such hidden flame^
And let it tempred be in such strange wise,
That as I cast my look upon the same,
It quite may take away her cruelty,
Melt straight the Ice, and Fan burn suddenly.
XX.
The Snakes (amongst themselves) so carefully
Love one another, (wonder for to see)
As if the one want, the other straight does dye:
Lady, unto these Snakes unlike we be.
For if I die, thou di'est not for my death,
But through my pain reuiu'st: such is thy spite,
And pleasure takst to see me void of breath.
Ah, yet in love lets unto them be like.
Thou Cupid work, that I (poor Snake in love)
This ^dainfull Snake for to be kind may move.
XXI.
Laura is fair and cruel both in one,
And borne was of a dainty Diamond:
Then is it marvel neither wonder none,
Although her heart as hard as stone be found.
Nature that hardness (as a Keeper) gave
To her, her Beauty thereby so to save.
But fond is he, and simple in concaite,
That thinks Love will not one day burst the same:
Then quickly (mighty Lord) quickly this break,
Break thou this stony heart so hard in twain,
Unto thy power let Natures force still yield,
And be thou Conqueror against her in field.
XXII.
The snow-white Swan betokens brightsome Day,
The cole-blacke Crow of darkie Night is sign,
Thou Day or Night bring unto me still may
With those bright lamps, those glistering stars of thine.
But (cruel thou) thy heart is bent so hard,
As I that Sun can never see with eyes
(That wishd for Sun, from these my lights debard,
Nor ought discern, but mists in foggie wise.
Then since I live in woe (and blind) naught see,
A Crow not Swan thou still shall be to me.
XXIII.
Say Cupid, since thou wings so swift do bear,
Within my heart (alone) why do thou lie?
Why do not seek to lodge some other where,
And to some other place why do not hye?
Go unto her who has the Lilly breast,
Who though she hates me, yet I love her best.
If her to entertain thee thou shall find,
It is a sign she hates me no more*
Straight then return again, and show her mind
To my Desire, who for this news longs sore.
Then pre thee go, no longer lingering stay,
Least when thou would thou can not go thy way..
XXIIII.
On Quicksedge wrought with lovely Eglantine
My Laura laid her handkercher to dry,
(Which had before snow white ywashed bin)
But after, when she called to memory,
That long twold be before, and very late
Ere Sun could do, as would her glistering eyes:
She cast from them such sparkling glaunces strait,
And with such force, in such a strangie guise;
As suddenly, and in one self same time,
She dryde her cloth, but burnt this heart of mine.
XXV.
Gold upon gold mine only Joy did plate,
Whilst she did dress her head by crystal Glass:
But whilst she looked on it, it sudden brake;
So (as amazde thereat) much grieud she was.
To whom I said; To grieve thus it is in vain,
Since what is broke, whole cannot be again.
Look steadfastly with both thine eyes on me,
Who have my heart (through Love) a glass new made:
She on my face looked, and her self did see:
Wherewith (contented thoroughly) thus she said,
Most happy I, since for to dress my head,
For broken glass, of whole one I am sped.
XXVI.
The Heavens begin with thunder for to break
The troubled Air, and to the colored Fields
The Lightning for to spoil their pride does threat,
Each thing unto the furious Tempest yields.
And yet me thinks within me I do hear
A gentle voice hard at my heart to say,
Fear nothing thou, but be of merry cheer,
Thou only safe fore others all shall stay:
To save thee from all hurt, thy Shield shall be,
The shadow of the conquering Laurall Tree.
Fano.
XXVII.
Love this fair Less (said Love) once unto me,
I loved her; love her now (says he) no more,
When thousand darts within my breast there be,
And if I love her, he me threatens sore:
He says himself is fallen in love with her,
And that himself ^ore others he will prefer.
His sense is this, He in her beauteous eyes,
Has found such Amors as nere like were seen:
But thinks he this shall serve, in cunning wise
To make me leave, he cousning me so cleene?
In spite of him I Will love, since heart does gree
With Love in love, as Rival for to be.
XXVIII.
My Mistres (writing) as her hand did shake
The Pen did dash, which on her gown did spurt:
One drop more higher than the rest did take,
And to presume to touch her Breast it durst.
Upon her dainty bosom it did light,
Wherewith she blushed, in show like damask Rose:
Presumptuous Black, how dar'dst thou tuch that White*
Wherein a world of gladsome pleasure grows?
Yet (spite of envy) hapt it for the best,
To the white more grace, more beauty it was to th'brest
XXIX.
None dares now look more on my Lauras face,
So dangerous is her beauty to behold:
For he no sooner gives to her the gaze,
But straight his heart she takes from him so bold:
Such virtue's locked within those ebbon Eyes,
Where (dallying with Delight) Dan Cupid lies.
So sweetly rouleth she that radiant Sphere,
As she (from whom she lists) robs suddenly:
So as to look on her each one does fear,
And yet to look on her spare will not I:
For though I loose my Heart, and him disease,
I like shall my Desire, and her I Will please.
XXX.
Vnbare that Iuorie hand, hide it no more,
For though it death brings to my tender heart,
To see it naked, where is beauties store,
And where moist Pearl with Azure does impart:
Yet fear I not to dye in this sweet wise,
My fancy so to see it, is set on fire:
Then leave that Glove, most hateful to mine eyes,
And let me surfeit with this kind Desire;
So that my looks may have of them their fill,
Though heart decay, I Will take it for none ill.
Mantoa.
XXXI.
My Mistres seems but brown (say you) to me.
It Is very true, and I confess the same:
Yet love I her, although that brown she be,
Because to please me she is glad and feign.
I loved one most Beautiful before,
Whom now (as Death) I deadly do abhore.
Because to scorn my service her I found,
I gave her ore, and chose to me this same:
Nor to be faithful (think I) I am bound
To one in whom no kindness does remain:
This is the cause, for Brown and Pitiful,
I left a fair, but yet a faithless Trull.
XXXII.
White art thou like the mountain snow to see,
I black like to the burned coal do show:
Then give some of thy purest white to me,
And I Will some of my Black on thee bestow.
So will we these two Contraries unite
Together, which so joined will show more fair:
Lets both then make this change for our delight,
Unless to kill me thou do little care.
But why of white or black talk I to thee?
My blood not black it is, which thou feign would see.
XXXIII.
As Sacrifice unto a Goddess bright
My heart I offered with Devotion great,
Thinking that She Loves Temple had been right.
But what unawares I spide not then in heat,
I (wary) now discern her for to be
Of Hell below the rightest crueltee.
I was deceiud, I do confess: That smile,
That wanton smile that bred in me delight,
Hid in those lips so fair did me beguile:
O Beauty false, O cruelty most right.
Flee flee (my Heart) flee then if thou be wise,
Thy hurt, my burning heat, her trecheries.
XXXIIII.
Strange is this thing, my Horse I cannot make
With spur, with speech, nor yet with rod in hand
Force him to go, although great pains I take,
Do what I can, he still as tyrde does stand:
No doubt he feels an heavy weight of me,
Which is the cause he stands still as stone:
Nor is he ware that now he carries three,
He thinks (poor lade) I am on's back alone:
But three we are with mine own self I prove,
Laura is in my Heart, in Soul is Love.
Pesaro.
XXXV.
When I of my sweet Laura leave did take,
Fair Fanos City for a while to leave:
She gave to me (to wear it for her sake)
Of gold and pearl a dainty wouen Wreathe.
Dear was the gift, because for love it came;
But deerer more, cause She gave me the same.
I look on it still, and kiss it as my joy;
Kissing and bussing it, with it I play:
Which at one instant brings me mirth and noy.
And sighing often, thus to my self I say;
White pearls are these, yet has her mouth more fair;
Fine gold is this, yet finer is her hair.
Fano.
XXXVI.
With thousand bands of furious inward heat
Love binds my Soul, and burns my gentle heart:
And two ways Laura death to me does threate,
With color fresh, and wanton eye like dart*
This for reward for all my love I gain,
For my good will two Enemies I have,
Laura and Love: four plagues conspire my pain,
Because I like, and what is but just do crave;
Fire, Roseall color, Eyes, and crull Band:
These at the gaze of Beauty make me stand.
XXXVII.
If scalding sighs my faith may testify,
And brinish tears of Love may warrant be:
Both the one and the other thou have seen with eye!
Then what would have (hard Hearted) mo^e of me?
But thou (perhaps) though much I have endured;
Would yet be better of my says assured.
Then with thine eyes into my breast do peer,
(Which for the nonce I leave to open sight)
And that which now thou doubtst, see shall thou clear
Ah, mark it then; and view what shows so bright.
But too too cruel art thou and precise,
That wilt not crdite give to thine own eyes.
XXXVIII.
The hapless Argus (happy in this same)
The glory of the Suns surpassing light,
The brightness of the Stars (the fire which stain)
With hundred eyes behold them always might.
But I (alas) who have but only twain,
Cannot behold the Beauty of my Sun:
For which I live as blind in endless pain,
And count my self for want thereof undone.
I can but wish that I an Argus were,
With hundred eyes to view her every where.
XXXIX.
In vastie Sea, feign would my slender Muse
VVade in thy praise, to praise thy beauty right:
But (Lady) I for pardon crave excuse,
To break such waves too brittle is her might:
Mean time with lowly Verse, in humble show,
A long the shallow shore I Will wading go.
The time may come (perhaps) ere it be long,
That this my quill more bold may write thy praise,
And venture for to sail in The Ocean strong,
Though now on graueld shore it fearful stays.
And where as now to dip his foot he fears,
He then shall diue himself ore head and ears.
Fano.
XL.
When I did part, my Soul did part from me,
And took his farewell of thy beauteous Eyne:
But now that I (returned) do thee see,
He is returned, and lives through kindness thine,
And of thee looks for a welcome home.
I then not any more to sorrow need,
Now I am come: and if before alone
On shadow then, on substance now I feed.
So, if my parting bitter was and sad,
Sweete's my return to thee, and passing glad.
The Conclusion of the last Part.
TImantes when he saw he could not paint
With lively colors (to his lasting fame)
Such works he took in hand, and found too faint
His c^^ning, seeking for to hide the same,
He over them a subtle shadow drew:
So that his faults, or none or few could view.
So Lady, I finding my wit too weak,
With current terms your beauty forth to blaze,
And that to arrive too blunt is my conceit
Unto the height of your surmounting praise:
With silence forced am (against my will)
To shadow my defect, (the want of skill).
Yet do I hope, the shadow you will not scorn,
Since Princes in their stately Arbors green
Account of shade, as trees which fruit adorn,
Because from heat they welcome shelters been.
The Shadow shields against Sun your beauty fair,
Which else his scortching heat would much impair,
Then though a Shadow without fruit I be,
And scarce yield leaves to cover this my bark:
Accept these leaves thy Beauties Shade of me,
Where wealth does ebb, good will does flow from Heart:
Deigne me for all my love but Shadow thine,
Thy Substance's too too high for Fortune m^ne.
R. T.

A Friends just excuse about the Book and Author, in his absence.
WIthout the Authors knowledge, as is before said by the Printer, this Poem is
made thus publicly known: which (with my best endeavor) the Gentleman
himself (suspecting what is now proved too true) at my coming up, earnestly
entreated me to prevent. But I came at the last sheets printing, and find
more than thirty Sonnets not his, intermixed with his: helped it cannot be but
by the well judging Reader, who will with less pain distinguish between them,
than I on this sudden possibly can. To him then I refer that labor, and for
the Printers faults past in some of the Books, I have gathered them in the
next page. With the Author bear I pray ye whom I must entreat to bear with
me.

R. B.


