DEMEGORIAI Certain Lectures upon sundry portions of Scripture, in one Volume.

By Lewys Thomas:

1. Christ travailing to Jerusalem. 2. Christ purging the Temple. 3. The
history of our Lords birth. 4. The True-louers Canticle. 5. The Prophetical
Kings Triumph. 6. The Anatomy of Tale-bearers. 7. Peter's persecution and his
deliverance. 8. Heavens Highway.
PHILIP. 3. 13. 14. Brethren, I count not my self to have attained unto it,
but one thing I do; I forget that which is behind, and endeavor my self to
that, which is before, and follow hard toward the mark, for the price of the
high calling of God in Christ Jesus.

AT LONDON, Printed by I. R. for Edw. White, and are to be sold at the little
North-doore of Paul's, at the sign of the Gunne. 1600.

To the Right Honorable Sir Thomas Egerton, Knight, Lord Keeper of the great
Seal of England, and one of her Majesty's most honorable Privy Counsel.
Lewis Thomas wishes continuance of health, and perfect happiness.
RIght Honorable and my very good Lord, the rich taste of your honors kindness
and special affection toward me the most unworthy of a thousand, but
principally your godly and zealous care in planting a learned Ministry
throughout this Land, have specially called upon me for this duty, by
presenting to your Honors self these few labors, the late fruits of my
second birth, which long ago had been strangled in ipso partu as it were, bad
not the careful respect of your Honors acceptance revived them, being almost
liuelesse. I recommend them to your Lordships safe protection: protesting that
with them, I will be always pressed to perform all such duties to your Honor
as God shall enable me unto, both in praying for your health, and increase of
zeal, to the comfort and maintenance of his poor flock, which I resolve is
the end and only aim of all your honorable purposes. Thus being ouer-bolde,
but in an honest cause, I take my leave, commending you to God, and to the word
of his grace, which is able to build you up further, and to give you an
inheritance Acts. 20, 32,
among them that are sanctified.

Your Lordships to command, L. Thomas.

These Texts of Scripture are handled in this Book.
Christ riding to Jerusalem. 1 And when he was come near the City, he beheld
it, and wept for it: saying: o, if thou had known even in this thy day, the
thingsthat belong to thy peace. Luke. 19. 41. Christ purging the Temple. 2
Jesus went into the Temple of God, and cast out them that bought, and sold in
the Temple, and overthrew the tables of the moneychangers, and the seats of
them that sold doves: saying: It is written, My house is the house of prayer,
but you have made it a den of thieves. Math. 21. 12. The history of our Lords
birth. 3 When Jesus then was borne in Bethleem in the days of Herod the king,
wise men came from the East to Jerusalem, saying: where is he that is borne
king of the Jews: for we have seen his star in the East, and are come to
worship him. Math. 2. 1. 2. The True-louers Canticle. 4 Herein is love, not
that we loved God, but God loved us, and sent his Son to be areconciliation
for our sins. Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also to love one
another. 1. John. 4. 10. 11. The prophetical Kings triumph. 5 This is the day
which the Lord has made, let us rejoice and be glad in it. Psalm. 118. 24. The
Anatomy of Tale-bearers. 6 Thou shall not walk about with tales among my
people. Leuit. 19. 16. Peter's persecution and his deliverance. 7 And when he
saw it pleased the people, he proceeded further, and took Peter also. etc.
Acts. 12. 3. 4. Heavens highway. 8 Sirs, what must I do to be saved? And they
said: Believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved, and thine household.
Acts. 16. 30.
Christ's travailing to Jerusalem.
Luke. 19. 41. etc. And when he was come near the City, he beheld it, and
wept for it, saying: oh, if thou had known even at the least, in this thy
day, those things that belong unto thy peace: but now are they hid from thine
eyes. etc.
IN the seventh of Eccles: and 4. verse, it is written, That it is better to
go into the house of mourning, than into the house of feasting; and therefore
I have chosen a tragical Text, sounding forth nothing but passions and
mournful notes: like the tunes of those banished Israelites Psalm. 137.
upon Babilons banks.

The first voice that ever proceeded from Adam our progenitor after his fall,
was a voice compounded of sorrow and fear, Genesis 3. 10.
when God called upon him, while he hid himself among the trees of the
garden: and all Adams children ought to be like Adam, passionate and
sorrowful, making their whole life suitable to their infancy, as we all come
to the world by a sorrowful conception.

In the 33. of Genesis, Jacob could not meet his brother, but their eyes must
stream forth tears.

And in the 23. chap. we find Abraham the Patriarch an old man in years, a
very child in tears, mourning and weeping.

In Josiah his time, whole multitudes are recorded to go out, and weep before
the Lord.

Not to stand upon particulers, which are not necessary in so clear a truth,
Christ Jesus the very mirror of sorrow, is in this place presented unto us
weeping pitifully upon Jerusalem.

Wherein we are by the way to note the differences between the godly and the
wicked, between the children of God, and the children of this world.

The godly are ever noted rather sorowing then rejoicing, rather bewailing and
lamenting their sinful condition, than solacing themselves with the vain
pleasures of this transitory life.

We find not them at any time either Gen, 9, 22. Mar, 6, 22. Dan, 5. 2.
sporting it like Cham, or dancing like Herodias, or carowsing like Belshazar.

Search the volume of holy Writ, from Moses, unto John that saw so many
misseries in Pathmos, and we shall find a contrary humor, and another kind
of affection reigning in the righteous.

Moses, as he was drawn up from the waters, so he showed himself in the
course of his life, to be (as it were) quite swallowed up with the ouerflowing
waters of affliction: and he prayed God to race him out of his book that he
had written, in the 32. of Exodus, 32.
Exodus.

David watered his couch with continual tears.

Paul wept for the Corinthians. 2, Cor, 2. Luke. 22. 62


Peter went out to weep bitterly for denying his Lord.

And to come to our example in this place, Christ Jesus, though he were the
Son of GOD, shows himself in this to be also the son of man, he shed many
a salt tear over Jerusalem.

Who among us can be so devoted, and so sold over (as it were) to sinful
vanity, now to be sporting, seeing Christ our Lord so heavy and passionate?

The general proposition which Saint Luke urges in this historical
discourse of Christ his travailing to Jerusalem, is this: He proves that in
this place, which indeed is the scope and drift of the whole Book: viz. to
clear to the world, but especially to the unbelieving Jews, that Christ is
the only Messiah or Savior, proved so by his birth, his life and death,
living, dying, rising, and ascending.

As John the Baptist poynted at Christ the Lamb of GOD, purging the sins of
the world; so here Saint Luke points at Christ, weeping for the sins of the
world.

When the people of Jerusalem laughed, Christ wept, as when the Ministrell
played, Elisha prophesied: and therefore this City, otherwise famous, but in
this infamous, 2. Reg 3. 15
worthily ran to ruin, and so received a true and due recompense for her
security.

And when he drew near the Cutie, he beheld it, and wept for it. The
Schoolmen do note many things in Christ appertaining to salvation.

Prudentiam in eius doctrina,

Wisdom in his doctrine.

Temperantiam in eius vita,

Temperance in his life.

Fortitudinem in eius tortura,

Fortitude in sustaining torments.

Diuinum numen in miraculis,

Divine power in his works.

Consolationem in dictis,

Consolation in his words.

and in this place, Compassionem in eius tristitia, compassion in his
sorrowfulnes: for he wept upon Jerusalem.

He wept. To teach us to weep, and to have compassion in beholding the
lamentable state and condition of our neighbors.

We must weep for them, as Christ wept for the Jews: and withal, he
teaches us to weep for our selves; as he bad the daughters of Jerusalem to
weep for themselves.

To draw yet a little nearer to the embowelling of these words, for a cleerer
narration observe with me these four things.

1. The person who came, that was Christ. 2. The place whether he came, to
Jerusalem. 3. The action: or rather you may term it a passion, he wept. 4.
His admonition in reprehending their ignorance, and foretelling their fall.
Now then that we have found out the Mine, let us dig for the treasure.

The person,] who came to Jerusalem, was Christ. And the Scripture does
manifestly declare how great he was: for he was God. The Father and I are one.
Ioh. 10.

How humble he was: for he was the Savior of the world. His humility
appeared in taking our nature upon him. Being God, it pleased him to become
man, and to dwell with men: he withdrew himself from none, no not from the
Publicans and sinners.

That Jesus, who was Contempt Mundi, a hater of this world, one that nothing
esteemed the pomp and glory thereof: for when the Tempter presented before him
at one view all the kingdoms of the earth, Math. 4.
Tempter and temptation were both driven to retire. One powerful word of
Christ quite vanquished him, as David overcame Golias with one stone, when it
perced into his temples.

That Jesus who refused all worldly superiority and power: for when in the
sixth of John they would have made him their King, he conveyed himself out of
the way. Who was merciful, for he forgave the woman taken in adultery.

Who was powerful: for his words made the soldiers give back when they came
to take him. As in the 4. of Mathewe, his word made the prince of darkness
give back when he came to tempt him.

Who was pitiful, this place proves it. He wept.

That Christ who is called Vera lux, the true light for the saved to walk in.
The John, 1, 5, Reu, 22, 16,
bright Morning star. The flower of less. The mighty Lion of the trybe of
Judah. The Author, and finisher of our faith.

That Christ to who^ that excellent voice of glory once sounded from the
heavens: This is my well beloved son in whom I am Luke, 3, 22,
well pleased.

He who was promised by the Father, figured in the Law, spoken of by the
Prophets, poynted at by John Baptist, manifested in the flesh, justified in the
Spirit, seen of Angels, preached to the Gentiles, 1. Tim. 3. 16.
believed on in the world, and received up in glory. This Christ came to
Jerusalem. So much briefly is spoken for the person, now for the place.

The place whether Christ came, was Jerusalem, the Metropolis or chief City
in all Asia, by interpretation, A vision of peace. Yet this people knevve not
their peace.

God had stamped a remembrance of his blessings in the very name of Jerusalem,
yet could not this people consider of it, they made no use of this peace which
God had given them.

This City had in it many faults in Christ's time. For first they knew not
their peace.

Secondly, they profaned the Temple of God, making it a den of thieves, and
a shop of Merchants, where it should have been the house of prayer.

Thirdly, in it were the Prophets slain.

Fourthly, it fostered within it the greatest enemies of the Cross of Christ.

Fifthly, being the City of the great King, it was allotted to destroy the
great King Christ Jesus, the King of glory.

This City so polluted Christ comes to visit.

As once God the Father said, Come let us go down and visit Babel: so here
Christ Gene, 11, 7,
the Son says to his Apostles, Come let us go visit Jerusalem.

In which his coming to Jerusalem, we see it first noted by the Evangelist he
drew near the City: for being a Prophet, he would do as did the Prophets.
Samuel came near to Israel, Jonas came to visit Niniuie, and Christ came
here to visit Jerusalem.

He drew near to it. Having first travailed to Jericho, and after to
Beth-phage, and then to Bethany, at last he comes to Jerusalem.

Wherein we are to note the great diligence of Christ, to verify his former
words, I came to seek and to save that which was lost. He never ceased to do
the will of his Father.

Being but twelve years old, he taught in the Temple, and disputed with the
Doctors, hearing them, and apposing them. Luke, 2, 46,
We should be armed with like industrious diligence.

The children of God are ever noted to be either going, or walking, or running.

Peter, during the time of his fall, is noted sitting, to show his carefulnes:
but so soon as he felt the soule-stirring motions of Gods Spirit calling him
to repentance, he Luke 22. 62.
sits no longer, but goes out.

The Israelites are recorded to be always Number. 33.
travailing, and removing, till they came to Canaan.

Moses, so soon as he was borne, was Exodus 2. 3.
cast out among the flagges, from thence he was brought to the Kings Court in
Egypt. After that, he was driven to she to Midian, and from Mydian back again
to Egypt. And after all this, what long and tedious travels did he undergo in
that long journey to Canaan.

Wherein is rightly typed the state of every religious Christian man's life.

Our life here is but a pilgrimage, a vanishing vapor that suddenly is lost,
while a man looks upon it: and therefore holy men must learn of Moses, and
of Christ, to redeem the time, by walking toward God, and by travailing
about our Fathers business, as Christ travailed about his Fathers business, when
he went to Jerusalem.

This is the pilgrimage that best pleases God, and not that of the Idolatrous
Antichristians of this age, the Jesuits I mean, and Seminaries, which take
great pains to compass sea and land, to make one proselite like themselves,
and when they have made him, he proves duplo plus filues Gehennae, quam erat
prius, two fold more the son of perdition then he was before.

Much better were it for such, if they sat still, than so to seal up
iniquity to their greater condemnation.

Christ his travel, and the travel of the godly tends to a contray purpose:
viz. to draw men to the knowledge of the truth, and the gayning of souls to
Christ. Such shall not loose their labor. He that Dan, 12, 4,
conuerteth souls. (says Daniell) shall shine like the stars for ever.

The Prophet David desires GOD to make him go the path of his commandments,
and having learned to go, he strives to run, I will run the way of thy
Psalm, 119, 32
commandments when thou have set my heart at liberty.

In the tenth of Mark, one comes running to Christ.

Zacheus beholding Christ out of the wild Fig Tree, made have to get down,
and runs to meet him.

Bartymeus threw away his cloak to run to Christ.

In the fourth of Micheas, the cry of religious Jews is noted: Come, (say
they) let us go up to the Mountain, and to the house Mica, 4, 2,
of the God of Jacob.

So the godly are still in motion: as Christ himself is ever noted travailing
for the most part.

We read never of his sitting, but once, and then he disputed, teaching us to
shun idleness.

He drew near the City. The Bride cannot be drawn from the Bridegroom,
nor Christ from the city.

In the first of Canticles, we find the Church the Spousesse of Christ,
running after Christ: I will run after thee.

And in the 3. chapter, we find her seeking and diligently inquiring after
Christ: Have ye seen him whom my soul loves? And in this place we find
Christ the Spouse, seeking out his Spousesse the Church; with like
correspondent affection he trauaileth to visit Jerusalem.

Wherein, besides his diligence, his love and tender affection toward the
children of God is manifested. He cherishes them as his own bowels, and
therefore he draws near to Jerusalem, as one desirous to know their state.

Christ being borne in the City, couets to live in the city. He came for
man's sake into the world, and so he lived in the presence of men 33. years
together. He came to call sinners, and therefore he lived in the City, because
there were the greatest sinners.

We read of John Baptist, that he lived in Deserto, in the Wilderness: he
shrunk the city, for that the city was full of pollution, which Christ
needed not to fear.

He would live in the city to win the city: like an immaculate Lamb, he
took away all spots from his elect.

He vvoulde live in Oculis Aduersariorum, in the eyes of his adversaries, to
the end he might truly justify himself. Quis exvobis arguat me de peccato,
who of you can reprove me of sin?

Every thing couets to live at home, the byrds in the air, the fishes in the
water, the beasts in the mountains: and Christ bred in the City, loves the
city, and delights to visit it.

He drew near to the city. More than this, it is added, he beheld it. In
104. psalm it is said; A vertente faciem tuam, omnia turbabuntur, when thou
turnest away thy face, all things are troubled. To show that they are blessed
upon whom Christ looks.

Happy had these people been, if they had as carefully looked upon Christ, as
Christ did upon them: for then they had been healed, as they that looked upon
the brazen Serpent recovered.

He beheld. That is, in a careful contemplation he considered the great
corruptions wherewith this city was stained: and withal, he looked with a
prophetical eye upon the severe judgments which God already had determined to
throw upon the city, for the sins therein committed.

In this example two sorts of men are called upon, that is, Ministers and
Magistrates.

Ministers ought to visit the places most sinful. They must cry out against
the sins of the people. Es. 5.

They must be known by their teaching and preaching, as Aarons entering into
the Sanctuary was known by the sound of Exo. 28. 35.
the belles which he wore in the skirts of his clothing.

Magistrates are likewise called upon, for Christ was both Rex et Propheta, a
King and a Prophet. They may not slumber when iniquity is increased, but they
also must come and visit Jerusalem: that is, they must see the disorders of
cities and towns, and labor to reform them.

Christ has in his own person chaulked the way before us, and other godly
Magistrates in all ages have succeeded him with like holy practice.

Moses, the perfect mirror of sincere magistracy, did look into the abuses of
sinners in his time, and labored carefully to reform the same. And for that
he could not alone undergo so weighty a province, by the advice of Iethro
his Father in law, Gods counsel also concurring, he chose unto himself
other inferior Magistrates Exodus, 18. 21.
to be Rulers and Judges, and there he describes what manner of men they
ought to be. viz.

Men of courage, fearing God, dealing What manner of men Magistrates ought to
be.
truly, hating covetousness. But I am not to speak of this, but in a
generality.

Magistrates must learn of Christ to behold those places over which GOD has
made them overseers. They must not only in their circuites come to Cities,
and towns, but they must circumspectly look into the disorders there.

When Christ came within a sight of Jerusalem, he makes there his rest, his
station: and there deliberatly in this his prospect, he summoneth and
arraigneth at the bar of his justice, all the sins of the people of Jerusalem.

To behold then in this place, imports not a slender looking into matters of
corruption, as the fashion is of many Magistrates that carry no conscience of
their places, such as was Corah and his accomplices, that could smooth up the
matter to Moses with this warm conceit: All is well, and the people are holy
enough.

But this intimates a diligent and a careful speculation, a due examination
of all matters, both of smaller crimes and greater offenses; and when they have
found out the sinner, as Iosuah found out Achan the thief, and his theft
also, then to punish according to the weight of the offense.

The Magistrates judicial censures must not be like Spyders webs, which
entangle only the small flies.

As Christ passed first from Beth-phage to Bethany, and from Bethany to
Jerusalem, so should Magistrates pass from smaller sins to greater
enormities, till all wickedness be abandoned: without which due speculatiue
courses, nothing can be reformed in any well ordered Commonwealth.

The Magistrates ought to have Lynceos oculos, to be Eagle-sighted, the better
to look into abuses.

They must be able to judge of sin, Intus et in cute, to make a scruting into
every corner of corruption, that no sin may escape without his censure.

They must rather show themselves severe and straight, like unto Moses and
Iosuah in the punishing of sin, than too slack and remiss in their places,
like Ely, who spared to correct the disobedience of his sons: and so God
took the judgment 1. Sam. 4.
into his own hands, and spared not to cut off both him and them in the
severity of his justice.

Magistrates must remember that they are the Lords Vize-gerents, in Gods sled
appointed for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do
well.

The Philosophers lay down three properties of a good eye: that is, To see
quick. To see long. To see far.

Like Balaam, to see the utmost coasts of Israel, even from Dan to Beershebath.

They are not sound Politicians nor profoundly learned in the Art Speculatiue,
that do not in this sort behold abuses.

They carry not in them the substance of magistracy, till they have learned to
execute the edge of their authority in punishing offenses.

As the Spiritual sword has two edges, so the temporal or civil sword
should have two edges, to cut two ways.

In the foure-score and second psalm, I have said ye are Gods, says David,
speaking in the person of God. As if he should have said, During the time of
your magistracy, while you sit in Gods chair, you must forget that you are
men, least so base a conceit do make you yield to weakness, and corruption, but
you are for that time more then men. You are Gods, and therefore consider of
your places, Behold and punish. Look into the nature of the sin, and let the
punishment be aunswerable.

Otherwise, you are not like Gods, more than in your names and titles, as
Labans Idols were called gods, and yet were but blocks.

If Magistrates, when they shall ascend their judicial seats did but consider
of this, their very names would teach them how to carry themselves, and then
would not sin so violently break out, nor walk in the open streets so
uncontrolled as at this day it does.

As no halt, nor lame, nor blind, might be admitted into the Ministry, so
unto the Magistracy should no weak, or corrupt, or blind Magistrate be
preferred: but the wisest and best approved.

It follows, He wept for it. When Christ beheld the monstrous impiety, and
horrible sins in this city committed, without any hope of speedy
reformation, or amendment, it grieved him to the very heart, as once it grieved
God his Father, when looking upon the sins of the old world, he repented that
he had made man. And when he had once entered into this grief, he could not
choose but express the same by tears that flowed amain from his eyes in great
abundance, like the waters of Hesbon. Cant. 7. 4.


He wept partly for their sins, partly for the judgments of God, which now
already were begun to be poured out.

Saint Bernard principally notes three things in Christ our Savior: Dicta
consolationis, words of consolation. Opera propitiationis, works of
propitiation. Facta commiserationis, deeds of commiseration or pity, as in
this place, and elsewhere.

We read that he wept thrice, once when he raised Lazarus: in this place upon
Jerusalem: and upon the cross. Yet, we are not to think but that he wept
more often. For he did always with tears no doubt lament the wickedness of
men, to teach us not to glory in our neighbors fall, but to weep and bewail
their frail condition.

Cyprian has a sweet saying: Vere patitur, qui compatitur: He is most patient,
that is most passionate. Or rather, he has passion enough in him, that has in
him compassion. And it argues a most Christianlike, and charitable affection,
when we are in a pitiful remorse touched with our brethrens infirmities.

Such was Moses his compassion in the 25. of Numbers. And Paul, when he wept
3. years for the Corinthians. And Esdras for the afflicted Jews.

Here by Christ's tears we are to learn three things. First, that he was a
man like others, sin only excepted: which confuteth the heresy of the
Manichees, which do deny his humanity. For they hold that Christ was not verus
homo, but quasi homo, not very man, but in the similitude of a man; and that he
had not corpus, but quasi corpus. viz. corpus assumptinum, not a natural body,
but an assumptiue body.

In maintaining whereof they cross that Scripture: He was made of the seed
of David according to the flesh. Romans 1. 3. The word was made flesh. John. 1.
14. And again, We have but one Mediator, even the man Jesus Christ.

Let them but ask the devil in this case, and he (although the father of
lies) will speak truth herein, to convince them the rather of heresy. Cast
thy self down headlong, Mute te deorsum says he to Christ. The devil is
better then the Anabaptists, for he acknowledges that Christ had a body, which
they deny.

The second thing that we learn by his Tears, is, he was unwilling that the
people of Israel should commit sin, against the^ that most blasphemously
affirm that God is the Author of sin. Volens, Efficiens, Suggerens.
Crossing these Scriptures.

A profane Writer, that never saw the light of Diuititie, could confute such
heretical opinions.

(...) Theopompus.
(...).

Neither must we imagine that God is the Author of evil, neither yet without
God can any evil be done. For the spirit of God has spoken it, Non est malum
in Ciuitate, quod non facit Dominus.

Thirdly, by Christ's weeping we learn the sympathy and holy union that is
betwixt Christ and us. He feels our sorrows, and is touched with our
infirmities.

We read of his sighing in Marks gospel, Mark. 7. 34.
when he cured one that was deaf, and here we read of his weeping over
Jerusalem, that had in it many deaf ears, and regarded not the voice of the
Charmer.

Of the necessity of weeping, and how far tears may prevail with God,
being powered out from the eyes of the godly, I have plentifully spoken
elsewhere.

Thus much then shall briefly suffice, concerning Christ's weeping upon
Jerusalem. Now let us proceed by order of the Text to the cause of his
weeping.

O, if thou had known. etc. Ierusalems sins provoked Christ's tears, and
of their many sins one is here discovered: They knew not their peace.

The learned do expound peace three ways: either it may signify External or
outward peace: or peace of conscience: or Christ, the Author of peace.

Ye may admit any of these significations in this place, but in my judgment
the last is fittest, and most specially meant by our Savior in this check,
when he told them, They knew not that which belonged to their peace. Which
had they known, it had brought them to the knowledge of all the rest. They
knew not Christ by the preaching of the word, they received not the Gospel of
peace. They yielded no obedience to the word of truth, nor did show any
careful practice in reforming their lives accordingly.

These people of Jerusalem lived in security, and at ease, they lived in
peace, every man under his own Vine, and under his own fig tree. And they
soothed up themselves in this their security: assuring themselves that this
great city, being the Lady of so many Provinces, the light and beauty of all
Asia, and all kings glory, so strongly sortifyed, so richly furnished, and
with so many people replenished, should never be brought to utter desolation.

Such is the natural corruption of men, generally to be careless, and not
once to think or advise themselves of future calamities, so long as it goes
well with them: so long as they are fatted with the abundance of Gods
blessings.

These inhabitants of Jerusalem were not so provident, nor so wise as the
profane Philosophers, notwithstanding, they lived then when wisdom cried in
their streets.

Sapientis est in otio de negotio cogitare, a wise man ought in time of peace
to think upon war.

So is it verifyed which was spoken by our Savior: The children of this
world are Luke, 16, 8.
wiser in their generation then the children of light.

These careless Jews abused their peace, because they sought no means to
contitiue it: For they killed the Prophets, and stoned the^ that were sent unto
them: Yea, when Christ himself came among them, they crucified him, to seal
up their security to their greater overthrow.

And how then could this people know their peace, when they contemned and
evil entreated him that was the only author and maintainer of their peace?

This Peace, contains in it all other blessings. And therefore Christ only
names it in this place, as the very continent of all the rest.

The excellency whereof may appear in those special commendations of it.
Before his departure he commended unto them Peace. My peace I leave unto you.
Luk, 24, 36


When he was risen again he commended peace: and upon his byrth-day the
Angels proclaimed peace: and the Gospel is Luke, 2, 14
called the Gospel of peace. Therefore have peace, and thou have all the
blessings that God has: and want only this peace, and thou art worse spoiled
of Gods graces, than ever was Job of his children and goods.

Oh, if thou had known, etc. Here it may be proclaimed again, which once
was uttered by that voice of majesty proceeding from God himself in the 34.
of Exodus, The Lord, the Lord, strong, merciful, and gracious, slow to anger,
and abundant in mercy and truth.

See how Christ our Savior trauaileth with mercy in this place, and labors
to be delivered. Oh, if thou had known. Yet, he offers mercy to
Jerusalem, if Jerusalem would have repented.

Oh that yet they would turn, and be saved. Shall I say, since they will
perrish, let them perrisht nay surely, says Christ, I will yet wash Naaman
seven times more, to cleanse him of his leprosy, if he will be cleansed.

In the 51. of Jeremy and ninth verse, says the Lord, I would have cured
Babell: So Christ in this place says: I would have cured Jerusalem, but alas,
she will not be cured. All the precious balm in Gylead will not suffice to
recover Jerusalem, the praise of the world.

In this thy day. He calls it Ierusalems day: to show that God gives all men
a time; and now is our day, and our time: therefore use the time, and abuse not
Gods lenity. For the night will come, when no man can work. And therefore it
is said, To day, if you will hear his voice. But if you will not to day, I
will not to morrow. Behold, as when I called, you would not hear, so when
you call, I will not hear, says the Lord.

A day consists but of a morning, an evening, and a noone: and he that has
the longest time permitted him, has but a day. Defer it not then in any case,
since thy time in which thou may turn to God is so narowly scantled.

If thou lose the morning of thy life, lose not the noone: and if thou be so
careless a sinner, as that thou put off thy conversion till the evening of
thy life, yet even then reclaim thy self, before the sun of Righteousness
do set, when it can shine no more unto thee.

But thou shall have a happier success in my judgment, if thou begin betimes,
like Abraham, in the morning of thy life, to sacrifice thy self to GOD. For
we have an old saying, and it is a true saying: A good beginning makes a good
ending. And qualis ^ua. s^ns ita. As a man lives, so commonly he dies.

Every man would be glad to die well, as Balaam desired to die the death of
the righteous, but he had no care to live the life of the righteous. And
therefore, though he could prophecy to others, yet he could not prophecy to
himself, nor sore-see his own end.

Far otherwise did David that prophetical King carry himself, and may
stand as a rare president, not for Kings only, but for private men also: he
began his day betimes, and so continued it to the end. At evening, morning, and
at noone will I praise Psalm. 55. 17.
thee.

This forslowing the time, and continual running on in sin, making up the
score of iniquity, is here imbrayded unto these Jews.

The time of grace was offered them, the time of visitation, when the Lord
called upon them for repentance, but they repented not. The Turtle, the Crane,
and the Swallowe, know their appointed times, yet Israel knows not his time.

God sent his Word, they neglected it, his Prophets, them they slew, his
own Son, and him they crucified. Still they were careless, like the old
world before the flood. And so GOD shut them out of Time, for that when they
had Time, they abused the commodity thereof in the world.

If these people had considered of their peace, they had not provoked Christ's
eyes to distill into tears: But as fast as Christ drew them forwards, sin
and satan drew them backwards: euer-more sounding in their ears this so
pleasing and so plausible a lesson, It is not yet time, time is not yet.

See how continuance of sin breeds custom, and when custom enters, Gods
grace auoydeth, and so the Temple of God becomes a den of thieves.

For, Consuetudo peccandi tollit sensum peccati: Custom in sin, takes away
al sense and feeling of sin: and so being once past sense and feeling, the
body becomes dead, without motion, life or soul in it.

Note the degrees of sin in sinful men, first they grow wicked, then
obstinate, then desperate, like Caine, posting it from one sin to another, at
last a griping worm of conscience seazeth upon their souls, as the devils
entered into the heard of Swine. And then they cry out in a desperate rage:
Whosoever finds me, shall sley me. Genc. 4. 14,


Not much different from this, is that destinction of the learned, wherein they
make four degrees of a sinner. The first, in voluntary delectation. The
second, in consent. The third, in fulfilling it by work. The fourth, in
continuance. Wherein whosoever is once buried, is hardly raised to life again
without earnest prayer unto God, and many tears on his own behalf.

And therefore it is said, Languor prolixior grauat medicu^: but languorem
breuem praecidit medicus: A long vlcerat sore troubles the Physician, but a
green wound is easily launced.

It follows, Tut now they are hid from thine eyes.

This call of Christ in this place, was as it were the third Cock to warn
these people to repent.

The sinner cannot say, but he has been called. Herod had a call, when John
preached unto him. That other Herod had a call, when he felt a desire to see
Christ.

What a call had Pilat, when he was made to understand the innocence of
Christ. And so Jerusalem had a call, and that a loud call by Christ himself,
preaching unto them every day in their Temple, and working so many miracles
before them, which made Christ utter with weeping eyes, this sentence so full
of sweet compassion, Oh, if thou had known, at least in this thy day, those
things that belong unto thy peace.

Now I come to particular application, and so conclude.

When we come to our cities and towns, as Christ came to Jerusalem: and do
cleerelie behold (as we cannot choose but see) the manifold pollutions, and
sins in them committed, have not we cause to take up a lamentation, and to
weep for our Jerusalem of England, together with our other Cities and Towns:
and may not we as justly proclaim with Christ in this place: Oh, if you had
known, at least now in this your day, the things that belong to your peace.

We are as sinful as ever the men of Jerusalem were. Nay, our sins
exceed theyrs, both in quantity, quality, number, and nature, every way
beyond comparison; And may not our eyes then stream forth tears, for that
we are they that do not know nor regard the day of our visitation.

These dissolute Jews lived securely, too too much presuming upon Gods long
tolerance and lenity. Besides, for that they had the Temple of God amongst
them, and the Arc of his Covenant, which promised blessing and life for
euer-more, they waxed the more careless, and mistrusted nothing. Yet more then
all this, they trusted in the strength of their city, and in the wise
government of their sage Senators, and in the multitude of their horses and
Chariots. But all deceived them, to justify the truth of that Scripture,
Cursed is he that makes flesh his arm.

Yea, the Emperor Titus himself confessed, it had been a thing in human
reason impossible to overcome it. The Prophet Jeremy confirming the same. The
Kings of the earth, and all the inhabitants of the world, would not have
believed that the adversary and the enemy, should have entered into the gates of
Jerusalem.

But their false confidence deceived the^, GOD had so disposed, that even at
Easter, when there came infinite multitudes from all places to Jerusalem to
worship the City should then be besieged. And there were gathered together at
one time, about thirty hundred thousand, as Josephus testifies.

In that bloody stratageme so many thousands left their lives, that it grieved
the very enemies that came to take it: And it was commanded by the Emperor
upon view of the dead bodies, that so many as remained alive, should not be
slain, but be sold. And the residue of the Jews were had in so vile a
reckoning, that thirty of them were valued but at one penny: as they valued
Christ our Lord but at thirty siluerlings, so God in his just judgment,
prized thirty of them to be worth but one siluerling, and that to be a coin
of the smallest value. Most Writers hold it to be but a farthing.

And at this day they are accounted the most co^temptible nation in the world
Yea, the very name of a Jew is odious, and it is not so much as once mentioned
without disdain.

And thus was Jerusalem defaced: thus were the peculiar people of God become no
people, and the city that once was Shem, the glory of the world, now become
the shame of the world, wherein may not be found one stone upon a stone,
because they regarded not to know the day of their visitation.

So it pleased the most just Jehovah to revenge that place, where our Lord was
crucified, and where the blood of Gods saints was spilt upon the ground like
water.

Hence let us grow wise, and learn by Ierusalems fall to stand. Let the shrubs
tremble when the tall Cedar trees are thrown down.

Si hoc fit in viridi, quid fiet de arid^? if this were done in the green tree
what shall become of the dry? If God spared not Jerusalem, because the people
thereof knew not their peace, shall he spare us, that know not our peace?

Never did so many Prophets cry at once in our streets, as at this day they do
throghout the whole Land, from Dan to Beerseba, from Dover to Saint Dauys, from
Barwicke to the Mount, Court, City, and Country: but who does listen to the
voice of the Crier?

Never was the word more plentifully taught, never more contemptuously
reckoned, never more talking of it, but never less walking after it: many that
can speak well, too too few that can do well. And so we defer our
conversion. till our confusion overtake us, like the Jews in this place, who
would not believe, till they smarted for it.

Well, if we persevere and run on the score with him as we do, certainly a
Iubilee of years cannot pass over us, till our judgment come. For the word
is the same now it was then, and GOD is the same to day, and yesterday, and the
same for ever.

Therefore, while the kingdom of grace is with us, let us hold it, least in
despysing it, we lose a better Paradise than Adam did.

We live in that age wherein we may behold the starre-bright cleerenes of
that glory, and the fullness of that peace which the Kings of the earth, and
the mighty men before us have desired to see, but might not attain unto it:
all which does agrauat our sins the more: for by how much more plentifully
GOD shines among us in his graces, by so much the sorer-will our punishment be.

For if the Word, when it was spoken by Angels, was steadfast: and every
transgression and disobedience received a just recompense of reward: how shall
we escape if we neglect so great salvation, which was first preached by the
Lord him Hebr. 2.
self, and after was confirmed of them that heard him.

Pyndarus writes, that it was counted a happy City on the which it was
thought that gold did rain. If any City be so, then has God poured this
blessing upon us and our Cities of England, in an extraordinary measure.

It is seen in the wealth, the peace, and godly security that we have now a
long time inioyed. Every man now lives under his own Vine, and under his own
figgetree: so that our houses may seem unto us so many Tabernacles of rest. It
is seen in the peaceable government, and in the whole frame of our Christian
policy.

Every good man weigh with himself the long tranquillity, great plenty,
peaceable liberty which God has given us, during the reign of our most
gracious Soueraign, making our days like the days of Solomon, in whose time
silver was as plentiful as 2. Chr. 9. 27,
stones, and Cedar trees like the wild figgetrees that are abundant in the
plain. These so great blessings from her derived unto us, ought in no wise to
be forgotten, for they are indeed for number so many, and for value so great,
as the like have not been seen almost in any age. First, in having the true
light of the Gospel so shining among us: so publicly received; so
universally professed; so freely preached. Again, in giving us a Prince so
virtuous borne among us, with such peace defending us, against them that would
devour us: what could God do more for his Vineyard then he has done? so
that we may sing with David, Peace is within our gates, and plenteousnesse
within our Palaces. And again, Mercy and truth have met together, righteousness
and peace have kissed each other. And again, Non est auditus Armorum sonitus in
vrbe.

That may be truly spoken of us, which Zephany could not justify of the
people in his time. Our Princes are not as roaring Lions, our Judges are not
like ravening Wolves, that leave not the bones till the morrow. Our Prophets
are not light and wicked persons, polluting the Sanctuary, and wresting the
law. The just GOD is in the midst of us, he will do no iniquity.

So many England seem (these infinite blessings that I have spoken of duly
considered) like Eden the pleasant garden planted by the Lord.

Since God has performed these great things for us, which no tongue of man or
Angel is sufficiently able to eternize, let us be thankful, and let our
gratitude be testified by our obedience, least it be said of us that Jerusalem
is no better then Samaria.

When Jacob in the 28. of Genesis avvaked out of his sleep at Bethel, he
said, Surely the Lord is in this place, and I was not aware.

So if, when God shall testify his presence among us, in his manifold
blessings, and we take no notice of it in acknowledging neither him nor them:
we may well say as Jacob did: Of a surety God was in this place, and we were
not aware.

Let us acknowledge them now we have them, for it will be too late when they
shall be taken from us.

Bring forth fruits (says John) worthy of repentance. So bring forth good
works worthy of these blessings. We would all seem to be hanged with leaves.
let us rather show that we are hanged with fruits, least we be like the
fruitelesse Fig Tree; least we be like Chorazin and Beth-saida where Christ
wrought many miracles, yet they remained faithless.

I beseech you brethren in the bowels of Jesus Christ, make much of the Word
which is preached among you: for it is even your life. So termed by Moses in
the 32. of Deuteronomy.

If you will have a care of your peace, if you will have Christ's eyes to
distill with no tears: if you will not grieve the Spirit of God, by whom ye
are sealed to the day of redemption. let Ierusalems ruin be to you a cause of
rising. This profit should be made of others harms, like the honny that
Sampson found in the dead Lion.

Oh that this here threatened to Jerusalem, were written upon the tables of
our hearts with an iron pen, or the point of a Dyamant, that it might never be
forgotten Oh that we would yet learn to know our peace, and the time of our
visitation.

Yet there is time to consider our selves, yet is the acceptable time, yet is
the day of salvation, yet the Sun of righteousness shines, and God calls to
the waters of life. Yet he cries in our ears. Be lifted up ye gates, and I
will enter in, says the Lord, and be open unto me ye everlasting doors, and
the King of glory shall come in. The same Christ our Lord in the 3. of
Revelation and 20. verse says, I stand at the door and knock, and if any
will hear my voice, and open to me, I will come in, and sup with him.

I end in a word with this short exhortation. As when God made the light, and
had it from the darkness, he said, Bonum est, it is good. When he had made the
firmament, the earth and the seas, he said: bonum est, it is good. When he had
made the trees, herbs, and plants, and all creatures, he said still bonum
est, it is good. But having finished his work of creation, and taking a perfect
view of all that he had made, finding that all things did agree and suit
together, after a kind of heavenly harmony, and more then Geometrical
proportion, then he pronounced, Valde bonu^ est, it was exceeding good. So when
good and profitable laws shall be established among us, it may be said, bonu^
est. When Magistrates minister righteous judgments, dealing truly and
vprightlie in their offices, it may be said: bonum est, it is good.

When the Minister preaches the word of truth in season, and out of season,
and the people do diligently hear, and reform their lives accordingly, it
may be said, bonum est. But when there shall be a musical consent as it were,
and a mutual harmony of all ^hese together, where such matters are duly
performed and practiced in a Christian policy, it may be said, Valde bonum
est, it is exceeding good. And all this will be easily brought to pass, if
we do but consider of our peace.

Now the very God of peace sanctify us throughout: and I pray God that our
souls and bodies may be kept blameless to the coming of our Lord Jesus.

Christ purging the Temple.
MATH. 21. 12. And Jesus went into the Temple of God, and cast out them that
bought and sold in the Temple, and ouerthrewe the tables of the
money changers, and the seats of them that sold Doves: saying, It is written,
My house shall be called the house of prayer, but you have made it a den of
thieves.
IN every action of Christ we may learn to save our souls, and to shun
those things that are enemies to the Spirit of GOD.

By his heavenly doctrine, we learn heavenly wisdom, by his practice of holy
life, example of well living, by his miracles, our fayths confirmation, and
here in this place, by his entrance into the Temple we learn devotion.

He entered into the Temple. Within this Temple were his professed enemies, the
Scribes and Pharisees, yet hither he would enter to express his zeal, and
kingly authority.

He entered once into the Desert, signifying the temptations, whereunto the
children of God are subject. Another time he entered into a ship, showing the
perrill of Christians. He entered into Zacheus his house, showing the
humility that must be in Christians.

He entered into judgment when he was condemned, showing the persecution of
Christians. He entered up upon his Cross, showing the patience of Christians:
and in this place he entered into the Temple showing the devotion that must be
in Christians. Christ loved the Temple, and therefore he would enter into the
Temple, and holy men that have their names from Christ, must also carry the like
affection that was in Christ. They must love the templ^ and they must learn to
say with David, The zeal of thine house has even eaten me up.

And again, I have loved the habitation of thy house, and the place where
thine honor dwells.

Many there be that enter into the Temple of God, but few there be that enter
in like Christ in this place, for devotion and zeal.

We read of Antiochus, in the first of Mac. verse 23. and in the 2. of Mac.
5. that he entered into the Temple, but he entered in like a thief: for he
robbed the Temple of God, and took out of it the golden Altar, the
Candlesticks, the pouring vessels, the golden vestments, and the precious
Jewels, and treasure of infinite value.

The like do we read of that not so old as wicked Athenyan, whose name is
there omitted, because the Author of the book reckoned him as a vile person,
not worthy to be mentioned in holy writ. He also en^red into the Temple, but
he entered in to ^rophane it, and to fill it full with dissolu^ion, and
gluttony.

Nichanor another instrument suborned ^y satan to rise up against God, and to
de^ace religion, purposed to enter into Gods ^ouse, but himself uttered his
wicked in^ention, When I come again (says he) I will ^urne up this house. And
so Belshazar in ^he 5. of Daniel, caused his Lords to go in^o the Temple, and
thence to bring him the ^olden vessels, that himself, his wives, and
^oncubines might drink in them.

And these buyers and sellers here, cast out by our Savior Christ, entered
the temple, but not for any holy practice to pray, or praise God in it, but to
pollute it and to abuse it, in making the house of God a shop of merchandise.

In all these wicked men there was not found devotion, but pollution,
uncleanness of heart. Sinfulness had so possessed them, that they seemed to have
sold themselves to work impiety, like Ahab. But this their monstrous
sacrilege and horrible profanation of Gods Temple, escaped not unpunished.
For in the same place where their faults are mentioned, their judgments are
likewise recorded.

Antiochus was stricken with a remediless pain in his bowels, and he died most
lothsomly: the worms issuing out of his body in great abundance.

Nicanor was the first man that was slain in the battle, after the Armies had
met. His head and right hand were smitten off, and hanged upon the gates of
Jerusalem.

Belshazar in the prime of his pride, and when he was most merry, carowsing
wine in his golden vessels, was stricken to a dump when he saw the hideous
hand upon the wall, penning his tragical end, and ruin of his kingdom.
That night was Belshazer slain, and forced to resign at once both life and
kingdom.

So as the wicked plow upon Gods back large and long furrows, the furrows of
iniquity: so God also ploweth upon their backs, he trampleth upon them at his
pleasure: and this will he do to all them that seek to dishonor GOD, by
stablishing their own honor. To justify that which the prophetical King
has published long ago: Surely God will arise, and his enemies shall be
scattered, they also that hate him, shall flee before him. As the smoke
vanishes, so shall thou drive them away, and as the wax melts before the
fire, so shall the wicked perrish at the presence of God.

Let us then betimes advise our selves: by these men's falls to learn to stand,
and by their punishments to hate their sins, least we be ouer-taken with the
same condemnation. This lesson ought we to learn even in the sinners school:
and thus should we from other men's sins derive instruction to our selves, as
Solomon did to himself in the 24. of the Proverbs, when he passed by the
fields of the slothful, and saw it all covered with weeds.

Let us know then, that if devotion call us not hither, our entrance is in
vain. If the Pharisee when he entered into the Temple had carried with him
devotion, as he carried pride with him when he justified himself, he had not
lost that which the publican found, to teach us to come as the publican, that
is in humility, if we will find mercy.

Many come to the Temple, but few come as they should: as a number in Christ's
time came to the Sinagoues to see him, and to hear him, but yet few there
were that drew faith and devotion from him, as the woman drew virtue from him
by touching but his hem. Herod desired to see Christ, but it was for that he
looked that Christ should work some miracle before him. In another place we
read of whole companies following him, but not for the doctrine he taught
them, but rather for the bellies sake, as they that said, Rabby, when cammest
thou hither? The Scribes and Pharisees slocked to the temple to hear Christ
preach, but it was to entangle him in his words.

So is it now with us, all will come to the Temple, all will present
themselves, some for fear of law, some in hypocrisy will come, because they
will pretend a show of religion, and so be reputed as honest men as any
within their neighborhood; other for fashion sake, few or none for conscience
will present themselves to the Lord in pure devotion, as Christ did here.

The note of instruction then to be raised from this example of Christ is this.
We must learn how to enter into Gods Temple, that our service and ministry
there, when we come may be accepted.

For as Paul said to the Philippians, Many walk, of whom I have told you
often, and now tell you weeping, that they are the enemies of the Cross of
Christ.

So may it be said, That many enter into the Temple of GOD, as if they were the
enemies of the cross of Christ. Like the buyers and sellers in this place,
that entered in, both to corupt themselves, and the Temple.

He that will enter then as he ought, must first consider of the place
whether he presses. It is the Temple: more then that, it is Gods Temple; nay
yet more, it is Gods house, the place where God dwells, and it is the very
Arc of his presence: and unto it has he appointed blessing and life for
evermore.

We seek men commonly at their houses, for there is their continual
dwelling: So if we will find God, we must seek him at his house, as Joseph
and Mary did: his house is the Temple.

So then, both in regard of the place whether we come, and of the person to
whom we come, we are to be armed with reverence.

Jacob found the Angel in Bethell, and we must come to Bethell before we can
find the Angel, that is, Christ.

We must free our selves from corruption, before we enter in hither, and the
means to effect that, is by aduising our selves of the place and person.

In the fifth of Exodus, when God appeared to Moses, he called the place Terram
sanctam, a holy place, and he might not tread upon it, till first he had put
off his shoes: and so we must put off our shoes of carnalitie before we enter
into this holy place. In the 28. of Genesis, when God appeared to Jacob, he
called the place Terram terribilem, a fearful place: so the Temple of God is
also a fearful place: it is both fearful and holy. It is a terrible place
to them that make no conscience how they enter in, with uncircumcised hearts
and hands. For to such God is a co^suming fire, as he consumed Nadab and Abihu,
even in the Temple, making of a place of refuge a place of terror: for that
they regarded not with what fire their sacrifice was kindled.

But it is a holy place to them that come in holiness, and devotion; to them
that before hand prepare themselves, as Moses prepared himself before he
adventured to come near the flaming bush.

In the 40. of Exodus, Aaron and his sons might not enter into the Sanctuary
with unwashed hands, nevther might they minister in the Priests office, but
in their holy garments. Why then we must know that somewhat is to be done,
before we enter into Gods Sanctuary, before we presume to press into the
presence of GOD, we must prepare our selves, and we must cleuse our souls
from all corruption, we must purify first our own temples, our bodies, and
souls: for it is said, Estis vos templum Dei: your bodies are the Temples of
the holy Ghost, therefore glorify God in your bodies, and in your souls, for
they are Gods.

Otherwise, if this reverent preparation be not made, well we may thrust in
our selves among others into Gods Temple, like as these buyers and sellers
intruded themselves, but we have no comfort in so coming, and we must look
to be thrown out, as they were, and as the unworthy commer to the marriage of
the Kings son was cast out, because he brought not with him vestem
nuptialem, a wedding garment.

This is to come irreverently and unworthily: and such shall not be accepted,
because they offer up the sacrifice of fools, as Solomon notes. In the 22. of
the Revel. no unclean thing might enter into the new Jerusalem: so no unclean
thing should enter our bodies, our earthly Jerusalem.

It is written of Abraham, that when he went to sacrifice his son, he left
his Asses at the foot of the hill: So when we have a purpose to sacrifice our
selves unto God, we must leave our sins and corruptions behind us, as he did
his asses.

Our cares, and our corruptions may not enter in with us, but we must leave
them without, as a man leaves his shadow at the door when he enters into the
house.

Consider when we are going out from our houses, we are going out from our
selves, and from our vanities, and when we are come to the Temple, we are com
to God: God and our souls are here met together, like Abraham and Lazarus in
the heavens.

As the Israelites durst not come to the Mount where God spoke, till they had
washed their clothes, and sanctified themselves, so may not we presume to enter
into Gods Temple, till we have washed our clothes, our menstruous rags of
sinfulnes; like the Spousesse in the Canti^les, who had vvashed her feet, and
changed her rayments, when she went to meet her Spouse.

And to this purpose it is said; Keep my Sabbath, and reverence my Sanctuary.
And to this purpose we have our preparations before the Sabbath, which we call
the Sabbath Eeue: and on the Sabbath, our morning sacrifice, and our evening
incense. Yea, and the bells that sound in our ears do give us summons for
this reverence, as Aaron gave notice of his entrance into the Sanctuary by the
sound of those golden belles, which were fastened to the skyrts of his robe.

In a word, not to make a long amplification in so clear a matter: by this
entrance of Christ we learn two things, first his godly care: secondly, the
effect of his carefulnes.

In this chapter it is especially noted, that as soon as he came into the City,
he made have to go visit the Temple. We do not read that he first entered
into any house, to refresh himself, or to ease his body, being by all
likelihoode ouer-wearied with long travel: for he had come from Jericho, to
Beth-phage, and to Bethany, and so to Jerusalem.

But all this notwithstanding, to the Temple he goes, to teach us principally
to be careful in the service of God, before we minister to our selves or
other, in the businesses of this world. We must first serve God, and then our
selves, as Eliah said to the woman of Sarepsah: Bake me a Cake first, and
then after prepare for thee and thy family. So unto us God says; First offer
me a sacrifice of holiness, and than minister to thy self and thine.

First seek the kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof: but we seek
our own things first. First we serve the world and our lusts, and our
vanities, and God is served either not at all, or after all. After sin, and
after the word, and after the devil.

He entered into the Temple. In the Temple give to GOD all holy worship:
there is the place where our Lamps ought to be continually burning, kindled
with the fire of zeal and devotion. There ought we to hold up pure hands and
hearts unto God, praising him continually without ceasing: and in pouring out
infinite Halle-lu-iahs, like those Saints in the Revelation, unto him that was,
and is, and is to come.

This is called by our Savior. Vnum necessarium, that one necessary thing, and
the Better part, which cannot be taken from us. Christ was careful, and he
was willing to visit the Temple, for it was the first thing he did after he
had se^te foot within the streets of Jerusalem.

He that will serve God, must serve him willingly, we must come to the Church
in a voluntary affection, not by constraint, as do the Church-papists in our
age: For they enter in by compulsion, for fear of Law, and the Princes
displeasure, not for conscience. Or if it be love that draws the^ thither: it
is the love they bear to their houses and lands, not for the love they have to
Christ, or his Gospel, whom they have denied, in denying his truth. Such men's
room is better then their company: and they go forth as they came in: only a
little water is sprinkled, which presently falls of, faster then it lighted on.

These are they that like temporary menpleasers do only serve the time to serve
their turn, hoping when time will turn, that they may turn with time. These
serve God, as Nabucadnezars chaplains served their idol god, God Bell, they
served Bell because Bell served their bellies; and they seem now to serve
God, not the true God, who^ we worship, but a God whom their own idolatrous
conceits have erected, another Adoni^am, another Bell, and all for the belly.

But we (beloved) have not so learned Christ: let us rather stick to him, and
say with the Apostles, Whether shall we go, thou have the words of eternal
life.

Let us learn to serve him willingly with alacrity and cheerefulnes, for as
it is said God loves a cheerful giver, so it may be said, God loves a
cheerful worshipper.

S. Paul in the 12. of Romans 1. exhorts us to give our bodies: in that he
calls it a gift, he shows a voluntary obedience. And where in the following
words, he says; And fashion not your selves like unto the world: he
justifies thereby, that indeed it is far from the fashion of this world to
give our bodies unto God: for the men of this world are carnally minded, and
do take their bodies from God, and do give them to their lusts as the
Isralites gave their children to Moloch. In the time of the Leuiticall Law we
read, that among those many offerings, some were called Free Will offerings, and
these were in greatest request with God. Look the 35. of Exodus, how bountifully
the people gave, and how gladly the lord accepted it: look the 29. of the 1.
book of chro* what a liberal offering is there recorded.

The Princes, and Captains, and Rulers, gave for the service of the house of
God, five thousand talents of gold, and ten thousand of silver, and of brass
and y^on beyond measure. Yea, and they with whom precious stones were found,
gave them to the treasure of the house of the Lord: and all this was done
willingly. For it is added in the ninth verse, The people rejoiced when they
offered willingly, and with a perfect heart.

Lo how chargeable was the service of the Temple then, and none of these
things does God require of us: Only (says he) give me thy heart; and yet we
cannot afford to give him but so much.

Surely, we ought not to with-holde it from him, for he has dearly bought
it, and paid for it. And Paul witnesses the same: Ye^ are bought with a
price. It was a price indeed of greatest value, more worth then all the
Talents of gold before mentioned. Even the hart-blood of the most glorious
person in the world.

And thus much shall briefly suffice for clearing the matter of substance
contained in these words of Christ's entrance into the Temple.

You have heard of Christ's devotion, now shall you hear of his zeal. Where
these two are met together, there is a perfect Christian.

As a Lamp cannot burn without oil, so devotion cannot be kindled without
zeal.

He threw out them that bought. etc.

Here is showed Christ's action, what he did upon his entrance into the
Church, he throws out them that bought and sold: wherein he shows his regal
authority.

Christ entering into the Temple, finds the people there neither praying nor
prophesying, but chopping and changing, as if it were Forum, not Templum.

As it is not co^^enient to make of the house of God a den of thieves: so is it
not fit to make it a shop of merchandise.

It was once said, Where God has his Church, the devil has his chapel: but
now it may be said, Where God has his chapel, the devil has his church.
Nay, God has scarce a chapel.

These Merchants, these buyers and sellers in this place, possess both church,
chapel, chauncell and all. Even from the porch to the Altar, and to the
Sanctum Sanctorum, all is divided between these buyers and sellers: and for
the throng Christ is scarce able to have room to enter into the Temple.

Of old time it was established, that it should not be lawful to carry so
much as a vessel through the Temple. Yet in this place, chapmen, buyers and
sellers most profanely durst intrude themselves into Gods Church.

Solomon had so great a care in the building of that magnificent Temple in
Jerusalem, that he suffered nor, either hammer or axe, or any iron tool to be
heard in the house, while it was in building.

But this ungodly generation of buyers and sellers, feared not to pollute and
defile Gods Temple, with blasphemous clamors, loud cryings, idle talkings, and
walkings, swearing, and forswearing: all which horrible and gross corruptions
are wont to be among them that buy and sell. Yea, and this to be done in Gods
house, and in Christ's presence.

Needs must Christ be grieved at this sight. This spectacle must needs make
him look about for his zeal, as Job looked about for his patience after so
many heavy messages.

No doubt as Noah was grieved with the sins of the old world, and Lot at the
unrighteousness of the Sodomites: so it grieved Christ our Lord to find in the
Temple this rout of wicked ones, abusing the Temple of God with their most
ungodly demeanure.

But what does Christ? Does he show himself only a looker on? and does he
make no speed to reform this intolerable outrage: yes he bestirres himself
like a mighty Giant newly wakened out of a dream: and he clothes himself
with zeal as with a garment, and presently proceeds to purge the Temple of
this wicked assembly. He throws them out.

In the third of Genesis we read, that as soon as Adam had sinned. God sent
his Angel to thrust him out of Paradise: Here was zeal.

The Sodomites and people of Gomorha sinned, presently God rained fire and
brymstone from heaven to consume the^ at once: and here was zeal.

David sinned in nu^bering the people, for which 70. thousand lost their lives:
here was zeal. Phineas in his zeal slew Zymrie and Cosby. And in this place
GOD sent his Son to punish the prophaners of his Temple.

He cast them out. After sin comes revenge, the heauiest companion of
wickedness. The sins of Jerusalem did once make Christ's eyes to distill into
tears. There he exercised his eyes expressing his great grief, and here
their sins made him exercise his hands, by throwing them out of the Temple,
expressing his zeal.

It is worth the noting to consider with what speed Christ labors to
reform the abuses that had crept into his church.

Presently upon his entrance into the Temple, he begins to purge it. Sin
must be strangled in the birth, before it get strength: for if it may once
have his full growth, it will be sure to have the upper hand of thee, and thou
can not ouer-maister it.

I showed you before of Christ's carefulnes, and in this place again you may
learn his speedines in resisting sin: to teach us to be speedy and quick in
beating down corruptions whatsoever.

Doctor Speed is the best Physician for Mistres Vanity. Sinfulnes is soonest
resisted upon her first entrance: but if it rancle through continuance, and
grow to a running fore, it must speedily either be launced, or quite cut off
like a putrified member. Because sentence against an evil work is not
executed speedily, therefore the hearts of men are fully bent in them to do
evil. Eccles. 8. 11.

The use of this example to our selves is this: When we purpose to do any
good thing, we must testify our carfulness in doing it presently. If this
were carefully observed, much evil would soon be stopped even in the
fountain, before it might stream forth to the universal harm of country,
city, and commonwealth.

For many times when we mind to do good, and do it not presently, our
endeavors do fail between the purpose and the practice: and so the good to
be done, is not done at all, but it dies with us, like a byrd in a man's hand,
while the head is devising whether it were best to hold it still, or let it
go.

As this concerns all men generally: so in a more special manner it concerns
them that are advanced to high place of authority in the Common wealth.

Officers are chosen for the punishment of evil doers, and the praise of them
that do well. They must be zealous-in Gods cause, by throwing out such as
transgress.

They must consider that they are appointed as in Gods stedde to punish
malefactors: and therefore they must not suffer the sword of justice to rust in
the scabbard of long sufferance.

And zeal it is that will soon advise you, when and how this may be done:
zeal will tell you by the quality of the offense how it may be best corrected.
For greater sins, must of necessity have greater punishments, as old and
festered sores, require sharp and bitter medicaments.

Only be courageous, says the Lord to Iosuah, and I will be with thee: so to
the Magistrate God speaks, Only be zealous, and I will be with thee.

Zeal best graceth an Officer, and it is first named among those 4. in Exodus
18. 21. Such as must be ready with Phineas, to kill sin in the act. They must
when occasion requires, learn to protest with Nehemiah, If you do it once
more, I will lay hands upon you.

This want of zeal in Officers, suffering sins to pass with immunitie, is
the cause that corruption now carries such a sway, and does spread it self
like a cankerworme over the world.

What a coffeehouse and mutinous outrage did Corah and his rebellious
confederates cause the Israelites to grow unto, when being prepossest with a
key-colde conceitednes, and an ouer-weening opinion, they would have persuaded
Moses that all was well, and the people holy enough?

Surely the best works we can do, yea, our religion it self, is stark dead
before us, until zeal come. Religion without zeal, is like the Sunamites dead
child, without breath, life, or soul in it.

All our knowledge, our wisdom, and other virtues can little avail us, little
can they do, if only zeal be absent.

They can profit us no more the^ the prophets staff could recover the dead
child, till Elisha came himself.

Let faith come, and yet thou art imperfect, let patience come, and thou art
yet imperfect, let temperance come, and thou art yet imperfect, let charity and
chastity and all come that may come, and thou art still imperfect. Thou art
but a maimed Christian, like Agrippa till zeal come, and then as David said,
The rivers of God are full, so may thou say, The graces of God are full. Thou
art as well furnished as Zacheus was, when Christ told him, This day is
salvation come to thine house.

But this is satan's policy, when he cannot draw us from religion, nor from
our prosession, yet even then will he seek to hinder us in our good course:
he will stand like a Lion in the passages, that we be not too forward, either
to stop us in our running by one rub of iniquity or other, or by laying some
pleasant bait before us, to tum us aside out of the way: as he coosend Adam
out of Paradise.

If needs thou will be religious, says he, ye^ thou shall not be zealous. As
Jacob said of Ruben, Thou art my might, and the beginning of my strength, but
yet thou shall not be excellent: so though we be of power and might, and have
made a good growth in Gods graces, and do carry about us excellency of
dignity, as Ruben did, yet says satan I Will prevent thee, thou shall not be
fervent.

The Minister of Laodicia had many good qualities that graced him: but one vice
marrs many good virtues, as one dead fly putrifieth the swee^e ointments of
the Apothecary. He was not zealous, he was neither hot nor cold.

And therefore God said, I will spew thee out of my mouth: and so undoubtedly
God will also spue out of his mouth the lukewarm Protestants, and the
temporary gospellers of this age, that are neither hot nor cold. Oh then let
us labor to have zeal, or our religion profits us nothing.

Knowledge and zeal must be united together, like the Vrym and Thummym to the
consecrating of those holy ones.

One brief note yet remains, and so we will descend to particular
application, and so conclude.

If buyers and sellers of small things were thrown out of the church, what and
how great shall their punishment be, that buy and sell the patrimony of the
Church.

How shall they be thrown out from the presence of GOD and good men for ever,
that so sacriligiously dare intrude unto gods possession, as if it did descend
unto them by inheritance.

It is a matter of horror to consider into what injury, or rather into what
iniquity of times we are fallen. Nothing is now so common, and so familiar a
matter, as to see Scholars spending their times in Kings Courts, making their
Courts their cloisters. Merchants by their bylls entering into Gentlemen's
patrimonies, and Gentlemen themselves intruding into Church livings, as if the
whole frame and course of the world were quite dissolved into the old Chaos:
like Lots wife moulten into a saltpyllar; so that the godly, zealously looking
into these intolerable abuses, have cause to cry out:

Tempora, tempora, quale Monstrum aluistis: O injurious times, what a
prodigious monster have you traueled vvithall. Did these men but sound their
consciences in this behalf, Quocunque sint ^^sts cauterio, yet they must
needs cry with the^, and sound forth this ill-sorting harmony: that they have
no more right norinterest in Church-liuings, then Herod had to Philips wife, or
Achab unto Naboths vineyard.

But this is a sore that may not be ripped up, the contagion thereof is so great
and so universal.

Only we are to pray that God may open the eyes of them that are the
transgressors in this behalf. And that it would please him to work a speedy
reformation in restoring to his Church, that which of right belongs unto it.

Give it beauty, o Lord, in sted of ashes, and rich apparel in sted of
Sackcloth: that yet it may be pronounced which was once proclaimed by the
Prophet Aggei: The glory of the last house, is greater then the glory of the
first house.

He cast out them that bought and sold. You have seen Christ reforming the
abuses that had crept into this Temple, now let us make a true use of this to
our selves.

As these gross corruptions crept into the material Temple, so the like to
these, or rather worse then these do creep into our spiritual Temples, our
bodies.

When we convert our bodies to any profane use, and do not glorify God in
them, then it may be said that we pollute our Temple.

When the Magistrate shall be found not to deal truly, when he shall not carry
clean hands, free from corruptions, when he shall pervert judgment, and turn
aside out of the right way, then it may be said he polluteth the temple of God.

When the Lawyer or Counselor carries not himself to his clyent as he ought,
if he encourage him to proceed in law with his adversary when he might work a
peace between both, and all for his private gains, thinking to become a
purchazer with poo^^ men's purses, as Gehazy thought to intich himself with
Naamans gold: then does ^^ pollute the temple of God.

When the Recorder or Prymitorie does falsify the record, most of al it
co^cernes him to be circumspect, for the record being falsified, it may do
harm an 100. years after: then he does corrupt his conscience, and defiles
his temple.

If the Sheriff shall make a partial return of such as must determine
matters between party and party, he prophaneth the temple.

If the Jurors that are impaneled, shall through friendship, favor or fear,
or being blinded with rewards shall deliver an i^ust verdict, they pollute the
Temple.

In a word, this pollution is universal wheresoever any kind of ungodliness
shall take place. And the sovereign help for all this is that which our
Savior in his own example has here taught us. When and so often as these
corruptions shall break out, we must cast them out betimes, as Christ did the
buyers and sellers. This speedy purging must be effected by the word in the
godly Minister, and by the sword of authority in the civil Magistrate.

Every man can best sound his own conscience, by sending down the bucket of
Gods spirit into his heart. Every man can best satifie himself, whether he has
cleansed his body, by casting out all sin and vanity, and so consecrating it as
a holy Temple unto the Lord, or whether he has abused it, by giving it over
to all sensuality with greedines, suffering sin and satan to have ingresse,
and egrelle and regresse at their pleasures, till the grave be possessed of his
body, the worms of his flesh, and the world of his goods. And so he return
more rotten out of the world, then the matter he was first made of when he
first came into the world.

Thus you see how the temple of GOD may be polluted, and so in time a general
rent be made from the top to the bottom, till it be quite destroyed and
defaced as that famous Temple of Jerusalem is now defaced and lies in the dust.

But let us beware how we run to the like ruin: how we destroy this
Temple of God, not made with hands, but by the mighty power of God: for
fearful is that saying; He that dest^ cy^th the temple of God, him shall God
destroy.

Corruption and sinfulnes are the pullers down, but holiness and righteousness,
holiness I mean toward God, and righteousness I say toward man, are the
raysers up of this temple.

These two are better builders than Noa^s vvor-kmaisters that joined with him
in the building of the Arc, for they built not for themselves, but for others:
but these do build for God and us.

Yea, and Christ himself works in this frame of this spiritual building:
nay, himself becomes the head-corner-stone, in whom all the building being
coupled together, grows to a holy temple in the Lord.

It follows; For it is written: My house is the house of prayer, but you have
made it a den of thieves.

Christ in these words yields them a reason why he threw them out: he makes
them acquainted with their sin, it was for defiling the Temple, My house is
the house of prayer, but you have made it a den of thieves.

Sin till it be known cannot be shunned. We shall the sooner be drawn from
doing evil, when we shall look into the nature of it, and the danger that shall
ensue of it.

Christ proves to their faces the greatness of their sin, which they could
not deny: nay, they must needs condemn themselves in it upon this so manifest
a proof produced by our Savior. It is written. Either implying a notable
ignorance in not knowing the Scriptures, or an obstinate wilfulnes in them,
for not performing obedience to the Word. By these two, as by special
instruments of wrath, satan works mightily in the children of disobedience,
and by them millions of souls are chaind up, and brought under satan's
servitude.

It is written.] As if he should have said: Have you never read that
Scripture that speaks thus. etc.

The Lawyer who would needs know what he must do to inherit life, had this
answer, How read thou? Christ sendes him to the Word to find out the life
that he looked sor: and so to these buyers and sellers that polluted the
Temple, Christ speaks in like manner. How read you. It it not written, A^y
house is the house of prayer: why go ye about then to make it a den of
thieves?

You err (says our Savior in the twelfth of Mark) not knowing the
Scriptures: and here he tells these prophaners, that they Mark, 12. and
Math. 22.
erred in polluting the temple, for that they knew not the Scriptures.

In the fourth of Matthew, he drove away the devil with one word, Scriptum est:
and here with the same word, he drives before him these buyers and sellers out
of the Temple.

I would the Papists did learn but this one thing from Christ, only to plead
Scriptumest, in all their Counsels, writings, and conferences: for then all
controversies in religion would quickly be decided.

^inde up the testimony, says Esaias, seal up Esaias, 8, 16.
the law among my disciples. If they teach not according to this law, it is
because there is no light in them. If any man brings not with him this
learning, receive him not to house, nor bid him so much as God speed. 2. John.
1.

Christ brings his warrant out of Scripture to teach us to do the same: other
authorities cannot build up our holy faith.

As the sun is not discerned but by his own light, so no spirit can
interpret Scripture, but by the same spirit that wrote it.

Go not out of this field to gleane, said Boas to Ruth: so go not out of the
plentiful field of Gods book to gather. Whatsoever is gathered elsewhere,
proves no corn but chafe, which every gale of wind soon scatters. We must
keep our selves within our compass, that is, within the Canon of the word, as
Shimey was charged not to go beyond the River. Most certain it is and a
matter of undoubted evidence, that no doctrine ought to be delivered concerning
faith and religion, but Scripture. The religion of God must stand simple, as
GOD himself left it. Man's additions in Gods matters are but fantasies. In
other matters add what they list: but in matter and cause of salvation, Christ
left nothing behind him to be added any more, either by Apostles, or Martyrs,
or whomsoever: because the perfection thereof is absolute, nothing being lest
imperfect. Whereunto who so adds, blasphemeth, and does no less then infringe
the testament of the Lord.

Let the Papists then beware how they maintain unwritten verities: for in so
doing, what do they else but infringe the testament Ambr. in ^uk lib 3. cap. 3.
of the Lord. And they seek to eclipse the glory of Christ like Herod, who
caused all the genealogies of the Kings of Israel to be burnt, because he
would not have his pedigree abased, or obscured.

What certain^e of truth can unwritten verities carry: since they resemble a
tale that is told, which passing from mouth to mouth, is told so many ways as
the^e be men to tell it. Beware of the leven of the Phartsees, says our
Savior: So I say, Beware of the leven of unwritten traditions, for it is a
phariseicall leven, and it will sour the whole lump. The doctrines of men may
not pass for the precepts of God.

These things are written that ye should believe that Jesus Christ is the
son of God, and in so believing, you might have life everlasting. Where it is
showed that the Scripture is all sufficient, and has nothing it it imperfect.
It includes all things that are necessarily to be known in matters of
salvation. Let us draw then from this most holy fountain, and for go the
puddles of man's invention.

But to end this note let us have recourse to Christ alone, both in this place
and elsewhere, let us make him our Pilot, and we shall be sure to be soundly
directed in our compass that we cannot err.

Consider but of his practice, hy^ proofs are Scriptum est. His demands are
Quomodo legis? His apologies, Scrutam^^^ s^r^pturas. And the Apostles, as they
were taught by him, so they learned to speak as he did: I delivered to you
that which I received, how that Christ died for our sins, according to the
Scriptures: and that he was buried and rose the third day, according to the
Scriptures. So Christ, himself, his Apostles, and all the holy men of God,
still point us to the Scriptures, as the only Touchstone of Salvation, whereby
we try the difference between light and darkness, God, and Beliall, truth and
heresy.

It is written: My house. etc. In this place* God appropriateth to himself the
Church to be his house: if it be Gods house, than are we to have a greater
regard of this than of our own houses.

David had a special care of this house, when he said: One day is better in
thy Courts then a thousand elsewhere. He had rather accept of the meanest office
in Gods house, than to be a princely commander in his own house. Yea, were
it but a Porters room, he valued the same so greatly, that it made him
register his love to the world, and to all ensuing posterities. I had rather be
a doore-keeper in the house of God, than to dwell in Tabernacles of Cedar. And
again, he says to express further the care he had of Gods house: Shall the
King dwell in his sieled house, and the Ark of God remain between the
Curtains?

This shows David's love and care, and it should draw from us the like love
and care to Gods house: yea, he calls upon us for this carefulnes in the
hundred psalm and in many other places: O enter ye into his gates with
praise, and into his Courts with rejoicing. etc.

The very name of the place, as I have said before, should force from us a
religious worship. It is Gods house, the place that he has sanctified and
chosen to himself, to place his Name there. In that it is called an house, it
does signify the unity that must be between Christians. They that are of
this household may not be divided. The minister that serves in the Sanctuary,
and the people that come together in the holy assembly, to hear, or pray, or
to praise God, must be all of one mind, of one affection. The coat of Christ
was Inconsutilis, without division: showing that if we will wear Christ's
coat, we must shun division. As there is but one truth, one faith, one
Baptisine, one Christ, one Lord over all, and in us all: so there should be but
one Shepherd, one slock, one Pastor, and one pasture. So all is Unity, to
show that he was false that maintained ^nplicitie.

One lately writ a book, the title whereof was Tria sunt omnia. But it had com
nearer to the truth of Druinitie, if he had altered his poesy thus, Vnum sunt
omnia. For Trinity must be reduced to Unity, before our faith can be perfited.

It pittieth me to see, and it is a matter of such grief that it man express
and wring tears from trees and stones where men are senseless: in beholding
the lamentable condition that cities, towns, and almost every particular
congregation is fallen into: and all for want of this unity. The Minister one
way, the Magistrate another way, and the people a third way, divided from them
both. Manasses against Ephraim, and Ephraim against Manasses, and both against
Judah. Alas, what is this else but in time to eat up and devour one another,
and to bring in civil hostility, the most mortal and capital enemy to
mankind, and the very moth that fretteth and tears in sunder by little and
little, the peace that maintains all Christian societies. The Minister beats
down vanity, the Magistrate raises it on foot again like Dagon, and the
people like men amazed, wot not what to do, nor who^ they should cleave unto,
whither to God or Baal.

When Aaron and Myriam were divided from Moses, what came of it? God departed
from them, and the clowd a testimony of his presence, likewise departed from
among them. And we must not think the contrary but that God also departs from
us, when we cease to be at one. When we divide our selves, God will also divide
himself, he will go out from us, as Lot went out from Sodom to dwell in Zoar.
Nay, he will not so much as leave behind him the cloud, the testimony of his
presence: that is, his blessings and graces all shall be taken from us, our
peace, our liberty, our wealth, and whatsoever we had comfort in, ^l we be left
as naked as Adam, when he ran to the sigtrees, or as Job, upon the dunghill,
without his children, his wife, his friends, his wealth, his health. He had
nothing now, who before had all things: only his scabbes and sores did beat
him company.

In the 133. psalm, the Prophet considering the great treasure of peace and
unity, falls into a kind of admiration, saying: O how good and joyful a
thing it is brethren to dwell together in unity? It is like the precious
ointment upon Aarons head, which ran down unto his beard, and went down to the
borders of his garment. It is like the dew of Harmon, that falls upon the
mountains of Sion.

In the former verse he calls all the children of God brethren, and ought
brethen to be divided?

Abraham, when he devised how to bring his servants and Lots servants to
unity, uses this argument, O let not us fall out, f^^ we are brethren.

The like speech is used by the Patriarch in the 42. of Genesis They told Joseph,
W^^ are all one man's sons. And in the 13. verse, We thy servants are al
brethren. So should we say, We are all one man's sons: for God is our Father,
and we his sons: yea, we are all brethren; and therefore why should not we
agree, and be at one?

A kingdom that is not at peace in it self, cannot flourish, and a house that
is divided, cannot stand.

What breeds so many Scismes and sects, and variety in opinions, but division?

Labor then for unity: for that is the only watchman that peserueth the
City.

My house.] A house consists of a foundation, the sellers, the side-poasts, and
the roof: and every of these must be agreeable, and fitting one to another.
This shows what unity is. And a City consists but of many houses joined
together in due proportion: and the very name shows the worke-maister who
first built the City. It was unity: for it is called Ciuitas, quasi ciuium
vnitas.

Many seeds are sown in one field, and being grown up they fill but one
ear, and are bound up in one sheaffe, and are lapt up in one loaf. This
shows unity.

The body of man has many members, many parts: the head, the arin^^, the
shoulders, the feet, etc. Yet all make but one body.

The head alone commands, and all the other parts are pliable and serviceable
to him. Let us also learn to serve our head, for we being many members of one
body, have also but one head: even Christ. Let us not then be divided from our
head, for then we shall be censured to make a worse rent then the Jews did,
who divided his garments: but we divide his flesh and his body, so long as we
are not at unity.

A house of prayer. The Temple is called not the house of cruelty, nor the
house of maliciousnes, nor the house of pride, nor the house of covetousness,
as these Merchants thought to make it, but the house of prayer. The Jews had
Cities of refuge to she unto: but the place of refuge for Christians now to
slye unto, is Templum Dei, the house of prayer. Here is the place where the
Priests and the people ought to pray before the lord, even between Vestibulum
et Altar, the porch and the Altar, as Ioell speaks.

In the 7. of Math it is said, Seek and you shall find. If we will sind
Christ, here is the place where we must seek him: not as they that sought
after Eliah when he was translated, but as Joseph and Mary sought for their
son, in the temple they sought him, and there they found him: and there shall
we be sure to find him, if we seek after him with the like affection that
they did.

And having found him: if you will know how you may both speak with him, and
speed with him in your godly requests, this place resolves you, Prayer must be
the harbenger, to pass from you to him, and it will in no wise return again
to you, till it has prevailed, like the Dove that returned with the Olive
leaf in her bill. Prayer poured out with devotion, and uttered with zeal, is
for power so forcible, and for motion so swift, that it pearceth like a
Thunderbolt clouds and skies, and having come to God, it departs not away,
till it has prevailed by strong wrestlings, like Jacob for a blessing.

In the 2. chro. 6. we find Solomon praying in the temple: he desired God that
his eyes should ever be open, and his ears always attentive to the prayers
that should be offered up in that place: and his prayer then, is effectual for
us now that pray before the lord in the temple, being the place whereof he
has spoken, he would put his name there. This house of prayer has been
^requented by the godly in all ages, since there began to be a Temple. And
when there was (...) Temple, yet there were solemn assemblies and holy
meetings from the beginning.

In the 4. of Genesis upon the restoring and reestablishing of religion, presently
after the birth of Sheth, we read that men assembled together, and called
upon the name of the Lord. After the flood, Noah and his family sacrificed
unto the Lord. Genesis 8. 20. And after him, Abraham built an Altar at Bethell,
and called upon the Name of the Lord. Jacob did the like, and Moses and all
ages to Christ. The Tabernacle made by Moses, was in sted of a Temple.

Reverence my Sanctuary. Leuit. Peter and John went up to the Temple to pray.
Symeon went to the Temple. Anna prayed in the Temple.

Here is the place where the afflicted may find consolation: the poor may
find plenty: the wealthy shall find thankfulness: and the thankful shall have
more gifts: the desperate shall find comfort: the sick a Physician: the
sinner in a word, shall find his Savior, where he may embrace him in his
arms, if he will, as Symeon did.

Of prayer,] that is, of public prayer, and not of private. If we will pray
privately, we have houses to pray in at home. Enter into thy chamber, and there
pour out thy heart unto God, and he that hears thee in secret, shall reward
thee openly.

If thou pray when thou should hear, thou prophanest the place, and thy
prayer shall return as a curse into thy bosom. For Math. 6.
the word of truth has spoken it; He that turns away his ear from hearing
the law, his prayer shall be abominable.

It is not a private place, and therefore it will entertain no private action. If
thy heart call upon thee to present any private prayer to the Lord, follow the
use of holy men in all ages. Isaac went out into the fields to pray and
meditate. Jacob being alone in Bethel, fell to prayer. Genesis 28. David watered
his couch with tears which fell from him while he prayed. Daniell in his
chamber fell to prayer. Dan. 6. Peter in the 9. of the Acts went up to the top
of the house to pray. Christ went aside into the mountain to pray.

If I pray, being in the Temple, and all the congregation there present, and
another preaches, and a third man standing by reads, here is no order, but
confusion, and God is not the God of confusion.

Let all things in the Church be done decently, and in order.

Thus have you seen Christ our Lord entering into the Temple in devotion, and
in zeal correcting the abuses that he found there. Teaching them withal, the
right use of the Temple, and what exercises of holiness the place requires,
that so they might not come together to condemnation. Let it be considered what
is said, and the Lord give us understanding in all things, that having
attained in some measure to the fullness of knowledge that is in Christ Jesus,
and being stablished in every good work and word, our fruit may be holiness,
and our end everlasting life. Let us pray the spirit of Grace to enter into the
temples of our hearts, and thence to purge and cast out all corruptions
whatsoever.

To God only wise, our Savior, be rendered all honor, glory, and praise, with
thanksgiving, now and ever. Amen.

The history of our Lords Birth. A Sermon preached by the Author at
Shrewsburie upon Christ his day.
MATH. 2. 1. 2. When Jesus then was borne in Bethleem in Judea, in the days of
Herod the King, behold there came Wise men from the East to Jerusalem, saying,
Where is he that is borne King of the Jews? For we have seen his star in
the East, and are come to worship him.
TWo principal motives or reasons, beloved in our Lord, induced me to make
choice of this Text. One was the occasion of our meeting at this time, which
is, to solemnize and keep in memory the Nativity of our Lord and Savior
Christ Jesus. The other, the great necessity of the doctrine in these words
contained. For they deliver unto us the history and full discourse of Christ's
Incarnation, being one principal branch in the mystery of our Redemption. So
you see how both text, and time our meeting and matter, or cause of our
meeting, all conspire together, and are alike suitable.

There should be no matter of greater force to draw men together, than this
we have now in hand: for it is able to furnish us with all necessary
knowledge, like the roll that Ezechiell took from the Angel, which when he
had eaten, it filled both Ezch, 3,
belly and bowels: and he straightwayes began to prophecy.

We live not in those times wherein we may offer rich presents unto Christ,
like the Wisemen, nor can we now point at the bodily presence of Christ, as
John did: not can we feast him in our houses, as Zacheus did, nor can we
embrace him in our arms, as once Symeon did, when he came by inspiration into
the Temple.

Christ now looks not for these courtesies, nor can we perform the^ if we
would But this, and all this we do, when we come to hear Christ preached unto
us, when we open our hearts to entertain the word, as Lydia did, and when we
embrace with alacrity and cheerfulness the doctrine of Christ. And as I have
told you, one capital branch of this doctrine, is this concerning his
nativity.

Men are careful, and very diligent in calculating their own byrth-dayes, and
their childrens natiuities: for a more certain account they calendar them up,
to the end they may not be forgotten: and this they ^may do, for reason
requires it, law allows it, and ciuility commends the same.

But a thousand times more careful ought we to be, both Prince, prophet, and
people, to calendar and keep in memory the nativity of our Lord and Savior:
conscience ^inforceth it, custom calls for it and which is most of all.
Christ^^^^^e commands it. For unto this name, and to no other under heaven are
we baptized. Of Christ we are called Christians.

We are his scholars his servant, his disciples, and therefore very careful
should we be to honor our Lord and Master in keeping holy his day. For as
Christ in earth sought nothing but the glory only of his Father, so his father
now in heaven, seeks nothing but the glory of his son. And as the same
son, being here on earth humbly debased himself as a servant under all
men, to obey his Fathers will: so has it pleased God his Father again to
exalt him, not only to surmount the glory of all Princes and Potentates
whatsoever, but also with such power and majesty has he advanced him, that
even the very knowledge and beleese of his glorious Name, is able to give
everlasting life to all sinners be they never so grievously burdened or laden,
whosoever will come unto him, to seek any refreshing. So proved by his o^n
testimony in the 6. of John, verse 40. Thy is the will of him that sent me,
that every man that believes in him, should have everlasting life, and I will
raise him up at the last day.

Have not we great reason then to remember this day of Christ? a day (as Saint
Augustine calls it) of all days; the beginning of all days; the beginning of
eternity to the believers.

He was borne to make us rich, he was laid in a stall even among beasts, to
exal^ us to the company of Angels.

He was borne an exile, a banished person, from the cradle driven to fly into
Egypt, as Moses did to Mydian, to the end he might make us free. Vt Moses in
vluas.


He came from heaven to the earth, to the end he might dravve us from earth
to heaven. He took upon him a natural ^ody, to make us heavenly bodies.

He was made flesh, to make us spirits, he was made the son of man, to make
us the ^onnes of God. To as many as received him, ^o them gave he power that
they might be the ^onnes of God. Great reason have we then ^o remember him
that did all this for us.

And this much shall briefly suffice to ^tirre up your minds to a careful
contem^lation of Christ and his glory. Now let us ^eare S. Matthew speaking.

When Jesus then was borne at Bethleem. etc. For the increase of our faith, and
for an ^ndoubted certainty, here is laid down ^he true story of Christ's
birth, with cir^umstances thereunto belonging.

The manner of our Lords birth is at large ^eliuered by this our Evangelist, in
the for^er chap before my Text, beginning at the 8. verse. The other
circumstances run ^eere in these words: as first; The place ^here he was
born: In Bethleem. 2. When: ^n the days of Herod. 3. Who came first to ^im:
The wise men. 4. How did they know ^ee was borne, or how were they directed ^^
find him? They were guided by a star.

5. To what end came they to him? I^ worship him.

This day and time, was foretold by the Prophets, commended to men by Angels
and celeb^ated by the godly Fathers of the Church.

Esaias, long before the coming of Chr^^^ prophesied, saying; Lo, a virgin
shall ^^^ceaue, Esaias, 7,
and bear a son, and they shall (...) name Emanuell. And again, Unto us a
^^^ Esaias, 9,
is borne, and unto us a child is given.

And in the ninth of Damel, the very moment of time wherein Christ should come
is s^gni^ied by Ga^riell, Seventy weeks sa^^ Dan 9, 2^.
he, are determi^ed upon the people, and (...) the ^oly C^^ty, to finish the
wickedness, (...) seal up the sins, and to recon^ile iniqui^^^^ to brin^ in
euerl^sting righteousness, and to s^^ up vision and prophe^ie, and to annoint
the^^holie.

To make up the harmony, Micah po^teth to the very place where our Lo^^
should be borne: And thou Bethleem, Mica, 5, 2.
little to be among the thou^andes of Iu^^^ yet out of thee shall ^ee come
that must rule ^^raell.

To produce proofs in so clear a ^^^^er, were to point to the sun, being
alrea^ie mounted to Zenith, where it is per^ect day.

The legal, the ceremonial, historical, and ^ropheticall Scriptures, all
prefigured Christ to come.

Christ's own testimony agreeing to this: ^earch the Scriptures, for they
testify of me. Ioh, 5, 39,
And again, Had ye bel^eued Moses ye would ^lso have believed me: for Moses
wrote of me.

Semen mulieris contret caput serp^ntis. And ^^^thy seed shall all the nations
of the ^arth be ^lessed.

Of this day and time Jacob prophesied, ^lmost two thousand years a^ore
Christ: that he should come in the fulness of time; The scepter shall not depart
from Judah, nor a ^aw-giuer from between his feet, until Shi^oh come, and
the people shall be gathered unto ^im.

He shall bind his Ass^-fo^le unto the vine, and his A^^es colt unto the b^st
^^^e.

The Lord Go^ will rai^e up a Prophet from Deuteronomy, 18.
among you, out of your brethren: unto ^^^ ye shall barken.

But all this is but to light a candle at ^oone day. For we all, from the ^^^^
to the suckling, from the gray head to the ten^^^ babe, all are trained up in
this doctrine, and we receive it from an autentique truth. We all profess it
and believe it, that Christ ^ at this time took our nature upon him, and
became flesh for our sakes; and therefore ^ will be the more sparing in
amplifying th^^ point.

Were it so that I were to speak before Infidels, or before an unbelieving
sort ^^ Jews, which are not yet resolved th^^ Christ is come: because the
veil is not ^^ taken from them, and their hearts are hardened that they cannot
believe the Scriptures: then had I need to produce all the testimonies that
might be found for confirmation of this doctrine, and gayning ^^ them to the
says.

And yet all this notwithstanding vvo^^^ hardly prevail, since it appears by
Christ's own testimony of the^, that they ^^^^ given over to a rep^obate
sense. Seeing ^^^ shall see, and not perceive, and hearing you (...) hear, and
not understand.

For had they not been altogether hardened, and sold to infidelity, so many
scriptures and prophecies of Christ, (all which ^hey daily read in their
Sinagogues,) would have forced them to acknowledge Christ, whom yet they deny.

We would have thought, that if we had been then living in that age of
theyrs, when Christ was borne among them, conuersed with them, wrought so many
miracles before them, we could not have been so faithless.

All the chiefest Jews both Priests and Scribes, being asked where Christ
should be borne, answered thus: At Bethlehem in Iud^a. Yea, and they allege
this pregnant place out of the Prophets: For it is written, Thou Bethlem. etc.

And again, which condemns them further, in the 7. of John, 42. Says not
the Scripture that Christ shall come of the seed of David, and out of the Town
of Bethleem?

Yet though they knew all this, when Christ came among them, they denied him:
so do they gore themselves in their own sides, ^ike the Baalites.

The reason why the Evangelist so precisely lays down these circumstances
of the manner, time and place, with other occurrences of our Savior Christ
his birth, is for that he would take away all distrustfulnes, and also to
verify the former prophecies of Christ: that when it came to pass, we might
acknowledge the truth thereof, since it fell out in the same sort, time, and
place, as was so long before foretold.

Well, let us especially remember to give God thanks for this grace given us,
that we are not faithless like the Jews, who to this hour resist the truth
in ungodliness.

Or like Thomas the Apostle, that would in no wise believe, till he had put
his fingers into the print of the nails.

But we not seeing, do believe, and can say with an undoubted testimony, Thou
art our Lord, and our God. And a special blessing follows this our faith, for
our Savior iustifies it, Thou have seen, and beleeuest, (...) John, 20.
say, blessed are they that have not seen, and ^^ have believed.

When Jesus then was borne. Here we are to learn the mercy of God, in sending
his son to the world for ou^ good only: which mercy of GOD, made S. John
exclaim with a rauishing kind of admiration; So God loved the world, that he
sent his only begotten son into the world, (...) ^re might live through him.

And in the tenth verse, Herein is love, in that God loved us first, and sent
his son to be ^a reconciliation. etc.

And in the 17. verse, he makes the same repeticion in substance, still
expressing the mercy and love of God.

This was so melodious a note in his ears, when he struck upon love* that as
a bird being taught to record, does double and treble one and the same thing
often, so does John upon this love of God, as if he could never part from it:
So God (...) the word. And herein appeared the (...) of God. And God loved us
first. etc.

John could no more part with this love, then Elisha could with Ehah, ^^ the
whirlewinde divided them.

A Father of the Church (...) upon this love of God, says that the (...) ^n of
the world, and after that the creation of man, did not argue a greater (...) in
God that this: In giving us his Son to be borne for us.

All the other works of God, as the making of the heavens, the (...) and the
creatures, have in them matter enough of admiration, but this one surmounteth
all the rest, being as Nazianzen speaks (...), a work that passes all
admiration: and they may wonder at this; that wonder at nothing besides: at
this love of God in sending his son to be borne for us, after such a
supernatural manner to be borne of a virgin, to translate him from the heavens
to the earth; God, and the Son of God, whom the heavens, nor the heaven of
heavens could contain, now to be included in so narrow a room as the womb
of a Virgin. They that passed by Hazaels corpse, stood still and wondered,
here may we rather wonder at a living body.

Let the foolish Philosophers henceforth burn their books, as the Ephesians
did their vain books: they build al upon reason, Acts, 19.
and upon the causes of things: but this is a reason beyond reason, by no
human reason to be comprised.

The hautie Astronomers that walk among the stars, that send up their
typtoeco^ceits beyond the clouds as if they were the only commanders of the
world, and could measure the heavens with a span, as they seem to shut up all
in one globe, let them trace it no more upon the pinacles of planetary
influences.

If they can be so humble, as to walk with us here beneath upon this earth:
the seely Cratch in Bethleem where our Lord lay, and the womb of a virgin
travailing with the most glorious person of the world, Christ Jesus, at whose
feet Kings and Emperors must cast down their crowns, as before the chief
and supreme King, King of Kings, and all Kings glory; here may they sinde (I
say) matter enough to occupy their wits and senses withal: and here they may
rather contemplate this Comet, this blazing star, as in whose presence, the
greatest star, Sun, Moon, and all do lose their light. Here they may
rather wonder at his so strange coming into the world: as his Disciples
wondered at his going out of the world upon his ascending.

We all acknowledge this love of God, in that he gave us his son to be borne
for us, but where is that serious consideration, where is that Isaac a^ong us,
that will go out into the fields to meditate of this so excellent a benefit?

S. Paul counted this world but dung in respect of the excellent knowledge of
Christ: yet with many now adays dunge it self, the basest thing, is
preferred before the dearest thing. For what is silver and gold, and the mammon
of this world, which the wicked do so highly magnify, but very earth, and
vile dung?

This time wherein we celebrate our lords nativity, we make it a time of
feasting, and a time of merrie-making, and time of rejoicing: but I fear too
too few there are, that rejoice that Christ was as at this time borne for them.

If this true rejoicing were planted in us, it would cut off much vanity and
much rejoicing in evil. It would make us fall into this holy parlee, and
angelical conference: Has God performed this great work for me, and shall I
be unthankful? Shall I forget him that testified so great and so unspeakable
kindness for me, in not disdaining to take my flesh and nature upon him, to be
borne for me, to die for me, to shed his heart blood for me, and to sustain
intolerable torments for me, which I should have undergone. And all to the
end I should live, and not die.

If one man should die for another, here were demonstration of great love: but
in that Christ our Lord would die for us, being the son, the only son of
God, the brightness of glory, and far superior to the Angels, this is yet
greater love, such love as no tongue nor pen can amplify. Express it we
cannot, rather we may wonder at it, and exclaim like Paul, O the riches of
Gods grace.

Was borne. Here we must also learn the obedience of Christ our Lord, and his
humility. As it was love in God the Father, that sent forth Christ into the
world: so it was obedience in Christ the Son of God, that brought him and
presented him unto the world.

God would have him come, and it was his will to come: for so testifies he of
him self. Lo, I come to do thy will o God. Hebr. 10.


O that we could possibly pactise the like holy obedience: that when by the
motion of Gods Spyrit working in us, and calling upon us to do any good thing,
we might be ready to answer, We are come to do thy will. This was ever in
Christ, but it is sildome or never in us: As the Father has Ioh, 9, 29.
sent me, so I do always the things that please him. His humility is
likewise testified in ^aking our flesh upon him: in being borne for us: and in
de^ecting himself to sustain in his glorious body our infirmities. For it
pleased him to become in all things like unto us, sin only excepted.

Great was this humility, and it must bear down our pride: it must teach us
to be humble and meek, if we will pass from earth to heaven, whether he is
now ascended.

Abraham bowed himself to the Angels, to show that there is no way to come
near unto God, or to the resemblance of Christ, but by humility.

All do gape after honor, as Eve thought to be equal with GOD her Maker: she
would be higher then she was, and she would needs from Paradise mount up to
heaven before her time.

But because she sought it by pride, therefore by pride she lost both the one
and the other, heaven and Eden, till Christ regayned them by his humility.

Humility is the first step to honor, as pride is to baseness: and therefore
says Sa^omon, Pride goes before destruction, and an ^igh mind before the
fall.

Pride before, and shame behind, as ^ewys the French-King spoke both pithily
and pleasantly; When pride is on the horse^acke, then is shame on the crooper.

Our Savior in the eyghteene of Mark chaulking the way that leads unto honor,
says, He that humbles himself, shall be exalted: but the proud he checketh,
when he says thus, He that exalts himself, shall be brought low.

As here we find humility in Christ, so may we find it in all the holy men
before and since Christ.

Joseph, though he were the greatest Potentate in Egypt, yet confessed he was
but a shepherds son, and this he uttered being Gen, 46.
in the ruff and prime of his honor. Yet Joseph knew right well that the name
of a sheep-keeper was odious to the Egyptians. Moses is registered to be the
meekest man upon the earth.

David being instaled into the kingdom, humbly acknowledges his beginning:
Thou tookest David, when he followed the Ewes great with young. His honor
made him not forget his pe^gree.

That Prince who spoke mildly and humbly to Eliah, was not consumed: so if
(...) will not be consumed with the fire of Go^ wrath, we must be humble.

Saint Basil speaking of the creation (...) man, says, Cur accepit Deus (...)
Why did God take the dust of the ear^^ C^m (...) audis cur el^uaris, Why should
dust and ashes be proud then?

Surely, neither honor no^ riches, n^^ friends, nor apparel* nor ought
else, if ^ the glory of the world were heaped vpp^ us, it should not make us
proud. If the^ might wear ^oth of gold, remembe^ couers but a ^oule
^^rka^^e, dust and ashes.

Of all sorts of proud men, they are ^o be most condemned that are proud of
the^ apparel, as if they should glory in th^^ shame: for apparel was made
to coue^ our shame. When Ad^^ had sinned, and so knew th^^ he was naked,
presently he made himself breeches of ^^g-leaues.

So sin and shame were the first Tailors that shaped Adams garments.

The humble and proud, are both noted ^^ Scripture by their diversity of
apparel.

John is noted to have vestimentum e pilis Camelorum, et zonum pelliceam, his
apparel of Camels hair, and a girdle of a skin about his loins. Here was
an humble man. But the rich man in Luke 16. is otherwise pictured. It is not
omitted as a matter of special note, that he was apparelled in purple, and
fared deliciously every day. Here was a proud man.

How does the Lord by Esaias rip up the ^ryde of our rioting age: expressing by
^ame all the handmaides of pride. Slippers, calls, and round tyres, sweet balls,
bracelets, and bonnets, the tyres of the head, the tablets, earings, rings, and
mufflers: costly apparel, the vailes and crisping pynnes, the glasses, fine
linen, hoodes and lawnes, etc. Had the Prophet lived in these times, how might
he have inueighed against the gaudines of apparel, long staring ru^^es,
pe^iwiggs, fardingals, maskes, fannes, painted faces, partlets, bracelets,
frontlets, fillets, all lets to let and hinder us from humility.

When God began to make apparel for man, he made it but of the skins of
beasts. And all the former Saints were covered only with Goates-skinnes, and
the ha^^ of Camels. But now this fashion is qu^^ out of fashion, for we rob
all the creatu^^ of the world to cloth our backs, by taking from some their
wool, from some their sk^^ from some their fur, and from some th^^ very
excrements, not sparing so much a the silly poor worm: for the silk is b^
the excrement of worms.

Nay, rather then we will be unfurnished of any thing that may adorn or
beaut^^^ us, we will not stick to diue as it were (...) to the bottom of the
sea, and turn up (...) sands of the sea for precious stones.

When the glystering silks ^uffle on (...) backs, and the precious Indian
rings (...) upon our fingers, when our necks are ^^^ged with goodly and costly
chains, (...) the wristes of our hands with bracelets, (...) think all the
world does admire us: and we seem in our own eyes like the (...) kyms: or
like the builders of Babell, (...) thought to hyde their heads among (...)
clouds.

A godly devout man, who now is w^^^ the Lord, meruaileth much at the vani^^
of proud men: I wonder (says he) the men should in seeking to exalt
themselves, ^o far debase themselves: for in clothing ^hemselues so richly,
they make their apparel better than themselves: their bodies are not so much
worth as their apparel: ^hey would be better then all men, and yet cannot
make themselves equal to the clothes ^hey wear upon their backs.

Solomon, when he was most royally roa^ed, was not half so glorious as the
L^lly in ^he field.

If the Lilly did exceed S^lomon, and ^ee a King, why should private men, or
great men in high place, or in low place howsoever, strive to be proud, since
they cannot make themselves like one of the flowers of the field, which
florisheth before ^he Sieth, and is cut down in a moment.

O let us not so pass away our days in vanity: let us rather learn this
lesson of Christ here taught us, which is humility.

Even from the beginning of his life, the ^ime of his birth in Bethleem, to the
time of his death in Caluary, always he practiced humility.

He sought no rich apparel, but was con^ent to be lapt up in a few clow^es.

When he came to the world, he sought no stately building to dwell in. The
Foxes had holes, and the birds of the air had nestes, but the Son of man had
not whereon to lay his head.

In sted of a cradle he had but a Cratch, and a stable in sted of a chamber,
for there was no room in the Inn, other guests had taken up the lodgings.

See what poor entertainment was made here for him, who was the King of
glory, a palace was not good enough for him: yet in Bethleem, a Town that had
ma^^^ houses in it, and many rooms, he alone could get neither house nor
house-roome.

Joseph his supposed Father, and Mary the blessedst among women, though she
were even now travailing to be delivered, were glad of a stable, like as Jacob
was glad of stones to put under his head in stedde of a pyllow, when he slept
at Bethell.

The Inne-keeper had made it to entertain his guestes horses, yet it is
dignified here, and of a base place it is made an honorable place, of better
reckoning then any Emperors Chamber or Prince in the world: for it was our
Savior Christ his ^odging. The person took away the vile^^es of the place,
and made it honorable.

Micah, when he wrote of Bethleem, Thou Bethleem art little among the cities
of Judah, might also have said, Thou Inn in Beth^eem, or rather, thou stable
of that Inn in Bethleem, art little among the houses in Bethleem, yet in thee
shall he be borne that must rule Israel.

Zachary prophesying of Christ his coming, says thus; Rejoice o Sion, shoute
for ^oy o daughter Jerusalem: for behold thy King Zach, 9, 9,
comes unto thee, he comes poor, and riding upon an Ass, and upon a colt,
the foale of an Ass.

He was poor indeed when he might not command an house: but he did it to
show his humility. The Lord of all, had least of all, he had not so much as
a house to be borne in, and yet his father was a carpenter: he made many a
house for others, but none for himself, no^ his son.

Humility never founded gay houses, and this has sprung up but of late
years: for our ancestors contented themselves with simple lodgings.
Heere-hence comes it, which is not so commonly as truly spoken: Gay-clothing
and sumptuous building, has undone England.

Good-house-keeping, and hospitality,
Are lost through pride and prodigality.
Before time, honest men contented them selves with an homely hall, and a
loouer, no Now stately buildings, cold kitchens.
chimney nor parlour, nor upper chamber, and in such houses the poor found
good relief. But now our houses have so enlarged themselves, as if they were
so many cities, for height and statelines like Nabucadnezers palace in
Babell: and the many rooms in them like the streets of Niniuie, one wrought
within another like Dedalus Labyrinth, or the Pyramides in Memphis, and Egypt,
that a man being once in them, can hardly find the way out of them: many
halls, and many parlours, and many chimneyes, or shows of chimneyes: and of
many, scarce one or none smoking. Goodly mock-beggers.

And all this came in with pride: it was never so in his ruff as now it is,
and therefore no better time to press this example of humility then now. He
teaches us this lesson that teaches us al things; Learn of me, for I am
humble and meek, and ye shall find rest for your souls.

Christ that was borne for us, so govern us by his Spirit of grace, that this
sin of pride, and all other enormities being suppressed in us, we may
practice that humility, which at last will exalt us to immortality, and
infinite happiness.

It follows: In the days of Herod the King.

Here is delivered the time when Christ was borne. When Herod reigned in
Iedea. It is worth the noting to consider of the time of Christ's birth.

It was a time of cruelty, a time of trouble, a time of tyranny, and
persecution. The troubles that fell upon him in his infancy, did presage
continuance of like ensuing calamities through the whole course of his life. He
found no ease, no peace, no place almost in the world, but was ever afflicted,
persecuted, betrayed, arrayned, condemned, and at last crucified.

In the reign of Herod. Herod was the first that stepped upon the stage, and
other tyrants after, succeeded him to act Christ's tragedy.

The murdered innocents in that merciles massacre, can witness the bloody
cruelty of that time.

Christ newborn, is compeld to fly from Bethleem to Egypt, like Moses to
Mydian, The mother and tender babe, were driven to fly, like as the woman in
the revel.
and there remained till they were dead, who sought his life.

In the days of Herod,] that is, in the days of him, whose power was of God:
but he abused his power, and with the same sought to destroy the sons of God.

This Herod was the son of Hyrcanus, as Josephus notes, in lib. 14. Antiq.
ca. 18. Three circumstances are to be noted, concerning this cruel Herod.
First, he was troubled when he heard of Christ's birth: and the rather, for
that he was termed a King. Wherein we may see the eare-marke of the wicked and
reprobates: they be sad when others are merry: when the Sheepheards and Wise
men triumphed and rejoiced, then was Herod and his people discomforted.

There could not come to the world greater tidings of joy, than the news of
Christ's birth, so proclaimed by the Angel that appeared to the Sheepheards:
in testimony whereof, the multitudes of heavenly soldiers praised God, and
sung melodiously unto the Lord. Yea, and with them, the whole frame of nature
seemed to rejoice.

Yet now was Herod in the midst of his dumps, not knowing which way to turn
him: terrors within, and troubles without so affrighted him, as pangs do a
woman that trauaileth with child, and is plained to be delivered. It drove him
to a maze when he heard of Christ, as the handwriting drove Baithazer to a
stackering.

Herod's conscience (it seems) could tell him that he had no interest in
Christ, and therefore no marvel if he were troubled. He feared also that he
should now lose his kingly titles and honors, and that Christ would deprive
him of his kingdom: and so seeking an earthly kingdom, he lost an heavenly
kingdom; and though he lived for a short time like a king, yet he dyed far
unlike a king, for he was eaten up of life in the midst of his glory.

The second circumstance. All Jerusalem was troubled with him. Here is that
proverb verified, Regis ad exemplar totus componitur orbis. The City was
moved to see the King moved, the whole people frame themselves to the
passions of the Prince.

Moses counsel was this, Non sequere multitudinem. etc. Thou shall not follow
a multitude to do evil. But in this place it is noted, that the multitude
follow, and many are drawn by the example of one to do evil. King and people
and all, oppose themselves against Christ.

This is it which David so long before prophesied of Christ: The kings of the
earth and the mighty men, have assembled themselves together: they banded
themselves against the Lord, and against his anointed.

Thirdly; this fear proceeded to spill the blood of Saints thereby to destroy
Christ. This was not Timor, but Tremor: such a terror and fearefulnes, as is
wont to assault the reprobate.

There is fear in the children of God, but it is a fihall fear, a sonne-like
fear: but this is a servile fear that was in Herod; such a fear as expels
all good graces out of us.

Of that fear Saint John speaks, when he says; Fear has painfulnes, and
in Herod here it had painfulnes: for it disquieted him and his people.

It has in it painfulnes, and hatefulness, for so soon as this fear entered,
he began to hate Christ.

By this Herod, the wicked mighty men of this world are noted, which endeavor
by all means to oppress the Gospel of Christ. The Tyrants of the earth could
not abide that the glory of Christ should stand, but they are like the 4.
Angels in the Revel. withholding the 4. winds of the earth, that they should
not blow on the earth, nor on the sea, nor upon any green tree.

Examples of persecuting Tyrants, are plentiful in Scripture.

The tyranny of Pharao against Israel. The tyranny of Saul against David. The
tyranny of Achab persecuting Michaeas.

So the devil still has his instruments to exercise cruelty, and to insult
over Gods people, as here he proucked Herod to persecute Christ.

This note among the rest must not be forgotten, concerning the time of
Christ's birth: when most tyranny was used, and religion most defaced, then was
Christ borne. And therefore in John he is called Lux lucens in tenebris, a light
shining in darkness.

As our Savior was borne under tyranny: so have his members ever since been
borne under tyranny and affliction: to teach us that persecution is ever a
mark of the true Church.

To draw this doctrine to particular applycation. We see in this place the
cruelty and maliciousnes of Herod against Christ, let us learn to hate
cruelty, and rather strive to be meek and gentle.

God hates nothing more than cruelty, and the blood-thirsty man never comes
to the grave in peace.

Cruelty, rather then it shall escape without punishment, will be it own
executioner; like Caine, whose own conscience did persecute him for his
brothers blood, crying within him: Whosoever finds me, shall sley me.

Let this bloody tyrant Herod, be a president of terror to all that carry like
bloody minds. As Herod slew the poor innocents in Bethleem, so the Lord slew
him, the blood of those innocents cried to the Lord for revenge, and their cry
prevailed: for he died most shamefully. As he sent an army of men, even men of
war to destroy all those males: so God sent another kind of vvarriours to
fight against him, even an army of lice. These came about him in troops,
thicker than the flies of Egypt, and did eat him up alive, as you may read
more at large in the 12. of the Acts.

And as Eusebius reports it: he seeing the judgments of God upon him,
uttered these words; Qui vobis Deus videor vitam turpiter finire cogor. I that
am reputed in your eyes as a God, am constrained to die most filthily.

It follows: Wise men came from the East to Jerusalem, saying: Where is he
that is borne King of the Jews?

Since neither Herod, nor his people the inhabitants of Jerusalem, did labor
to seek out Christ, lo God styrreth up others, even mere strangers to come
from far, from the East to Jerusalem to worship his son.

A Prophet is not without honor save in his own Country, and amongst his
own. Christ being in Bethleem among his own, is not received, and therefore,
as our Savior told the Jews when they bragged they had Abraham to their
Father, God is able even of stones, to raise up sons to Abraham. So here,
rather than Christ shall want honor, God rayseth men from far, that never
knew Jury, nor Jerusalem, to come unto him, and to present him with rich
gifts, undoubted testimonies of a true worship.

They were Wise men: yet but worldly wise, till they came to Christ, and then
they learned of him true wisdom, even the Word of life, which was able to
save their souls.

In the example of these Wise men, travailing so far to seek Christ, we
must learn, that if we will come to Christ, as we ought, we must forsake
our parents, our Country, and friends. We must leave all behind us, the
world and the cares thereof, to the end we may be the lighter in our iou^ney
toward Christ.

We shall be sure to find no rubbes in the way able to stay us, if we do
but consider that we are running unto Christ.

To Christ must we run, not to Idols, nor to the power of men; but we must
travail to him alone, to hi^ only must we offer, and to no other.

For he is Agnus Dei: he is the Lamb of GOD, that takes away the sins of
the world.

It is neither Angel nor Saint that can hear us, or entreat for us, or can
grant the thing we ask for. Christ alone can do it, for he alone has borne
our infirmities.

He is the only Physician that heals us, he is the brazen Serpent upon
whom, vvho-soeuer looks, recouereth. He is the Samaritane that powers wine
and oil into our wounds.

These men thus travailing to Christ, are not recorded who they were, and it is
cu^iositie for us to pry unto that, which the spirit of God has kept secret.

But Wise men they were, and religiously wise it seems they were, for
they were inflamed with a fervent desire to see Christ.

Some are of opinion that they were Magicians, such as had skill in divining,
and interpreting difficult matters, and in foretelling things to come. And the
original word would seem to carry this sense, Magoi.

Such knowledge was extraordinary: and it is forbidden and accursed in many
places of Scripture. Let none be found among you that has a spirit of
divination: or that is a s^rcerer, or a charmer. Deuteronomy. 18. 10.

And if any turn after such, Ego excidam. Leuit. 20.

And such it may be were these Wise men before they knew Christ: but this
profane wisdom went from them, when the true knowledge of Christ was
implanted in them.

These Magi were Wisemen and Gentiles, they first came to see Christ, and
therefore they are called the first fruits of the Gentiles: they had neither
the law nor the Prophets read unto them, yet they first labor to find out
Christ.

Signifying, that it is God only who forms every Christian man's heart, he
can soon turn David from adultery, Adam to confess his sin: Paul of a
persecutor to become a professor. He can make of stones, sons to Abraham, and
of Gentiles sound Christians. As here he caused these Wise men to come from
far, even from the East to Jerusalem to vvorshippe Christ: So is there no
respect of persons with God, but in all places, who so fears him, and works
righteousness, shall be accepted.

From the East to Jerusalem. As Christ our Lord came from the bosom of his
Father to be incarnate, and to dwell among us: so these Wise men came from
their country from the East, to find out Christ their Redeemer.

This shows their great desire. Jeroboam said it was too far to go to
Jerusalem, but these Wse men did not think it too far to come from the Fast
to Jerusalem to worship Christ, and ^inding him not at Jerusalem, they traueled
yet further, to Bethleem in Judea: they never rested till they found out him
that saved them.

By grace they sought him, and by faith they found him, whom they would not
lose again for the gayning of the world.

But leave we these Wise men thus traueling, and return we to our selves
awhile, and I doubt not before we have done, by the guide of that star in
this story mentioned, to place the^ in the Inn at Bethleem, together with that
princely babe, though poo^ely lodged, whom they with such a longing desire
expected to behold.

The use of the doctrine to our selves is this, we must ca^y the like desire,
and the same holy affection that they did. We must labor to come to the
knowledge of Christ, we must seek after where it is to be had by traueling for
it, though it were as far as Jerusalem: knowing that the sufferinges of this
world are not worthy the glory that shall be revealed.

We may not look that Christ should come to us, we must rather go to him,
and never cease going, till we come where our souls and he man belodged
together.

We read of the earnest care of the church in the ^ of (...) in the first,
second and ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^.

She never gave over to seek him, (...) she ^ound him.

And so should we be like diligent and careful. We should no^ ^u^^er our
eyes to sleep, nor our eye-^^ds to ^^^mber, nor the temples of our ^ead to
take any (...) ^^ should not cease (...) and day seeking, and still seeking and
inquiring after him whom our soule^ long for, till we have ^ound him. Like
these Wise men, whom their ^edious journey (...) inquired, even in the (...) of
Jerusalem, and in the open places thereof, whether all the people of the wo^ld
h^d recou^^e: there they demanded for the new borne King of the ^ewes and at
length in Bethleem they find him.

This may (...) the lazy (...) of (...) men, ^ho (...) they know the comfort
and (...) they have in Christ, yet will not (...) miles to hear the Word which
is the (...) (...) now where (...).

Christ is now no (...) to be found in his bodily presence among us: only
(...) is present in the Word, and there alone he will be sought for.

As Christ showed himself to the Wisemen at Bethleem, and after showed
himself to the Doctors in the Temple: So in our Bethleems, in our cities, and
Towns, and in our Temples does he still show him self in his word and in his
Gospel, daily taught and preached.

It is not now that Jerusalem in Judea, no^ N^^ (...), (...) (...)^^m.
that Bethleem, where these wise men once were, that Christ will be found in
now.

Our travel is easier, and our journey ^a^ shorter, he is come home to our own
country from (...) to England, and from Jerusalem to London, and to all the
Cities and towns wi^ in our Land, teaching and expounding in our S^agogues
every Sabbath. Yet ^ewe labor to hear him: the Wise men shall rise up at the
last day to condemn such.

Yet more, it controules the loose and dissolu^^ carelesnes of those licentious
libertines. I cannot call them men, but rather (...) of men, who having Christ
preached unto them at their doors, within the walls of their Cities and
towns, will not (...) to it, dishonoring in a graceless im(...) the Sp^^it
of grace, and despising, as much as in them lies, both Christ, and the
Ministers of his Gospel.

Such are worse then the unbelieving Jews, for they heard Christ every
Sabbath: nay they are worse then Herod: for he desired to see Christ, and to
hear him.

But leave we them to their dissolute resolutions: let them remain while they
list, in the darkness of Egypt. But let us hold Goshen, the comfortable light
whereof will direct us in our passage, as the clowdy pillar did the Israelites
through the wilderness, or as the star did these Wise men. When this
stifnecked generation shall stumble at the truth, and err from it, like the
Sodomites, groping for the door of Lots house Gene, 19.
when they were stricken with blindness.

Where the Spirit of GOD is, there is a longing and a thirsting, and a burning
desire of the word. But sure there can be no grace where there is no liking of
godliness. I exhort you then, and beseech you beloved in the Lord, even in the
bowels of Jesus Christ, who will one day call you to a reckoning for your
single-soale service of him labor to hear the word, travel to it, desire it
in a burning affection.

If you have any grace of Gods Spirit, any measure of santi^ycation, proceed
and grow more and more in the lively faith of Christ Jesus. Cast away all your
cares of this world: and labor only to have that saving knowledge which God
has revealed in his w^^d. This one thing is necessary* and it will supply all
your wants.

You are not yet the seru^unts of Christ, till this desire of the Word be
planted in you.

They that carry not an hungry appetite to the Word^, let them be for honor
and dignity how excellent so ever, for wealth and riches how potent soever,
for friends and followers how mighty soever, yet are they but (...) (...) or
(...), that are full of (...) and pu^rifyed ^ones. Because the comfort of the
word is sequestered from their souls which alone can magnify them. Without the
Word nothing can make us happy, and having it, nothing can make us miserable.

It is the (...) (...) that ^eedes us to (...) life: ^^ is the pearl for which
the wi^e Merchant would give all that ever ^^ (...) is the (...) of David,
which opens and no man (...), and (...), and no man opens: it is the only
eye-salue, wherewith our eyes being anointed, can not choose but clearly
behold Christ.

Name the Word, and thou have named all things, it is all ^^ all, and
contains all the blessings of Gods ^^ore-house, which are for number so many,
and for value so great, that no man can know them but he that has them: like
the stone in the Revelation, that white stone with a new Name graven in it,
which no man knows, saving he that receaueth it.

These wise men come (...) from the East, to Jerusalem. Things of high prise,
and of necessary use, if they be not near us, must be sought far of, where
they are to be had. And we must spare no pains nor cost in procuring them.

Co^elius sent to loppa for Peter, to inform him in the way of righteousness.
David longing for the return of the Arc, went and brought it from (...).

The (...) longing to see his prod^gall son, ran to meet him a great way
of, and kissed him.

(...) sent to (...) to (...), and here these Wisemen (...) East to Beth-leem
to seek out Christ, David's Lord.

Another note worthy the observation, comes to be considered in these Wise
men. These wise men did not cast the perrill and lets that might happen in
their journey.

The Gentiles might not converse with the Jews, ^or they were enemies one to
the other. Yet these enemies through whose country they were to pass, did not
ass^ight them, the dangers subject to their journey did not disquiet them, the
tediousnes of the way did not terrify them: nothing could stay them from
their intended enterprise.

Their io^fulnesse to see Christ, took away all worldly carefulnes: Our
practice should be like theyrs. No business of this li^e should withdraw us from
Christ.

When they came to Jerusalem, they found Herod snaring them, all the City in
an vproa^e, King and people, and all were moved. So when we come to Christ, ^e
sh^l ^ind an Herod without us, and an Idol^^^^call Jerusalem within us: Tyrants
with ou^ and (...) within: many lets and nets, and ^^ny snates to ^^^^p us. Put
we must respect neither Herod nor Ier^salem, but still hold on our viage to
Bethleem, the place where Christ lodges.

In all ages there will be satan's instruments, like so many Lions in the
passages, to stop the children of God in their good courses. And now with us
there are many Herod's, many like Herod and Archelaus to cut the throat of
Religion, as he sought the life of Christ in the blood of the innocents.

But yet must we go forwards like these Wise men, we must not fear them that
kill the body, rather ^eare him that can cast both body and soul into hell
fi^e.

Stronger is he that is with us, than whole legions of enemies, that band
themselves with them against God. Let them ^aile and per^ecute never so much,
like Ze^^ che^^b, and Rab-shakeh: yet GOD will put an hook in their nostrils,
and they shall not prevail. No more than the stood preua^led, which was cast
out of the mouth of the Dragon in the Revelation, against the woman t^^t sled
to the wilderness.

We have seen his star. Here comes to be considered how they knew he was
borne. The sta^^e gave them knowledge, and was their guide in (...) journey,
never leaving them till they came to Beth-leem.

S. Austin says, that at the birth of Christ a new star appeared. A blazing
Comet that never showed it self before: and at his death, the Sun, greater
then the greatest star, was obscured.

At this bvrth, infants were murdered, and at his death they were crowned.

At his birth, hell was more conquered, and his enemies more troubled.

Eusebius says, that at the b^^th of Christ, there happened to break up on a
sudden a goodly Spring, that ran with oil the space of one day.

And at the same time in Romea circle was seen about the Sun, no less
clear then the Sun.

And that when the imperial Crown was brought by the Senate to Oct^uius
Augustus, he refused it: saving that a greater Prince then himself was now
borne: to whom all the crowns and kingdoms in the world did belong.

A famous Temple at the same time rent in s^nder: in the dedication whereof
when the Oracle was demanded how long the same should continue: answer was
given it should remain, till a Virgin should bring forth a son.

These, and many such wonders then happened, all being evident signs, and
perfect demonstrations of the new borne King: the rather to work in men's
ha^ts, and to stamp in them a never dying knowledge of this wonderful birth of
Christ our Lord.

By the Star they knew him: and by the starie they sound him. And so if we
will know Christ and find him as they did, we must examine our selves (...)
this star has appeared unto us or not.

There is Duplex st^lia. This (...) is of two sorts: There is a spirit (...) in
us, and another with ^^ us.

The star without is the (...) Word. The star within, (...) of faith and
charity, without (...) not see Christ.

In the first of the Revel (...) called a star in the hand (...)

And Christ himself (...) morning star.

The Minister must have (...) a star, which is to be always bright and
shining, and to be ever in motu, to shine in doctrine, and to shine in his
manner of living: to go before his people in example of good life and
doctrine, to be a guide unto them, as this star was a guide to the wise men to
direct them to Christ.

To be ever in motu: that is, to exercise his gifts of teaching and preaching
and godly conference continually without cealing, without intermission. Like a
star that s^^^ trauelleth and keeps his course night and day.

The star of faith which is within us, contains five circumstances, noted in
the (...) of John. The multitude of believing le^s, when they heard that Christ
should come to Jerusalem, in testimony of their faith, took branches of
Palme-trees, showing their gratitude: so our faith must receive Christ, (...)
Palmis, with palm branches, that is, with praise and thankfulness.

They were green branches, ^ircntes rami, so must our faith be green, it must
never wither, it must always operari, it must branch forth into good works
like to fruc^ifying greene-boughes.

They confessed him Hosanna, blessed is the King of Israel, that comes in
the Name of the Lord. So sides, faith, cannot be without confession. They also
called upon him Hosanna, to show the necessity of ^^^^cation.

Lastly they followed him: so faith always follows Christ, and is ever with
christ, like the beloved disciple that leaned upon his bosom.

We have seen his star, and are come to worship him. Here is set down
the end why they came. They came to worship him. For they opened their
treasures, and presented unto him Gold, Frankincense, and My^th. By their rich
presents, you may guess at the rich assection and love they bare to Christ.
They came to give all holy worship to him that was the King of glory.

And therefore, in testimony of their loialty and obedience: they bring unto
him gystes worthy such a King, as it were to defray the t^bute of an undivided
love gold, Frankencense and Mirth.

Behold a free-will-offering, which faith drew forth, and pure devotion
presented an offering better accepted then all the f^^ of Ra^s. What gyfts
might be of great^^ value then these? So is it shll with the godly, they count
count nothing too dear which they bring to Christ.

Look the (...) of Exodus Pure Mirth and Frankencense were appointed by a
spec^commaund, for the oil o^ holy ointment, and for the persume, among other
things of price there noted.

In the 36. of Exodus the people brought so liberal and so (...) toward the
building of the Sanc^^^^: that M^^s was (...) to pro^^^me they (...) give over.
Such and so free is the hurt of the righteous, when faith does (...) it, and
the grace of Gods sp^^^t inflames it, and such was the gift of these Wise men.

This read^nes in them must encourage us to present and give out of the
^^easures of hearts, (...) to the lord.

And this we may (...) do, since God requires of us, not gold o^ ^^uer, or
the like: but he requires us to offer but our selves, a (...) even our souls
and bodies to serve the Lord.

Offer not to me thy goods, or thy wealth, or thy gold: but (says God) if thou
vvilt give me any thing, give me thy heart.

Sliuer it mine, and gold is mine: says the Lord Aggei.

We cannot enrich him, if we give him all that we have, if we give him all the
world and the kingdoms thereof, we give him but his own. For, Terra est
Do^ani, ^t pl^ntiu^^ e^^s: The earth ^s the Lords, and the fulness thereof.

GOD required in former ages large sacrifices. Oxen, Sheep, and Calves: but
these sacrifices have now an end, and are long agone determined: but the
offering that best pleases GOD now, is that proclaimed by Solomon, (...), give
(...) thy heart. And that spoken by Micah in his sixth chapter.

Where-withall shall I come (...) the Lord, or how my self before the (...)
GOD? shall I come before him with burnt ^^^rings, or with Calves of a (...)
old?

Will the Lord be (...) of Ra^^es, or with t^nne (...) of o^le, or shall I
give my first (...) for my transgression, even the fruit of my body for the
sin of my soul.

He has showed thee o man what is good, and what the Lord requires, surely to
do justice, to love mercy, and to humble thy self, and to walk with thy God.

So then ye honor Christ aright, and ye then worship him in spirit and truth,
in presenting these treasures of the heart. This will be better accepted then the
sacrifycing of a Bullock that has horns and hoofes.

If you thus glorify Christ, he will also glorify you: and when he comes
in glory, he will take us to himself, and give us better habitations then his
own Son found with us when he dwelt among us, even glorious mansions in his
Kingdom of glory.

To him be glory for ever.

The true Lovers Canticle.
1. JOHN. 4. 10. 11. Herein is love, not, that that we loved God, but that
God loves us, and sent his son to be areconciliation for our sins.
Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also to love one another.
THis love holds me to it like an adamant, and I cannot be divided from it:
for that it is such a matter as car^ieth with it doctrine of greatest
substance, and of greatest necessity.

Somewhat already has been spoken in the former Treatise concerning this
love: and now comes more to be spoken thereof in this place by course of the
text. Not doubting, but that this argument of love, being presented again
before ^our eyes, as at a second view, it will the rather be planted in you.

Either the one or the other, that former, or this latter discourse, must
needs slampe so deep an impression in the tables of your hearts, as no
perpetuity of time shall be able to out-weare.

Saint Matthew first in his Gospel commended unto us the love of God, in
sending his son into the world to be borne for us: and here Saint John in
his Epistle, commends unto us the like love of God, in sending his son into
the world to die for us.

John was he of the Apostles, who alone with a special appellation is termed
the disciple of the Lord: and the disciple whom Jesus loved: whom our Lord
also seemed to carry (as it were) in his own bosom.

Christ his Lord for loving him, must needs draw like love and like
affection from him toward Christ.

And to express this love, as if he were wholly compounded of love, this
beloved Disciple sounds nothing else almost throughout his Epistle, but this
love we speak of.

The love of GOD toward us, our love again toward God. Gods love first, and
ours after: all is love.

And therefore this Text may well be called, The Lovers Canticle. For the
Apostle begins the Text with love, and continues and ends the same with love:
making love (as it were) the burden of his song. Heere-in is love, in that GOD
loved us, and sent his son to reconcile us: Beloved, if God so loved us, we
ought also to love one another.

All you that have been foolishly devoted to fond love, that have ill spent
many good hours in pouring out your passionate complaynts, and in a vain
vain of humorous conceytednesse, have taken great pains to pen loves Poems,
idle toys of adle-heads: hence-foorth suspende both pen and poem: cast them
from you, as the Israelites hanged their harpes upon the willowes.

Time that tries all things, and is the mother of Truth, can well assu^e you
with infallible demonstrations, that such lascivious love, or rather such
lawless lust, will but lead you to vanity, and vanity will seal up
iniquity.

And so being bereaved of all grace and godliness, you become in a moment
utterly irreligious.

If you must and will needs love: if you have made it your profession to be
amorous, here is love, even that true love, (that other to this, is but an
Idol, like Dagon to the Arc) this love, how simply tired s^euer, is able to
draw all ha^ts-con-ceits.

In eternizing her praises, if so be you make her the Mistres of your
affections, you shall sinde matter enough to work upon.

This love calls upon you, as the chief commander of all your actions, and
the only supreme Sovereign, unto which your tongues and pens should
sacrifice their well-bestowed labors.

Herein is love. etc. VVhere-vnto shall I liken this love of GOD? This holy
love is like a golden chain that by an inseparable union linketh together God
and us, like David aad Jonathan, yoaked together by an inviolable leagne of
amity.

VVhere-vnto again may I liken this love? It is like to Jacobs ladder, which
reached from the earth to the heavens: on the Gene, 28.
which were Angels descending and ascending, and God himself slanding above
upon the top of it.

Yet once more, to what shall I liken this love, or whereunto may it be
compared? It is like to the golden Censer in the hand of the Angel before the
Altar, which Censer was full of sweet odours, the smoke whereof did ascend up
before God out of the Angels hand.

And it was a sweet savor in Gods nos^rils, for God accepted it: so we read
in the 8. of the Renel. Now i^ we will be accepted with God, we must use this
incense. Love must be the golden Censer of vvellsmelling odours to be carried
up to the Lord, and to be presented before the Altar, and before the throane,
by the ministry of the Angel, that is Christ, the holiest of all holies, who
alone shall be accepted for us, for that he alone has reconciled us.

Jacobs ladder reached up to heaven, and this must be our ladder, if we will
learn like the Angels to ascend up where God is.

A chain consists of many linkes, and all are fastened in so sure one in
another, that they cannot be sundred or divided, and he that draws but the one
link, draws unto him all the whole chain. This chavne is love, and we must
of necessity be possessed of this chain, if we will have to do with god. For
God is not but where is unity, and this chain is unity: for what is a
chain but many linkes in one. First one link, then another, then a third to
that, and after that another, and so the chain is perfited.

Nay, there is such a mutual relation between GOD and us, if this love be in
us whereof we speak, that we can in no sort separate the one from the other,
no not in intellectu, not so much as in conceit, as the Schoolmen term it.

The Apostle Saint John proouing the same, where he says, GOD is love, and he
that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him. etc.

This love is two-sold, consisting of two parts: The love of God toward us,
and our love to one another.

We ought first to consider of Gods love, and then to descend to our selves,
making a pattern first of his love toward us, and out of it to frame a like
love in our selves one to another.

God goes before us in the example of this love and we must follow after as
near as we can, in practizing the like love among our selves.

Herein is love. The principal proposition handled by the Apostle in this
place, is the general doctrine of Christ, who was sent forth from the bosom
of his Father unto the world, to reconcile us by the virtue of his death:
which doctrine is grounded upon these arguments, for strength like a brazen
wall, against which, satan and the power of hell cannot prevail.

The first argument is drawn from the mercy or love of God: in these words:
Herein is love.

The second from his will, being a special effect of his love, in these
words: And sent his son. etc.

Many properties and attributes are in GOD, which it behooves us especially
to take notice of.

First, he is omnipotent, proved by his Creation. Wise, by his daily
gubernation. Just in his promises. Merciful, for he spares sinners. Loving
to all, for he calls all, and is careful for all.

But specially for the elect: who do hear when he calls.

His lone is here justified: for that he sent his son to the world, that so
many as believed, might have life everlasting.

The fountain of all graces is love, which drew from him a greater work then
the Creation of the world: even the work of our Redemption, a matter of so
great mystery, that it caused all the Prophets, from Adam the son of God, to
John Baptist the son of Zachary, in all times and ages to speak and write
of this superabundant grace and rich good will long before the foundations of
the world determined, but in the fullness of time revealed unto us by the
coming of his Son, by whom we ^^he. 1. 7.
have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of our sins according
to his rich grace.

This exceeding love of GOD, being deeply wa^ed in a careful consideration,
m^^^ needs work mightily in the children of God* and drive them to acknowledge
with S. John in this place: That ^eere^^ ^^ (...) indeed.

These first words in the Text, how bare and naked so ever they may seem at
the first front or blush, do carry in them matter of moment: they must run in
our mouths if we sound them rightly and significantlie with a kind of
Emphasis. Thus if you require to know the love of God, why here you may learn
it: Saint John tells you that hee^e-in was the love of God made manifest, in
that he sent his son. etc.

You are bought with a price, says the Apostle: the words make but a bare
show, but they are very significant: as if he should have said: A price with
a witness.

So herein is love: that is, a love with a witness. For God so loved us, that
he spared not his only Son, but gave him for us all to death.

Him that knew no sin. God made to be sin for us, that we should be made
the righteousness of God by him.

It is not possible for us to express the greatness of this love of God in this
behalf, for it is infinite, it is as great as God is great, whose glory
fills the world, the heavens, the earth, and the creatures.

No man can understand this love, but they that have the bene^^^e of it, I
mean the redeemed of the lord: as no man could learn the Elders new song,
^u^ the (...) forty four thousand which were brought from the earth. Revel. 14.

This love of God we all do behold, like the brightness of the Sun, whose
fiery beams and crystal rays, proceeding as from the Father of all lights,
pass forth to the ends of the world.

But where be they that in beholding this love of God, this sunne-bright
cleerenesse of Gods rich grace, will be ready with the Wisemen to present
unto God all holy vvorshyp.

Where is the rich thankfulness aunswerable to this rich grace?

We read of ^enne Lepers that were cleansed: and of the ten but one
returned to give thanks. So we are all cleansed by the blood of Christ, but
scarce one of ten returns to give thanks to him that cleansed him, thereby to
testify our dutiful affection to Christ, as Christ testified his to us, in
laying down his life for the many: sealing up remission of sins by his blood.

The sick is cured, but he has forgotten the Physician that cured him. The
diseased is delivered, and the mortal wound is salued: but the Patient now
become a whole man, remembers neither his sore, nor yet the Physician.

Herein is love, not that we loved God. Saint John in speaking of this love,
does not presently acquaint us with the particularitie of this love; but he
first suspendeth the matter, the rather to draw from us attention and
carefulnes.

Before I proceed to tell you what this love is, I will first tell you what it
is not.

A thing that is sought for being presently found, is no longer thought on, and
so if the Apostle should upon the sudden discover to us this so great a
mystery of Gods love, it would be but lightly regarded.

Therefore he offers it, and yet draws it back again, and then presents it
again: still offering, and yet withholding, to make us the rather long after
it with a more eager and fervent affection.

Like children in this respect, who the more they be denied of that they
would have, the more they cry, and do never leave crying till it be given
them.

Not that we loved God. The love I mean, says Saint John* is not the love
that you mean. It is not vain love, nor self-love, nor carnal love, nor the
love of the world, nor the love of honors, nor the love of pleasures, nor the
love of riches, it is none of all these, for this is our love: but I am to tell
you of Gods love.

It was not love in us, but in God was this love that caused Christ to come
unto the world Nay there was in us no love at all, the contrary was in us, even
hatred and enmity: and therefore it is said, cum hosts essemus.

And therefore well might the Apostle make this conclusion against us, not that
we loved God. And we our selves do justify the truth thereof in our selves,
for we know that we love our lusts, and our vanities, and the world, more then
God.

Adams corruption has trans-fused it self into Adams children, even all his
posterity. God had given him all the kingdoms of the earth, and placed him in
Paradise, this worlds heaven, here God exhibited plentiful testimony of his
love, but Adam could show forth no love to God for this: so proved by his
wilful disobedience. The taste of one Apple made him forget both himself and
God his Maker. And have not our pleasures the same sovereignty over us.

Judas sold his Master for thirty pence, he loved his money better then his
Master, and many Mammonites now, whose cares are upon their coffers, and
whose minds are upon the bag as Judas was, if they would not be corrupted
with money to betray Christ, yet they could be contented to betray the members
of Christ, their brethren and neighbors, for fewer shekels of filuer then
Delilah took from the Princes of the Philistims.

No man would willingly be leprous, yet many worldlings that are carried away
with the love of riches, could be contented to buy a leprofie with less then
two bags of silver, 2. Reg. 5.
as Gehazie did.

Esau, as he had an earthly name, so was he earthly minded: his prophanenes
is laid open to all eyes, where it is registered of him that he sold his
birthright for a mess of pottage. And he is no less infamous for so doing,
then he that burnt Dianas Temple at Ephesus, or that Tyrant, who harped N^^o.
at Romes flames.

That Esau is long ago dissolved into earth and dust, but out of his ashes
others like him are risen up (like Cadmus brood) and the same prophannes that
was in Esau, is grown up with them. Many Edomites live now, that can be
content to sell a better patrimony then he did, even their spiritual
inhearitance which they should have in Christ, and all for the transitory
pleasures of this life.

To be short, we should love God only and principally, before all things. We
should love God more the^ our parents, our country, our friends, our selves.
etc.

He that loves Father or mother, or sister or brother, or wife or ^hyldren,
or kinsfolks, more then me, says our Savior Christ, is not worthy to be my
disciple. This ought to be: but we cannot yet apply our selves to this love
which Christ does here so necessarily require. We are all like Demas loath to
part with the world, and like the young rich man in the gospel, who was
unwilling to leave his possessions: he loved his wealth better than Christ.
And therefore, when Christ bad him follow him, he chose rather to follow the
world. And all the peacemakers in the earth, are not able to set these two at
one, the love of God, and the love of the world. For Christ has spoken it, If
you love the world, the love of God cannot be in you. You see the truth then of
this conclusion, not that we loved God, but that God loved us: and sent his
Son.

Here the Apostle shows the particularitie of the love, which all this while
he suspended. Herein is that love manifested, in sending his son. etc.

There was no good thing in us at all, no mirit or desert that might move GOD
to give us his Son. It was his love only, and the good pleasure of his will,
as the Apostle speaks to the Ephesians, in the first chapter.

Our adversaries ought to blush, if Christian modesty did rest upon them,
when they read this text in John's Epistle, and that other in his gospel: since
they deny that truth which is is both places and elsewhere so strongly
maintained.

They would persuade men by their doctrine of merit, that this love of God is
but a matter of course: as if God were bound to love us, and that we can
deserve at gods hands to be so loved.

Yea, they say we may do good works of Supererogation, more then God
requires. We need not far fet Scriptures to answer such. One Text of
many shall suffice, this now in handling. God loved us first, and not we him.

Nay, he loved us when we hated him, and fell from him by wilful transgression.

As soon as Adam had sinned, GOD in this his love salued him with the promise
of Christ, the seed of the woman breaking the Serpents head.

This love of God was universal, it extended to all men, of all sorts, Jews
and Gentiles, circumcised and uncircumcised, bond and free, believers and
unbelievers.

In thy seed shall all the Nations of the earth be blessed. All might have
taken hold of this blessing, as freely as Adam might stretch his hand to all
the trees of the garden, save the tree of knowledge. God would have all men to
be saved, and therefore Christ was offered to all: but in that all be not
saved, the fault is theyrs that will not partake of this blessing.

The death of Christ was sufficient for all, but it was not effectual for all:
it was effectual only for the believers.

And therefore says this same John in the 3. Chap. of his Gospel: That, so many
as believed on him, should not perrish.

All were bidden to the marriage of the Kings Son, yet all did not come: nay,
they who were first bidden came not at all. So the fault was theirs, that
refused, being so solemnly invited.

In like manner, all are not saved that are called to partake of this love of
God, universally made known to the whole world in Christ, who would have all
men to be saved.

Only the believers have this prerogative: For many are called, but few are
chosen.

And sent his son to be a reconciliation.

Infinite are the testimonies of Gods love toward us, as Paul said, O how
unsearchable are thy judgments (O Lord) and thy ways past finding out: So may
we say; o how deep is thy love (o Lord) toward us, how unsearchable and
past finding out? no bucket of man's understanding is able to sound the bottom
of this bottomless fountain.

Thy love was manifested first, in giving us a Being, when before we were not,
in committing to us the government of this mossie world, and the creatures
therein; making us for dignity but a little infe^iour to the Angels, pouring
upon us all temporal blessings. For all things that ever were or are, for
our sakes they were, and are created, all for the ministry of man^ all to
serve man, and man to serve GOD.

This tes^^s^^th the abundant love of our Creatoar: but more then can be most,
is this exceeding testimony of his love, in sending his Son, his only
begotten Son, Christ Jesus, into the world for our redemption. The work of
the six days Creating of the world, is nothing to the work of the
redemption of the world.

Which made Saint John exclaine with a special kind of admiration: So God
loved the world, that he gave. etc.

And again in this place, Herein is love, in that God ^ent his s^nne to be a
reconciliation. He spared not his only son, but gave him for us all to
death.

Never was there a time since man began to be upon the earth, sitter for the
learning and practicing of this heavenly lesson, than now, for these are the
worst and last times, wherein the sins of men are grown ripe, for the sickle
of Gods wrath: and men drink up iniquity like water. Men are so frozen in
their dreggs, and the world with the lusts thereof, ^ath so captiued them,
that they can sinde no leisure at all to enter into this careful consideration
of Gods love.

You know the parable of the excusers, in the gospel: One had bought a Farm,
another had bought a yoke o^ Oxen, the third had married a wi^e So is it in
this declyning age of the world: some are so entangled and wholely prepossest
with the cares of this life: others again so sold to carnality and
lycensiousnes, as if they had bound themselves appren^zes to the devil, to
serve in the stauery of sin.

And a third sort so irreligiously careless, and void of all seeling, that
they can find no svveetenesse, no comfort, no taste in GODS word, farie wide
of David's affection: it was in his mouth sweeter than the honey-combe; but to
these men, it is more bitter than vvormewood.

They think every moment of time too long, which is bestowed in Gods service.
Only, they come to the Temple of God for fashions sake, and as it were by
compulsion, like a Bear to a stake, drawn by violence, and as soon as they
are in the church, they covet to be out of the Church, far unlike those Lamps
in the Sanctuary, which were always burning.

And so by one means or other, few or none can think upon the love of God.

All such are here pinched by the elbow, and are wakened with the alarm that
S. John here sounds. Herein is love. etc.

And sent his Son. In the 3. Chap. of his Gospel (he says) He gave his
Son: all is one.

God gives and sendes his Son Christ unto us, and yet the Papists will keep
him from us, unless we will buy him at their hands.

God does give his Son freely, and the Son offers him self freely, and yet
the Pope will sell him.

Hoe, every one that is thirsty, come to the Esa. 50.
waters, and you that have no money, come?

The Popes proclamation runs in another tenor. Hoe (says he) you that have
money, come and buy out your sins, you shall have Bulls, and pardons, and
indulgences, and dispensations, and privileges to sin while you live. These
are strong delusions, sweet allurements, and able to enti^e all the Merchants
of the earth to this so great a Mart.

But he kills all dead in the ^ewse: this is it that marres the market; you shall
be sure to pay well for it.

S. John says, here was love in God to give his son for us: but we may say,
here is no love in the Pope, save the love of lucre, the love of money.

So does he throughout show himself a plain Antichrist, and a Vi^ar, not to
God, but to the devil, even his chief sovereign.

God looks for no retribution: his love freely presents him: he has given us
him, and all things with him.

In this gift are all things contained, For in him dwells all fulness.

He is omnia in omnibus, all in all things, and had we all the world,
without him it were nothing. In him we live, and move, and have our Being; in
him we are at peace with God and men; in him we obtain remission of our sins:
it is he, who was wounded for our sins, and smitten for our iniquities. He was
borne for us that we might be borne again in him; and so by that our new birth
might have an entrance into that holy place whether ^e is now ascended.

It is he that suffered for us, to the end we should not suffer those indurable
torments which by our sins we had incurred. He was (...) for us, that we should
learn to cru(...) our old man with our crooked affections. In a word: He is
become our redemption, sanctification, salvation, and daily preservation: he is
our health, our wealth, our liberty; name but Christ, and thou have named
heaven and earth, and all the rich treasures and blessings in them both. For in
that God has given unto us his son, he has likewise with him given us all
things.

(...) for our sins. Reconciliation imports a regayning of Gods favor once
lost.

Why then we cannot per^itly consider of the greatness of this benefit of
reconciliation, unless we look back into our condition and state, before
this atonement and reconciliation wrought in Christ.

We were before in a most wretched and miserable estate, subject to sin, and
^athan, under the curse and malediction of the law and the wrath of God, quite
aliants from God, and from the covenant.

This was the state wherein Adam left us: a state that had in it nothing but
wretchedness, sinfulnes, and corruption; but now since the exceeding love of
God has appeared, in sending his son to be our reconciliation, and to set us
at peace with God by the virtue of his death: Since this true sun of
righteousness showed it self, all is salued: sin, death, and the devil, have
no more power over us: for Christ has enlarged us, and set us at liberty, like
prisoners at a laile-deliuery.

All this duly considered, we may sing with Paul, Nulla ^st (...): new there
is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus

And henceforth we may be ready with our Apostle, in th^^ place, to (...) up
our hearts in the midst of all our cros^es, with this song of deliverance,
which (...) a better harmony then all the Instruments of music in the world.

Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that God loved us, and sent his
Son to be a reconciliation for our sins.

It follows.] Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also to love one another.

We are not capable of this love of God, except we also love one another.

Gods love going first, should beget and form in us a like love one toward
another.

Here then we are to learn a lesson of charity.

It is said, that love covers a multitude of sins. If we will have many
sins covered, we must labor for this charity.

We ought to love even our enemies, as God loved us being his enemies: but
much rather our brethren and neighbors.

This is not a common love, but a brotherly love that is here meant, such a
love as Peter commended to the Church, in his 1. Epistle. 1. 22. Love one
another with a pure heart, fervently. Where we may observe the properties of
true love, which is, It must be brotherly, pure, and fervent.

Brotherly: not after a common affection; for brotherhood is the bond that
knitteth together Christians among themselves even as brothers, without any
respect, or difference: for we have all but one Christ, one baptism, and one
faith; so we should have all one love.

Pure it must be: without faining, without glozing, without hypocrisy.

For many call their neighbors, brethren, and friends: and yet will not stick
privily and secretly to undermine them.

It must be fervent: there is heat in true love, as there is fire in jealousy.

Where this heat is, it will make thee tender thy friend so dearly, as that
thou will not stick to lay down thy life for him, as Christ laid down his
life for the brethren.

If you will known the excellency of this love, peruse at your leisure the
13. of the first to the Corinthians, there you may see the wonderful effects
of it. No virtue in the world brancheth it self into so many strange
operations of godliness: it will be a spectacle worth the looking on, to behold
upon one stalk so many fruits growing of infinite varieties.

It suffers long, it is bountiful: it enuieth not, it boastes not it self,
it is not puffed up, it disdayneth not: it is not provoked to anger, it
reioyeeth not in iniquity: it suffers all things, it believes all things,
it never falls away. etc.

I end with this one note: if you will be resolved, that this love is in you,
whereof we speak, you shall principally know it by this one fruit among many.

You will so love one another, that you will wholely employ your endeavors to
do good one to another, and not evil all the days of our lives.

You will forget and forgive all injuries, and trespasses committed, for his
sake, who forgiueth you your great trespasses, your sins: a greater debt then
was forgiven to the merciless debtor.

We cannot come nearer to God, than in the resemblance of this love. S. John
proves it, If thou love not thy brother whom thou have seen, how should thou
love God whom thou have not seen.

Thou sinnest ten thousand times more against God, than thy neighbor can
trespass against thee, yet he forgiues thee all: and can not thou forgive
thy brother?

Some can soon shift of the matter, by aunswering it thus. I will forgive him,
but I Will never forget him.

He shall come to my pater noster, but never to my Creed.

God will reaunswere such in the same measure. Thou shall come to my presence,
where thou shall see me and my holy Angels, and all the holy company of heaven
in that honorable consistory, when quick and Omnis caro.
dead shall be judged: but thou shall be debarred from that holy society: Thou
shall not rest upon my holy mountain.

Thus you have seen God loving us, and manifesting the same, his love, in
sending us his son to reconcile us.

You have seen, how tender he is over us, and how gracious in loving us; more
then that, how careful to manifest his love, in sending us his only son to
reconcile us: and lastly, what he requires of us in liew of this his
carefulnes: which is, that he loving us, we should also love one another.

God is the first that inuiteth, and the last that forsakes, never leaving,
but first left, and ever offering till he be refused.

He still spreads his arms, like as the Cherubins do their wings.

O let us yield to his embracings, least when we would, he will not: and so
we seek the blessing with Esau, too late, and cannot prevail though we
shed many tears.

And so I end this Loue-song as I began, to the end, that if you be so dull of
hearing, as that you have forgotten the sum of all that has been delivered;
yet at least you may remember the burden of the song. Herein is love, not
that we loved God, but that God loved us, and sent his Son to be a
reconciliation for our sins. Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also to
love one another.

Soli Deo gloria.
The Prophetical Kings triumph.
PSALM. 118. 24. This is the day that the Lord has made. Let us rejoice and
be glad in it.
The whole Argument of the Psalm, is in substance thus much.

David being the last, and least of all his Father house, being despised of his
own brethren, persecuted by Saul, and utterly rejected of the Jews, does
notwithstanding obtain the Kingdom, to justify the truth of that Scripture.
There is no regard of persons with Acts. 10. 35.
God, but in all places, and among all Nations, who so fears him and works
righteousness, shall be accepted.

And again, God has chosen the vile things of the world to confound the
honorable.

And the virgins song was this. God has Luke 1, 52.
put down the mighty from their seats, and has exalted the humble and meek.

David being the youngest son of Ishay, and of smallest reckoning, is taken
from the sheepe-fold, and crowned a King, from guiding sheep in Bethleem, to
govern a 1. Sam. 16.
mighty Nation in Israel.

So God alone numbreth, wayeth, and deuideth. He measures seasons, times, and
years: he sets up Kings, and puts down Kings at his pleasure: as we
read in the 2. of Dan. 21.

The very consideration of which kindness and exceeding favor of the Lord,
caused David to pen this Psalm, to testify thereby his thankfulness. And this
is briefly the substance of this Psalm.

And yet is this but a litterall construction: you must know, that another
mystical matter, and of greater import, is here delivered.

In the person of David, Christ our Lord is most lively set forth. Who being
the king of glory, the very son of God, heir and Lord of all things, was
notwithstanding rejected of the Jews, among whom he was borne; he came among
his own, and his own received him not.

But maugre the malice of the devil, and his instruments: flesh and blood
could not prevail. Herod, and all the waiting for of the people of the Jews,
could not overthrow Christ, and his Kingdom: Nay, they rather overthrow
themselves. He is nevertheless exalted, and his enemies quite confounded:
yea, he has crushed them with a Scepter of iron, and broken them in pieces
like a potters vessel. To make the Tyrants of the world to know how vain
a thing it is to band themselves against the Lord, and against his anointed.

The careful consideration here of gladded the heart of David, more then the
stablishment of his own throane. Yea, it filled him with such unspeakable
joy, when once the Spyrite of GOD had taught him that Christ should come from
his loins to be a Prince to his people, and to govern them with righteous
judgments for ever: and how he alone must make his enemies his foote-stoole:
I say it so rejoiced him, that he could not choose but sing tryumphantly to
the Lord. The right hand of the Lord is exalted: The right hand of the Lord
brings mighty things to pass. The stone which the builders refused, is
become the head-stone in the corner. And so in a heavenly kind of meditation,
he conti^^eth the same note to the words of my text, proclayming as it were a
new holy day to the Lord, which should religiously be observed throughout a^l
ensuing posterities, even to a thousand generations.

This is the day, which the Lord has made. Let us rejoice and be glad in it.

This Text needs no curious division, for the words divide themselves.

This is the day: There is the Prophets proclamation.

Which the Lord has made: There is the Author from whom it is sent.

Let us rejoice, etc. There is the celebration of it.

This is the day. David being endued with the spirit of prophecy, could tell
that Christ should come in the flesh: as could the Patriarchs and all the holy
men before him.

And least a matter of so great tydinges should by the malice of satan, or by
the practice of bloody tyrants, be lapt up in obscurity, both our Prophet here
and all the rest did in all ages record the same in sundry places of Scripture:
as well to challenge it from forgetfulness and oblivion, as also to take away all
excuse from the unbelieving Jews: who if they had not been altogether given
over to a reprobate sense, they must of necessity have acknowledged Christ,
since he was so lively poynted at by so many prophecies throughout the whole
Scripture.

Moses in the 3. of Genesis told it plainly, or rather God himself by Moses
speaks, that the seed of the woman should break the serpents head.

Zachary tells Sion and Jerusalem, that her King was coming, He comes
poor, Zach, 9. 9.
ryding upon an ass. etc.

Christ himself, speaking of Abraham's testimony, says, Abraham saw my days
and rejoiced. As a lamb before the shearer, so opened he not his mouth. And
diverse other testimonies, whereof the Scriptures are plentiful.

David, as if he had seen all prophecies sealed up, speaks in this place of
Christ's day as it were, as if he had been already in the world. This is the
day. Blessed is he that comes in the Name of the Lord.

For Sions sake I will not hold my tongue, and Esiy, 62.
for Ierusalems sake I will not rest, till the righteousness thereof break
forth as the light.

What was that lamp and light but Christ, all the law and the Prophets, did
presignify to the world that Christ should come, even to the time that the
Angel appeared to the Shepherds, and bad them go see him, whom all the world
desired to behold. So that we may preach to our selves, as Christ did to the
Jews. In our ears this day are all these Scriptures fulfilled.

This is the day. This proclamation is very suitable to that in the second of
Luke, Behold, I bring you ty^ings of great joy, which shall be to all flesh:
that unto you this day is borne a Savior.

It was indeed tidings of the greatest joy that might come into the world: for
then was the world redeemed from her old silence. Then began the true son of
righteousness to appear, who alone was able to expel all the clowdy mists of
ignorance.

What greater joy can be then for the prisoner to hear of liberty, the sick
of his health, the sinner of his salvation.

In the coming of Christ, it is to be observed, that God sent his Angel, he
did not use the ministry of man to publish this mes^age, which shows the
dignity thereof. This Angel was accompanied with heavenly soldiers, who so
soon as these tidings were published, began to sing, Glory to God on high.
Peace on earth. Good will toward men.

Three notable wonders wrought in one day. The first part of this heavenly song
notes, that the benefit of Christ's Incarnation was not in earth only, but
in heaven also, and therefore, as there was peace on earth, so there was glory
in heaven among the Angels.

2. Peace on earth: This shows that ^e came as a Medratour to make peace
between God and us.

3. Good will toward men: To show that as he was Fons Charitatis, the
fountain of charity, so he would work love and charity among men.

What day could bring forth greater matters, and therefore we have reason to
sing with David; This is the ^ay.

The day of our Creation, is in no sort to be compared to this day of our
Redemption. Gods mercy appeared in making us, but his greater mercy in saving
us.

Before this day we were in a state most miserable, under the curse wherein
Adam left us, under wretchedness, under sin, the curse of the law, and
dominion of the devil. But now that Christ has appeared, hell is conquered,
satan confounded, sin put to flight, and heaven set open to all believers.

So is it verified: Heaviness may endure for a night, but joy comes in the
morning: our coming in has been with tears, but our return to Sion, is with
everlasting joy upon our heads.

The first Adam brought into the world darkness, fearefulnes and sorrow, but
the last Adam brought comfort, light (...) fulness.

All is changed in our second Adam, mortality to immortality, mourning to
mirth, misery to felicity, sadness to solace: now is the sinner justified, the
law discharged, the dead revived, and the devil vanquished, according to his
mighty power who has subdued all things unto himself.

The Iubilee year to the Israelites was not half so welcome, as this day
ought to be to us: when that year came, it brought with it freedom and
releasing of debts: and this day and time, this acceptable year of Christ,
has brought unto us a greater freedom, even our souls freedom, and a
greater releasing of debts, our sins: for we owe unto God more than the
cruel debtor, not ten thousand talents, but ten thousand times ten thousand
talents.

Neither was the day of their deliverance from Pharao half so acceptable unto
them, as this day of our deliverance is to us. For we are set free from our
spyrituall Pharao the devil.

As Moses said to the Israelites, Remember this day: so I say, Remember this
day: for it is the day of our deliverance: the day of our redemption: the
acceptable day of the Lord.

This is a day wherein light first appeared to the Gentiles, even to us that
were aliants from God, yet to us has the light appeared, according to Symeons
saying: A light to lighten the gentiles.

We that once were not a people, are now become a people: we are made through
Christ to be the sons of the living God. For to the Israelites pertained the
adoption and the glory, and the covenant, and giving of the law, and the
service of God, and the promises, of whom are the Fathers, and of whom
concerning the flesh, Christ came. Romans 9. 4.

A whole Sea of matter is here laid open to me, if I would at large
discourse of the inestimable good derived unto us by Christ's birth: but the
time will not permit: and this little that has been spoken may carry you to
the consideration of all the rest.

As a certain Geometrician, finding Hercules foot upon Olympus, by that one
foot drew the proportion of the whole body: so by this little, being but as
it were a foot, in respect of the body of the matter included, you may
conceive what might further be amplified in this point: the absolute fullness
whereof, we cannot possibly be able to comprehend.

Only let us consider that as at this time God sent his son to be our
Savior. He has given us him, and all things with him, so that we may now
say with the Apostle Saint Paul, All is ours, the world and the Creatures,
things present and things to come, all is ours, and we are Christ's, and
Christ is GOD.

It follows: Let us rejoice. Abraham seeing Christ's days a far of
rejoiced: and yet he was before Christ thrice foure-teene generations: How may
we rejoice, that live to those days already determined?

Neither Abraham, nor the Patriarchs, nor all the Prophets could say as we
can: They could say no more but Christ shall come, we can say he is come.

Blessed are the eyes that see the things that you see, and the ears that
hear the things that you hear.

Where it appears, we are rather blessed than all that were before
Christ. The Kings of the earth have desired to see that which you see. etc.

All that were before Christ, saw but a glymse of that light, the fullness
whereof we now behold, like the Sun in his strength.

We have seen the righteousness of Sion break out like the light, and the
salvation thereof as a burning lamp.

Thus have we a greater privilege than the Keysars and mighty Monarchs might
be suffered to enjoy. For us were these better things reserved, even we that
now live in the time of the glorious Kingdom of Christ, have obtained this so
rich prerogative: all to show forth the greatness of our felicity.

Great cause have we then to rejoice. As the babe sprang in Elizabeth's womb:
so should our hearts spring within our bodies for joy of the presence of Christ.

If Annah rejoiced for that GOD gave her a son, and so took away the rebuke
of her barrennes, much more cause have we to rejoice, that God has given us
his son to be borne for us, whereby our barrennes of faith is taken away, and
we are made fruitful in the works of righteousness.

If Iephtah his daughter went out with Tymbrels to welcome home her Father,
how may we prepare to welcome a greater then Iephtah, nay a greater then
Solomon. How should we prepare our minslrelsie to welcome home this victorious
Lion of the Trybe of Judah, since by him we do return in victory? and may
triumph as Iephtha did, not over a sew faint-harted Gybeonits, but over many
millions of spiritual adversaries; Sin, death and hell, this world, and the
lusts thereof.

We have then cause to rejoice and to prepare our musical instruments. We
should say with David: Awake up Lute and Harp, awake up my glory, I my self
will awake right early.

If David daunced before the Ark, which was but a testimony and a sign of gods
presence, how would David have daunced and skypt, and trypt it, if he had lived
to see his Lord walking upon the earth, as his Apostles did?

What should I more say: surely this is all I can say: if this love of Christ,
and this true rejoicing were planted in you, you would carry less love to the
world then you do.

Neither the love of riches, nor the love of honor, nor the love of long life,
no wealth, no friends, no treasure, should wear it: the gayning of ten
thousand worlds should not be able to draw us from Christ.

Symeon was weary of the world when once he had found Christ: Now let me
die, says he: As if he should say, Now have I had the fruition of the greatest
blessing, a greater treasure then this, the world cannot afford me: For mine
eyes have seen my salvation. And so have our eyes seen the same salvation:
we should therefore love the world no more than Simeon did.

I count all things but loss, says Paul, in respect Philip. 3.
of the excellent knowledge of my Lord: yea, very d^ng, etc.

And in the eight to the Romans, he concludes with a sweet protestation,
saying: Neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor Principal^ties, nor height,
nor depth, nor things Romans 8.
Present, nor things to come, nor any creature, shall be able to separate me
from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

Oh, that now among us, might be found some such like Simeon, or like Paul, or
like David in his Psalms, and elsewhere, ever sending forth plentiful
testimonies of his rejoicing in Christ.

Let us rejoice. This rejoicing is not a matter so soon practiced as many
conceive it to be.

Every man will be ready to say we do rejoice, and we are right glad of
this day of the Lord. And as a sign of our rejoicing, we are willing to
celebrate not this day only, but even this whole feast in remembrance of our
Lord.

And to this purpose we deck our houses, and our streets, and our Temples
with boughs, like them that strewed branches in the way where Christ should
come, and crying Hosanna before him as he rid to lerusalem.

And we with mouth and heart, are ready to cry Hosanna in like sort: Blessed is
he that comes is the name of the Lord.

All this beloved we may do, and yet come short of the true ^eioycing.

It is not in every man power to rejoice, and therefore David says: Blessed
are the people that can (...)

And to show who they are that can so rejoice, it is added: They (...) the
light of thy cou^^^ (...) Psalm. 88.
continually in thy N^^^, (...)nesse shall they exalt them-se^ues. Their hearts
are ever indyting good matters: and their tongues are as the pens of ready
Writers, freely and cheerfully to tell out the goodness of the Lord.

They will not hide the mercies of the lord from their children, yea, to the
generation to come will they show the praises of the Lord, and the wonderful
acts that he has done.

Hence we may learn the manner of true rejoicing. We should be ever
meditating upon the Lords mercies: and we should publish them to our
children. If it were possible, we should make it known to the whole world,
what God has done for our souls. This should be our continual exercise, not
for a day, or a month, or a year, but for ever. Infinitely happy were we, if
we could thus rejoice.

But alas, our rejoicing is in evil, we rejoice not in Christ: or if we do
rejoice, it is but an interim, a starting joy, a temporary and a ^leeting joy,
of no continuance, like a buble on the water, which dies while it swells.

As long as my Text runs, or while you are in the Church and do hear Christ
spoken of, you remember him, and ^ou can breathe out a short thanksgiving,
like a Scholars grace: but no sooner shall you get home to your houses, and a
fair pair of cards or tables thrown upon the table, but all is forgotten;
the price of our Redemption forgotten, yea, Christ himself forgotten: so does
a little vanity like a dampe soon extinguish all the lights of godliness.

I know you would be loath to be thus censured: do but ask your selves and
your consciences and they shall tell you whether I misdeeme or not.

Your coming hither now, I commend: and the simplest that sits among us in
Gods house, will seem to present himself before the Lord as a sacrifice of
thanksgiving, for this great benefit in Christ, begun to be wrought as upon
this day, the joyful day of Christ's incarnation.

But thou must know, that God requires no temporary, but a continual
sacrifycing of thy self, a daily presenting of thy Christian duties. What is
become of you, or where are you bestowed all the year after? The Church is now
full, but a few Sabbaths hence, scarce the fourth person will be found in this
place. Here one, and there one, like the after-gleaning in the vintage.

What does this argue, but that we celebrate this feast rather for custom
than for conscience.

This is called a time of feasting, and a time of rejoicing, and a time of
merriemaking: and so it ought to be, so it be done in the Lord.

But we greatly profane the same, in bestowing it wholly upon our lusts: in
ryoting, reuelling, and roysting, in dycing and carding and in pampering up our
bodies too much with the supers^uities of Gods creatures. All such rejoicing is
evil.

You seemed once this day as Lamps burning in the Sanctuary: and now you
seem to have neither oil nor light at all. Now no Lamps, but lumpes of
sinfulness, and the senceles^e earth groneth under the massy weight of such a
burden.

If the profane Jews should come into your houses, and to your Taue^^es, and
there look upon your disorders. Finding you not trau^^sing the Scriptures, nor
reading the law and the Prophers: nay all of you otherwise exercised, wholly
devoted to sinsul vanity, some at cards, some at dice, swearing, and
forswearing. etc.

Others, carowsing and qu^^^ing, pouring in wine and strong drink without
measure, as if their ^odies were given them to no other purpose.

And he is the iolliest fellow that can drink his companion under the board.
As if they meant to make themselves famous in this, as the S^ythians thought to
make themselves famous in another respect.

Among them, he was reputed the brauest Gentleman that had committed the
bloodiest s^aughter.

Such forget Esayes woe in the third of his prophecy. 11. 12. 14. verses.

Ther^ore has hell enlarged it self, and has opened his mouth without
measure.

O that this one sentence of terror were engraven in the tables of our hearts,
or enrolled in lead, or in stone, for ever.

This one sentence of the severity of gods justice against such, would make us
beware to transgress: and how to carry our selves in a greater measure of
sobriety.

Surely great, and beioynd measure intolerable is the vanity of sinful men
in this behalf: for we dishonor God in our bodies where we should glorify
him. GOD has made us Christian men, but we show our selves no men, but beasts
among men.

He that loves father or mother more then me, says Christ, is not worthy of
me. We do worse, we love our follies, our vanities, and our pastimes more then
God.

Some are given to one vanity, some to another: as all sins are not found in
one, and yet in one are many found, and no^e without some, and all are in us,
and among us all.

Our true rejoicing were rather this, to bestow the time in meditation, still to
praise God for this rich treasure, to pen godly songs and psalms of
thankfulness like David: to be devising with Micah what we should give unto the
Lord, for that which he has given us.

We hang our houses with Holies and green boughs: but we our selves should
rather be holy boughs, even trees of righteousness, as we are called by Esaias.
61.

If we will needs feast, let us yet beware of the abuses in feasting. Job can
best counsel us herein. We read in the 1. chapter of his book, That when
his sons and daughters had made an end of banqueting in their houses, every
one his day, he like a careful Father sent for them, and sanctified them, and
sacrificed for them. And this did Job every day: for he feared his sons had
blasphemed God in their hearts.

Job doubted that his children had committed many slips, and that they carried
not themselves in such a Christian-like sobriety, as was required in those holy
feasts, and therefore he did both send for them, and sacrificed for them.

Parents over their children, and masters over their households, should be
armed with like godly jealousy. For if this religious care were had both of
our selves and ours, fewer offenses would be committed; or at least being
committed, they would be soon salued by prayer and sanctisication, as Job did.

For this example is pend and registered for our good, and for our imitation,
that in all our feastings, and meetings, and merry-makings, we should remember
our selves, and pray that God would pardon our corruptions and profane
carriage of our selves, in time of our feasting.

For it is an hard and difficult matter, at such times to keep our selves so
clear, but some corruption or other will cling unto us.

Sins then are soonest swallowed, like the dainty morsells that pass down
our throats: and so sin goes down as fast, and is devoured with pleasure,
like the Apple that Eve tasted. The pleasantnes of it to the eye, and the
toothsomnes of it to the mouth, pricked forward her desire, and so in eating
she fell, and so in eating we fall.

And therefore it is said, Woe to the full, for the full are apt to sorget God.

The devil never fell to tempting, till the hour of eating came. And when
hunger called for meat, he also called for his temptations, and presented
before them the most delicious meat, such as he well knew was fitting to
their swnet-mouthd humors.

It behooves us therefore especially, to beware how we feast, not for that
feasting in it self is evil: nay, it is a thing commended and commanded in
Scripture, as the feasts of Tabernacles, and the feasts of Sabaoths, and
Jubilees, and new moons, etc.

And Christ wrought his first miracle at a feast.

The abuse it is that we speak of, which often is committed in our
feastinges. For in our pleasures the devil has hid his snares: and therefore
a godly man gives this prouiso or caveat.

Handle your pleasures (says he) as you handle Bees, that is, first take out
the sting, and after, you may play with them without harm.

It may be that my Sons have sinned, and blasphemed God in their hearts.

So let us say of our selves, as Job spoke of his Sons: It may be, in this
time of our banqueting, we have sinned and blasphemed.

It may be, our good cheer, and delicious fare, and our carde-playing, and our
dancing, and our reuelling, and our other vanities, have made us forgette GOD,
and our selves, and forget Christ, who is the feast-maker, the cause and Author
of our meeting at this time.

Now then that I have showed you the difference between the true rejoicing and
the false: advise your selves which you will follow.

As Iosuah said at his farewell, when he was to be gathered to his people, and
to go the way of all the world. Now (says he) choose you, whether you will
serve the Gods of the heathen, or serve the Lord.

So I say, whether you will henceforth serve your lusts, or serve God. If God
be God, serve him: If Baal be God, serve him. Either stick to vanity, or
stick to God. God has not redeemed you to sin any more; but that you should
subdue, and utterly kill the whole body of sin: for it is said, Be ye holy,
as I am holy.

But know, that if you run on in your vanities, you run from God, who has
created you, and from Christ who has redeemed you; and from the spirit of God,
by whom you are sealed.

If we sin wilfully now after we have received the knowledge of the truth,
there remains no more sacrifice for sin: but a fearful looking for of
judgment, and Heb. 10, 26,
violent fire, which shall devour the adversary.

Full of dreadfulnes is that, in the 6. of the same Author to the Heb. It is
impossible that they which were once lightened, and have tasted of the heavenly
gift, and were made pertakers of the holy Ghost, and have tasted of the good
word of God, and the powers of the world to come: if they fall Heb. 6, 4.
away, should be renewed again by repentance, seeing they crucify the son of
god, and make a mock of him.

But beloved, we have persuaded our selves better things of you, and things
that accompany salvation, though we thus speak.

God forbid that I should think, that all the good seed of the word, so
plentifully sowed in your hearts now, the space of forty years, should fall to
the ground in vain.

Paul has not so planted you: no^ Apollo watered you in vain; that you should
still prove faithless and barren: but there must needs be in you, some
increasing in knowledge, some growing in religion, some prositing in
understanding.

The thorns choke not all; nor do the birds devour up all; nor is all
fallen upon stony ground to hinder the growth of the word.

And yet if all this should be so, there is hope nevertheless in the fourth
part: it being the better part, and the fructifying part, will make amends
for all the rest: yielding increase an hundred fold, like the seed of Isaac.

Licet pars minima sit.
Triplu^ in duplo.
The Anatomy of Tale bearers.
LEVIT. 19. 16. Thou shall not walk about with tales among my people.
GOD has made us principally, and before all things, to glorify him, and
serve him in holiness all the days of our sinful pylgrimage; he has also for
a secondarie purpose created us, even to be helpful and serviceable one to
another.

As we must be especially careful how we run into those sins that are
offensive to the majesty of God, and do provoke his displeasure: so must we
be careful in like manner how we commit such offenses and trespasses against
our brethren or ne^ghbours, whereby we may incur their hatred and
displeasure. God does look into our carriage and behauior among our selves,
that we offend not one another: that so being created after the similitude of
God, in holiness, we might also be profited in holding on our course in the
same holiness, by performing all Christian duties both toward God and man.

The whole duty of a Christian man, consists but in two points: viz. in
holiness toward God, and in righteousness toward man: aunsvverable to that
short division made by our Savior. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all
thy heart, etc. And thy neighbor as thy self.

The one does necessarily imply the other, and they cannot be separated: for
S. John proves it. If thou love not thy brother whom thou have seen, how
can thou love God whom thou have not seen?

Of the latter only I am to speak in this place: and of that, but in a
particularity neither, as my Text does lead me.

This portion of Scripture now to be handled is one of the branches of the
commandments, in the second table, enforcing righteousness toward man.

It is one of the edges of that more than one edged sword, to cut in sunder the
very hart-strings of false witnes-bearing. For a false tale is a false
testimony: and the secret accusing of our neighbors by bad reports, whereby
their name and fame may be impeached, is a species or kind of false witness
bearing: and it is such a trespass, as does quite overthrow the peaceable
state of all Christian societies.

Thou shall not walk about with tales among my people. God in this place,
uses two principal arguments, to enforce this commandment. The one taken
from the person of our selves, in the word thou: and the other from the person
of God, in the word shall.

Thou, being as thou art, my creature, the workmanship of my hands, whom I have
formed and fashioned out of the clay, and so by breathing into thee breath of
life, did make thee a living soul.

Thou, who art but vile earth, very corruption, and rottennes: Thou shall not.
etc.

The careful remembrance of our selves in a dutiful remorce, is a matter of
such force, that it is able to batter, or at least, to mollify the most
obdurate heart of any Christian, and to stir him up to a sincere obedience
toward God his Creator.

Nature it self has stamped a reverent impression, even in the unreasonable
creatures, working a dutifulnes in them toward their benefactours. Esaias
proves it to reprove men, that sometimes show themselves worse then beasts.
The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his masters crib, yet Israel knows
not me. My people hau^ forgotten him that made them.

Though it were practiced by a profane man, yet was it a practice of
Christianity, that which we read of Phillip King of Macedon: He caused this
lesson of mortality, to be every morning sounded at his door: Memento Philippe
te esse hominem.

This lesson did he learn, even in the morning, in the beginning of the day,
least his kingly tytles, and honors, and magnificence, might make him forget
him self, as Coruinus forgot his name.

Least he might wax insolent, and proud against GOD, like Nabuchadnezer,
when he ietted it in his royal Palace at Babell.

Or like Alexander, Son to this King Phillippe, who after this, far unlike
his Father, being rapt away with the high conceit of honor, termed himself a
God. To verify that, which has been long ago fore-tolde by the prophetical
King: Man being in honor, may be compared to the beasts that perrish.

This consideration of a man's self, it is the very eye of the soul, whereby
she looks and pryeth into her whole estate.

It is the very door of humility: and where it is soundly planted in any
religious Christian, it so beauti^ieth and inuesteth him, that he shall seem
no other than a very lively resemblance of Christ our Lord, svvadled up in
cloutes, and laid in a manger.

This consideration was in David, when looking first upon himself: he after
looked up to GOD, and exclaymed with a rauishing kind of admiration. (O Lord)
what is man, that thou should be so mindful of him: or what is this mortal
generation, that thou should so graciously visit it.

And again, in a greater measure of humility, in the two and twentieth Psalm:
he calls hym-selfe a worm, and no man.

I have said to corruption, thou art my Father, and to rottennes, thou art my
mother.

Moses the servant of God, and the meekest man upon the earth, thought there
could be no greater argument of persuasion to draw the Israelites to the true
service of God, than this we now speak of, being taken from the person of man.
I have chosen thee from among all Nations under heaven, to be a peculier people
to my self: therefore thou shall observe all my ordinances to do them: And
again, in the 40. of Exodus, Thou art my first borne, etc. Therefore I look
that thou observe my commandments.

A certain devout man was wont to thank God for three things

First, for that God had made him a reasonable creature, not a beast.

2. For making him a man, and not a woman.

3. For making him a Christian man.

Where this or the like consideration goes before, there sin and satan
following after, can no more prevail against thee, than the Philistines could
against Sampson, when he brake the cords.

I say, if we do but consider, what we are, how weak and corruptible we
are, and what great things notwithstanding God has done for us, in making us
of nothing, giving us the whole world to command, and the creatures in it;
the sun to shine to us, the fire to warm us, the earth to bear us, beasts,
fowls, and fishes to feed us. These, and a thousand times greater things than
these, being duly considered, must needs produce in us an effectual
operation, for performance of this righteousness we speak of.

God being so mindful of us, should force us to be mindful of him, in the
careful practice of his commandments. And thus much for the first argument,
drawn from the person of our selves.

The second argument is taken from the person of God: noted in the word shall
not.

Before God had published the commandments, he pressed them with this special
charge. I am Lord that brought thee out of the land of Aegipt, etc. Wherein
thou wast a staanger 400. years. Therefore be careful to do my
commandments.

And the same again is repeated, in the second of Leuit. I am the Lord who
brought thee, etc.

Twice seven times these words are repeated in the nineteenth of Leuitticus:
I am the Lord. Ye shall not turn to I^^lls: I am the Lord. Ye shall not
steal, nor do wrong to your neighbors: I am the Lord, etc. Thou shall not
walk about with tales among my people, I am the Lord.

The original word is Jehovah: which signifies the very essence of GOD.
(...), quam colunt Angeli, obseruant ^npi^, osculatur vniuersitatis natura.

This word is left untranslated in Scripture, in respect of the majesty
thereof.

Saint Augustine says: That certain words are not always to be translated,
either propter maiorem sanctuatem, as the word H^leilutah, and Amen. Or
because they cannot significantlie be translated into another tongue: as
Osanna, Racha.

The maiesticall name of God being examined in the weights of the Sanctuary,
it is able to strike a terror in the hearts of them, who shall violate this
law.

When Moses came to Pharaoh, he came unto him in the person of God, and said,
Thus says the Lord. Exodus ^.

And the book of GOD in many places uses the name of God, as a special
motive to draw men to obedience: Deus exercituum: He that sits between
the Cherubines: He that turns the floods into a Wilderness, and dries up the
water-springs: He that sittes amidst the golden candlestickes, arrayed in a
golden garment, down to the feet, and girt about the pappes with a golden
girdle. Whose head and hair were white as wool, and his eyes a flaming fire.
Revel. 1.

And again, He that has the sword with two edges.

I am he that has Celsitudine^ dignitatis. Rectitudine^ v^ritatis.
Magnitudine^ potestatis Fortitudine^ firmitatis.


Unconquerable truth it self, power it self immutable.

I am he who have Condicionem liberiorem. Dilectionem vberiorem. Praelationem
superiorem.


And therefore you are to respect my laws; as if he should have said: All
these circumstances of majesty, do evidently declare, and clearly prove to
the eyes and ears of all the world, that I am the Lord Jehovah. I am God
alone, and there is no other besides me. Therefore thou shall not violate any
of my laws, nor shall thou transgress in the least of my commandments. Thou
shall not walk about with tales among my people.

And thus much briefly for the second argument, taken from the person of God.
Having thus proceeded by these two motives, to the charge of this
commandment, he comes in order to the substance or matter of the same.

Thou shall not go about with tales. etc. The principal matter here
forbidden by express words in this commandment, is, the carrying of tales.

There are many sorts of passengers, that do intercourse between man and man.

Princes have their Ambassadors, that either do denounce open war and
hostility, or else do entreat for peace.

Noble men have their attedants and followers, that post it upon their masters
affairs, in executing their commandments.

Ministers, are Gods messengers, to preach good tidings, the glad tydinges of
the gospel: thereby to reconcile sinners unto God, through the word of
reconciliation.

Merchants have their Factours on this side and beyond the Seas, which
transport news and other matter concerning their traffic. etc.

Private men have some or other their friends, to carry their mind in their
desires what-soeuer, whether it be by mouth or by letter, to such as they would
acquaint with their business, being separated by distance of place.

None of these are charged in this commandment, it concerns them not: and
yet they are such as carry and reca^y. They are a kind of people that pass
and repasse, still going, and returning, and walking about from man to man, and
from house to house, and from city to city, even through the world.

No post, no passenger, no trauailer, nor no Ambassador in the world, ever
carried about him a larger commission or pasport, then these we speak of; nay,
whom God especially notes by express name: those that walk about with tales
among the people.

Princes Ambassadors are necessary instruments, and without such exercising
their places and offices in all dutiful diligence and fidelity, the state of
kingdoms can not be maintained. Noble men, Merchants, Ministers, and private
men, are special members of the body politic, and they may lawfully use others
their followers to walk about for the executing and effecting of their honest
desires: but these Tale-bearers are utterly to be condemned, for that they run
before they be sent, and do devise all the means they can to breed
dislention, and hatred between men.

Where the Be draws forth honny, these like Spyders suck out poison, and with
the same as by a general contagion, do seek to infect the whole world.

Their names disery their natures. They are called in this place walkers about:
being busybodies, they trouble themselves and others with unnecessary
business. No body bids them walk, and yet they walk.

Satan's instruments are like satan: for in the second of Job, when God asked
him where he had been, his answer was. I come from comp^ssing the world to
and fro, and walking in it.

And so here the Talebearer suborned by satan, he comes from comp^ssing the
world to and fro, and from walking in it.

The devil is the Muster-m^^ster, and these be his soldiers. ^^ee walks in
his Marches.
greater circuit, and these in the lesser circuit, they run to and fro,
hee^e and there, and every where, filling the Court, c^^^e, and country.

They walk from door to do^e* and from house to house, begging for ^ales, (...)
the^ the slarued beg for bread.

There is no name in Scripture given to the devil, but it may be as s^^ly
given to these. He is called a Liar, so are they, he is called an Accusar* so
are they: he is called an Adversary, so are they, for they are like Ismaell,
who was against all.

He in Saint Peter's Epistle is called a Deuourer, and so are they.

Note well Saint Peter his description of satan, and see if they be not
satan's.

Saint Peter says, he goes about: As the Keeper rayles in his Dear, so the
devil makes his rail about us, to the end we may not escape him. And even so
do Tale-bearers go about, as Saint Paul has testified of them, being
busybodies, they learn to go about from house to house, yea, they are not
only idle, but also pratlers, and speaking things that are not comely. 1. Tim.
5. 13.

The second property of satan is to roar in his walk: he goes about like a
roaring Lion, and so does the Tale-teller roar as he walks like a Lion: but
indeed the most part of them are Lyonesses. They spare no words that may
furnish the matter, before they will go away unheard, they will make a double
and treble repetion of that they speak.

Thirdly, S. Peter says the devil seeks as he goes, and so do they: they
are as glad of a tale by the end, as a friar of a pudding.

At last comes in, to devour: seeking who^ he may devour: and there he ends:
showing that to devour is his purpose, and so to devour is their purpose.

The devil has a deep swallowe, and therefore he is called Diabolos, quasi
duo bols: he makes but two morsels of a man: and in that respect he may well
be called a deuourer. No less deuourer is the tale-guest. For Solomon, the
only experimented man of the world, he that considered of al things, considered
this also among rest.

There is a generation (says he) of people, Prou, 30. 14
whose teeth are as swords, and their chawes as knives, to eat up the
afflicted out of the earth, and the poor from among men.

Other men carry their swords by their sides, but these carry them in their
mouths, because they may draw them forth at their pleasure.

These people are worse then Crows: for they feed but upon dead carcasses but
these carriers of tales feed upon them that are alive. Like those
Anth^opophagi, who^ the Cospographers speak of, such as eat man's flesh.

To cut up the Anatomy, and to embowel it thoroughly for a cleerer view: to
what shall I liken this generation? They are like a moath: as a moath eats a
hole in cloth, so these eat holes in every man's coat.

To what shall I liken this generation they are like to the Camelion, which
feeds only upon the air: and so these tale guestes f^^^e upon the air,
that is, the breath of men, and yet sometimes they draw soorth ^roth from the
k^^chm.

To what again may I liken this generation: The Talebearer is like an Archer,
men are his marks and evil reports are his arrows: and therefore says the
prophet, They bend their tongues like bows to shoot Ier^n^9.
out lies.

David says, the Angels pitch their camps about them that serve God, and
delivers them. But we may say Tale-bearers pitch their campe^ of lies, and
rumors, and slanders, about them that fear God, and deuoureth them.

These wicked Ismaelites, who oppose themselves against all the world, are by
so much the more odious, for that their chattering tongues offending all men's
ears with a more then ^ioting talkeatiuenes, can never come to a period, till
they have run themselves clean out of breath, as they have run out of
credit.

When there shall be no men upon the earth, then shall the slaunderer cease
from slaundering.

Hell, and the Talebearer are much alike: Like the Hors^ leeches daughter,
still crying, give, give.
the one is never satisfied with sinners, the other with slanders.

There is no way to be rid of a slaunderer, but either by cutting out his
tongue: that though he can devise and hear, yet he cannot utter what he has
heard or devised. Or else, by shutting him out of all company, that he might
neither hear nor see.

For as it was permitted to Abraham to see the smoke of Sodom, but Lot might
not be pri^iledged to see it: so he that can make a use of what is done, may
be permitted to hear and see, and to pry into the actions of men, but others
may not: for that they are like Spyders, which suck up nothing but poison,
even out of the most wholesome herbs that are.

As the charitable peacemakers labor to breed peace, and good will among men:
so these make-bates strain their endeavors to set men together by the ears.

They are always sowing the seed of division betwixt one and another, as the
envious man sowed ta^res in the husbandmans field while he slept.

When men are sleeping, then be these waking, and walking about like
Nightcrowes, being ashamed the day should discover them, because their deeds
are evil.

These messengers of satan, as they show themselves vigilant and diligent, so
are they pollitick withal, and full of craft, like their crafts-maister the
devil.

For when they deliver any matter of obloquy and manifest untruth, they indent
and covenant with the party to whom they discover it, that he shall not
bewray them, or make them the Authors of the report. And all to blind the
truth, and to stop all the means whereby it may be found out.

If men would be advised to take heed how they entertain such idle
circumcelians, or if they did but publish their names to the world, much
contention and hatred would be slopped.

The Tale-hearer is as much in some respects to be condemned as the
Talebearer. For many are light of hearing, and are apt to receive with open
ears what-soeuer is told them by whisperers, and flatterers, and the like. As
the Athenians gave themselves to hear news, so do these to hear tales.

Micah was not half so willing to entertain a Leuit, as a number be now to
entertain tale-guests.

Others be so light of credit, that whatsoever they hear told, that they
believe, and do so believe the first tale, that they will not believe the
second: and these are homines altera tantum part auriti. And they deserve to
have but one ear, that will not hear with both.

A third sort there is which is worst of all, some are so wayward and so
froward, that they will never or very hardly be reconciled after they have been
once prepossest with sinister reports.

And this variety of ill-affected humors in men, spring all from the
Talebearer, or from the back-byter, who cannot in any wise brook that peace
should rest among men.

When the Lord had determined Achabs fall, a spirit came forth and stood
before the Lord, and said, I will go forth and be a lying spirit in the
mouth of all his prophets.

So the Tale-teller, he also stands up like a speedy messenger, and he like a
lying spyrit, possesses both the mouths and hearts of all men, to make them
fall.

If God should make us see our country dispeopled, our Cities ransacked, and
our houses spoiled, as GOD grant our eyes may never see such ruins, we might
say, The enemy has been here. So when we see our peace become confusion, our
unity turned to envy, our good lyking turned to froward grudging: When friends
become foes, and neighbors adversaries one to another, we may well say, The
Talebearer, or the slaunderer, or the back-byter has been here.

Thus are weeds sprung up where grapes should have been planted.

But why go I about to wash a Negro: who will still be black, though he
were washed with all the soap of the gospel.

I do but like him that purges and scoures a stinking channel, which the more
it is stirred, the worse it savors. He is yet as read^e to ba^kbite as
before, and to return me aslaunder for this his Anatomy.

H^^ scto pro certo, quod si cum stercore certo:

Vinco seu vincor, semper eg^ maculor.

Well, though he be in this place but controlled the slying book which
Zachane speaks of in his fifth chapter, the length whereof was twenty cubits,
and the breadth ten cubits, even the book that contains the curses of the
wicked, shall more largely decypher him hereafter, in his full proportion.

For enery one that slaundereth, shall be cut off, as well on this side as on
that.

And every one that tells tales, shall be cut off, as well on this side as on
that.

And it shall be brought forth, and it shall enter into the house of the
s^^underer, and him that tells tales, and him that delights to hatch lies.

And it shall remain in the midst thereof, and it shall consume it with the
Timber thereof, and the stones thereof.

Thus as the Talebearer accuses others, so have I accused him: and blazed him
to the world, that ye may the rather beware of him, and shun him now you
know him. And when he shall intrude into your company, or presume to tread
within your houses, ye may shut the door against him, and be ready to give him
the like entertainment as Christ did to the devil, when he said, Avoid
satan: and so you may say to this messenger of satan, Avoid Taleteller, come
not at me. Thou art the breeder of my trouble, and the Author of my confusion.

Thou come as a friend, full of ^ayning ^lattery, but I know thee to be a
fiende, and a mortal foe to me and mine. Therefore I defy thee, and do debar
thee from my society for ever.

Now then in time be warned: all ye that have lent diligent ears to such,
beware how you partake with their sins.

As no thief would presume to steal without a receauer: so no Talebearer
will presume to bring a tale, without a receauer. Therefore as Christ warned
his disciples: Beware how ye hear: So I say unto you, Beware how you hear.

Be not carried away with every wind, be swift to hear good things.

If thou have heard a slander against any, let it die with thee, and be sure
it shall not burst thee.

Blessed is the man that has not offended Ecclus, 14.
in his tongue, nor has fallen by the word of his mouth.

Peter's persecution, and his deliverance.
ACTS. 12. 3. 4. 5. And when he saw it pleased the Jews, he proceeded
further, he took Peter also. etc. From the ^. verse to the 11.
Satan the Accuser of our brethren, will ever stir up one or other to
persecute the poor Church of Christ. He began with Adam our graundfather,
even in Paradise, provoking him to eat of the forbidden siuite: whereas it had
been told him before, In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die.

He proceeded further, and procured Caine to sley Abell: he incensed ^sau
against Jacob, made Saul to persecute David, set Nabucadnezar against
Daniell: Iesabell against Eliah: Not to ^unne upon particulars, the Scribes and
pharisces against Christ, Herod the Father against the Innocents, Herod the
Son against John Baptist, and this Herod against James and Pete^

Behold the Serpents policy, note in what sort he bestirres himself, even by
seating himself in the hearts and consciences of great men, by making Kings
and Princes and Rulers his instruments, for the practizing of cruelty against
Gods Church.

The mighty men of the earth, which ought with their authority that they
have from God, to maintain and stablish true religion, and to uphold the
Church when storms of persecution do arise; Their hands and their endeavors
are most forward in laboring to suppress Religion, and the professors
theirof: they first lift themselves up against the Lord, and against his
anointed.

The second ^ormer Herod raged most violently against John Baptist, and against
Christ, and this Herod here mentioned, exercises like tyranny against the
Apostles of Christ.

James was already slain, and so had Peter been but for the holy time of
Passover, as now comes to be considered.

The Text offers these three things worthy our observation.

First, the captivity of Peter.

Secondly, his deliverance. Thirdly, his thankfulness.

And when he saw it pleased the people.

This bloody persecuting Tirant, did vex the Church of God by killing James
with the sword, and by imprisoning Peter, thinking to dispatch him in like
manner, having no cause at all.

Sometimes men persecute of malice, as Caine did Abel: sometimes of envy, as
Esau did Jacob: sometimes through Idolatry, and for religion, as Nabucadnezer
did the three children: sometimes of covetousness, as Judas did his master:
sometimes of ignorance, as the Jews in putting Christ to death: Father forgive
them, they know not what they do.

But this Tyrant could yield no cause or reason for his imp^^soning of Peter,
but this, the slenderest and weakest reason of a thousand, For that he saw it
pleased the people. He did it to win the peoples favor, not caring for Gods
favor.

Thus did Herod, and the same do the wicked Tyrants continually, buy the
favor and good lyking of their subjects, with the blood of Gods servant.

Saul, when he persecuted David, had some pretense, for he feared his kingdom.

The Philippians in like manner had some pretense, when they beat Paul and
Sylas with rods, and after cast them into prison. They trouble our City (quoth
they) and preach ordinances that are not lawful.

Demetrius had somewhat to color the sedition and tumult raisd in their City
against Paul: he feared his craft would little avail him, if Paul's doctrine
had taken place, for being a silver Smith, he made shrines for Diana.

The king of Babylon had some pretense, when he put the three children into the
fiery furnace: he feared that the Gods who^ he worshipped should be despised.

The Princes of Zedechiah had some pretense, when they put Jeremy into the
dungeon: He weakened, say they, the hands of the men of war, in prophesying,
that their City should be given over, into the hands of the King of Babell.

These pretenses how colorable so ever, could not excuse the^ in their
actions; they were but base subterfuges, no better then coats of nets, or
like Fig-leaues, to cover the nakedness of their cause, of little moment, and
less substance. Yet they carried some show of reason, and with men made of the
same grist, might seem to be of force in defense of that they did.

But this reason of Herod, for imprisoning Peter, is too too vain, and
ridiculous, only he did it, because he saw it pleased the people.

The like we read of Pestus, in the Acts, willing to do the Jews a pleasure,
he delivered Acts, 25.
Paul into their hands.

And so Pilat, for fear of the Jews, delivered Christ to be crucified.

It skilleth much how the people are affected: if the multitude be religious,
and do love the word tyrants shall not dare to rage so much; their tyrannous
purposes how wicked so ever shall not break out no more then the practices of
the Scribes and Pharisees could prevail against John, to put him openly to
death, because of the multitude; for all the people counted John as a prophet.
King, and people, and all in this place joined together, in a wicked
conspiracy against Peter. The people encouraged the King, and the King
prepares himself to satisfy their desires, in committing Peter to close
prison.

A King has a name of sovereignty, he is called, Rex a Regendo, he must
govern, and not be governed.

But he that should rule, is here ouerruled. The subject commands the King,
Herod plies himself to the humor o^ his people. C^ossing that Scripture, Non
seque^e multitudinem ad fa^iendum malum. Wicked tyrants, if they shall perceive
the people like affected to themselves, will be the more imboldned in their
cruelty.

This Herod, could not abide that Peter should ^eprooue him in his sins, no
more than the other He^od could John Baptist. And finding the applause of the
people to concur with his practice, he is the rather whetted on to do
wickedly.

Since therefore the success and growth of religion depends so much upon the
peoples lyking or dislyking: the Minister of the word ought especially to
labor in this, that the people bewel informed in the true way, and be soundly
taught to know God, if they shall show themselves zealous professors. Though a
wicked tyrant did reign over them, yet should he not prevail to do hurt to
the children of God.

It pleased the people. Here is great ods, and a manifest inequality: one
against many, and many against one. The whole people oppose themselves against
Peter, to destory him, like so many Philistims against Sampson: but as Sampson
brake the cords, so Peter brake the prison. or rather God for Peter opened the
prison, and so he escaped, and so Herod's expectation was frustied, the
multitude of their purpose disappoynted, and the glory of God mightily
magnisied: as shall appear in the sequel of the story.

You have heard the reason why Herod took Peter: Here it follows, how he
used him, where we are first to note in a word, the degrees of Herod's cruelty.

First, he took him, or caught him, which argues, that he lay in wait for him
before: then he committed him to prison, and caused him to be kept with a
strait guard, no less then four quaternions of Soldiers. Lastly, he
purposed after the feast, to put him to death: that was the mark he aimed at,
and the drift of his endeavors. His apprehending of him, his committing him to
prison, his diligence in close and sure keeping him, all was to murder him at
last.

The devils purposes, and tyrants practices, are both one: he is an adversary,
he goes about, he seeks, he roa^eth, he deuoureth: So do tyrants, they
never rest going about, seeking, watching, threating, till at length they have
devoured us.

Mark the care that Herod took to keep Peter, that he should by no means
start from him: he would never have used the like carefulnes in any good
matter. A quaternion contained four Soldiers, so the whole make sixteen.
There was a keeper before the door of the prison, and two with him, betwixt
whom he lay, and the rest round about him, in their several wards or
stations: this was notable diligence, they meant to make sure work.

This their over wary circumspection, was no doubt a testimony of a guilty
and distrustful conscience. In this tyrant so many circumstances in this
Scripture delivered, concerning the apprehension of Peter, may stand in steed
of so many witnesses accusing him within of wrongful imprisonment. He saw in
him self that he had no just cause to do it, and therefore he feared that
this prisoner would by some means get from him, notwithstanding this so sure
a watch.

Such was Herod's watchfulnes; and such was Peter's weakness, that no
resis^ance might be made. But least this Tyrant should grow too insolent, GOD
himself sends his Angel to take part with Peter, and to rescue him from
Herod's tyranny.

Dalilah did think she had made Sampson fast enough with ropes and cords; but
through his strength he brake them.

Saul thought he had David sure enough when he was in his bed; but he escaped
out of his hands, his wife Micholl letting him down at a window.

Paul was by an earthquake delivered out of prison: and at another time the
Jews took counsel to kill him; they laid wait day and night at the gates
to take him: but the other Apos^les put him out at a wall and let him down in
a basket, and so he escaped.

And in this place, the Angel delivers Peter in like sort, from the hands of
them who sought to slay him.

Rather then the enemy shall insult over the children of God: he will work a
miracle, the rather to procure their safety even beyond all expectation.

As Elias was fed by a Raven, at the Rivers side: and Daniell refreshed with
the pottage that Abacuck brought unto him, when he lay in the Lions den.

And as Ehsha compassed his adversaries, while they compassed him.

So in the midst of all our afflictions, God will make a way for us escape, if
it be good for us, and stand with his will.

As the hills stand about Jerusalem, so the Lord causes a whole Army of
Angels to stand about us.

It follows:] That night Peter slept between two Soldiers.

Peter is all this while in prison: and what does he in the midst of these so
great extremities?

Our text tells us what he did.

He slept. What means Peter to sleep in so great a danger: as if he were
altogether careless, as if he had been possessed with a stoycall stupidity,
without all sense and feeling: and this security or carelesnes to rest upon him
then, when he was ready to resign up his life; even the very night before he
should be brought forth to be executed.

Indeed, by reason of long watching before, all the former time of his
indurance, nature might have forced him to slumber a little: but the words are
(he slept) it was a sound sleep that he slept.

His danger so imminent, and his sorrows full of terror and fearefulnes,
being the post* masters of death, should have been able to keep him waking,
and not to suffer the temples of his head to rest.

Some there are that expound this sleep of Peter, to signify not a dissolute
carelesnes, but a godly security, and confident trustfulnes in him.

God commands us to cast our care upon him, for he cares for us: and so
Peter knowing that God did care for him, did cast his care upon the Lord. And
therefore he mistrusting no evil, suffered his body to take his repose: he
knew that God, the watchman of Israel, was also his watchman; and so the
rather might he sleep in safety.

Peter had commended him self to his providence and protection: he knew his
quarrel to be good, if he were to die, it was in the Lords cause; and these
reasons made him sleep so soundly.

Others interpret this place otherwise; they hold this sleeping in Peter to be
an infirmity of nature, and a great weakness in him: for which, he was worthy
reprehension; then to be sleeping when he should have been most watchful, in
attending the Lords leisure, and in laying hold upon the Lords mercies, in
working his deliverance. God would have him to be a spectacle of infirmity, to
the end we looking into our selves, should acknowledge our own frailty.

Say, he had cast all his care upon the Lord, and was assured that nothing
should befall him contrary to Gods appointment, yet should he have been
watchful, as the Angel was watchful over him.

The Lord indeed has promised never to fail us, nor forsake us in our
troubles: yet he will not have us to do nothing our selves: but as God
works, so must we work with him, and call upon our endeavors to further that
which God will have effected.

Who so falls into a ditch, and prays to the Lord to be delivered thence,
and yet will not seek to raise himself with one of his fingers, shall be sure
never to get forth.

God helps by means, and he that contemns those means, must not look for
help. Let us put to our endeavors, and if they come short, Gods helping hand
will be ready to yield a present supply.

Though he had slept all the time of his imprisonment, yet now being the last
night before his determined execution, he should have been watchful: he
should have beslowed this time in prayer and meditation.

Christ rebuked the Disciples, for that they slept the very night before he was
betrayed. Peter, sleep thou, could thou not watch one hour: Watch, and
pray, least ye enter into temptation. He came again the 2. and third time,
and found them sleeping.

Peter was careless then for his Master: and in this place, he is as
careless for himself; like Jonas, sleeping under the Hatches, when he was in
ieopardie of drowning.

He was so heavy, and in such a dead sleep, as we say, that the Angel was
feign to strike him on the side, before he would awake.

Though Peter slept, the rest of Gods Church slept not: The other Apostles
greeuing at his troubles, and vexed in spirit at Herod's cruelty, and his
imprisonment, made earnest prayer unto God for him.

Where we are to note the simpathy and mutual feeling that one member has with
another. Peter's passions wrought compassion in the brethren, and therefore they
both sorrowed for him, and prayed for him. It grieved them to see so notable an
instrument of Gods glory lie in bonds.

To teach us to have a feeling each of others calamity, to be touched with
compunction, in beholding our brethrens distresses and miseries.

They could not help him out of prison, nor set him free: they saw that there
was no way possible for him to escape in the judgment of man: therefore they
commend him unto God, praying him not to leave him comfortless: nor to suffer
him to be swallowed up by the malicious cruelty of his adversaries.

They were persuaded that these sufferings of Peter were inflicted upon him, by
the special appointment of God, for the trial of his faith and patience: and
therefore they committed him unto God in their prayers, as unto a faithful
Creator.

Prayer was made. God has given unto every living creature, his weapon to
defend himself against the enemy.

To the Lion his tail, to the Elephant his nose, to the Be his sting, to the
Bore his tuske, to the Bull his horns, to the Cock his spurs, to the Eagle
his talents, to the Hedgehogge his prickles, to the Horse his heels* to the
Bear his paws, to the fish his sins: but to man, to us that are his
reasonable creatures, he has given one weapon more forcible then all the
weapons of war, that is to say, Prayer, issuing from faith out of a pure heart.

This has been the course of the godly, in all ages, when the church of God,
or any one member thereof has been afflicted.

There was comfort in Peter, though he were eue^ in bonds: for it is said, He
slept that night, etc. And there was also confidence in the congregation; for
they prayed for Peter, hoping that GOD would deliver him.

We can look for nothing so long as we remain distrustful: for faith alone
must support us.

In all troubles that shall assail us, faith alone must be sent forth to gain
the conquest: and until we be arined with this faith, we are not fit to march
with Christ, as none might go to battle with Gedeon, which were timorous and
fearful.

Though we seem never so weak, and our adversaries never so strong let them
be mighty and tall, like the Enakyms. Yet if we have faith, and do trust in
God, we shall be strong enough to save our selves, and to foil our foes like
Gedeon, with his empty pitchers.

David having courage and confidence, when he took with him but a sling and
stone, feared not to encounter with Goliath of Gath: notwithstanding, that he
came against him with a shield of brass, and his spear like a Weauers beam.

Earnest Prayer was made.] This argues their feruencie; and that they prayed
in a feeling. Be fervent in spirit, says the Apostle: and it is here
practiced by the Romans 12, 12
Apostles, they were fervent in spirit when they prayed for Peter.

The prayer that GOD accepts, must be fervent: and it must be with
watchfulnes and perseverance, as Paul w^iteth to the Ephe. 6. 18.
Ephesians.

Every prayer is not accepted, as every fire might not be allowed to kindle
the sacrifice; only that prayer is available, which faith pours out, and is
presented unto God by zeal and feruencie.

The Lord accepts not a cold prayer, a lip-prayer, from the teeth outward:
such praying, or such babbling rather is thus cheeked by our Savior. This
people draws nigh unto me with their mouth, and honors Math, 5. 18.
me with their lips, but their heart is far from me.

As Moses said unto the people, When ye offer unto the Lord, ye shall offer
freely: So I say, when ye pray unto the Lord, pray zealously. Let your prayers
be earnest, like the Apostles, in this place.

Earnest Prayer was made by the Church.] Here is discoursed not only the
manner of prayer, but the persons also by whom it was offered: it was a prayer
made by the Church.

The prayer of the just prevails much, if Iam. 5, 16.
it be fervent. And of Helias prayer it is noted: When he prayed for rain, he
prayed earnestly.

The wicked man's prayer is abominable. Cayn and Habell did both sacrifice unto
the Lord: but Habels was only accepted.

To wicked Sacrifices mark what the Lord speaks, in Esa 1. What have I to
do with the multitudes of your Sacrifices: I am full of the burnt efferings of
Rams, and of the fat of sed beasts. I desire not the blood of Bullockes,
nor of Lambs, nor of Goats. When ye come to appear before me, who required
this at your hands, to tread in my Courts. etc.

Prayer was made unto God. This shows to whom we are to pray, only to God. We
may not with our adversaries the Papists run to Saints, to seek succor of
them. God alone must be prayed unto; for that he alone is able to help us: in
him dwells all fulness.

Abraham has forgotttn us, and Israelknoweth us not. Es. 63.

The prayer thus offered of holy men, in a feeling zeal, and feruencie of
spirit unto God. is a sanctified prayer, an acceptable prayer; a prayer that
pearceth the clouds, presses unto the presence of God, and returns not
empty unto them that pour it forth.

Such was the prayer of meek Moses, for the Israehtes, against Pharaoh, and
prevailed.

Such was the prayer of Iehosaphat against Ammon and Moab, and prevailed.

Such was the praver of the godly for Paul, in the Acts, against his
persecutours, and prevailed.

And such was the prayer of the congregation here for Peter, and it likewise
prevailed.

Such a prayer does the Lord look for, for such a prayer does he call upon
David, and us, in David in the 149. psalm. Call upon me in the day of
tribulation: and I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me.

It was not the sling, but the prayer of David, that caused the stone to sincke
into the forehead of the uncircumcised Philis^^an.

And behold, the Angel of the Lord came. etc. See here the powerful effect
of prayer. As the Church sent soorth their prayers, so here God sends forth his
Angel to execute that which they prayed for.

Rather then the prayer of the just should fast, God ceased not to work Peter's
deliverance by a miracle.

The Angel smote Peter on the side, and raised him up, saying? Up quickly, and
the chains fell off from his hands.

Their prayer found a speedy success, in a most strange and extraordinary
manner.

Peter, beyond all expectation, is delivered for a greater comfort to Gods
church: and the greater terror to the persecuting Tyrant.

So has God his enemies in derision, and laughes them to scorn in their own
imaginatious. When they thought themselves most sure of Peter, even then they
find themselves most deceived.

Herod did purpose on the next morrow to put Peter to death, but he failed of
his purpose: as the Philistims failed of Sampson, though he lay bound with
great cords in the midst of them.

So man does purpose, but God does dispose: man imagines, but God determines
all to the best for them that love him.

Hence we are to learn, that what-soeuer troubles shall happen unto us, they
be known before hand, and are especially appointed upon whom they shall
fall: so that they cannot come sooner or later unto us, nor can prevail
further against us, then GOD shall permit: as God gave Herod power to take
Peter, but he had no power to kill him.

The Lord cutteth short the arm of Tyrants at his pleasure, he can put a
bridle in their mouths, and an hook in their nostrils, as he did Zenacharib,
when he came up against Ezechiah.

The Angel set Peter at liberty. Many such examples of the Lords providence
over his elect we find in the Scripture, as in the sixth of the second of
Kings, when the servant of Eliseus rose up early in the morning to go out,
an host of men sent thither from the King of Aram compassed the City round
about with horses and charyots; and he cried to his Master, Alas we perrish.
But he answered, Fear not, they that are with us, are more then they that are
with them.

Then Elisha prayed that the Lord would open the eyes of his servant, that he
might see, and he looked, and behold the mountain was full of horses and
chariots of fire round about Elisha. There we find Gods gracious providence
garding the prophet: and here we find another president of the like providence
of God in rescuing Peter by the ministry of an Angel, from the violent rage
of Herod.

An Angel appeared to Paul in that Acts, 27.
dangerous viage, and told him that none in the ship should perrish.

And here an Angel tells Peter that he shall not miscarry nor perrish, though
he were even now shut up in the lowest dungeon, and kept with four
quaternions of soldiers.

Lot by Angels was delivered from the flames of Sodom.

Rather then the three children should be consumed in the siery Oven, God sent
his Angel to protect them, causing the fire against nature to lose his heat,
and as it were to quench it self in his own flame.

The fire lost his heat, as the iron chains lost their strength when they fell
from Peter's hands.

What should I stand upon particulars, when as the prophet David says; The
Angels of the Lord pitch their camps round about them that fear him, and
delivers them.

So Peter came and followed him, and knew not that it was true. This
deliverance came to Peter unlooked for, as appears by these words. Had he
known of this happy news, he would surely have watched for the Angels
coming: and not have suffered his eyes to sleep, being a time so full of
peril, when nothing but death was presented before him. And upon the next
morrow, he was to be led to the place of execution.

Well, coming unlooked for, it was by so much the better welcome: and it was a
motive of forcible efficacy, to cause Peter enter into a deeper consideration
of Gods goodness, in so strange a sort working his deliverance.

This circumstance in Peter's deliverance is worth the nothing, viz. The time
of the Angels coming, when now there was almost no hope of any evasion or
escape out of their hands: for upon the day following Herod thought to dispatch
him. Even then in the moment as it were of his greatest extremity, comes the
Angel and opens the prison doors, and causes the chains to fall from his
hands: and so Peter escapes almost before he awaketh, or before he can have
any leisure to consider of his deliverance.

The history speaks, that he thought he had seen a vision.

So was David delivered from the hands of Saul, and Jerusalem from the tyranny
of the King of Ashur, and Samaria from the Aramites; and this happened unto the^
upon a sudden, when no help was expected.

In that it pleased God not to deliver him sooner, it proves that the Lord
will have the measure of affliction left to himself.

He will sift us to the uttermost to try our patience.

Our Savior had told Peter before, that satan should winow both him and the
other Apostles, as one winoweth Wheat. And here he finds it true, that
satan indeed had winowed him by his instruments of cruelty, Herod and the
rest, and he was even now at the next door to death. But the providence of
God became unto him a present help in time of trouble: he rescued him from the
violence of his mighty adversaries, and stayed their fury in the very instant.
As the Angel stayde Abraham's hand, when the fatal blow was coming.

The very night before Herod purposed to bring him out to the people, came this
unexpected deliverance.

Christ suffered the ship to be almost under the waves before he would
awake. God went far with Heliah, when he was forced to fly from Iesabell:
and to cry out, They have killed the prophets: and I alone 1, Reg, 19.
am left, and they seek my soul.

And David the friend of God, was put to his shy^ts, when he cried out in
grief and anguish of his soul, Why do thou turn away thy face, and why
forgettest thou my Psalm, 30.
tribulation.

And in another place, Christ suffered Peter to sin^k, and to be in danger of
drowning, before he would stretch out his hand to support him.

As here, he sent not his Angel to deliver him forth of prison, till the
very night before his execution.

And when they were past the first and second watch: they came to the iron
gate, which opened unto them of it own accord. This is a further circumstance
of his miraculous deliverance. They passed through all the watches, and the
watchmen never perceived it. They came to the iron gate, and it opened
voluntarily.

Senseless things made show of pity, when neither King nor people could
yield compassion.

The chains and linkes fell from him before, and here the iron gate gives way
to Peter, both working out together his deliverance.

These things must admonish us of the forcible effect of prayer.

Haec effrin^at carceres: soluit catenas: ferreas aperit portas: impetrat
liberatores angelos. Prayer it is that breaks the strongest prysons, loses
the iron bands, opens the well-barred gates, and draws the Angels out of
heaven to come to the earth to work our deliverance.

Now I know of a truth that the Lord has sent his Angel, and delivered me
out of the hand of Herod, and from all the waiting for of the people of the
Jews. Here is laid down Peter's thankfulness after his deliverance. He
acknowledges the loving kindness of the Lord, who had so graciously set him
free from the tyranny of his enemies, that thirsted after his blood.

We must learn by this example to give thanks for what-soeuer benefits God
shall power upon us.

For to receive Gods benefits, and not to be thankful for them, is to contemn
God in them.

The Lord expects no retribution at our hands, Quis enim dedit ei, Who has
given unto him, as the Apostle speaks. Yet he will have us to he thankful,
that is the special duty that he requires of us.

Who so offers me thanks, he honors me: and to him that orders his
conversation aright, will I show the salvation of God.

If one man do pleasure or gratify another, there will be an expectancy of
thanks at least: and shall not the Lord much rather require the same of us,
from whom we receive our selves, our lives, and all that we are worth: the
bread we feed upon, the ground we tread upon, the light we look upon, all
comes from God, and what-soeuer is within us, or without us, all temporal and
spiritual graces, whereof each one is more worth then a thousand worlds.

The consideration whereof, caused the prophet David to call upon himself and
others for this thankfulness in his Book of psalms, saying; O that m^n would
praise the goodness of the Lord, and that they would tell out the wonders that
be does for the children of men.

He calls all the blessings of GOD Mirabilia, Wonders: all have in the^
matter of admiration, the rather to stamp in us an impression of gratitude.

We have well waded unto this thankfulness, when we have learned to say with
David, and with the like spirit that he did: I will make it known to the
world, what God has done for my soul. Psalm, 84.


All the day long will I be telling of his wonderful works.

Thus have you briefly heard the sum of this history of Peter's
imprisonment, and his deliverance.

You have seen on the one side the people soliciting, and Herod consenting to
the death of Peter.

They in their wicked purposes, and the King in his cruel practices, conspired
his overthrow.

But on the other side, the congregation of the faithful powered forth their
important peticions for Peter: and these more strong then the iron bands,
prevailed for his deliverance.

Prayer went up from them, and the Angel came down to him: and so was Peter
delivered, Herod of his purpose disappointed, the Church comforted, and Gods
Name highly magnified.

Heavens Highway.
ACTS. 16. 30. 31. Syrs, what must I do to be saved? And they said, Believe in
the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved, and thine household.
THese words consist of question and an answer. The occasion of the question
grew thus, noted in the precedent verses: When Paul and Sylas had been
imprisoned in the City of Philippi for the testimony of Gods truth, and
being now in the lowest dungeon, it pleased the Lord to work their
deliverance in a miraculous manner, as appears in the 26. verse. For
suddenly there came an Earthquake, so that the foundation of the prison was
shaken, and anon all the doors opened, and every man's bands were loosed: and
the Iayler being stricken with a great terror, would straight-wayes have slain
himself, had not Paul staid his fury.

Where-vppon, after a more sober consideration, finding all the prisoners to
be there, every man sure and forth-comming, and withal, acknowledging the
mighty power of God, he comes in great humility before Paul and Silas, and he
brought them forth and said; Syrs, what must I do to be saved? Where we are
to note the sudden and strange, and yet not so strange as powerful and mighty
operation of Gods Spirit in this Iaylor.

He who even now would have spoiled himself, seeks to save himself and he
that but now was most desperate, is become devout, and most desirous to be
informed in the way of his salvation.

So in a moment, he becomes of an heathen man a Christian man, as if he had
been made anewe, his affections clean changed, his wicked resolution altered,
his cruelty turned to Christianity. All this came upon him in a moment, as
wisdoms came upon Saul, when a kingly spirit was given him.

Sirs, what must I do to be saved? Here it is verified, I came not to call the
righteous, but sinners to repentance. And again, I am not sent but to the lost
sheep of the house of Israel.

Behold the power of God in his effectual calling of sinners: Saul in his
greatest rage, when he tyrannized most against Gods Saints, was upon a
sudden made of Saul a persecuter, Paul a professor. The same powerful
Spirit wrought in the conversion of Zacheus, making him of a publican a zealous
Christian. So of stones, God can and still does raise up children to Abraham,
as in this place he wrought in this wicked and cruel saylor now to seek the
means of his salvation.

He who ere-whiles had chained others, is now chayned up himself, and by the
mighty power of God driven to seek relief at his hands whom before he
despised, and shut up in the basest place of his house.

Fear made him run to the Apostles: as shame drove Adam to the fig trees.
And he who before was lofty and proud, and disdainful, now stoopes down and
humbles himself, and discouers his ignorance, as Adam did his nakedness.

Sirs, what must I do to be saved.

It is a voice of passionate fearfulness, such as is wont to proceed from
them that are distracted, and as it were at their wits end. What shall I do.

This Iaylour was not careful how to answer the Rulers, that had committed
them: nor does he devise what excuse he might make to the officers and
Magistrates, who in all likelihood would exact them at his hands, who had the
custody of them. But all these matters laid apart, he is now possessed with
a deeper meditation, which is, how he may be saved.

Syrs,] The first word notes his humility and reverence. Syrs, or Lords, to
signify that there is a reverence and an honor stamped in the very name and
office of Ministers: and therefore it is said: Fear God, and honor his
Priests. And they that minister well, are worthy of double honor.

O how beautiful upon the Mountains, (says Esaias) are the feet of them
that preach peace, that publish good tydins, saying to Syon, thy King reigns.

They are called the eyes of the body, operatores messis, the workmen in the
harvest.

The messengers inuiting to the marriage of the Kings son. The horsemen and
chariots of Israel: Spiritual Fathers, Angels, stars, etc.

If men did but consider of these honorable tytles which the word of God does
attribute to the Ministers of his Word, this calling would not receive that
contempt as at this day it does: Gods sacred Word would be more reverently
entertained, and the Ministry it self better reckoned.

Surely, great is, and beyond measure intolerable, the mystery of iniquity
in this respect, which woorketh strongly i^ the children of disobedience.

Sin and satan have both conspired together to broach in men's hearts this
contempt of the Ministers of the Gospel, to the end that in the Minister, the
Ministry it self in time might utterly be contemned.

The Author to the Hebrews, denounces an heau^e judgment against the^ that
do but neglect the means of their salvation. Much rather then must they
expect the severity of Gods judgments, that shall despise and contemn with
and high hand the ministry of the word.

He that despised Moses law, died under two or three witnesses: but how shall
he be sentenced that treads under foot the son of God, and counts the
blood of the Testament wherewith he was sanctified, as an unholy thing, and so
despites the spirit of grace.

Certainly, if Princes take the contempt as done to them, which is done to
their Ambassadors.

If Hanun and Ammon stink in the nosthrils of Israel, for their vill^ny
ossered to David's messengers.

If Judas took peny-worths of himself, and became his own executioner, for
betraying his Lord and Master.

If Jerusalem, fai^e and famous Jerusalem, became an heap of stones, and the
shame of the world, for despising, and evil entreating of so many prophets
that were sent unto them: how shall God suffer these mocking Micholls, these
oppressing Pharaoes, and railing Rabshakehs? Whether they be Libertines, or
Neutrals, Athiests, or Papists, of any Religion, or of no Religion, in City,
or in Country, or wheresoever they be, how shall God suffer them at last,
though he suffer them long to escape his wrath.

And know you, that hear the Preacher for fashion sake, that go home and jest
at him your bellies full: that censure him at your pleasures, that eat him at
your feasts, that buy and sell him at your shoppes, that recreate your selves
with his faults.

The day will come when ye shall know, and be driven to confess, that Prophets
have been among you: and then you will wish you had learned that which the
Iaylor now teaches you: which is, to humble your selves in all reverence,
even at the feet of Gods messengers, and so to seek the means of your
salvation.

Sirs.

So then the first door that opens to Gods graces and treasures, is humility.

Many a fair and large house has but a narrow entry, and a low door.

And so the low gate of humility is the door of Gods house, narrow without,
but within are many Mansions. And we must first pass by the narrow, before we
come to the broad.

Having made this reverent preparatiue, he comes to the matter. What must I do
to be saved?

This one question is worth all questions that may be made: for in other
demaundes whatsoever, a per^ect answer cannot be so given at once: but we
must demand again, and again, and never give over questroning, till we have
a full answer that pleases us.

But this demand, this one question but once made, cuts off all others; and
being but once answered, we rest satisfied like this laylour, for it
ministers a full contentment to our desires.

O that all men were like this Iaylour, to make like questions.

This should be our first demand, but we make it our last: after all the
lessons that we have learned, yet we have been schooled in this: we have not
learned how to be saved.

We have no leisure to think on this, for our other businesses of the world
call us from it.

Like those lingerers in the Gospel. He that should have followed Christ,
said, Nay, suffer me first to go bury my Father.

Still there will be one let or other to hinder us from salvation, like the
fowls that cumbered Abraham in his sacrifice.

Either we have bought a yoke of Oxen, and must of necessity go prove them:
or we have taken a Farm, and we must go see it: or we have married a wife,
and cannot come.

So we have no time yet, and less leisure to learn how to be saved.

We will learn this lesson last of all, and after all, when we are most unfit
to learn, and have almost quite lost our wits and our senses then we will go
to school.

This Iaylour did not so: so soon as he felt the motion of Gods spirit within
him, calling him to the knowledge of this holy lesson, he lingers not, nor
deferres the time; but he suffers the spirit of God to work him and to frame
him now he is pliable, as the Smith does his i^on while it is hot.

He did not suffer this golden opportunity to slip, which in no case (specially
in heavenly matters) ought to be neglected: but he runs to the Apostles, as
the Apostles themselves a little before ran to Christ, when they prayed in
the prison, and says, What must I do to be saved.

Of all intergatories, this is the sweetest, yet least thought upon or
practiced, few that have learned to minister it to themselves, or others.

All generally settle their minds upon other matters, merely contrary to this.

The most part study how they may be rich? how they may be honorable? how
they may advance themselves, and so be magnified in this world.

How they may be possessed of house and lands? how in a word they may reap the
crop of all the pleasures that this transito^y life can aford them.

Few or none care how to be saved: so this that should be the Alpha of our
desires, it is the Omega of our endeavors.

Christ says, Seek first the Kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof:
but the carnal man says, Nay, I will first seek afvanity, and after my lusts
and after my pleasures. The greatest number are like Haman, or Belshazzar, or
like the ^^^ple ^i^h man in the Gospel. Very sewe ^^^ David, or Solomon, or
Ioliah, tha^^^b^^^ ^or wisdom, that seek after the saving knowledge. Few like
this Iaylor that will run to Christ, or his Ministers, as he did to the
Apostles, to demand how they may be saved.

Well, where the graces of God are implanted, and where the sweet motions of
his holy spirit sind entrance, there has vanity no place: but all the whole
man, the soul, and spirit, and body, all is carried away with heavenly
desires; as Paul was ravished with new visions, when he was rapt up into the
third heaven.

But this cannot be, till we have bidden the world farewell, with the
deceaueable glory thereof, until the old man be utterly abollished, and the
whole body of sin be destroyed. And until we be molded as it were a new
like Adam in Paradise before his fall.

The course of this wo^lde is such, that whatsoever in face we profess, yet
our manner of living bewrayes our contrary desire. We all would seem to have
the smooth voice of Jacob; but we can be content to carry within us Esaus heart
and hands.

Where the Iaylour questioneth how he may be saved, the greater part of men of
this age demand how they may be damned. No man asks how he may be made more
holy, but how be more wicked, not how he may become more humble, but how he may
wax more proud; not how he may go like John in Cammels hair, and girt about
after the homeliest fashion, with the girdle of a skin: but how he may iet
it, and ruffle it in silks and veluets, like them that are Velut He^od in
reguli v^stiru splendidus.
in Kings Courts.

This Iaylour had been a wicked and profane cruel man; but now he lamenteth
his former carriage of himself, and he now cares to know nothing now, but how
to be saved.

As if he should say, I have taken great pains to be wicked, and I have
devised by all means how to exercise cruelty against the children of God; but
if I knew now how to recover Gods favor, how to become a Christian, I would
refuse to undergo no pains in the world. Nothing should stand in my way, no
perrill were it ever so hurtful no persecution, were it ever so hot and
raging, should withold me from the recovery of Gods rich mercies, the happy
man's only prerogative.

Here we may see the growth of Gods graces in his children: first, God
planteth and sows in our hearts a desire of well doing, a desire to know Gods
will: secondly, a holy knowledge: and thirdly, a practike obedience of the same
will of God, according to the measure of our knowledge. A desire, a knowledge,
and a practice, like Herba culmus spica.
the seed that is sown, comes up by degrees; first it is grass. then the
blade, and then the ear. So first we must labor to have knowledge, and that
will soon appear, if we have in us a desire to learn, as this laylour had.
And last of all, to work accordingly, and so the Christian man is fully
perfited: and so grows up in holiness and righteousness, after the similitude
of him that made him.

What must do. Must, imports the present opportunity, which in no case ought
to be neglected, specielly in matters of salvation.

Men are least careful in this behalf: they deserre their conversion till
their last and latest time; Being loath to part with sin, as Lot was to go
out of Sodom: they would not leave sin till sin leave them. This Iaylor
teaches you otherwise, if you ask him, when it is best to enter into this
holy resolution, when it is time to turn to God and so be saved: He tells you
now you must do it, now is the time. Ask Solomon, He tells thee in the days
of thy youth remember thy Creator.

Ask God himself, he tells thee, To day, hear my voice. If thou will know
the time of the day, ask Abraham, He tells thee it must be in the morning: as
he in the morning of the day rose up to sacrifice his son, so thou In mane
vitae tuae. In the morning of thy life.

If thou let the day slip till the morrow, to thee belongs that curse. Vae qui
dicitis cras: cras, cras, non Christianorum, sed Coruorum vox est misere
crocitantium. Woe be to you that say to morrow: to morrow, to morrow, is not
the voice of Christians, but the unlucky croaking of Ravens and Crows.

Praesens tempus tantum nostrum est. The present time is only ours.

Dum dicitur hodie. Whilst to day we live.

Qui non est hodie, ^ras minus aptus erit. He that endeavors not to day, will
be less apt for any good to morrow.

All men would gladly go to heaven, but they cannot resolve to go yet: they
would a while live upon the earth; they are not of this laylours mind, nor of
Paul's mind. I desire, says he, to be dissolved: And what must I do? He does
not so much as give the Apostles leave and respite to refresh and feed
themselves he was so earnest.

As Abraham's servant did not eat meat till he had first told his message:
so the laylour would not suffer the Apostles nor himself to eat meat, till
he had told them his message.

He cared like Mary, rather to feed the soul then the body; not respecting
the perishing food, but rather that which should feed him up to eternal life.

This shows a careful desire in the laylour: but we must proceed further
than to a naked desire. He that only desires to do well, and either goes no
further, or retires back again where he began: is like to the smoke which
goes up toward heaven, but never comes there. Or like a cloud that mountes
aloft, as long as the suns heat lasts; but the sun once set, it falls
down to the earth faster then it mounted up.

This laylour went further then so, for as we find him in this place desiring
to know the means of his salvation: so in the next verse to my Text, we find
him using the means of his salvation.

The Apostles were diligent to preach unto him, and he as diligent to hear
them.

As our bodies grow, so must our souls: first we creep, and then we grow, and
then we run: so we must grow in the spirit, and increase in knowledge, and
profit in Religion, till the man of God be perfect.

As this laylour said, What shall I do to be saved: so let every man say,
What shall I do to have knowledge? what shall I do to have faith? what
shall I do to have charity? what shall I do to have zeal?

All these are so many means of thy salvation, and shall carry thee to heaven,
faster then the fiery chariot carried Elias thither, when he was translated.

And thus much is spoken briefly for the question of the laylour.

Now let us consider of the Apostles answer. Believe in the Lord Jesus, and
thou shall be saved and thy household.

This is their answer: he was not so ready to ask, but they are as ready to
satisfy his demand.

Christ's Disciples are like Christ; he in the 10. of Mark, answered thus to
him that demanded what he might do to inherit eternal life: Hoc fac et
viues: This do and thou shall live.

And here the Apostles gave like answer to this Iaylour: Do this and thou
shall be saved.

Believe in the Lord Jesus. Here we are to learn by this example of the
Apostles, to be helpful to our neighbors, or whom so ever we find fit for the
Kingdom of God: we ought to furnish them with all spiritual knowledge: we
must like Peter, strengthen them that are weak, when we our selves are strong.

But we see the contrary practiced; for the greatest part are apt to draw men
from God, and from his truth; as the Athiests and Papists of these times who
strain their endeavors to make others like themselves.

Boni malos volunt esse bonos,
vt sint sut similes:
Mali contra bonos volunt esse malos,
vt sint sui similes.
More then a good many can be apt to say with Chora: The people are all holy,
and whereto serves this precisenes.

They would persuade men that they are too good, when they are stark naught.

They will be straight-wayes in the extremity, before they have attained the
mediocrity: Like the lazy trauailer, that sittes down in the midst of his
journey: or like him, that running in a race, gives over in the midst of his
course, and suffers others to get the goal before him.

This is the reluctation between the holy and unholy, the children of light,
and the children of the darkness.

Good men strive to be holy themselves, and to beget holiness in others: but the
wicked strive to be naught, and to make others worse than themselves.

And the devil comes in to act up the tragedy, and so he rages, and so sin
suggesteth, and so the weakness of man yields, because he has not faith, in
which only we can overthrow the world.

The Apostles sinding this Iaylour in the way of his salvation, do help him
forwards, and do support his weakness: as Christ carried the lost sheep upon
his shoulders, and as the merciful Samaritane did lay the man that lay by the
way side robbed and wounded, upon his own beast.

Believe say they in the Lord.

This may seem to be a lesson soon learned, and the gayning of heaven a
matter of short and easy surprise, if it may be obtained only by believing in
the Lord Jesus.

Indeed the answer is short, but the matter of substance included therein is
great: for as one tree has many branches, and one branch many blossoms: so
this one answer has many circumstances. All which being duly considered, we
shall be forced to acknowledge it a matter of greatest difficulty; and that we
have need to call upon Gods spirit, for his special furtherance in this great
frame of our spiritual building.

For it is not given to all, to believe in the Lord Jesus, nay, it is given but
to a few, to those only whom the Father has sealed for that purpose.

Yea, even the best of us, to whom the Lord has given most talents of his
rich graces, may say notwithstanding, looking upon our imperfections.

Lord we believe, help our unbeleefe, and the spirit is willing, but the
flesh is weak.

Faith in the strongest, will be found to be but a deficient faith, as Peter's
was, when he began to sink.

God will have it to be so, to the end we should have recourse to the fulness
that is in Christ. That when we see our faith weakened or wounded, we should
do, as they did, who were bitten by Scorpions: cast up our eyes to Christ, the
brazen serpent, who will not cease, since now he is lifred up, to draw us up
also unto himself.

Believe in the Lord Jesus. Asour Savior told Martha, one thing is necessary;
so the Apostles tell this Iaylor, one thing is necessary to furnish him for the
Kingdom of heaven, even faith: Belecu^ only and thou shall be saved.

To believe, is to give consent in thy heart to the word of truth: to subscribe
thereunto by an unfeigned profession, and to yield all Christian obedience
aunswerable to the measure of grace given unto us.

This faith is begotten in us, by the immediate gift of God, and increased in
us by the word of God read and preached.

God gives the word, and the word gives faith, and faith gives salvation.

The Jews read the Scriptures, and they heard Christ preaching unto them
every Sabbath in their Sinagogues: yet they believed not, because the veil was
not taken from them: and they were still in their sins, to show that faith is
the special gift of God, and all cannot receive it, which makes so many to
withstand the truth in ungodliness.

Where it is said here, Believe only, and thou shall be saved: We learn
that faith is the only principal instrument, whereby we apprehend Christ, and
so consequently our salvation.

For without faith it is impossible to please God; and so without faith it is
impossible to be saved.

Here may the Papists lay their hands upon their mouths; for they are no
longer In architectura totu^ artificiu^ attribuitur architecto, non arti, non
instrumentis. Ol^u^ et ignis duo sunt, sed cohare^t in vno lam^ad^o. Make your
(...) sure by good works. In facto, no^ pto facto.
able to maintain their doctrine of Good-workes in the act of justification.

They would have us acknowledge with them, that faith without works is not
sufficient to justify: but with our says (say they) our works must be
co^current. Which is a manifest error, and this place conuinceth it.

True it is that faith never goes alone, but is always accompanied with
goodworks: as the heat is never separated from the fire: but in the act of
justification faith alone must be considered: otherwise Christ dyed in vain.

Homines meritum quid esse potest (...) vt ait vaus, hommis desperatio, aut vt
a^ alter, Dei miseratio.

For what is man's merit? but as one author says, man's desperation. Or as
another says; the mercy of God.

Who can say, My heart is clean? Can the infant or the tender babe newly
drawn from the womb? In no wise they cannot. For quis dabit mundum, ex
immundo semme? Of unclean seed, what cleanness can come?

Number adult us? vt sunt annorum, sic vitiorum incrementa. In youth; as years
multiply, so vices increase.

Cum omnia feceritis dicite vos esse seruos in vtiles. When ye have done all
you can, say ye are unprofitable servants.

Si dixerimus nos volumus, respondet Apostolus, Deus dat velle: si dixerimus
nos facimus, at vt facimus Deus facit, qui dat et velle, et perficere. If we
say we will, the Apostle answers, God gives the will: If we say we do
endeavor, God gives that endeavor; for in him is both the will and the work.

Most excellent is that place of Paul, in the 5. to the Ephe. A voice for
strength so forcible as Sampsons hairie locks, even to foil whole Armies of
adversaries. (...) gratia estis seruati. By grace ye are saved through faith;
not of your selves, it is the gift of God, not of works, least any man should
boast. Vita, ^ternum Dei donum est. Shall we so unkindly entertain this
bountifulnes of Gods free mercy, as not to accept hereof.

Yet says the Papist, I Will not have it, like a disdainful proud Merchant,
unless I may pay for it: either I Will merit heaven by my works, or I Will not come
there.

If the Papist had said, he would never come there, I had the rather believed
him. Certainly, if he stay till merit carry him thither, unless by merit he
understand the merit of Christ, he is never like to come there.

In the Lord Jesus Christ.

Believe in the Lord: he does not say, believe the Lord. This shows the
manner how we ought to believe; it is one thing credere Deum, another thing
credere in De^.

The one is a general faith, such as the devil has, and his instruments,
the Athiests, Daemones cred^nt and contremiscunt.
and Heretics, and all the Reprobates.

They have a general knowledge: they Simon Magus credidit ve^am esse docuinam
Apostolorum. non h^buit tam^n veram side^. 1, 10. 4.
believe, and they will acknowledge, that there is a God that made the world,
and that governs the world. And we find this confession of God and of
Christ, in many places of the Gospel. Thou art Christ, the Son of the living
God.

We never find that he confessed him to be filium homines. Demon agnoscit
Christam vt Deu^, sed no^ vt homine^ simul.


Jesus I know, and Paul I know: but who are ye? But we are taught another
special kind of faith, which is to believe in God, and in Christ.

That is, to apply by faith unto our selves, all that GOD has wrought for us
in his Son Christ: as that he has created us: redeemed us, preserved us:
sanctified us: and in time will glorify us: and all in Christ nothing of our
selves, not for us: but all in Christ, and for Christ: for without him, we can
do nothing.

Yea, this our faith, as it comes from us, as of it self cannot justify, nor
please God: only it is his will to accept it, and us in it, how imperfect
soever it be: because Christ our Lord presents it, and does perfect it. Nam
i^^llo habitat omms plenitudo, for in him dwells all fulness.

This is briefly the substance of that says which being planted in us by
the spirit of GOD, will bring with it all saving kn^^ledge.

This true belief is in us, when we bel^^ue the wholesome Word of truth: All
that the Prophets have written concerning Christ, how that he was borne for
us, and dyed for us, and so entered into his glory.

To believe this, and to do there-after, so making our election sure, as the
Ap^s^le warns us, this is to have eternal life: this is to find out that
salvation which the Iaylour so diligently sought for.

I shut up all with this one note, the true justifying faith has these
properties.

Acquiescit in Christo, omnes cius promissiones, et merita apprehendus. It does
repose it self in Christ, laying hold on all his promises and merrits.

Non est temporaria, semper cons^ntit doctrinae caelesti: per Prophetas et
Apostolos traditae: Math, 13. 20
eum profitetur, de ea gloriatur, eius cognitione laetatur: non ad tempus, sed
perpetuo: It is not for a time: but always agreeable with the heavenly
doctrine delivered by the Prophets and Apostles: the same it professes, of it
she glories, in the knowledge thereof she rejoices, not for a time, but for
ever.

Semper est fructuosa, and operans per charitem: It is always fruitful, and
works by love.

The Scripture mentions but two kinds of ^ayth.

The one a dead faith without good works, which believes all you say of
Christ, but observes not his commandments.

The other, a lively, a justifying faith, which does not only believe, but
work also in charity.

And thus much may be spoken of faith, which as Chrysostom says, No man
knows, or understands a-right, but he that receaueth it: as no man knows
the savor of honey but he that has seen it, and tasted it.

This faith, as the same holy man also writes, is, Lumen animae, ostium vitae,
fundamentum salutis ^ternae.

He that has this faith, has already the kingdom of God within him: and he
may say as Jacob, did when he rested him in Bethel: and this is no other but
the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven.

Lord.

Lord, imports his sovereignty, and power, in that he is a Lord: he is able
to save us, and to protect us, if we submit our selves to his government.

In that he is called a Lord, we must be directed only by him: he must reign
in us, and over us.

The homage we must pay to this our Lord and King, is our selves, our souls
and bodies. A living sacrifice holy and acceptable unto God, which is our
reasonable service of God.

If I be a Lord, where is mine honor, says the Lord by Malachy.

God will not be our Lord, unless we will become his servant: but if we
serve the world, or our lusts, or our vanities, then we cast his yoke from us.

Jesus.

Signifies a Savior: I came not to destroy, but that the world in me might
have life. And this is eternal life: to believe that God has sent his son.
They shall call his name Jesus; for he shall save his people from their sins.

There is no other name given under heaven, whereby we must be saved, neither
is salvation in any other.

Christ.

Vnctus: The Lord has anointed him with the oil of gladness above his
fellows. Heb. 1.
Kings, Priests, and Prophets, were first anointed, before they executed their
offices.

And Christ our Lord being a King, a Priest, and a Prophet, is likewise
anointed to execute his threefold office for us, in governing, sacrifycing,
and praying for us.

He was a Prophet and the last of the prophets, who now has sealed up both
vision and prophecy, and the whole mystery of godliness: which is. God is
manifested in the 1. Tim, 3. 16
flesh, justified in the spirit* s^^ne of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles,
believed on in the world, and receu^ed up in glory.

And thou shall be saved and thine household. Behold here the wondersull
comfort presented upon a sudden to this laylour. Salvation is freely in this
place offered unto him by faith in Christ, whom Paul and Sylas preached.

Never was the cool shadow so comfortable to the weary traueler in the
extremity of Summers drought, as this glad tidings of salvation was to this
distres^ed Iaylour.

Sin and s^than seized upon him before, as the legion of fi^nds upon the heard
of Swine: but now he has separated from him his sins, and quite expulsed all
the inty^ing vanities of this decei^full world, and he runs to Christ,
faster then Zacheus out of the wild fig tree. Before he was under the wrath
of God, but now he is under grace, and is upon a sudden become an elect
vessel of mercy.

And thine household. See how full the rivers of God are, and how universally
they stream forth to water the hearts of all Christians that are apt to
receive them. Not the Iaylour alone has the benefit of this wholeso^e
Emplayster, but his whole household are salued as well as himself: they for his
sake have a promise of the like grace.

Servant may be glad that are in service under a religious Master, for that
the blessings of God in the Master are derived unto them. Here we may cry out
with Paul* O the riches of Gods mercisulnes. And with Moses, Dominus domtnus
potens et misericors, slow to anger, and abundant in mercy and truth: reserving
mercy for thousands. The householder himself, and his family, children,
servant, and all are saved.

The vnbelceuing wife shall be accepted for the believing husband: and in this
place the household is accepted for the householder.

And this that has been spoken, shall suffize, for the clearing of this story
of the Iaylour.

In whose example we are called upon, to make strait steps unto our paths, and
to be always devising what we may do to be saved: He ranue to the Apostles,
to learn how he might be saved: we must also run to the Apostles, that is, to
the word and we shall be sure to be informed as he was in the way of our
salvation.

We must apply to our sick souls the benefit of the same emplaister: and we
must believe in the Lord Jesus, as he did, that is, Let us acknowledge him
alone to be our Messiah, our Redeemer, and Advocate; and according to this
faith let us work and fructify, by testifying the same both to the world, and
our own consciences: and then shall this undoubtedly follow. We shall be saved
and our households.

Soli Deo gloria.

