THE EGYPTIAN COVRTIER.

Delivered in two Sermons, before the Vniv^^sitie, at St. MARY'S Church in
Oxford. The first, July 25. 1631. The other, July 6. 1634.

BY RICHARD THORNTON, Mr. of Arts, and sometimes Fellow of LINCOLN COLLEGE.

ERASM. ENCHIR. Habet unumquodque vitae genus cognata quaedam degenerandi
pericula; ca qui commonstrat, non derogat ordini, sed rem ordinis agit.

ECCLVS. 8. VER. 8. Despise not the discourse of the wise, but acquaint thy
self with their Proverbs: for of them thou shall learn instruction, and how
to serve great men with ease.

LONDON, Printed by E. P. for HENRY SEILE, and are to be sold at the Tygres
head in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1635.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
IT is a great question, whether Art or Nature be more fruitful, in producing
Monsters: the one, presents many erroneous and wilful opinions; the other
wanders up and down in many gross deformities and corruptions of life; both,
active and forward enough to publish themselves, did not the power of Heaven,
the wisdom of Authority, restrain them both. But passing along the channels
of Egypt, once the Nurserie of Learning, famous for variety and abundance of
such Prodigies; I find one, of one kind, as chief for his quality, as for
his Office; one, in whom concur the aberrations of Art and Nature; one
complying with each of them, to make himself one of both, a strange prodigious
Monster, a living man without bowels, a man-pleaser, yet no friend: such a man,
of whom there can be no Picture drawn, no full expression, unless we go
again to Egypt for some new invention of Paper and Characters: Time (perhaps)
may hereafter discover him in better colors; in the mean while, who list may
come and see, and learn to save himself from this untoward generation.

The Story is a Looking-glass, wherein most passengers may see a glimpse of
themselves, either acting or suffering affliction; here you may guess at the
substance, by the shadow: and if the boundless waters of trouble (swelling to
the height of a Proverb) have made it transparent enough for each man (whom it
may concern) to reflect a little upon himself; thin^^ upon the River Nylus,
the place from whence it came, whose overflowings makes the soil thus
fruitful, beneficial to all.

How-ever, be it never so mean a Comm^dtie put upon the Merchant (like Joseph
himself, no better esteemed by his own brethren) and bought at first by
Ismaelites, men of the meaner sort; yet in time, the price thereof may be
raised by experience, and so made good for great ones: sure I am (like a Glass
indeed) there is matter in it which has been tried in the fire, and which
returns impression, without flattery.

The Work (in plain terms) is a Rod prepared for the back of fools; but
yet (like that of Moses) stretched only over the Land of Egypt: no wise man
will be offended, nor any true Israelite, in whom there is no guile. The God of
all consolation (who turned a Rod into a Serpent, and made a Serpent wise by
nature, for a pattern of instruction) prosper my weak endeavors, improve
these Blossoms to maturitie, that his blessed Name may be glorified, the
Church edified, Joseph's afflictions remembered, his enemies scattered, his
friends increased, all of us wiser unto salvation, and my self every day more
profitably

Thine in the Lord, R. THORNTON.
From (...) an in Lincolnshire, April the 4. 1635.
THE EGYPTIAN COVRTIER. The first Sermon.
GENESIS 40. VER. 23. Yet did not the chief Butler remember JOSEPH, but forgot
hi^^^.


1 THE way to true happiness, is but a troublesome pilgrimage, distracted with
variety of bypath, wherein temptations on every side lie at catch, like so
many rubs and shrubs, both obscuring and disturbing the passage: So that a
House of Bordage must be inhabited, before a Land of Promise; and he who will
not pass through a Wilderness of hunger and thirst, shall never come into
that pl^asant Land, flowing with Milk and Honey. He who thinks to go to
Heaven in a sleep, shall never come there but in a dream; which I am sure, if
Joseph may interpret, will find no answer of peace. No; his experience proves
the contrary: the Irons entered into his soul, Psalm. 105.18.
before the Vestments of fine Linen came near his body; Genesis 41.42.3.
even those Iron fetters hurt his feet, before the Gold Ring did beautify his
hand, or the Chain his neck: before others did bow the knee to him, he bowed
the knee to others; to his brethren, for compassion; to his Master, Potiphar,
for justice; to his fellow in the Dungeon, for favor: His brethren were bound
to commiserate the anguish of his soul, by the Law of Nature, the Nature of
fraternity; and yet they sold him for a slave to the Ismaelites, Genesis 37.28.
and made the benefit of a Brother, but the commodity of a Merchant: His
Master was bound to do him right at least, for the fidelity of his service; a
service very prosperous; Genesis 39.20.
and yet he put him in prison: His fellow prisoner was bound to remember the
truth of his interpretation; an interpretation very welcome, bringing glad
tidings, tidings of deliverance, and restitution to his place: Yet did not the
chief Butler, etc.

2 The meaning of which words, presents unto us Joseph, forgot by an Egyptian
Courtier: And because the want of remembrance in these days is but a common
fault, sometimes an excuse, always most liable to exception from the quality
of the parties; the business in hand will seem no matter of importance,
unless we enter into the consideration of these two particulars (as general
parts) Joseph's condition, and the chief Butlers; both which are the story and
premises of this Chapter, whereof my Text is the conclusion: In Joseph's
condition, you may see the motives of remembrance; in the chief Butlers
condition, you may guess at the reasons of his forgetfulness: These motives,
those reasons arguing his unworthiness to be a friend to any, much less a
servant to his Prince, not so much deserving a good turn as a bad one, rather
the chief Bakers fate, than the Christians imitation; and so I proceed in the
first place, to take a view of Joseph's condition, a plain case: Yet did, etc.

3 What Joseph was before his coming into Egypt, will not be much material
to persuade respect; the World we know esteems men by what they are, not as
they have been: Indeed, in a case of envy, or revenge, tenax injuriarum
memoria, the worst (though past) is soonest remembered; but in a case of
misery, the best being past, is soon thought tedious to be heard, or
repeated, seldom worthy to be believed, especially in a man of Joseph's
condition: in whom, if it stand not with the wisdom of this great man to
believe more than he saw, yet he must needs take notice of these three
particulars, to enforce his remembrance afterward: first, that Joseph was a
prisoner: secondly, that he was a man of special worth, an Interpreter:
thirdly, that he was a petitioner; each whereof aggravating the chief Butlers
unworthiness, makes this short Text too long for an hours work: so that it
seems best, only to speak of the two former particulars at this time, and
leave the Petitioner till hereafter, as fittest and most likely to attend and
wait upon this Courtiers condition.

4 First then, he was a prisoner. Whether this was a state of misery, or no,
the chief Butler knew by his own experience: he once had been a prisoner,
and that in the same place; there I am sure he looked sad, Verse 6. and by the
loss of his Office, Psalm. 104.15.
wanted that Wine which makes glad the heart of man: and (indeed) could he
look otherwise than sad, in a place of that nature? Pareus in Genesis
Non liberalis custodia sed faedus carcer e figura rotunda habens desuper
orificium (as some will observe from the original) no free Prison, but an
obscure subterraneous noisome Vault, of a round figure, with the mouth upwards;
signifying (perhaps) that whosoever comes there) must quickly be turned upside
down; liberty, into thraldom; chains of Gold, into fetters of Iron; Wine,
into Water; variety of delicacies, into bread of affliction: even the fresh
air, which was the cheapest, must now be the dearest commodity; no fortunes,
beyond allowance, to supply the wants; no ancient servants to attend the
person, no faithful friends to advise the counsels, no kind^ed, none at all to
come near the place of a close prisoner, who alone seems enriched with the
remembrance of former contents, to aggravate the depth of present miserie^. No
marvel if he were sad: Joseph's experience was the same in proportion to his
estate, witness Ps. 105. The chief Butler knew so much, for he was a prisoner
at the same time with Joseph; Joseph's f^llow prisoner. Indeed at that time he
had a little more liberty than before, and yet this gave him a fairer way to
relate the severity of his former punishment: for though Joseph (being a mean
and contemptible man, without friends or fortunes) might heretofore seem
unworthy to receive any ^avor, even the favor to be heard from the Nec vile
putetur ossic^um cum apud Reges Barbaros u que hodit maximae dignitatis sit
Regi poculum porrigere. Hieron.
other Archipincerna, the chief Butler, primariae dignitatis vir, a man of the
first rank, of greatest authority in Pharaohs house; yet now the case is
altered, they were both prisoners together, the disparity is grown less,
affliction makes the haughty mind stoop; and for want of other, thinks this a
content, socios habero doloris, to have fellow prisoners, partners in
affliction: for thus opportunity and patience, to hear men speak in their own
behalf, may be obtained without petition or a bribe, and willingly returned
too, by way of requital. Men being by nature desirous to ease their troubled
hearts, strive to mitigate their sorrow, by imparting it one to another: nay,
(being greedy to catch at any shadow of relief) they easily comply together in
this mutual presumption, if one of the^ be released, the other may hope to be
remembered. Caeterum iis qui in eodem erant carcere quoties labor intermitteret^
confabulanlibus (ita ul solent) miseriarum socus and s^ae damnationis causam
invicem percontantibus pincerna Regi charus familiaritatem cum fusepho
contra^it. Joseph, lib. 2. Antio.
Something it was of like nature, which made this great Officer so willing to
interchange language with Joseph, and which made Joseph so bold as to ask him a
question; what question? a reason only, and that no reason of State, but a
reason within the circumference of his own judgment, and the Dungeon, a reason
of sadness, a passage most remarkable of all others, during the time of his
imprisonment; and therefore a little to be observed for his better remembrance
who forgot it, and yet it seems least worthy of notice: for was it not a
sufficient reason of sadness, to b^ shut up in so unworthy a place? me thinks
that complaint in Petrarch, carcere claudor indigno, might well have begun the
dialogue, and prevented the question: but Joseph (by his long acquaintance with
the condition of that place) could have given himself this answer, before he
moved the question, had he not perceived the sadness to be more than ordinary:
and therefore, to proceed from a cause proportionable to the effect, this cause
could not be that ordinary discourse incident to all men in affliction, whereby
extremity and hope and folly beget and increase one another. No, Verse. 6.
it was in the morning (says the Text) before any such discourse was stirring,
and that not in respect of the morning unlosing the senses from sleep, and
thereby exposing the^ to a more violent apprehension of those miseries whereof
the day before they had surfeted, for this was every days work; but the
question was, Cur tristior solito sit hodie facies vestra? Why are ye so sad to
day? Verse. 7.
And if it were in respect of sleep, judge ye. Indeed the cares of an
oppressed mind having wearied a man in the day tim^, may assault him in the
night by a dream: thus the Husbandman may dream of his Ox, and the Mariner
of his Sails; and thus all in a prison may find it, not only waking, but
sleeping, a place of misery: but th^n this phantasme quickly vanishes,
tantummodo creditur dum videtur, it is believed only so long as it is seen*
and so c^uld not aft^rwards be a means of any sadness more than ordinary,
unless it were more than an ordinary dream: and if it were more than an
ordinary dream (as indeed it was) the sadness, how great soever, must needs
more and more increase; for here is none (for ought this great Egyptian knew)
that could interpret it, answera^le to the superstition of his country, and the
greatness of his fears; none but Joseph not likely to help others, who had
bin the^e (even there) so long himself; not likely to be an Interpreter, who
was a fellow prisoner, and that willing to wait, as their occasions served.

And now, if there were no other Remembrancer, but the afflictions of the body,
the losses of fortunes, the distractions of the mind, both waking and
sleeping, common to all prisoners; how could one forget another? how could one,
being released, not remember him who was left behind? Surely, not by the Law
of Nature; for by it one man cannot hurt another: What then? Lactantius makes
the argument; L. Fir. Divin. Instit. lib. 6. cap. 10.
Si nocere homini contra naturam sit, prodesse igitur homini secundum naturam
fit necesse est: If to hurt a man, be against Nature; then surely to do him
good, is most agreeable to Nature: And though this be one of those precepts
which bind always, and at all times; yet the more a man's neighbor stands in
need of this good, the more the duty is required. Sen. in Proverbiis.
And therefore Seneca goes further; Qui succurrere perituro potest, cum non
succurrit, occidit: He that may help a man ready to perish, and will not,
makes himself liable to that man's destruction. The Scripture strikes it home
in the 41. Psalm: From whence we may well conclude, Psalm. 41.1.
That he who regards not the poor and needy, the Lord will not deliver him
in the time of trouble: His want of humanity, does not only damnifie his
brother, but makes himself a looser. And therefore the Schoolmen give us two
reasons, Aq. 22. q. 30.2. C.
why every man should make his neighbors calamity his own: First, propter
unionem amoris, for the love one man must bear another; not only in general,
according to the rules of humanity, common to Infidels; but more particularly,
1 Cor. 12.26. Esaias 53.3.
as members of one body, whereof Christ Jesus is the Head, who made himself a
man of sorrows, for the good of others. And therefore, if there be any of
those Plant-animalia, Plants having the sense of feeling (as some report) in
regard if one leaf be cut off, or bruised, all the rest will presently shrink
and contract themselves: surely they were created for an emblem of charity,
worthy to be worn upon your heads; but chiefly to be rooted in your hearts,
if you desire to be leaves of that Plant, and branches of that Tree, which is
found in the Land of the living, and grows in the Paradise of Heaven.

6 The other reason is, propter possibilitatem similia patiendi, because man is
still in possibility to endure the like afflictions himself. If rich Croesus
could have been secured from change, he and his wealth had never been
enslaved to Cyrus. Was any more eminent than Nebuchadnezzar? who said, Is not
this great Babel, Dan 4.30.33.
which I have built for the house of the Kingdom, by the might of my power,
for the honor of my Majesty? And yet behold he was forced to change his
habitation, to have his dwelling amongst the beasts of the earth, and for seven
years together eat grass like Oxen, till his hairs were grown like Eagles
feathers, and his nails like birds claws, as it is in the fourth of Daniel.
Had any more favor amongst the people of Israel, than David the Kings son in
law? and yet behold he was forced to fly for his life to a neighbor Prince,
and to beg his bread of churlish Nabal. Are any more beloved than the Saints
and servants of God? and yet we read, Heb. 11.37.
they were stoned, they were sawed asunder, they were tempted, they were slain
with the sword, they wandered up and down in Sheepe-skins, and Goat Skins,
being destitute, afflicted, tormented: And all this to teach us, that it is not
the greatness of Riches, nor the stateliness of Palaces, nor the favor of
Princes, no, nor the real and true-hearted affection of God himself toward
his Saints and servants, which will free them from suffering afflictions in
this life. Psalm. 37.35. Phil. 1.16. Esaias 32.6.
Come hither then especially all ye that flourish like a green Bay Tree: Will
you add affliction to affliction? Will you make empty the soul of the
hungry, and cause the drink of the thirsty to fail? Will you look upon the
poor and needy with the eyes of scorn and indignation, as though their cases
could never be your own? And if there be a possibility, if the green Tree
may be withered, hewn down, and cast into the fire; why is there so much
oppression and extortion, so much uncharitableness and complaining in our
streets? Surely, if there were not a day to come, it were much better to be an
Indian Bird, and there to be sed (as they think) upon charity, then here to
be a poor Christian, and starve for hunger, lie gasping and panting in the
streets for want of relief, and yet Art and Nature stretched our, to please
other men's saucy and gluttonous appetites. Nay, this is not all: the Lord has
a quarrel, an irreconciliable quarrel, wherein he may call Sodom and
Gomorrha, Corazin and Bethsuida to rise up in judgment against those who rob
the Church of God, and grind the faces of the poor, to make Bread daily bread
for brute Beasts: As though that which is a part of the Christians prayer, were
to be made a portion for unreasonable creatures: as though it were humanity,
to gather up the crummes which fall from the Manger; or charity, to take the
childrens bread, and give it to whelps: Oh, why should their mouths be filled
with such abundance of man's nourishment, to increase Gods wrath, and the
present scarcity? To come nearer my Text; why should dumb Dogs be sooner
heard, than the doleful cries of poor prisoners, ingeminating their requests
more for Bread, Bread, than liberty?

7 There is a tradition worthy to be believed; That sometimes a great Prelate
of this Kingdom did thrice redeem all the prisoners in London confined for
Debt; but surely he died without issue: there is so much love of covetousness,
or so much needless fear of being accounted vainglorious, or so much
vainglorious desire, that posterity may see the visible structures and
lasting monuments of a full (I cannot say a bountiful) hand, few or none
inherit this kind of charity: which, though it flourished in many H^uses of
Bondage, yet (I am sure) it was never derived from the loins of this great
Egyptian; who besides the common motives of humanity and experience, going
hand in hand (as you see) with Joseph, had one Remembrancer more of special
note, to wit, his extraordinary sadness; whereby the more sensible he must
needs be of his own imprisonment, the less reason he had to forget another,
especially Joseph's, not only his fellow prisoner, but (which is the next
particular of his condition) a man of special worth, an interpreter of his
dream, a remover of his sadness: Yet did not the chief Butler, etc.

8 Here we cannot stay, to behold the comeliness of Joseph, and the ingenuitie
of his countenance, acknowledged by Primo aspectu iudicans hominem ingenuum and
honest natum. Philo. in l. de Ios. Genesis 39.6.
Pharaoh at the first sight, as Philo tells us: a goodly person no question he
was, and well-favoured (says the Text) and that is something to increase
respect, where merit is the foundation, and might here have been a motive of
greater compassion.

Nor will we look back upon Joseph's reputation in Potiphars house, Genesis 39.4.
where all things were left to be ordered and guided by his direction: in the
managing whereof, it seems he was not like that idle servant, Math. 25.25.
who hid his Masters Talent; or like that unjust Steward, Luke 16.1.
who wasted his Masters goods: it seems he did not lessen the yearly Revenue,
or mitigate the Fines, or any way under-value the price of his Masters Lands,
of purpose to make himself a Gratuitie; a practice much feared, where the
servant grows extraordinary rich, and the Master poor: No; by his wisdom
and providence all things succeeded well, and prospered in his Masters behalf;
Genesis 39.5.
the blessing of the Lord was upon all that he had in the house and in the
field. The fame whereof (no question) followed him to the Prison, and there so
pleaded his cause, that after a while he finds favor in the sight of the
Keeper, Ibid. verse. 21, 22.
all things are committed into his hand; and so he becomes charged with this
great Officer, and his companion; who could not but perceive (though at a
little hole, the hole of a Dungeon) the brightness of his fidelity, worthy of
a larger, of a better employment, and the rather regard that (his fidelity)
because the want of it in themselves had begot the anger of a King, the
punishment of a Prison, the terrors of a guilty Conscience, the matter of a
fearful Dream, the cause of this sadness; which in the chief Butler might
have increased beyond expression, had not Joseph been an Interpreter, and
thereby testified that worth which now we intend to discover: Yet did not the
chief Butler, etc.

9 Though the natural man cannot discern the mysteries of Grace, the best
means of happiness; yet his losses by the fall of Adam are not so great, but
he is both sensible of his wants, and greedy to repair them. Hereupon the
corners of Nature have been searched, to see if there were any voice of joy
and gladness in their habitations: Nay, least those futura contingentia,
contingencies, uncertainties to come, should rest in silence, even the Heathen
people have made themselves ( Wise men so called) to foretell events; such as
amongst the Babylonians, were known by the name of Chaldeans; Chaldeans not by
Nation, but profession; a name attributed to the most learned in that faculty:
in Persia, they were most properly called Magicians; in Greece, Philosophers;
amongst the Hebrews, they were styled Cabalists, Scribes, Pharisees; and
amongst the Egyptians, they were termed Priests: even the Land of Egypt
became a Nurserie for the Art of Divination, a black Art, far beyond the
light of flesh and blood; for in Nature we find only three sorts of causes,
to regulate our judgments concerning events. First, some causes do
necessarily and always produce the same effects, and these effects (as the
Eclipses of the year) may be certainly foreseen. Secondly, some causes do
not always, and necessarily, but commonly, and for the most part, produce the
same effects; and these effects (as the several changes of the Weather) may be
foreseen too, but by way of conjecture only. Lastly, some causes are
indifferently disposed ad opposita, to contrary effects; and these effects (as
for a man in perfect health, to go or stand, to be sick or die such a day, at
one time more than another) I say these effects cannot be foreseen, or seen,
but when they are present. And yet the learning of the Egyptians will needs
go further, and as Aquinas speaks, usurpare futuro^um ut futura sint
notitiam, 22.95.1 C.
foretell events, without the consideration of any cause: whereupon their
intelligence seeming above Nature, and guided as it were by a divine spirit,
their worth became more admired, and their persons promoted accordingly. Dan.
1.48.
Hereupon the Prophet Daniel being taken as one of that number, for showing and
interpreting the Kings Dream, was preferred over all the Province of Babylon.
In Rome, whilst the State was governed by Senators, we may clearly see their
privileges: there they had a College of Augures, or Magicians, (whose walls I
fear are not yet demolished) their authority was so great, that whatsoever
they designed, was ratified by a Law: Qui non paruerit capitalis esto, as
Cicero speaks in his second Booked de Leg. Whosoever will not obey, let him be
held a capital offender. Ep. l. 4.
Pliny writing to Arius, calls other dignities propemodum paria, almost equal
in reputation: Nay, being one of that number himself, he pleads antiquity for
respect, and calls it priscum Sacerdotium, an ancient Priesthood, Ibid.
derived it seems (as all Learning was) from these Egyptians; which perhaps
is the reason, why the same word in the original being applied to them,
signifies both a Priest and a Prince, Chap. 41. v. 50. as though their
authority were equal. No question it was very Augurum magna tunc erat tum
copia tum authoritas.
great, as appears afterward by Joseph's promotion, who was always held for
one of that number, tantum religio potuit suadere malorum: So much was this
profane Art of Divination respected and practiced amongst the greatest in the
Kingdom, entertained sooner than a better thing, and rewarded accordingly;
rewarded did I say: yes surely; for the Priests share was not Onions and
Garlic, but the third part of all this large and most fruitful Land; treble
the value of that, whereat the whole World seems to murmr and exclaim in
these days.

10 In this Art, Joseph seems to comply with the Magicians, by foretelling
things which afterward came to pass; but yet with much difference in the end,
and means of his knowledge: for the knowledge of the Magicians, was by a
wicked manner of Divination, whereof there are many kinds unworthy to be
named; whose end, is vain curiosity; and the means, grand or gross
Idolatry; either an express, or a tacit confederation with the Devil: but
Joseph's knowledge was prophetical; whose end, is the manifestation of Gods
glory; and the means, a special revelation from Heaven. Indeed, after his
promotion, we read, that his servant speaks of a Cup, wherein (he says) his
Master does divine: Genesis 44.5.
but it seems agreed on all sides, that such language was either according to
that manner of Divination by the Cup, frequent among the Egyptians, and so
answerable to that opinion which they held of Joseph, for a Magician; or to
blind the eyes of his brethren, from seeing his prophetical Spirit, before
he would reveal himself: otherwise we cannot think, that he who in the
time of his distress kept the Commandment, would in prosperity renounce it,
forsake the Lord God of Israel, and comply with Magicians, in the end and
means of their knowledge; though they seem to agree in the substance, by
foretelling things which afterward came to pass. And so much was apparent to
the chief Butler, it came within the compass of his apprehension; for he
heard an interpretation of his own Dream, and by seeing the predictions
verified in himself, he never saw the like before. Nay, least this
intelligence should be thought some imposture, he saw it seconded by another
interpretation of the chief Bakers Dream, wherein the truth of predictions
found like success: Like success shall I say? Yes; for evidence, not for
consolation: for when they were both offenders, full of distracted thoughts,
animated with nothing else but fears and sadness; even then Joseph's
interpretation awakes the chief Butlers Dream, frees him from Prison,
restores his Office, saves his life, preserves his fortunes: and where there is
no future happiness of the soul thought on, what good turn could be more
general, more seasonable, more grateful, especially at that time, when the
same spirit of interpretation which freed one, hanged another; the better to
make him who escaped, remember both his deliverance and his friend?

11 And yet for all this, Joseph's worth did most of all appear, by confessing
the means and Author of his knowledge: which he insinuates by a question; Genesis
40.8.
Do not interpretations belong to God? Which words, though they would not
sink into the head of this Egyptian at that time (being a prisoner,) yet
afterward (being a Courtier) they might well persuade a further inquiry; if
not for the goodness, yet for the noveltie of such direction: But the
goodness (had it been perceived, as who would not have tried whether this
Spirit came down from Heaven, or no?) was a Cup of greater blessing, than the
River Nilus overflowing the whole Land of Egypt; such (as for ought he knew
to the contrary) might have taught the Senators wisdom, Psalm. 105.22.
reformed the Superstition of that Age, rectified the judgment of all: so
fair an opportunity did Joseph give the chief Butler, to lay a foundation of
greater honor, of special advantage for himself, had he but given this Cup
of rare Divination into Pharaohs hand. But worth of the highest nature, finds
little respect where it is not apprehended; and being apprehended, obtaines not
much more, unless it be found beneficial and profitable to men's present
occasions: And therefore, either Joseph's worth in this kind was not understood
at all; and then he was very unhappie, (as many are upon like occasions) in
applying his worth to that man who understands it not: or this Egyptian has
some reasons to the contrary, of greater importance; whereat we may guess,
in the discovery of his condition.

12 In the mean time, we may return to the substance of the Work: and
whilst we behold it finished, the interpretation made, the prediction
verified, and the happiness of it in possession; let us consider, that as this
is sufficient for the ends of a natural man, so it may be for his remembrance
too; that remembrance, which includes a continual thanks and acknowledgement;
that thanks, which is sealed with a due requital, when occasion serves; even
a perfect thankfulness, as well in effect, as in show and desire: especially
the worth of interpretation, and foretelling events; being an act in general
so highly esteemed by the fashion and superstition of that country, and here
in particular so full of certainty, by the testimony of his own experience;
nay, so greedily embraced, by the consent and necessity of all his occasions:
and the rather, because the Egyptians, of all others, are famous for works of
thankfulness, not only toward their gods and men, but even to brute beasts
also, as Diodorus Siculus observes: Nay, they seem in a manner to have taught
the brute beasts themselves this quality: for besides the thankfulness of
the Dog, (very common, and remarkable) their Hieroglyphicke for a grateful
mind, Pieri. Val. l. 17. page 158.
is the Storke; which (as Historians tell us) provides a Nest, and prepares
nourishment for the old one, after the same manner, and in the same place
wherein she was brought up her self: and therefore me thinks an Egyptian, of
all others, should not so much incur the censure of his own country, so
much prejudice the reputation of his own judgment, so much violate the
preservation of common honesty, as not to pay this moral debt, of a thankful
remembrance.

Plut. in vita Alex.
13 We read, that the last gasp of great King Darius (being wounded by some
of his servants, and forsaken by them all) breathed thankfulness to
Polistratus, a Macedonian, for giving him a cup of cold water to drink. And it
is this virtue, which makes these ancient Women of Rome yet alive, fresh in
remembrance; Sabell. l. 7. c. 1. exemp.
who (because Junius Brutus had revenged the ravishment of Lucretia) they all
(in a thankful acknowledgement of that pious fact) mourned for his death a
whole year together. But examples have their time, Nature endures for ever;
and her Law (we know) gives honor to Parents, as causes of our being:
Whereupon (according to that of Aquinas; Aq. 22.106.3. C.
Benefactor in quantum hujusmodi est causa beneficiati; A Benefactor in some
sort is the cause of him who receives the benefit) we may well infer, that
the giver may challenge of the receiver a duty of thankfulness, Benefactori
quidem in quantum huiusmodi debetur honor and reverentia, eo quod habet
rationem principii. Ibid.
honor, and reverence, the proper duties of all effects to their cause. But it
may be the Graces speak more familiar language: they (we see) are pictured
complexis dextris, joining hand in hand, ut redditio beneficii notetur, to
express their inviolable connection, and the necessity of thankfulness in
all humane societies. So that he has little reason to break this sacred
confederation, who expects no other happiness but by the Law of Nature.

14 And if there be so much to persuade a natural man, then surely the
Christian must not come behind: And yet what needs any other invitation?
Nature likewise is the Christians familiar friend, and her Law must be his
direction. Sure I am, there needs no other example, but that of King David, in
the second of Samuel, chapter 9. who asked, if there were any left of Saul's house,
to whom he might show kindness? It seems that resolution of Tully was his
Motto, Lib. 2. de sinib. bon and mal.
Volo esse and haberi gratus, I will be thankful, and so accounted: for mark
the event; upon this inquiry, Siba the servant of Jonathan is brought in, and
he brings in Mephibosheth, the son of Jonathan: And should not David have
respected Mephibosheth, the sole remainder of Saul's house? And which is more,
the son of Jonathan: Jonathan, who loved him as his own soul; who incurred
his fathers high displeasure, and much endangered his own life for his sake;
by whose faithful advice and direction, David was always taught how to behave
himself in Court, and to avoid the Kings fury: I say, should not David have
loved Mephibosheth, the son of Jonathan, the soul of Jonathan might by
covenant have cried to Heaven for vengeance. But Mephibosheth was regarded; and
all that belonged to Saul and his household, was conferred upon him. The
brightness of this favor reflects upon Ziba too; for he is made Steward (as
it were) to Mephibosheth, to husband and manage his lands: whereby he also, and
his sons and his servants might bless King David, the remembrance of
Jonathan, and all enjoy the fruits of this most grateful and princely mind.

15 And thus, if thankfulness, by a Kings example, be written in Capital
Letters; whose proud, or careless, or greedy and covetous eye will pass by,
and not regard it? If he make thankfulness, like precious Ointment, run down
to the skirts of his clothing; who will not touch the hemme of that garment,
especially to cure the bloody issue of malice, where the debt is of a contrary
nature, a debt of love and kindness? In a word, if the King vouchsafe so much
favor to Mephibosheth, who called himself a dead Dog; 2 Samuel 9.8.
then surely they are worse than dead Dogs, who upon like occasions will not
(as Mephibosheth did) bow unto the King; much more, and in the first place, to
the King of Kings, the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel, from whom alone we
receive our being, life, and motion, preservation from dangers, and assistance
in these holy exercises: Ps. 107.8. Ps. 116.15.
O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness, and offer unto
him a sacrifice of thanksgiving; never receiving any benefit, never speaking of
his works, never thinking of his Name, without making that conclusion in Psalm.
106. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel from everlasting to everlasting, and let
all the people say, Amen.

16 And for a better illustration of this thankfulness to God, since he has
commanded us to honor our Parents, let it be the piety and Religion of our
Country, the height of gratitude, to give unto Caesar that which is Caesar's;
and in like proportion, to observe all those who in public or private affairs
deserve well at our hands, and appear to be men of worth and authority. In
which respect (were it in another place) I should a little plead the case of an
Interpreter (as most proper to my Text:) but being here, I will only present
some few materials of just exception, to be advised upon and drawn up into
better form by more learned Counsel.

17 It Is true, we are bound not by Superstition, but Religion, the Religion of
our Country, to respect Interpreters, not of Dreams, but Laws; not man's
Laws, but Gods; threatening more certain, more fearful events: We have
likewise the manner of this respect set down in 1 Corinthians. chap. 4. to esteem
them as Ministers of God, and stewards of divine Mysteries: besides we clearly
discover their interpretations to proceed from God; and the fruits thereof
daily springing up within the center of our own hearts, taking away the Curse
of an infernal Dungeon, and all sadness from our eyes; each particular
circumstance in the whole course of our lives crying aloud, and calling upon
us, to regard them according to the dignity of their calling, the excellency
of their employment. But (alas) how does this appear, when men do not respect
the person of the Priest? whereof the Prophet Jeremy complains, and makes it
one; Lam. 4.16.
and another of his lamentations, That he was a derision to the people, Lam.
3.14.63.
their music, their song all the day long. Nay, the Worlds sober practice
thinks, that sacred calling makes a man as it were an underling, lessens the
degree and reputation of his birth; as though it were no addition of honor, to
be Gods 2 Cor. 5.20.
Ambassador, a 2 Cor. 8.23.
Messenger of the Churches, the glory of Christ: no honorable employment, but
an Office of servitude, a stain and blemish to his quality; whence perhaps it
is, that men seldom consecrate their firstborn unto the Lord. No: this
sacred Office (the Office of a Minister) is thought too mean (forsooth) for
the greatness of an elder brother; and yet their Patrimony, their Tithes, most
convenient for his Lay Inheritance, coveted more, and upon worse terms, than
Naboths Vineyard; sometimes the whole body of maintenance divided, sometimes
all in a manner taken away; nothing reserved for the Church, but the gall (as
it were) the worst for use, and fittest for a bitter jest. Nay, that which is
reserved (some think) may well be taken away; and that the Ministers of the
Gospel can challenge nothing of right, but must be fed (not much unlike
children) from hand to mouth, upon alms, and a voluntary contribution: and
therefore men care not to rob God, as he himself complains in the third of
Malachy, Mal. 3.8.
by withdrawing Tithes and Offerings; striving by contracts, by customs, the
corruption of times, plain usurpations, and by devices fetched from Hell, to
make the Clergy poor and contemptible: as though it were their crown of pride
and rejoicing, the fittest proportion answerable to each man's worth, to see
themselves clothed in Bisse the footman in Velvet, the Prophet in Sackcloth; he
a poor man, ready to give his Lam. 5.6.
hand to Egyptians, to be satisfied with bread; themselves, like the rich
glutton, faring deliciously every day. Is this the way to honor the dignity
of that sacred calling? or not rather, the next way to make the worst of the
people Priests of the high places.

Nor is their proceeding more favorable than the beginning: for some we see
quite forgotren, lie obscure, and buried (as it were) in the midst of their
own most learned Works; whilst others, acquainted only with a few beggarly
rudiments, the impudence of a bawling language, or a temporizing judgment, are
set on horseback: these have much ado to be Door keepers in the house of the
Lord; but these, riding upon flying Horses, whose wings are of Silver, and
their feathers of Gold, mount up quickly to the pinacles of the Temple: these,
like Joseph, lie imprisoned in a vale of misery, and a valley of tears, in a
deep Dungeon of a round figure, wherein none can stand upright, none remain
without a bended posture, a dejected countenance, a discontented mind, finding
few friends to remember them; Am 6.4.
but these lie upon Beds of Ivorie, stretch themselves upon their Couches, like
Pictures drawn out at length, and like Simon Magus have a familiar wheresoever
they go, to carry them up to the top of the Mountain; where being tempted and
overcome with a large and vainglorious Prospect, they ride posting up and
down, (and for more have, changing at every stage) to take possession of that
worldly pomp for which they have fallen down and worshipped the unrighteous
Mammon, the Prince of darkness: And yet such proceedings, the judgment of
this Age esteems the best interpretations of worth, and the strongest
arguments of wisdom and providence.

18 But though some knock, and no man opens, unless it be that of the Poet,
stabis Homere for as, an express denial of entrance, or a pretended excuse;
yet others perhaps are thought to find a little favor, and like the Levite in
the 17. of Judges, are entertained in private houses: but it is much feared,
more for fashion sake, than Religion; more to hold a correspondencie with
State, than devotion: otherwise they would not be kept at such an awful
distance as many times they are, but used in a more familiar manner; Genesis 42.32.
thought worthy (no abomination) to sit at their Tables, to whom they carve the
Bread of Life, Act. 8.31.
and received into the Chariot (as Philip was by the Eunuch) to be his guide
and interpreter; much less should their worth, at the mercenarie pleasure of a
corrupt follower, groaning under the burdens of pride and covetousness, stand
or fall in the Masters opinion. Is this the way to underdand the worth of
Interpreters? But mark the conclusion: either their greatest favor in the
end, is an opportunity of giving a Bribe sooner than another man; or the hire
of the labourer, the portion of Levi; the long expectation of his service, even
those sacred and masculine preferments of the Church, are by a plausible kind
of Sacrilege enforced to a transmutation of Sex: Nay (which is much feared, as
most damnable) they are sometime made like the Signet and Bracelets of Thamar,
the reward of a Harlot: In which case it may well be said, this Marriage is not
honorable, nor that Bed undefiled: and yet (I fear) there are too many, who
water such Couches with their tears; whereby Beneficium in maleficium, they
obtain a Curse, for a Blessing; in stead of a reward, they are made a scorn,
a byword, a laughing stock to the whole world. Is this the way to requite the
pains, and gratify the expectation of Gods Ambassadors? Have we so learned
Christ, who said to his Disciples, Luke 10.16. He that despises you, despises
me; and he that despises me, despises him that sent me? Surely, if
interpretations belong to God as the author, they belong to man as the object:
and then the Messenger betwixt God and man deserves a better requital, unless
we desire to make our selves objects of his fury and everlasting displeasure,
who hates the works of unthankefulnesse both toward God and man. Shall
Superstition make more of her Priests, than Religion of ours? then surely it is
much better to be the chief Butlers servant, than his Interpreter: Joseph was
both for a while; and (which is the last particular of his condition) a
petitioner too: Yet did not the chief Butler remember Joseph, etc.

For this likewise I am prepared: But the particulars of Joseph's petition, set
down in the 14. and 15. Verses of this Chapter, seem reasons of denial, in
the chief Butlers condition, so that we cannot well speak of the one without
the other; and both together, will trespass too much upon your patience, being
sufficient for another opportunity,

THE EGYPTIAN COVRTIER.

THE SECOND SERMON.

HORA. Sermon. Li. 1. Sat. 4. Qui non defendit alio culpante --
-- Hic niger est hunc tu Roman caveto.
EZEKIEL. 29. VER. 6. And all the inhabitants of Egypt shall know, that I am the
Lord, because they have been a staff of Reed to the house of Israel.

LONDON, Printed for HENRY SEILE. 1635.

THE EGYPTIAN COVRTIER. The second Sermon.
GENESIS 40. VER. 23. Yet did not the chief Butler remember JOSEPH, but forgot
him.


1AS the bond of all society (especially that daily intercourse amongst men)
is best preserved by a mutual knowledge of each others condition: So all
relations and censures must pass by the same acquaintance, as the only means
to animate and regulate their proceedings. In which respect, having met with
two persons of different quality, Joseph and the chief Butler, we have
heretofore made their several conditions the two general parts of this Text;
that so by discovering the motives of remembrance in the one, and by guessing
at the reasons of forge^fulnesse in the other, the matter it self might be
more worthy of attention, and the censure more heavy upon him who deserves it.

In Joseph's condition were observed three particulars: the first, of a
prisoner; the second, of an Interpreter; the third, and last, of a petitioner:
the two former have been delivered at large in this place; the other stayed
behind, for a better trial of the chief Butler, and his condition. Now all
the remainder is ready to be presented: but first, the next in order proves
like it self, a Petitioner, for your favor and patience, to hear an end of
the whole business.

And yet before we proceed any further, it must not be thought any vain
repetition, to sum up all that has been spoken, by reducing it to a word or
two.

Joseph was a prisoner, so the chief Butlers humanity, and experience of the
same misery, might well make him remember his fellow prisoner; especially
considering his own extraordinary sadness, occasioned by a Dream at the
same time, which surely afterward he could never forget.

Joseph was an Interpreter, the interpreter of a Dream; so the chief Butler
might be taught by his mothers wit, by the fashion and superstition of his
country, to remember him as a man of great worth, worth of the highest nature,
by the common voice of all Egypt; much more might he requite this Interpreter,
for removing the sadness of his Dream, and that chiefly at such a time, when
the same spirit of interpretation which recalled one to the pleasures of life,
delivered another to the terrors of death; the better (as might be then well
enlarged by your own private meditations) to make him who was restored to his
Office, neither eat Bread, nor drink Wine; neither lie down to sleep, nor
rise up to play; never see a cluster of Grapes, or a basket of baked meats; or
Fowls upon the Kings Table, or Birds flying in the Air; never bow the knee to
Pharaoh, or give the Cup into his hand, without remembering both the manner of
his deliverance, and the condition of his friend; not only a prisoner, and
therefore to be relieved; not only an interpreter of the chiefest rank, and
therefore highly to be rewarded: but (which is the last particular of his
condition, and comes now to be handled) a petitioner too: Yet did not the
chief Butler remember Joseph, but forgot him.

3 Hitherto then you have seen Joseph's misery, and you have heard his worth,
whereby you must needs think him the fittest man to be an humble suitor: for
by the one (his misery) he cannot want matter; and by the other (his worth) he
is best able to contrive the form of a sad and discreet petition: and yet when
free retired meditations of a sublime and Angelical nature are curbed and
crushed by the clownish and saucy intrusion of these distracting thoughts,
thoughts of want and extremity; when this extremity may be exposed to the
grief and trouble of friends, to the hissing and insultation of enemies, to
the shame and sleighting of acquaintance, to the censures and Table-talke of
strangers, to the scorn, or pity, or wonder, or laughter of all; when all
this may be aggravated by the quality of the person, the condition of his
former estate, the greatness of his spirit, the tenderness of his conscience,
the uncertaintie of his hopes, the inconstancy of favor, the hardness and
corruption of the times: But when this aggravation may be enlarged (as here it
fell out) by reflecting upon the cause, false accusations cunningly disguised,
imputations of faithlesnesse and dishonestie, inrolling the loss of a good
name; these, oh these presented to authority, countenanced by impudence,
prosecuted by wilfulness, entertained by credulity, resolved by partiality,
and punished by the indignation of great persons, to the height of malice, to
the depth of imprisonment, to the bitterness of his soul, to the fullness of
oppression, oppression which makes a wise man mad, Eccl. 7. v. 7. What heart
(though never so well tempered for the greatest designs in Church or State)
can breath out any voice but that of the Psalmist: Oh that I had the wings of a
Dove, Psalm. 55.6.
that I might fly away, and be at rest; or spend any time, but in sighs and
sobs; petitions not to be expressed, unless they be very short, and so was
this (thereby fittest for a Courtiers liking) as you may read it in the 14.
and 15. Verses of this Chapter: There I am sure it was delivered; for it was
spoken, not written; and that not by another, but himself: Think on me (says
he) when it shall be well with thee, and show kindness J pray thee unto me,
and make mention of me unto Pharaoh, and bring me out of this house, for I was
stolen out of the Land of the Hebrews; and here also have J done nothing why
they should put me into the dungeon. Here Is the Petition: Had Joseph trusted
either his paper or his friend to present it, the one might have been read at
leisure, the other might have wearied his expectation, or perhaps durst not
have spoken without a license from Potiphar: and so in conclusion, neither of
them prove better than both together (if I may so say) a Paper-friend, capable
of impression on both sides: but the Petition was delivered, whereof both the
matter seems very reasonable, and each circumstance beyond exception. For
first you see, without any preface of Job 32.21.
flattering Titles, the givers folly, the receivers pride; whereof Joseph it
seems will not be taxed for the one himself, nor be thought to suspect the
other in this Egyptian. The chief thing desired, is full of modesty, only
to be brought out of that house, especially that place of a Dungeon: which (as
Peter Martyr observes) having but one passage into it, and that both a window
for light, and a door for entrance, makes the request not much unlike that of
Diogenes to Great Alexander, Plut in vit. Alex.
That the Sun might not be kept from him; only to be freed from that dark
circumference, whose noisome vapors might well infect the places adjoining,
and make Joseph, as well a keeper as a prisoner, desirous to be brought out of
such a house.

4 The reasons are very forcible: the one, that he was no banished man from his
own country, no runnagate, no malefactor, but he was stolen out of the Land
of the Hebrews: the other, that he had done no offense since his coming into
Egypt, nothing worthy of the Dungeon.

5 The means likewise are very commendable: the one subordinate, the chief
Butlers kindness; the other principal, the Kings notice: his kindness, to
procure a discharge; the Kings notice, to grant it: his kindness (in case of
opposition) for true information; the Kings notice, for speedy justice; both
Talium rerum usus spem and fiduciam divini auxilii nec tollit, nec minuit.
Pere. de inter. somniorum a Joseph in carcere.
lawful in themselves, honorable for a Kingdom, and necessary for his
trial; who desires by fair and indifferent means to testify his innocence,
and redeem his liberty.

6 And now the matter being thus reasonable, makes the success very probable:
had it been a matter of difficulty, Joseph had denied himself, by asking it;
but all things of like nature are easily granted, where there is nothing hard
to be believed; and here is nothing to be suspected, nothing can be but the
reasons, whereof the one wants an accuser; in which case, it were much better
to believe that he was stolen out of the Land of the Hebrews, than go
thither to try it: the other (his innocence) has no accusation but a woman's
malice; a party, no sufficient proof; a Wife indeed, whose complaint might
well make her Husband distaste and cashiere his servant, not severely punish
him, without a legal witness. Howsoever, as it is well observed by S.
Chrysostom, Joseph descends not to any particulars in Nihil addens de
iniquitate fratrum, nihil de nequitia herae suae cum utramque hic possit
perfiringer^. Musc.
this, or his other reason, as that he was stolen and sold by his own
brethren; and that though he was farre-fetch'd, yet he was not dearly
bought, as he might have been, had he fed the lascivious eye of his Masters
Wife, and been partaker in her adultery; that he was careful to resist and
prevent her daily solicitations; that she being greedy of an opportunity,
found one, lays hold upon him, but all in vain, pro I^no^e nubem, she could
detain nothing but his Garment: that this Relic she kept in a Cloister
(safe enough, no question) as a matter of wonder for others, of advantage for
her self: and that so it fell out; for by a speedy transmutation of lust into
malice, as though she had formerly been taught the practice of his brethren,
who stripped him of his party-colored Coat, to accuse the wild beasts, to
delude the old man their father, and to free themselves from suspicion: so
she, in like manner, had made the same Ipsa igitur quod celare debuerat
prodebat ut composito crimine laederet innocentem. Amb. in li. 5. de Ios.
Garment a witness to accuse his honesty, and to magnify her own; and so
that which was left behind as a pledge, to testify his innocence, she makes
a cloak to cover her own Ill im vere exutam dixerim etiam aliena vestimenta
servantem, qua omnia amiserat velamina castitatis. Amb. ibid.
nakedness, and a hood to blind her Husbands eyes. And that besides all this,
if the truth hereof, or the generality of his good behavior in times past
will not be justified by his fellow servants, in promptu causa est, the reason
is plain; his false accuser, was the Mistress of the house; and his Judge,
the Master of it: And if a Ruler hearken unto lies, (much more, if he practice
them himself) all his servants are wicked, Prove. 29. ver. 12. I say, all these
particulars sleep in silence; and Hoc unum eurat, non ut illos condemnet, sed
ut prose solo dicat. Chrysostom.
he seems only to study this one thing (which indeed should be every man's
car^) how he may speak for himself without condemning, without accusing
others: though he might have declared the whole circumstance, as matter of
instruction, to inform the King, to satisfy gainsayers, and to answer all
objections; yet (it seems) he thinks it better (as indeed it is) both in
point of wisdom and Religion, to conceal the faults of others (at least men
of quality) as much as may be; and (though all grief is lessened, in being
communicated) seldom or never to reveal any particular passages of injury
before private men (especially such as can neither advise nor compose the
difference) but rather to refer them to some public and judicial
examination; for thus (no question) the Truth it self will be freest from
suffering prejudice, the Tale bearer loose his profession, and pine away, the
Defendant furthest from taking advantage, from preventing the punishment of his
offense, and the Plaintiff least of all suspected for any uncharitableness or
partiality in his own cause.

7 But I hasten: and (because a good matter may be spoiled in the carriage) let
the Petition be denied, if the success in any could be more probable than
this, in respect of the time wherein it was delivered; for it was made to the
chief Butler, in the time of his sad imprisonment, nay, in the Winter of his
fears, in the Spring of his hopes; a time wherein men are apt to promise most,
and most easy to be entreated.

8 Nor is it less remarkable, that this Petition was made to him alone: Joseph
addressed himself wholly to the chief Butler, without imploring the assistance
of other friends, as being confident in his power and goodness: a passage (if
I mistake not) answerable in some sort to the pride and expectation of many
great ones in these days; who in the promotion of Suites, and preferment of
others, will be all, or nothing: like Lovers, like Kings, they admit no
partners, no fellow laborers: nay, like God himself (who surely never
commanded any such resemblance) they would be thought to make other men their
creatures, and are highly pleased to have them called so; such ambition and
vainglory, such private ends, such hopes of entire respect, and blind
observance, (the designs of worldly wisdom) lie hidden, and (as it were)
enterlined betwixt the protestation and the performance of real favors: so
that he who (for the dispatch of his business) imployes more friends than
one, (unless they be subordinate) takes the only way to lose them all, and
his Cause to boot.

9 Besides, the Petition is made but once: as though he had been taught that
in Ovid, Et pudet, and metuo semperque eademque precari; to fear, and be
ashamed to entreat the same things often; and this must be held a point of
discretion too: for though in respect of God, whose infinite wisdom is
always at leisure, Saint Augustine commands us, pete, quaere, insta, to be
instant in season and out of season, 2 Timothy 4.2.
to pray continually, yet in respect of men, whose understandings are bounded
and limited, especially such whose high places are attended with variety of
great employments, Petitions may be unseasonable, frequent solicitations very
unwelcome, many times beget neglect, nay, a cause of denial, and that
deservedly too, unless it be in cases of extreme misery, or where the Judge
proves unjust; for then necessity has no law, Luke 18.10.
and importunity (which was the poor Widows friend) may well be excused, if
it speak the Poets language, Da veniam vitio (mitis amice) meo; confess the
fault, and entreat a pardon.

10 But here, though Joseph's affliction was very much, yet he might think,
that since Egyptians were the first (as Herodotus reports) who brought Altars
and Images and Temples into the World, they will not be so unnatural, so
contrary to themselves and their own invention, as to forget the Priest,
especially such a Priest as brings down from Heaven the image of the most
High, and is himself an Angel of Light, the light of this truth: Verse 8.
Do not interpretations belong to God?

11 Again, he might hope, that since Egyptians hold themselves to be all
Gentlemen (as Stories record) they will accordingly show themselves gentle, and
easy to be entreated, Iam. 3.17.
full of mercy and good works, the foundation of true Gentilitie; much more
being thereunto invited by the wants, deserts, and powerful words of a divine
Apostle, a rare Interpreter.

12 Besides, this was an opinion generally received throughout all Egypt, and
afterward of all others became most remarkable to posterity; That the next
way to root out wickedness, was to punish the wicked, to support the innocent,
and to help all those who were reduced to any great extremity. And therefore,
since Egyptians were observed to carry about them the figures and
representations of brute Beasts, Dogs, Crocodiles, and the like, showing them a
far off as their preserving gods; Joseph might well think the chief Butler
would carry about him a lesser burden, a Jewel, the remembrance of a friend,
a distressed friend, and make mention of him to Pharaoh, as a Messenger from
Heaven, a restorer of his life and fortunes, a helper in the time of need.

13 Howsoever, if these opinions were not begot or ripe enough in that Age; yet
it might well be thought, the nobleness of a great man need not be urged,
where the Petition is not for preferment, but maintenance; maintenance in a
good cause, and that so miserable, so plain a case. And yet how plain a case
soever it be, me thinks the chief Butler hears and sees, and says nothing;
nothing for the present, nothing for the future; I am sure, nothing to the
purpose: small comfort for a miserable man of special worth, making such a
modest, and reasonable and seasonable Petition; whose deserts were the more,
and more to be regarded, by how much his affliction was so great, and his
request so small.

Surely, I should have taken silence for a part of his condition; but that at
first it cannot be discerned, whether it was the stateliness of his carriage,
or that wise kind of denial by delays, or discretion, which made him rather
imbosome the Petition than answer it. And yet stateliness was not suitable to
that place, the place of a Dungeon; and (I am sure) a denial were of it self
unjust, but by delays, a torture; only discretion may be pretended, and that
only for a while, till Joseph's Interpretation succeed, and a fair
opportunity serve to move the King; whereof the chief Butler had many, very
many, by reason of his condition, as will now appear: Yet did not the chief
Butler, etc.

14 I Am at last come to the condition of the chief Butler; which if I could
demonstrate, I should be very brief: but being only to guess at it, as short
as may be, such as we have heard and seen, and such as our fathers have told
us: and therefore his condition shall be wrapped up only in this one particular;
he was a great Officer in Pharaohs house, restored to his Office, and therefore
unlikely to remember Joseph, a Prisoner, an Interpreter, a Petitioner: The
probability of this consequence (for it is no more) will a little resemble
natural wisdom; whereby, as he who stands, will take heed lest he fall; so
he who was fallen, and stands again, must needs more sensibly apprehend a
possibility of change, and thereby more carefully endeavor a prevention of
relapse: For whereas this great Officer had offended Pharaoh, and was therefore
cast from his Office, yet we find him restored again; by what means, the
Text is silent. It could not be a discovery of his innocence; it is plain he
had offended: Verse. 1.
And surely this offense was not as the Jews affirm, because a little Fly was
fallen into the Cup; and yet so reported by them (says Peter Martyr) to show
us, that great men for the most part are very prone to be angry, and severely
to punish too for small offenses (true Egyptians it seems) as though to be
slow to wrath, Jam. 1.19.
were no divine command, no wisdom worth their having: for if it were such a
trivial offense, as the falling of a Fly into the Cup; then (me thinks) a
little time, especially the time of a feast, much more the feast of a King to
his servants, and that upon his birthday, might easily have wrought out his
displeasure; such a feast being usually a time of special grace and princely
compassion, the fittest time to restore a chief Butler to his place again,
and to remit small offenses, without making any means at all. But so the
chief Baker (who was hanged) might have been released too; his fault being
only (as the Jewish Fable goes) because a little stone was found in the Bread:
so small a cause makes their cases both alike; offenses of carelessness: they
could not be of treachery; for then common policy would never have restored
either of them to such places of daily and necessary trust: But though their
offenses are Equidem crediderim (si libet divinare) peccasse eos infidelitate
vel in Re^is vitam, vel in bona, aut luxuriose prodigendo aut avare in suum
emolumentum derivando. Pere. ubi supra.
uncertain, yet (no question) they were great; great against a King of Egypt,
whose name being always Pet. Mart. in Genesis
Pharaoh a vindicando, from Revenge, might no sooner consider himself, than
inflict a punishment; a punishment not to be satisfied by the one, without
loss of life; and therefore, in all likelihood, not to be released to the
other, without the mediation of powerful means.

15 Whereupon, since it is certain this great Officer had offended; that he
was cast from his Office, that he was restored again, and that his means of
restoring is uncertain; the most will think the best conjecture is, that
either his money, or his friends, or both, was the Key which opened the Door
both of the Prison and his Office. And if money, or friends, were the means;
who can think, he would not strive to regaine the one (his money) the best
help at a dead lift; and study to observe the other (his friends) though not
by way of thankfulness, yet to prevent a second displeasure: and being thus
prepared, he might well take Joseph's Petition into a second consideration, and
yet never remember Joseph, but forget him.

16 For first, the maine thing requested, is only to be brought out of that
House, the Prison; a small matter in it self, a natural desire of freedom
and liberty: it can be no pleasure for one man to see another perish, every
man will lend his helping hand, when he may not endanger himself. No question,
in this respect, the chief Butler was willing to remember Joseph; and the
rather, because common policy has taught wicked men (by the example of
Absolon) to be just and charitable in small matters, 2 Samuel 15.
the better to palliate their injustice and oppression in greater affairs.

But looking upon this Petition like one of Pharaohs wise Counselors, he
finds the means withal required, Esa. 19.11.
bears a high and lofty distance from the end; which might be obtained a
nearer way, without so much trouble, without moving the King, even by the
ordinary favor and proceeding of that Government, were the end as it seemed
at first, a matter of small importance: And this great disproportion betwixt
the end and the means, calls the reasons in question.

17 Whereof the first is, that he was stolen out of the Land of the Hebrews:
Whereat this great Officer (willing to make much of a small matter for his own
ends, or else no Egyptian) thinks it wisdom to pawse: for so being an
Hebrew, a stranger, he might be a Spy, (being a man of worth) he might be sent
of purpose (as Hushai the Archite, 2 Samuel 15.
David's friend was, to attend Absolon) even to wait upon some eminent person,
such as Potiphar: first, to make a difference betwixt him and his Wife, the
better to defeat his counsels, to descry his imperfections; and so by little
and little to discover the weakness of the country, the affairs of State,
the factions of great men, the inclinations of the people, the difference of
all; and so (by hatching conspiracies, and breeding sedition) make way for the
designs of a foreign enemy: In which case (no question) it was much better
to keep him still in prison, than to procure his liberty; for treasons and
conspiracies may be long in working, long in contriving, and therefore they may
be long in discovery: otherwise that cannot be found (which is most
necessary) the largeness of the Plot, and the number of offenders. This
seems to be Joseph's own practice, after his promotion; when purposely taking
his brethren for Spies, Genesis 42.
he caused Simeon to be bound, till the rest (by bringing their youngest
brother) should prove themselves honest men.

18 But no such thing is recorded against Joseph, since his coming into
Egypt, nothing of that nature laid to his charge, in the space of thirteen
years nothing suspected; if it were, yet many things may be suspected, without
reason: For resolution whereof, the best way is to look back upon the
generality of his former courses, and see, Is it likely that he had any gall
in his heart, any firebrand in his tail; is it likely that he came to sport
himself in the waters of trouble, rather than to assuage them, who like an
innocent Dove brought an Olive branch in his mouth, and made all things prosper
wheresoever he came? And therefore it is more likely (as he himself says)
that he was stolen out of the Land of the Hebrews; and that from some great
person, and that for revealing faults done by others, unworthy of their service
and his own silence. And if so (as indeed it was) the denial is given by
himself: for this great Officer, one of Pharaohs Court, (not of his mind) a
Heathenish Politician, willing (no question) to offend again in the midst of
Egyptian darkness (a fair opportunity) and being careful, ne quid
invidiae subiret (as Calvin observes) lest he should derive any envy upon
himself from his own countrymen (who of all things cannot endure the command
of strangers) thinks it no Ne forte in suspitionem incurrat quasi vellet
mancipio contempto magis quam omnibus sapientibus Regis patrocinari. Pare.
wisdom, to give him freedom, encouragement, or any opportunity to show
himself, much less to make mention of him to Pharaoh; whose worth (casting a
light upon future events, by a rare kind of divination from Heaven) is most
likely (like Aarons Rod) to overtop the Magicians of Egypt, to over-looke and
disparage their practices; most likely to discover present offenses (at least
offenses like those in his own case, Lying, Slandering, Collusion,
Partiality, Oppression, the lean ill-favored Kine of Egypt, which Pharaoh
sees not but in a Dream) and by innocence turn Informer: and the rather,
because this innocence is so much protested in his other reason; And here also
have I done nothing, why they should put me into the Dungeon.

19 And will Joseph still protest his innocence? Then (it seems) he will not
take the blame upon himself, and confess that fault whereof he was never
guilty, to preserve Potiphars reputation and his Wives: Like those servants,
who wittingly and willingly marry themselves to their Masters Adultery, to
prevent his public and approaching shame; betray their own honesty, to
patronize his errors, Whoredom, Injustice, Oppression, Briberie, and the like:
It seems he will not cry, Jer. 6.14.
peace, peace, where there is no peace: And this may be something which makes
him less regarded, as one unlikely to be of those thriving professions; either
a Pandar for another man's lust, who disclaimes his own; or a Broker for
another griping covetousness, who will not purchase his own liberty, to be
accounted dishonest; altogether unlikely to wink at offenses, and flatter the
perverse counsels of others, who will not for his own sake, Esa. 5.20.
in a case of so great importance, speak evil of good, or good of evil. And
therefore, if he were sent for out of the Dungeon, more likely with the Prophet
Michaiah, 2 Chronicles. 18.
to be sent thither again, much more to be kept there, even there to be fed
with bread and water of affliction.

20 But this something is not all; the consequence is greater: for though
here is no formal complaint, yet here is one included; the more innocent Joseph
makes himself, the more unjust he makes Potiphar, the more unchaste his Wife:
and then to help him, to show him any kindness upon terms of innocence, and
favor a good cause, much more to make mention of him to the King, either for
favor, in respect of his worth, or justice, in respect of his cause; is the
next way to bring the whole business upon the Stage; the next way, to show
Pharaoh how much his power has been used (thereby abused) without a course of
justice, severe punishment inflicted, without a trial; the next way to offend
those friends who procured his liberty; the next way to recall his own former
faults to a second examination, who is so active in other men's: at least, the
next way to incense and break all correspondencie with Potiphar, a man greater
than himself, Genesis 39.1.
Captain of the Guard in Pharaohs house; who, as formerly, by virtue of his
place, he had committed the chief Butler to prison; so now, by displeasure,
he might return him thither again, if either he should do any thing in that
business without his notice, or not fawn, and applaud, and maintain the
partiality of his proceedings against Joseph: For some there are, that make a
man an offender for a word, that lay a snare for him that reproves in the
Gate, and turn aside the just for a thing of naught, Esaias 29. v. 21. Much more
might Potiphar be displeased, if such a business should be mentioned to the
King, which so nearly reflects upon his Wives incontinence, and his own
injustice.

21 But admit Potiphar were of himself as easy to be entreated for Joseph's
liberty, as he was formerly persuaded to imprison him; yet the frequent and
private solicitations of a Wife, being so often the impediments of justice, in
the distribution both of favors and punishments, but especially the malice of
an imperious whorish woman, so far beyond expression, and her condition so
apt to be a busie-body in the affairs of others, much more to be active about
her own; more especially, when those affairs behold the presentment of her
inordinate desires, spretaeque injuriam formae; and (which most of all stirs
up to revenge) the former contempt and rejection of her lust: these particulars
(all of them drawn from a lying tongue, which I am sure hates those who are
afflicted by it, Prove. 26. I say, these) are weapons which perhaps the chief
Butler had rather sharpen than oppose; as knowing that a woman, aut vehementer
amat, aut capitaliter odit, is either the best friend, or the greatest enemy;
and so in this case (having once before deluded her Husband) most likely to
urge his displeasure to the utmost, and that more against him, the chief
Butler, than Joseph; as having less opportunity, fewer ways to increase the
punishment of a poor prisoner, than to be revenged of his friend, a great
Officer in Pharaohs house, and that restored to his Office: And surely, it is
likely, that she, whose crafty wiliness so well succeeded to make advantage
of Joseph's Garment (which indeed was her shame) would afterward take upon her
both to know her friends, and oppress her enemies.

22 Nay, further to search the depth of this Egyptians wisdom, before we
turn it into foolishness, and (as it were) to plead for him freely, who would
not so much as remember another, no, not by the strongest obligations of life,
liberty, and honor. It Is true, the story tells us, that Joseph had the
managing of all things in the Prison, and was in particular charged by Potiphar
with the keeping of Pharaohs servants, two great offenders; whereby it might be
presumed, he had at that time unmasked the shameless countenance of his Wife,
which made him so confident in the care of an old servant; a strong motive (no
doubt) to encourage others to mediate his further enlargement: yet the chief
Butler, a restored Officer, knows perhaps by experience, or fears, that
Potiphar may be like Entrapelus, Ep. l. 1. ep. 18.
of whom Horace speaks: -- Cuicunque nocere volebat
Vestimenta dabat pretiosa.
One, whose favors were like the fair words of Iael to Sisera; Judge. 4.18, 19.
Come in (my Lord) fear not, come in: like her Bottle of Milk, and her
Covering, which lulled the Captain asleep, and made him secure of her
protection; who thereby contrived and effected the glory of his final
overthrow: And so (indeed) Joseph might be put into Office (as Haman was
invited by Queen Hester to the Banquet) not so much for favor, as hatred.

Employed he was: but this might be of purpose, to divert him from contriving
other matters of greater consequence, answerable to his worth; at least from
studying the means of liberty, and the remedy of his false imprisonment.

Nay, employed he was (as formerly in all likelihood by the connivencie) so
now by Verse. 4.
special appointment of Potiphar: but, timeo Danaos and dona ferentes, this
might be, not so much in approbation of his fidelity, as to make him depend
upon his further kindness, the kindness of an adversary; which we know no
sooner turns grievances into hopes, than hopes into folly: a Masterpiece of
close oppression, and the ready way to Joseph's ne ultra, his continual
bondage.

And thus likewise (to the same purpose) his particular employment might be,
not so much an Office to keep others, as a snare to catch himself: For so, by
taking opportunity to escape without any trial at all, (which perhaps was
chiefly desired, as being most for their credit who first imprisoned him) or
by running into errors (as no man is sufficient to prevent all) his adversaries
might find holes in that Coat which had none before, and have something
whereof to accuse him; at least (by showing him a little kindness, the
liberty of a Prison, and a command within it) the better discover who were
most likely to be his friends, their enemies, and durst any way comply with
Joseph, without Potiphars consent.

23 And surely, if that be true which In vit. Agric.
Tacitus observes, proprium humani ingenii est odisse quem laeseris, That we
are prone by the jealousy of a corrupt nature, to hate that man always, whom
once we purposely hurt: then (no question) if it were publicly known, that
Potiphar were so Coniugis amori plus aequo tribuens. Joseph. l. 1. Antiq.
unjust, as to imprison Joseph, Inaudita causa, inexplorata fide very, tanquam
reus criminis in carcerem Joseph mittitur. Ambr.
without hearing him speak in his own defense at first, and without calling
him to account afterward, (as here is no examination upon divine record) it
cannot be imagined, but that Potiphar will be still unjust: and in this
respect, the chief Butler, his servant also; nay (forsooth) his servants
servant, to second his desires, to keep Joseph still in darkness; for fear
his innocence should break forth as the Noonday, and (like that fire from
Heaven for which Elias prayed) consume the Captain and his men. 2 King. 1.


24 Or, if the truth were manifest to Potiphar, and he really inclined to
release this prisoner; yet the chief Butler (measuring others by himself)
thinks that Potiphar, so great a man, would at least seem wise and just in
the eyes of his Prince, and not have others meddle with his faults, or so much
as seem to know any passages of that nature; that (being Captain of the
Guard, a man most likely to be powerful in the State, or of a proud spirit) he
will take his own private courses to enlarge Joseph by little and little, and
not return the same public way, by which he proceeded against him; never
recant, never confess his errors before men, and set the saddle upon the right
horse; but either bridle the tongue, and stop the mouth of truth, or break the
neck of him that speaks it.

And that for this purpose: As the chief Priests in the 28. of Matthew, gave
large money to soldiers to belie the Resurrection; and withal promised, if
this came to the Governors ears, they would persuade him, and secure them (a
hellish policy) not only reward, but secure and protect the liars: So he
(Captain of the Guard, so near the person of Pharaoh) wants no opportunity
to open and close up the Princes ears, for his own advantage; he wants no
money to bribe, whose estate was lately so prosperous, for Joseph's sake; and
(by the quality of his Office) he wants no soldiers or warlike men, under his
own command, to out-brave the truth, to spit in the face of innocence, and
upon the least occasion to fight, especially in a Woman's quarrel, and that
when there is so little fear of being called in question; and above all, so
much hope to cast lots for Joseph's garment, and wear their Mistress favor:
such, and such like vanities being too often greater motives of courage, than
Religion and a good cause.

25 Howsoever, since the maintaining of correspondencie amongst great persons
looks many ways, and that upon trifles too, studying and observing them more
than better things; we may well conjecture, that as Herod and Pilate were m^de
friends, Luke 23.12.
by agreeing together against that innocent Lamb, Christ Jesus; so these two
Officers will continue friends, brethren in evil, rather than Authority shall
be truly informed, and Joseph remembered.

And thus it may be, this Egyptian Courtier degenerating from the Religion of
his Country, and reflecting wholly upon himself, having (as he thinks) made
all the use he can of such a friend (but an Interpreter) whose worth is seldom
esteemed or thought on, unless it be for discourse, or in cases of extremity,
(besides, finding at first no fair way open, competible with his own private
ends, to speak in a poor prisoners behalf) might afterward soon forget
Joseph, and lay aside the memory of his Petition, to verify the Proverb, Out
of sight, out of mind.

26 But let this cautelous Egyptian pretend what wisdom he can to excuse
himself, all is not sufficient to free him (though but a Heathen) from this
heavy censure, much less can it free a Christian upon like occasion: for
surely, in private affairs (the only scope of this Text) no policy can be
good against that charity o justice whereunto we are entreated by Petition,
persuaded ^y ^nnocence, bound by thankfulness, and invited by many fa^re
opportunities, in regard there seems no reason (u^d^r favo^) why the same
spirit which applied the rending of Samuels garment to the fatal prejudice and
destruction of Saul, in his own audience, 1 Samuel 15.
and yet found no discouragement, should not with like success tell Pharaoh,
or Potiphar at least, the truth of keeping Joseph's garment, and the danger of
not restoring it, without blemish to the owner.

27 And yet amongst men-pleasers, there is a worldly policy, which thinks it
better to bow and reverence to Haman, better to consent with the Thief, and to
have fellowship with the deceitful, Psalm 50.18. Esa. 28.25.
even such as have made lies their refuge, and under falsehood have hid
themselves; better to comply and hold correspondencie with the wicked practices
of many great men, who (in the words of the Psalmist) cruelly, Psalm. 81.20.
disdainefully, despightfully speak against the righteous, rather than call
for justice, or plead for truth, Esa. 1.17.
Esaias 59. v. 4. rather than judge the fatherless, speak for the Widow, or
relieve the oppressed, and advance his worth, though his cause be innocent, and
his deserts beyond compare. Hoc aulicorum solenne est, perfide insontes
prodere, and potius tradere jugulandos quam ut offendant cos a quibus metuunt
(says learned Calvin) This is the property of time-serving Courtiers,
perfidiously to betray the innocent, nay, to expose them to a final
destruction, rather than offend those whom they think may cross their
designs, or prevent their ambition. David's experience found out not only the
truth, but the slynesse also of these proceedings: Psalm. 31.11.
I became (says he) a reproach to mine enemies, but especially to my
neighbors, and they of my acquaintance were afraid of me, and conveyed
themselves from me. This experience of David was a prediction of Christ, and
verified at his Passion: for when he was apprehended, behold his Disciples
forsook him, and fled, Mar. 14, 50. Nay, Peter, that great professor of
fidelity, Mark. 14.54.
followed him a far off as though it were a shame, a disadvantage to be a
follower of Christ; who spent not only his breath, but his most precious
blood, to redeem him and all mankind from an everlasting bondage: as though
it were no religious courage, but a desperate resolution, which made Queen
Hester petition King Ahashuerosh for the lives of her people, when the success
both for them and her self was so doubtful, Hest. 4. 16.
so full of distraction; If I perish, I perish: as though, exeat aula qui volet
esse pius it were a like Orthodox, to fly from the love and protection, as to
have fallen from the state of innocence: as though there were no Wine Press of
wrath to be trodden by feet which never swell; no divine justice, Esa. 30.33.
no breath of the Lord (like a stream of Brimstone) to kindle the fire of
eternal perdition for those fawning flattering Parasites, who obscure and hide
the Lamp of innocence under a Bushel, and will not set it upon the Table, to
enlighten both themselves and others; but rather (like profane Churles) devise
wicked devices to destroy the poor with lying words, even when the needy
speaks right, Esaias 32. v. 7.

28 Thus it may be the reasons of Joseph's Petition were by this great Egyptian
(one of Pharaohs wise counselors, or rather those Senators to whom Joseph
afterward taught better wisdom) turned into arguments of denial and
forgetfulness.

29 But had Joseph's complaint (such as it is) been a welcome message to
Potiphar, or Potiphar and Joseph men of equal condition, the business (in all
likelihood) had not ended in general terms, nor after such a manner, and
been smothered in a Dungeon: No, if with Ad primum ingratitudinis gradum
pertinet quod aliquis retribuat mala pro bonis. Aqu. 22.107.2. c.
Aquinas there be a kind of unthankfulness (as, I am sure there is, a common
practice) which returns evil for good, even hatred for good will; then it
stands not with the policy of an Egyptian, to forget any passages of strife
and contention, but rather to urge a more particular discovery, and to make
advantage of a difference, (as here, by remembering Joseph, and the reasons of
his petition) for so by giving private intelligence, or by declaring himself
in public, (not so much for the truth, as the possibility of his own private
ends) he might (as it were) beg more familiar acquaintance, and skrue
himself into the favor of the one, by the destruction of the other: like
those deceitful workers amongst us, those slye companions, who (under the
color of friendship) go up and down, insinuating themselves into the
counsels and resolutions of different judgments, to betray one, and flatter
another; the very offspring of Dalilah, the seed of the Whore, whose fair
words made Samson discover where his st^eng^h lay, Judge. 16.
to his own destruction. But great men being ^o^h to hear of their faults,
and seldom or never admitting poor men to an open contestation, but where the
case is very plain (or made so) on their own sides; Joseph's Petition wanting
opportunity to be seconded, at least to be importuned (the hopes many times,
and endeavors too, of an u^j^st Judge) is here thought best answered by
silence, his condition slighted, himself forgot.

30 Had Joseph neither worth nor innocence to plead his cause; Then (me
thinks) the ordinary course of justice might have thought him more fit for
the place of execution, than to continue in a Dungeon.

Had Joseph, corpus sine pectore, a gross body, without any active worth, or
abilities of mind, but only this innocence of life, a bare simplicity of
conversation; Then likewise he might have been released too, without much
prejudice to the cause of his imprisonment (as wanting judgment to understand
and maintain the reason of his liberty) in which case, it must needs be more
trouble than advantage to keep so poor a prisoner, much better to have his
room than his company.

Had Joseph abundance of worth, enterlined with some malevolent quality; 2 Timothy 3.5.
a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof; Had he been a
malefactor upon record, or committed some heinous offense, not yet answered
before authority; Had he been possessed with any raging spirit of ambition,
or revenge; but otherwise, a man of great sufficiency, enriched with many
parts and perfections both of Nature and Art, no less able than willing to
satisfy their expectation; who said unto the Seers, see not; and unto the
Prophets, prophecy not unto us right things, speak smooth things, prophecy
deceits; Esaias 30. v. 10. Oh, then the policy of an Egyptian would have
studied to show this man kindness, earnestly entreated his release, as the
Jews did for Barabbas; nay, Ioh. 18.40.
preferred him too perhaps (were the times as afterward) to be some severe
oppressing Task-master over the people; as being the f^ttest instrument for
unworthy designs, who is himself liable to exception, most likely to make a
time-server, who every morning fears a day of trial in his own case; most
likely (in a woman's judgment) to accuse innocent Naboth, who is himself a
son of Belial; 1 King. 21.10.
most likely to outface the proceedings of Law and equity, who knows his
own freehold may be justly called in question; most likely to blow the coals
of sedition, to kindle and increase the fire of a divellish doctrine, whose
conscience is already seared with a hot iron, branded with impiety, made
famous by impenitencie.

But here innocence of life, and those rare abilities of mind, wisdom, and
discretion, (confessed afterward by Pharaoh) kiss each other, Genesis 41.39.
and are met together in one and the same person, Joseph; and therefore no
mervaile, if he be not remembered in a strange and Heathenish country: For,
Esa. 59.14.
where Judgment is turned away backward, and Justice stands afar off, when
Truth is fallen in the streets, and Equity cannot enter; there (I am sure)
he that protests innocence, even he that departs from evil, makes
himself a prey; Esaias 59. v. 15.

31 But admit the reasons free from all exception, as well for the safety of
the one, as the innocence of the other; and that, being in prison, there was no
offense taken at the want of flattering Titles, which (like a Preface indeed)
some men observe and weigh more than the whole matter besides: yet the
kindness here requested (especially to move the King) is a favor too high to
be reached by a man of Joseph's condition; for he is but an Hebrew servant, a
prisoner, unwilling by his innocence, unable by his poverty, to second his
Petition with a Bribe: but the chief Butler is an Egyptian, who cannot as yet
read (as it was afterward prophesied he should) nor understand the language
of Canaan, Esa. 14.18.
unless it be Apples of Gold in pictures of Silver; Prove. 25.11.
a Hieroglyphick of this nature is proper for his understanding; a temptation
very powerful, and no less seasonable at all times: being a great Officer,
and that restored to his Office, either by his money or his friends, he thinks
he may well make the best of his Place; sell dear (as he bought) the very lees
of favor, either for present money, greater employment, or the custom of more
suitors, to re-supply his store, and advance his condition in Pharaohs house;
where every man being a friend to him that gives gifts, Prove. 19. v. 6. it is
likely the cry of Joseph, the voice of that Charmer, is seldom heard, charm
he never so wisely, Psalm. 58.5.
who makes the words of Saint Peter an introduction to his request, Silver and
Gold have I none. Act. 3.6.


32 But had this Egyptian been within the Covenant of doing good works, he
might have been taught otherwise; that though he (who having many Suites of
his own depending upon the Kings favor, will notwithstanding speak for other
men) may well deserve the Laurel for his pains, even that, engraven and
stamped upon the princely front of blessed memory; yet Joseph must be remembered
with a Cup of Blessing, though he cannot pay for it; and that all kind of
favors toward all sorts of men, are not to be sold so publicly, so
certainly, as Wine is by a Bush, lest children and passengers turn it to a
Proverb, Here a Bush and there a Thief: For as there is a thankfulness
which is not written in Letters of Gold, a thankfulness performed (says
Aquinas) per exhibitionem honoris and reverentiae, 22. q. 106. 3. 5.
by giving honor and reverence; 22. q. 107.1.2.
nay, ad debitum gratitudinis reddendum sufficit sola voluntas (says the same
Author:) for want of other means to be thankful, the will is sufficient;
much more, when the tongue is the pen, and the knee the posture of a grateful
mind: so there is a command written in Letters of Marble, binding the
Christian for ever, in the 11. of Ecclesiastes, to cast his bread upon the
waters; even there to show kindness, where there is no possibility of
requital: and yet this must be held a special kind of providence, and a
means of great advantage, according to that of Seneca; Sen. in Prove.
Habet in adversis auxilia, qui in prosperis commodat: Which in effect is well
translated, Prove. 19.17. He that has pity on the poor, lends to the Lord;
and look what he has given him, he will repay: even He, the riches of whose
mercy cannot but make charitable men great gainers: But where men are of hard
uncircumcised hearts and ears, no mervaile if favors be not freely bestowed,
nor any good fortune told by an Egyptian Gipsey to him who is not open-handed.

33 Indeed, had Joseph's freedom been thought a work of as lasting fame, as
now the contrary proves of infamy; then it may be this Egyptian would have
dispensed a little with his greedie-griping hand, to get himself a Name; then
(according to his place) upon Pharaohs birthday at the furthest, like the
Water-Conduit upon great solemnities, he would have sent forth Wine to fill
the Dungeon; then perhaps his Wine (I mean, the Fees) nay, the Bribes, and
exactions of his Office, should have overflowne into those pleasant streams of
bounty which run amongst the stony Valleys, and there have erected some
famous Altar (as Caesar did, in memory of Pompeys defeat) or built some
religious Temple for the service of this rare Interpreter, monuments answerable
to the ancient practice and vaineglory of that Nation: but not understanding
the fruitfulness (the meaning) of Joseph's name, nor being able to foresee a
change, this strange event, either for quality or durance; he seems only to
verify that in effect, (which is too common in these days) that wealth makes
many friends, but the poor man is separated from his neighbor, Prove. 19.4.

34 And yet when we consider the particular condition of this chief Butler, I
should think the strength of new Wine had broken this old Vessel, overcome
his memory, made him weak in judgment, careless both of himself and
others, (as many are upon like occasions) making his belly his God; Phil. 3.19.
regarding the goodness of his Wine, the curiosity of his taste, more than
the increase or preservation of his estate: at least studying the newness of
his Bottles, the particular duties of his Office, more than the reasons of
Joseph's Petition.

35 Or I should think this Egyptian Ganimede (having in a manner as many
opportunities to move the King, as the King had occasion to drink in the space
of two years) I say, I should think him willing of himself to remember his
fellow prisoner; but (in that he was the chief and principal of his rank)
having his kindness too much swayed, or his remembrance tied to the pleasure
and approbation of some inferior Officers, some unworthy servants, who (if
they cannot by some strict covenant dispose their masters free or just
intendments to their own special advantage) will maliciously study either to
divert or delay them; such masters (only too credulous) being like blind men,
led and guided by their Dogs; not such as licked the sores of Lazarus, but
whose tongues are a sharp sword, Psalm. 57.4. Mich. 3.5.
who bite with their teeth, and cry peace; and he who puts not into their
mouths, even they prepare war against him, lying, and slandering, Lingua
mali pars pessima servi.
and backbiting, and evil surmises, the infallible tokens of a pestilent and
malicious heart: against which, there is no better remedy, no weapon of
defense, or prevention better, than what was spoken upon other occasions,
either Paul's caveat, Beware of Dogs, Phil. 3.2. or David's prayer, in the 22.
Psalm, the 19. and 20. Verses, Be not thou far from me, O Lord, haste thee
to help me, deliver my soul from the sword, and my Darling from the power of
the Dog; my condition, from serving a man more unworthy than my self; Eccl.
25.8.
and as with the Prophet Jeremiah, from the house of Jonathan the Scribe, Ier.
37.20.
so from all peculiar relation to those Egyptians, who are like Reeds shaken
with the wind, or like Wind, Matthew. 11.7. 1 King. 19.11.
wherein the Lord is not.

36 But as the Text is plain, the chief Butler himself did not put Joseph's
tears into his Bottles, did not remember him: so (leaving other conjectures to
the liberty of application) it is very probable from the consequence of the
story, that this forgetfulness was grounded upon deep premeditation, and
chiefly drawn from the reasons of Joseph's Petition: otherwise, when he was
forced (as afterward) to speak of Joseph to Pharaoh, Genesis 41.
with making mention of his own imprisonment, he would have better remembered
the greatness of Joseph's misery, the excellency of his Commemorat
interpretationem Iosephi, qu^m non laudat sed vocat puerum, servum principis
laniorum. Parcus.
worth, the modesty of his Petition, the innocence and justness of his cause;
he would have given a better testimony of his fellow prisoner, and more
commendations than he did; at least, he would have requested ( Pro Iosepho
nihil consulit aut rogat, ut accersatur a Rege. Ibid.
what he did not) that Joseph might have been sen^ for out of the Dungeon; a
passage observed by Interpreters, arguing a studied neglect; and that he was
resolved, rather than his own countrymen, the Magicians of Egypt, should be
disparaged by an Hebrew servant, or Potiphar displeased, for taking a poor
prisoners part; rather than offenses should be in danger of discovery, or
innocence in the way of protection, Joseph's misery should be still prolonged,
his worth eclipsed, his Petition suppressed, and his own part in this act
(never to be forgotten) should be neither Wine, nor thanks for this
Interpreter; but only ingratitude, Seminarium scelerum omnium, the Seminary
of all vices, base unthankfulness, and that in the highest degree: for,
Ingratissimus omnium est qui oblitus est, (says Seneca) He is most ungrateful
of all others, who will not remember his friend, but forget him.

37 It seems the chief Butler forgot what he was before; in being released
from one extreme, he quickly falls into another, Non potuit recordari Carceris
and interpretis sui propterea quod recuperatae dignitati plus aequo incubuit.
Musc.
and there most properly shows as well the several kinds and postures, as
the nakedness of a forgetful mind: For before, he was in prison, shrunk
(as it were) and contracted with the sadness of adversity; but now he is in
Pharaohs house, blown and puffed up with the pride of prosperity, quem
hominum statum superbia comitatur and aliorum contemptus, a state usually
attended with pride, and the contempt of others; whereunto (as we read) all
Egyptians are naturally subject; though he carry the same body, yet he has
not the same wits about him.

Before (being in prison) he saw a prophetical spirit, the crown of his
rejoicing, clothed in rags, unworthy to approach the royal presence, without
first changing his apparel, Genesis 41.
and shaving his hair; but now (being in the Kings house) he judges every
man's worth by the softness of his raiment, by the goodness of his clothes, by
the rare and daily handycraft of his Barber.

Before, he was glad to embrace all correspondencie with Joseph, Luke 16.
his Keeper, though like another Lazarus, lying at the Gate House, begging
relief; thinking this poor man as able by his wisdom to deliver a whole
City, Eccl. 9.15.
as by such strange revelation to foretell his happiness: but now, being in
Pharaohs house, curia pauperibus clausa est, he shuts the doors of favor, and
will not be within (not within forsooth) to remember this poor man; thinking
(perhaps) none worthy to be spoken to in a familiar manner, much less to be
mentioned to the King, who are not like himself, filled with the Wine-pots,
and fed with the fleshpots of Egypt. Exodus 16.3.


Before, from looking sadly, he lifted up his head at the sight of Joseph: but
now (should they meet together) me thinks, he casts down his head, and
turns away his eyes from beholding him, as though he were an object more fit
for a bended brow, and a supercilious look, than a cheerful countenance.

Before, words of a mild and pliable nature were courteously enterchanged: but
now, the pride of prosperity makes him think (if occasion were offered) some
harsh and bitter speeches, some churlish, insulting, blaspheming language,
catching at words before they are half spoken, and mistaking the sense, will
better maintain the disparitie of his condition, more preserve and increase
the reputation of his place.

Before, the still voice of Joseph's interpretation was like the sound of the
Dulcimer, greedily entertained: but now he stops his ears, and from the hollow
of a Dungeon will not hear the Echo of Joseph's Petition.

Before (though the Scripture think it best not to name those words, which are
but wind) yet (no question) since all Egyptians are observed by Historians to
be "braggers, great talkers, and of little truth in their discourse, we may
well presume he made large promises of remembrance, and those appearing in the
dark and noisome Dungeon (like the Star which guided the Wisemen) both
credible and comfortable: Matthew. 2.
but now (being carried aloft into the fresh air) mentitur speratum, and
promissum auxilium, those promises prove like falling Stars, Meteors, which
quickly consume themselves, and vanish into smoke; or rather, some ignis
fatuus, drawing Joseph out of his way, turning him aside, preventing the
direction and favor of other Guides; and now at last leaving him to himself,
Major quam prius desperatio incumbit (says Calvin) to wander yet further in
the midst of despair, to continue yet longer in a place of misery: for he did
not remember Joseph, but forgot him.

38 Never considering, as Oleaster speaks in his Commentaries upon Esaias: Qui
ab aliquo protectionem sperat, and non protegitur, ignominia afficitur; He
that makes another man hope for favor and protection at his hands, and yet
affords none, takes the wisest course to work that man's undoing, seems to
study his overthrow, and cunningly to turn his long expectation into a
lasting reproach; in regard all men, in such a case, are prone to spend their
censures: some, accuse his discretion; others, suspect his fidelity; many
blame his confidence, and too many scoff at the vanity of his hopes; crying,
There, there, so would we have it: Whereas (indeed) the fault is his; his
only, I mean that counterfeit Mecaenas, whose fair words and false heart
has made it a familiar practice, and judged it the safest way, per amici
fallere nomen, to betray his Petitioner with a kiss, and to lull him asleep
with expectation. Thus, in effect, we know the Great Master himself suffered:
Matthew. 10.24, 38.
and as the servant is not above his Lord, but must take up his cross and
follow him; so, of all servants, the Disciple, the Interpreter, is most likely
to be deceived after such a manner, even with words softer than Oil, Psalm.
55.21.
sweeter than Honey; by how much a harmless nature, busied with divine
contemplations, or oppressed with troubles, is soonest stained with this
Credulitas error magis est, quam culpa, and quidem in optimi cuiusque mentem
irrepit facillime. Cie.
credulity; not so much a crime (says Tully) as a common error of the noblest
mind.

39 And indeed (it may be) this Egyptian thinks Joseph deserves no other, but
to be slighted as a weak man, for being so credulous, so facile and ready to
interpret the happiness of his Dream, without making some contract or
bargain beforehand, in his own behalf: For there are some Ages so wise in
their own conceits, and so frozen with hardness, that to be a cheerful
giver, 2 Cor. 9.7.
to show any kindness, without a covenant, is the next way to be accounted
foolish, at least to prevent a due requital. But oh wretched times! to think
such freedom of mind a prejudice, which in all cases reflecting upon Joseph's
condition, is an argument of a most divine and heavenly disposition: whereas
that, Quid dabitis, What will you give me, was but the voice of a Harlot, in
the 38. of Genesis: And yet surely, amongst us there is a generation of Vipers
crept at least into the Patronage of Interpreters, which speak the same
Language, Matthew. 3.7.
and will not be warned to flee from the wrath to come. Nay, I fear, this
uncharitable, unthankefull, sacrilegious Language, is spoken by the tongues not
only of men, but Angels, Angels of the Church, and taught from the Chair of
their example; but, 1 Thessalonians. 5.13.
as I must esteem them very highly in love, so I spare them for their works
sake. Sure I am, such example was never drawn from this rare Interpreter,
Joseph; it might come from Simon the Sorcerer: who, as sounding Brass, or as a
tinckling Cymball, altogether uncharitable, is more fit for the Bellfrey than
the Quier, nay, to be whipped quite out of the Temple, as being already judged
by the Spirit of Truth, to be in the gall of bitterness, Act. 8.23.
and bond of iniquity.

40 And now, though the tediousness of this discourse may be a little excused
from the nature or subject of it, a Court business; wherein a man once
engaged, knows not well when, or how, he shall come off: yet surely it is high
time to make an end of all conjectures; whereof, no doubt, (were there
otherwise any kind of demonstration to be found) the wisest man would be most
impatient: and yet I have one thing more of like nature, a strange thing (me
thinks) very remarkable, even kindness from this Egyptian; which I cannot
omit, because it may be objected, I must not pass by without some
acknowledgement: And surely, it may be very probable, that (like the crafty
Lawyer, who thinks he deserves his Fee, for not being against his Client) the
chief Butler thought it a kindness, nay, a sufficient favor for Joseph, if
(in stead of Wine, which he should give) he did not give him Vinegar to drink;
if he did not reveal his complaint against Potiphar, lest Potiphar should
increase his punishment; if he did not return a churlish answer, 1 Samuel 25.
as Nabal did to David, tell Joseph he spoke out of discontent, whereunto
(though true, like the prophesies of Cassandra) no credit must be given; and
so, by the subtletie of oppression, make him less hopeful than before, and a
liar to boot. For some we find, 2 Pet. 2.15.
who loving the wages of unrighteousness, in stead of compassion,
encouragement, justice, or the due reward of merit, return pro perca Scorpium,
for a Fish a Serpent deeply stinging, Matthew. 7.10.
openly inueighing, whispering against and insulting over Joseph's condition, as
one in their judgment contemptible (by his adversity) of small worth, always
a troublesome suitor, unworthy to have his Petition signed, unless it be with
a greater cross; Exodus 1.8.
just as Pharaoh, who knew not Joseph, answered that request of the Israelites,
Exodus 5. Ye are idle, ye are idle; therefore ye say, Let us go and do
sacrifice to the Lord: go ye now therefore and work, for there shall be no
Straw given you, yet shall you deliver the tale of Bricks.

41 Thus, even thus many times, as the Prophet David complains in the 123.
Psalm, verse 4. Our soul is filled with the scornful reproof of the
wealthy, and with the despightfulnesse of the proud. Our soul (says he) not
our souls; intimating (at least by way of application) that a fellow-feeling
charity turns all men's souls into one, makes them all alike, all but one
individual object of compassion: So that, Homo qui homini calamitoso est
misericors, meminit sui; He who will not remember another, forgets himself;
forgets his complaint, of whom Joseph was a type, the complaint of Christ,
Mark. 8.34.
for whose sake he must deny himself; even that complaint in the 25. of
Matthew: I was hungry, and ye gave me no meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me
no drink; I was a stranger, and ye lodged me not; I was naked, and ye clothed
me not; I was sick, and in prison, and ye visited me not: in as much as ye did
it not to one of these little ones (such a one as Joseph) ye did it not unto me.

Nay, were it only the case of this Egyptian, a natural man, yet he forgets
the liberty which he has lost, by receiving a benefit; he forgets the
greatness of his obligation, by receiving such a benefit, a benefit of life
and well-being, which in effect he can Haneslatis ratio atque debitum postulat
ut compensatio non tantummodo aequet, sed ut superet acceptum beneficium. Aq
22. 106. 6. c. Quam diu recompensat minus vel aequale, non videtur facere
gratis sed reddere ouod accepit. Ibid. Potest nihilominus retributio esse
gratuita, si illud aequale aut minus tribuatur, non ut aequalitas rei
constituatur sed ut gratia referatur. Greg. de Val.
hardly requite; he forgets that due proportion of punishment which the
ungrateful man deserves, substractionem beneficii (says Aquinas) the
substraction, the taking away of that same benefit which he received before,
the benefit of life and well-being, by Joseph's interpretation: And for this
purpose, he forgets the power of that God, who brings Princes to nothing, and
makes the Judges of the Earth as vanity, Esaias 40.23. who can set an Egyptian
against an Egyptian, till both their names be rooted out from under Heaven; so
that he who lives longest, shall leave nothing behind him, but a specification
of his Office, to aggravate the quality of his unworthiness: that God being
the true Eagle stone, found in all places of Egypt, whose virtue can discover
and surprise all thieves and robbers of his glory, their neighbors right.

Nay, to speak more nearly, in remembrance both of his Office and his Dream,
he forgets that his buds and blossoms, and Grapes and Wine, shall one day be
turned into snares, and fire and brimstone, Psalm. 11.6.
and an horrible tempest, this shall be the portion of his Cup; and (which is
much more than all that can be spoken or imagined) it will be impossible that
ever this Cup should pass away from him.

In a word, (besides that incomparable, unspeakable loss, He loved not
blessing, Psalm. 109.17.
therefore it shall be far from him) he forgets the depth of that
bottomless Pit, wherein he shall be bound (never restored) till he has paid
the utmost farthing: And in the mean while, during this life, he forgets that
attractive virtue of unthankfulness, which draws the imputation of all vices
upon it self, to assure and ratify such final, such eternal destruction.

42 Thus you see, though Joseph might well have been presented by the chief
Butler as a Vessel of honor, Psalm. 31.12.
upon Pharaohs birthday; yet he is clean forgotten, like a dead man out of
mind, and become like a broken Vessel; and well he may be called so: for as a
broken Vessel has no sound at all, so (me thinks) he Vinculorum necessitatem
tacitus ferens. Joseph. lib. 1. Antiq.
opens not his mouth, though he were cast down, laid lower than the ground;
not only by the furious anger and partiality of that great man, who first
imprisoned him; but now also, by the neglect and unthankfulness of another
great man, who received so much observance from him: yet (I say) he opens not
his mouth, he complains not for want of remembrance: That so this Egyptian,
and all such like, may know from the event, and be assured, though the tongue
be silent, and perhaps will not speak for the present; yet there is a Pen,
Psalm. 45.1.
the Pen of a ready Writer, a sacred Pen, a Pen of Iron, Ier. 17.1.
which will write in black dismal Characters, and preserve for ever the
memory of their unworthiness.

43 In Joseph's condition, you may see the portion of Gods children in this
life; that the Race is not to the swift, nor the Battle to the strong, nor
Bread to the wise, nor Riches to men of understanding, nor favor to men of
skill, Genesis 45.26.
Eccl. 9. verse. 11. And indeed Joseph is yet alive: Quis non carcere clauditur
indigno? As there is no man, whose mortal body is not a prison to his soul;
so there is no Christian, whose soul is not subject to affliction: be he
never so happy, never so holy, yet a Dungeon is, or may be, the place of his
habitation.

44 In the chief Butlers condition, you may see the humor of the World, (long
since proverbially described by the Prophet Amos) They eat the Lambs of the
flock, and the Calves out of the midst of the Stall, they chaunt to the sound
of the Violl, and invent to themselves Instruments of Music, they anoint
themselves with the chief Ointments; and (as though this unworthiness of the
chief Butler were never to be forgotten) they drink Wine in Bowls, and are
not grieved for the afflictions of Joseph, Amos 6. verse. 6. Nay, though Joseph
deserve very much at their hands, by employing his profession, by spending his
time, many times his fortunes, in their service; though he be their own
countreyman, nay, their kinsman according to the flesh, wandering up and down,
and sometimes losing himself, in seeking after their welfare; yet, if
(withal) he will not descend from himself, and consent to the faults of his
brethren; if he will not break the fairest resolutions of a free spirit (the
signs of an ingenious birth and education) be of the giving hand, or (as it
were) sell himself for a slave, to their private ends; nay further, if he will
not patiently suffer wrong, and yet openly give thanks too, he shall be hated
the more for his worth; false accusations will be fought for, occasions of
displeasure easily taken, and (perhaps) brotherly kindness turned into the
greatest enmity: at least, Joseph is more likely to remain in the Pit of
affliction, or to be exposed to the mercy of strangers, (Infidels perhaps,
such as Ismaelites, Egyptians) rather than find any favor for his kindred,
or recompense for his merit, answerable to the Laws of Nature and Justice:
such is the state of corruption, such is the corruption of this World.

45 Whereupon we may well conclude with those words of the Prophet Esaias, in
his 31. Chapter, verse 1. Woe unto those that go down to Egypt for help:
for if there be any help there, it is more likely to be in the Cities, than in
the Villages: If in the Cities, then (me thinks) in Zoan, the Metropolis, the
chief City (as Strabo observes;) if in Zoan, then surely amongst the Princes,
the great men, the chief Officers: But, the Princes of Zoan are fools, Esaias
19. v. 11. Nay (as it follows in the same place) their wisdom is become
brutish: skillful (it may be the Prophet means) they were in dieting brute
beasts; whereof, amongst Egyptians (as we read) men of quality had the
charge; and no less eminent, for their devotion to Dogs; Illic tota oppida
canem venerantur, (says the Poet) there, whole Towns, every Village inherites
that disease, or (with this chief Butler) made famous to posterity for works
of uncharitableness, unthankefulnesse, or this worldly policy, which God
esteems foolishness: but otherwise, having neither wisdom, nor power, nor
goodness, (the necessary characters of a bountiful and munificent mind)
worthy to be the object of any confidence or refuge in the day of trouble.

And therefore, since now adays it is so much in fashion, to lean upon these
staves of broken Reeds (Egyptians I mean, Esaias 36.
so called in the Prophets language) it cannot be too often spoken; Woe unto
those that go down to Egypt for help; Esaias 31.
that trust in Chariots, because they are many; and in Horsemen, because they
are very strong; and look not to the holy One of Israel, nor seek unto the
Lord: for he alone is a God of compassion, once a fellow prisoner, Heb. 4.15.
Luke 4.18. Ephesians. 4.8.
touched with the sense of our infirmities; and therefore more likely to bind
up the brokenhearted, and to lead Captivity captive: and he alone is a God
of justice, weighing all things in a Balance; so that he who gives a Cup of
cold water for his sake, Mark. 9.41.
or receives a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, Matthew. 10.41.
shall never want a Prophets reward: and he alone is the Lord, the Lord God;
whose glory it is, Exodus 34. to be gracious and merciful, long suffering, and
abundant in goodness and truth; to hear the petitions of all them that call
upon him, in his Sons Name: nay, his forwardness to grant our requests in
spiritual matters, prevents the making of them: Ho, every man that thirsts,
come ye to the Waters; and he that has no money, come buy and eat; yea, come
buy Wine and Milk without money, without price, Esaias 55. v. 1. And shall he
not, with these, give us all things else? Yes verily: For though men be
stonie-hearted, and for the most part (upon like occasions) as dumb in effect,
as those Statues and Pictures whereunto Diogenes (by a choice kind of wisdom)
did commonly make requests as he passed by them, Plut. de vitiosa Verec.
ut assuesceret frustrari postulatis; that so, by inuring and acquainting
himself with these speechless denyals, he might the better teach others, not
to hope for much, to promise themselves little, to build upon nothing, to bear
all crosses with a quiet mind; and in particular, to deride and scoff at the
language of the Beast, which in these extremities hears and sees, and says
nothing: Yet if we patiently abide Gods leisure, if we commit our ways to
him, and wait upon the wisdom of his appointed times, Psalm. 132.1. Psalm.
142.7.
he will remember David and all his troubles, bring his soul out of prison,
and help them to right, who suffer wrong.

Nay, though the Dungeon be like the Sepulcher, wherein never man lay before
for such offenses, offenses (indeed) of others, his accusers, not of his own;
though Oppression set a watch upon the doors, and be it self a Rock of Stone,
to keep both them from being opened, and the prisoner from rising again: yet,
as one day, an Angel of God, a ministering Spirit, shall descend from Heaven to
visit this Dungeon, to open these doors, to justify a good cause, and to make
it shine as bright as himself, and that for fear of him, Matthew. 28.4.
the Keepers (the wretched Keepers) will shake, and become as dead men; so, in
this life, Psalm. 119.
the same God has ordained a Lantern for his anointed, and a Light for his
steps, powerful means to discover the ways of darkness, and to still the
voice of the oppressor: Job 3.18.
whereby (no doubt) according to his promise, and the case of temporal
happiness, he will raise the poor out of the dust, Psalm. 113.6, 7.
that he may set him with Princes, Psalm. 132.17.
even the Princes of his people; he will deck his Priests with health, and his
Saints shall rejoice and sing: and all this now, as heretofore, by great
Courtiers, instruments of blessed memory; amongst whom, though the chief
Butler (being entreated and engaged too) would not speak for Joseph, a poor
man, a Priest, a Saint; yet one, Neh. 2.
partly of his profession, good Nehemiah, Cupbearer to Artaxerxes,
(notwithstanding the fruition and honor of his place) will look sadly, and of
himself make request to the King, that he may go build up the walls of
Jerusalem, and comfort his afflicted brethren.

More particularly, God will (as he did) give Joseph wisdom and favor in
the sight of Pharaoh, Act. 7.10.
a most just, provident, grateful, bountiful Prince: nay, he can draw water
out of a stony Rock, and that by the hand of this chief Butler; causing him
(though a most unthankefull wretch) to make mention of Joseph to Pharaoh, even
then (when like a weak Politician, befooled with covetousness, or
self-conceit, intending altogether his own) he shall effect only Joseph's
promotion, and himself never after so much as named again, when Joseph came
in place, but requited in his own kind, not remembered, clean forgot: and no
mervaile; for he who makes another man eat the Bread of carfulness, does
well deserve himself to drink a draught of deadly Wine, a Cup of final
indignation.

John 2.9.
46 In a word, to conclude all, he can turn this Water into Wine (as he did at
a Marriage) making all things work together for the best, Romans 8.28.
to those who love him: But we know he has reserved the best Wine till the
last; that then whosoever drinks, may never thirst again, and stand in need
of any Courtiers kindness; that time being the Feast of a great King (greater
than Pharaoh) the King of Kings; and that no birthday, but the Marriage Supper
of his only begotten, only beloved Son: At which most glorious solemnity,
Joseph (no question, amongst others) will be clothed with a Wedding Garment,
even that Robe of Innocence, Matthew. 22.12.
which he left behind him; and being found a wise Virgin, Matthew. 25.
having Oil in his Lamp, burning and shining in the midst of a dark Dungeon,
shall from thence enter with the Bridegroom into his Chamber of Presence, that
Imperial Seat of incomprehensible Majesty, there to reign with him for
evermore.

Unto which Kingdom, the Lord of his infinite mercy bring us all, for his
Son Christ Jesus sake: To whom, with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, be
ascribed all honor, praise, power, and Dominion, now and evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
November. 22. 1634.
PErlegi has duas conciones Magistri Thornton, quae continent folia manuscripta
35. aut circiter, in quibus nihil reperio sanae Doctrinae aut bonis moribus
contrarium, quo minus cum utilitate publica imprimi possint, sub ea tamen
condition, ut si non intra sex menses typis mandentur, haec licentia sit
omnino irrita.

GVILIELMVS HAYWOOD, Capell. Dom. Archiep. Cant.


