The history of Italy, a book excedyng profitable to be read: Because it
entreats of the astate of many and diverse commonweals, how they have been,
and now be governed.

ANNO DOMINI. M. D. XLIX.

TB.

The contents of this book.
THe descripcion of Italy. Of the astate of Italy in general. Abbrigement of
the astate of Italy, from the beginning until the Roman empire was utterly
divided. The descripcion of Rome, and of the meruailouse antiquitees there. Of
the present astate of Rome. Abbrigement of the lives of the Roman bishops.
The Uenetian astate: and the order of their common weal. The descripcion of
Naples. The History of Naples. The descripcion of Florence. The astate of
Florence. The descripcion of Genoa. The astate of Genoa. The descripcion of
Millayne. The astate of Millayne. The astate of Mantua. The astate of Ferrara.
The astate of Placentia and Parma. The astate of Urbine.
To the right honorable and mine especial good lord, John^ Earl of
Warrewike, Uisconte Lisle, knight of the most noble order of the Garter, lord
great chambrelaine, and high admyrall of England.
THough many wise and learned men have so substancially set forth the infinite
commodities that grow of the readyng of histories, that my wits can not
atteigne to a small part of the due commendacion thereof: Yet seeing my travail
at this present has been to publishe unto our own nation in our mother tongue
the doings of strangers, and specially of the Italian nation, which seems
to flourisshe in ciuilitee most of all other at this day: me thought I could
no less do for the incourageyng of them that shall take this book in hand,
than partly rehearse what profit they may gather by trauailyng therein. First
they shall see, upon what little beginning many great astates have risen, and
how they that have had the power to rule, by vsyng their auctoritees well and
prudently, have merited immortal fame of honor and preise: and by vsyng
tyranny and ill governance, have contrariwise borne eternal sklaunder and
shame. It encourages the virtuous men, by the exaumples that they read, to
encreace in virtue and nobilitee: and shows the viciouse, what the fruit of
their abuses are, and how naughty doings have most commonly naughty
endyng. It moves the noble prince to mainteigne peace and justice: and shows
the tyra^ne, what plagues follow of war and crueltee: and that though his
tyranny pass vnplagued in this world (which happens seldom) yet shall his
name be hated and cursed in all ages and amongst all nations, as Nero,
Heliogabalus and such other princes be. It shows also, how mutable fortune
is, and how that, which has been gotten with extreme peines, unmeasurable
expenses, and unreasonable effusion of bloudde, has been lost in a moment: and
that commonly he that has conquered most in war, at the best is yet a
loser: and finally, that of division, either amongst the nobilitee or the
commons, there ensues utter destruction of realms, and subuercion of common
wealths: Whereunto there is none so great a minister as the alteracion of
ancient laws and customs.

All these things, with infinite more, histories do so set forth to the eyes
of princes (if they read them well) that their hertes shall be more inclined
with peace and justice to enriche their subjects, and thereby procure them
selfs glory, than by murtheryng of innocents, rauishyng of honest wives and
maidens, burning, spoilyng and destruction of countries (which are the
effects of war) to make them selfs conquerours of that they can not long
enioie. For surely, more preise shall that prince deserve, that leaves his
realm quiet and welthie unto his successor, than he that for the conquest of
other countries enpouerissheth and disturbeth his own.

And because this little work declares both these extremitees, as well what
a number of beautiful citees have been edified, and what great countries have
been enriched by peace and concord, as also how many goodly things and
wonderful regions have been destroyed by striefe and war: Therefore would I
wish all noble men to read it, to the end they may hereof take occasion so
honorably to spend their life time, that after their death, they may shine
in fame for ever.

And knowing your lordshippe for your excellent feats of chivalry, both by
sea and land, to be such a one as is hable to judge, whether mine opinion be
good or not, like as your wonderful knowlage in civil orders has made you
worthy to be no less esteemed excellent in counsel, than as you have been
tried a most valiant captain in the wars: I therefore could find none,
to whom I might so woorthily dedicate my little travail as to you: Most
humbly besechyng your lordeship to accept it at my poor hands, as the
giefte of him that wishes you all health and honor. At London the.xx. day of
September. 1549.

Your good lordeshippes most humble at commandment, William Thomas.

The descripcion of Italy.
Italy conteigneth in length from Augusta Pretoria unto Otranto.1020. miles:
and in breadth from the river Varo in Prouance, to the river Arsia in Friuli
(which is the brodest place) 410. miles: and in the narowe places, as from
the mouth of Pescara to the mouth of Tyber.126. miles. The circuit of Italy.
So that to compass it by sea from Varo to Arsia, are.3038. miles, which with
the.410. miles by land, makes the whole circuit to be.3448. miles. Thus it
appears, that it is almost an island, closed on the east side with the sea
Adriaticum, and on the southe and weast with the sea Tirrhenum, which is a
part of the great sea Mediterraneum. And from the North it has the mightiest
mountains of all Europe called Alps, which divides it from all other
regions.

The facion (as Pliny descriueth it) is like unto an oken leefe with the
stalk: The facion of Italy.
but it ends in manner of the Amazones targatte.

It has a very temperate and wholesome air, Temperature of Italy.
fertile fields, pleasant hills, batfull pastures, shadowyng wooddes,
plenty of all kind of trees and groves, haboundaunce of corn, vines, and
olives: good woulies, fair cattaile, and so many springes, fountains, lakes,
rivers, and havens, that it is an open lap to receive the trade of all
countries: and as it were to offer all men help it seems willingly to put it
self into the sea.

It lies between the.vi. hour and the first of the winter in manner half way
between the Equinoctial and the Pole: The site of Italy.
between (I say) the heat of the son and the cold of the north. For the
city of Bononia (where the great resort of scholars from all nations is wont
to be) stands almost in the heart of Italy, and has in his eleuacion.44.
degrees: so that diuidyng the quarter from the Equinoctial to the Septentrion
into.90. according to the rule of Cosmographie, and taking the one half
thereof, which is.45. the difference is little, to prove that Italy is in the
midst between the extremitees of heat and cold. And seeing than, that
temperature is it that most of all other comfort, nourissheth and
mainteineth nature: it must needs follow, that this being one of the most
indifferent regions, must be very pleasant delicate and abundant.

This little discourse I have made to the intent the wise may the better
understand the cause of those things, that to my purpose I must hereafter
treat upon.

The commoditees of Italy.
IF I should go about to descriue unto you perticulerly how commodious the
country is, as well to the trafficque of them that live by merchaundise, as to
the good liefe of them that love their rest, it should be enough alone to
occupy an whole volume, but because I would seem no more tediouse in this,
than I covet to do in all the rest, I say:

First for merchaundise, Merchandise.
Italy as an heart or knotte of these parts on our half of the world, is the
principal place of recourse of all nations that occupy any thing of
importance far from home. For like as with us in England the most
merchauntes of the realm resort to London, to utter their own wares, and to
bie such other as make for their purposes: even so they of France, of Spain,
of Germany, and of all other westerlie places, that covet the merchaundise of
Soria, Egypt, Cyprus, Candia, Constantinopol', and those other easterly
parts, as iewelles, drugges, spices, perfumes, silks, cotton, sugar,
malmeseis, and other like: resort most commonly into Italy with their
woulles, clothes, linen, leather, metalles and such other, to Genoa, Mylaine,
Venice, Ancona, Missena, Naples, or to some of those places, whereas trafficque
is used: and there metyng with Jews, Turks, Greeks, Moors and other easterly
merchauntes, sellyng the tone they bie the other.

Than for pleasure, he that has mean to pay for that he takes, Pleasures*
shall have in Italy what he can reasonably desire: fine breadde, singler
good wynes both strong and small, flesh of all sorts both wild and tame,
foul of all kinds both of water and land, fish as well of the sea as of
the fresshe water, but specially such plenty of delicate fruits, as would
make a man leave flesh, foul and fisshe to eat them: namely in the summer.
I mean the Melons, Pepons, Pomegranettes, Orenges, Lymmans, Citrous, and
sweet grapes: besides their figs, apples, pears, peaches, plommes and
olives, with a thousand other of that sort. And it is not to be meruailed at,
though (as the ^ame goes) the Italian be a small eater of flesh. For though
here before I have commended the temperature of Italy to be comparable with any
other countrei: yet must you understand, Feedyng in Italy.
that in summer the son is somewhat fervent, and in time of that heat, the
lightness of those sweet fresshe fruits is better to be digested, than the
heaviness of flesh or fisshe, which would not there be so lightly
digested. As I my self have proved, that before time could in manner brook no
fruit, and yet after I had been a while in Italy. I fell so in love withal*
that as long as I was there, I desired no meat more: because me thought
nothing more wholesome, specially in summer. And all be it, the heat be (as I
have said) somewhat fervent, yet it excedeth not so much of the hotest, as
the winter cold is temperate at the coldest. For at the most the cold there
endures not.iii. months of the.xii and some years in manner you shall feel
no winter at all.

These rehearsed commoditees, with infinite other, to long here to treat of,
Resort of strangers into Italy.
together with the loving company of the Italians (who in manner make more of
strangers than of their own) do cause the infinite resort of all nations
that continually is seen there. And I think verily, that in one region of all
the world again, are not half so many strangers as in Italy: specially of
gentilmen, whose resort thither is principally under pretense of study. For
there are diverse famous citees, that be priuileged with great libertees for
all scholars that come: as Padoa, Bononia, Pauia, Ferrara, Pisa, and others: in
every one of the which, are excellent learned men, waged for the readyng of
philosophy, of the civil laws, and of all the liberal sciences. Besides
excellent masters of music to sing and play on all manner of instruments,
and the best masters of fence at all weapons that can be found. So that all
kinds of virtue may there be learned: and therefore are those places
accordyngly furnisshed: not of such students alone, as most commonly are
brought up in our vniuersitees (mean men's children set to schole in ho^e to
live upon hired learning) but for the more part of noble men's sons, and of
the best gentilmen: that study more for knowlage and pleasure, than for
curiositee or luker. For lightly there passes no shroftide without rennyng at
the tilte, tourneiyng, fighting at the barriers, and other like feats of
arms, handled and furnisshed after the best sort: the greatest dooers whereof
are scholars.

This last winter liyng in Padoa, with diligent search I learned, that the
noumbre of scholars there was little less than fiftene hundredth: whereof I dare
say, a thousand at the lest were gentilmen.

Of the Italian customs and nature.
THe inheritance of lands in Italy goes by Gauell kind, that is to wete,
one brother as good part as an other. So that if a Conte, (which is as much
to say as an Earl) have.xx. sons, every one of them is called Conte, and
the youngest has as good part in his fathers lands and goods, as the
eldest: unless it be in the astates of princes, as of Mantua, Ferrara, Vrbino,
and such others, which theldest evermore enjoys. And by this mean it is
come to pass, that in process of time, with change from wealth to pouertee,
there be diverse Earls and Marqueses with out land or goods, reteignyng
nevertheless the glory of that name to them and theirs for ever.

Gentilmen
But to speak of the gentilmen, that have whereof woorshipfully to live (which
for the most part do commonly profess arms) me seems, that none other
nation is like them in maiestee.

First, to rehearse the conformitee of speech that is amongst them selfs
(considering what a noumbre of diuersitees they have in their tongue) it is a
merualle, that in manner all gentilmen do speak the courtisane. For
notwithstanding that between the Florentine and Uenetian is great diuersitee in
speech, as with us between a Londoner and a Yorkeshyreman, and likewise
between the Mylainese and the Roman, the Napolitane and the Genouese: yet by
the tongue you shall not lyghtlie discern of what part of the countreye any
gentilman is, because that being children they are brought up in the
courtisane only. And generally (a few citees excepted) in manners and
conditions they are no less agreeable than in their speech: so honorable, so
courteise, so prudente, and so grave withal, that it ^^oulde seem each one of
them to have had a princely bringyng up. To his superior obedient, to his
equal humble, and to his inferior gentill and courteise, amiable to a
stranger, and desirous with courtesy to win his love.

I grant, that in the expense or love of his money for a stranger he is ware,
and woull be at no more cost than he is sure either to save by, or to have
thank for: wherein I rather can commend him than otherwise. But this is out of
doubt, a stranger can not be better entreteigned, nor more honorably
entreated than amongst the Italians.

They are very modest in their apparaile, fine in trimmyng of their houses, and
excedyng nete at their table. But above all other they are sobre of speech,
enemies of ill report, and so tender over their own good name (which they
call their honor) that who so ever speaks ill of one of them, shall die for
it, if the party sklaundered may know it, and find time and place to do it.
Whereof there is a use grown amongst them, that few gentilmen go abroad
unarmed. And though some in this case do discommende them, yet mine opinion
does rather allow than blame them. For the fear of such dangers makes
men so ware of their tounges, that a man may go.xx. years through Italy
without findyng reproach or villainy, unless he provoke it him self.

And if one gentilman happen to defame an other, many times the defamed makes
his defiaunce by a writ called Cartello, and openly chalengeth the defamer to
fight in camp: so that there are seen sometime worthy trialles between them.

And it is true, that many years ago, such contencion has grown amongst
them, that almost the whole nation has been divided into parttakynges, as
Guelfi and Ghibellini: imperial and french, with other like: which has been
occasion of much manslaughter, and consequently of their foresaied continual
use in wearyng of armure. But at this day those open contencions are
wonderfully abated, whether it proceed of werinesse or of wisdom I can not
tell.

Finally in one thing I can singlerly commend them, that they woull not lightly
meddle with other men's mattiers, and that when they hear ill report, they do
their best to cover the sklaunder, saying that no man lives without fault: or
with some other such reason. But like as I could reckon in the Italians
commendacion many things more than are here rehearsed* even so on the other
side if I were disposed to speak of vice, I might happen to find a noumbre as
ill as in any other men: which are better untouched than spoken of. For whereas
temperance, modesty, and other civil virtues excel in the number of the
Italian nobilitee, more than in the nobilitee of any other nation that I know:
so undoubtedly the fleshely appetite with unnatural heat and other things in
them that be viciouse, do pass all the terms of reason or honesty.

And yet it is not to be forgotten, that these gentilmen generally profess
three things: the first is arms, to mainteigne withal his honor: the
second is love, to show him self gentill and not cruel of nature: and the
third is learning, to be hable to know, to understand, and to utter his
opinion in mattiers of weight.

Merchantes.
The principal merchauntes are for the most part gentilmen. For when there be
of one house.iii. or.iiii. brethren: lightly one or two of them dispose them
selfs to merchaundise. And if they happen not to divide their fathers
patrimony and substance (as many times they do not) than do the
merchauntes travail as well for the wealth of their brethren as their own:
for all renneth in common, be it gain or loss. In deed their outward
profession agrees not with the gentilmen before rehearsed. For they carry
another weapon nor armure, but do what they can to live in peace: not only
serching the trades of all countries with their merchaundise, but also
occupiyng at home the most substanciall fermes and possessions by their
factours, as hereafter more plainly it follows. And because these merchauntes
have nothing the less reputacion of nobilitee, for their trade of
merchaundise, therefore it follows that there be such numbres of wealthy men
in that countrei, as the like is not to be found any other where. For in
diverse citees of Italy it is no marvel to see.xx. persons in a city
woorthe.100000. crowns a piece and vpwardes.

As for the artificers I have nothing to say: Artificers.
saving that for the most part they are the finest woorkemen and best
inuentours of all other, and are so well paid for it, that many of them live
as well as they that have standing liuinges: and grow sometimes unto great
wealth and richesse, but not lightly in two or three descentes unto any
reputacion of nobilitee.

The housbandmen are of all hands oppressed. Husbandmen.
For in the country there dwells no man of substance. All the gentilmen and
other that are wealthy, dwell in the walled citees and towns: leauyng the
villaiges, fields and pastures in their tenauntes hands, not to ferme at
certain rent as we do in England, but to the halfes, or to the third of
all grain and fruit as the ground is fertile or baraine. And the poor
tenant is bound to till, sow and housbande the ground at his own cost and
charge. So that the landelordes part comes clear without disbursyng of a
penie. And at the harvest and vintaige the landelorde sends a man of his for
his part, who first takes his choice of the grain, wine, oil, and fruit:
and than leaves the rest to the tenant as his part arises to. And many
times if the landelorde be cruel, when he can not sell his things at his own
price, than forces he his tenant to utter it for him: and to pay for it, not
as he can sell it, but as the landelorde woull. By reason whereof the poor man
is brought so low, that he is not hable sometime to find bread of Zorgo (a
very vile grain) to feed his poor children withal.

And because I have here named Zorgo, me thinks it meet to tell, that in
Italy grows many sorts of grain, as this Zorgo, Meglio, Segala, and.xx.
such other, which can not be expressed by any english names, because in
England there is no kind of such grain. All which serve to make course
breadde for the poor people, and also for the staple of vitailes in strong
holds. For the breadde made thereof (specially of Meglio) woull endure a
noumbre of years uncorrupted. And in like manner they have certain kinds of
other grain, that in general are called Legumi (as we were wont to call
peasen, lenten stuff) whereof they use all the year long to make their potages.

Finally in the villages are many fair houses made only for the owners
passetime against the heat of the summer. For than do they habandon the
citees and go unto those houses for a month two or three, where under the
fresshe herbers, hedges and boowes, amongst the delicate fruits they triumph
in as much pleasure as may be imagined. And for the most part each man has
his make: with some instruments of music, and such other things as serve
for his recreacion. And if ever the tenant have good day, than lycketh he his
lips of his masters leauynges.

As for the women, Women.
Some be wonders gaie,
And some go as they may.
Some at libertee do swymme a flot,
And some would feign but they can not.
Some be meerie, I wot well why,
And some begile the housbande, with finger in the eye.
Some be married against their will,
And therefore some abide MAIDENS still.
In effect they are women all,
Ever have been and ever shall.


But in good earnest the gentilwomen generally, for gorgeouse atyre, apparaile
and iewelles, excede (I think) all other women of our known world. I mean
as well the courtisanes as the married women. For in some places of Italy,
specially where churchemen do reign: you shall find of that sort of women
in rich apparaill, in furniture of householde, in service, in horse and
hackeney, and in all things that apperteyne to a delicate Lady, so well
furnisshed, that to see one of them vnknowynglie, ^he should seem rather of
the qualitee of a princess, than of a common woman. But because I have to
speak hereafter in particular, I woull forbear to treat any further of them
in this place.

Of the states of Italy.
THe greatest prince of dominion there at this present is Charles the.v.
emperor of Almaine, who for his part has the realm of Naples and the Duchy
of Mylaine: which realm is divided into.8. regions, and to the intent the
readers may the better be satisfied, I have set forth as well the ancient
names of those regions, as the present.

The realm of Naples.
The present names. The ancient. Part of Campagnia di Roma Maremma.
Latium. Terra di Lauoro. Campania. Principato. Picentini. Basilicata. Lucania.
Calabria Brutij. Grecia magna.
Puglia. terra d'otranto Salentini. Calabria antiqua. Iapigia. Mesapia.
Puglia. Apulia Peucetia. Aetholia. Apulia Daunia.
Abruzzo Frentani. Peligni. Marrucini. Vestini. Precutij. Marsi.
Valle Beneuentana. Samnites.
As for that part of the Duchy of Mylaine that the emperor has, it lies in
Lumbardie aunciently called Gallia Cisalpina, for the most part on that side of
the river Po, that was called Transpadana.

The bishop of Rome has for his part, the city of Rome, with these
countries following.

The present names. The ancient. Part of Campagnia. Maremma.
Latium. Part of Tuscane. Hetruria. The Duchy of Sposeti. Vmbria. Marca D'
Ancona. Piceni. Romagnia. Flaminia. Emilia.
The city of Bononia.
The Uenetians for their part have the City of Uenice with those towns in
and about their marishe called La Contrada di Venetia, La Marca Triuigiana, and
a great part of Lumbardy, aunciently called Gallia Cisalpina on the same side
of the Po, that was called Transpadana. And part of the country of Istria.

The common wealth of Genoa, have the country about them now called, Jf
Genouesato and auncientlie Liguria.

Tuscane, auncientlie called, Hetruria, is divided into diverse dominions,
whereof a small part the bishop of Rome has, but the greatest is the Duke of
Florence, who has.vii. citees under him: And than there be two common
wealths, Siena and Lucca, whose territories are not great.

The Duke of Ferrare has part of Romagnia, and part of Lumbardie.

The Duke of Mantua is all in Lumbardie.

And the Duke of Urbine is between Marca d' Ancona and Tuscane, whose people
are called of Pliny Metaurensi.

The Citees of Parma and Placentia in Lumbardie have been of late transposed
from the church unto the astate of a Duchy, but now it is divided again: as
hereafter you shall perceive.

Now here is to be noted, that every particular prince and common wealth of
Italy, within his own dominion, accompteth him self absolute lord and king,
and lives upon the customs, taxes and tallaiges that he raises of his
subjects. For lightly they have littell or no lands at all of their own.
And generally they proceed all together by the civil laws, and are so
diligent in the administracion of justice, specially against murderers and
thieves, that I think no country more quiet than it: the realm of Naples,
and some part of the Roman territory excepted, where many times happens
much robbyng by the ways.

An abbridgement of the state of Italy, from the beginning until the Roman
empire was utterly divided.
AFter the general floudde remaigned no more but Noe, his.iii. soonnes and
their wifes, between whom it should seem the whole world was divided. Sem
took the east part, Cham, the southe, and Iafet the weast. Some write, that
Iafet was the same Ianus that first reigned in Italy, and some that Ianus was
Iafettes soonne. But whether so it be, this Ianus was ever taken for father of
the gods, and was peinted with two faces, either because he was father of two
nations, the Greeks and Italians, orels because the month of January (which
has two respects, one to the beginning, and an other to the end of the
year) took name of him. While this Ianus reigned in Italy, Saturn being
chased out of the realm of Candia by his soonne Jupiter, came in a manner naked
unto him: and Ianus not only received him: But also gave him the half of his
dominion. For memory whereof either of them builded a city to his own name,
that is to wete Ianicula and Saturnia, from Ianus unto Numitor were.xxi. kings
of the latins, whose names, with the years of their reign, hereafter follow.

Ianus.

Saturnus.

Picus, being a great talker, was therefore feigned of the poets to be
converted into a pie.



Laurentini to Latini, and gave his daughter Lauinia to Eneas the Troiane,
promised before unto Turnus, son of king Daunus.

These.v. kings reigned about.200. years.

Latinus, and after his death, reigned.iii. years, and builded the city
Lauinia.

Ascanius, son of Eneas and of Creusa, king Priamus Alba longa, to the which
he brought his fathers idolles called the gods Penates, but they of them
selfs turned, iii. times back again to Lauinia.

Lauinia, reigned.xxix. years. Of whom all the latin kings afterward
surnamed them selfs Siluij: and after some authors he was father to Brutus,
that first named this realm Britain, and that slew his own father by
mischaunce: which thing Polidorus Virgilius does not grant.





which he made his royal city: but after it was destroyed by Tullus
Hostilius. Of that city descended those that to this day are called Albanesi,
though they of their own original hold diverse opinions.

Athis or Egyptus Siluius, reigned.24. years.

Capi Siluius reigned.28. years. and builded the city Capua.

Carpentus reigned.13. years.

Tyberinus reigned.9. years: of whom the river that renneth through Rome was
first named Tyber: by reason Albula.

Agrippa reigned.40. years.

Remulus reigned.19. years, and was slain with a

Auentinus, reigned.38. years, and was slain in Auentine, and buried there:
whereof that hill took his name, though Varro says that the ^ame proceeded of
the sight of certain birds.

Proca reigned.23. years, and ordained by testament,

Amulius reigned.24. years, and chased his elder brother Numitor out of his
realm, because he had learned by diuinacion, that one of his brothers descent
should expel him out of his astate. Wherefore he slew his nephewe Sergistus,
and put his niece Rhea into a religion of virgins called Vestales, where at
the end of.vii. year she was gotten with child by an unknown man, and
brought forth at one burden two sons Romulus and Remus with the which
Amulius was so offended, that he not only caused the mother to be buried
quick, according to the law, but also commanded the two children to be
thrown into Tyber, so that they were left on the bank, and there fed by a she
woulfe (as the poe^es feign) but the troth of the history is, that they were
found by a shepherde, whose wife (for her beauty and licenciouse living) was
called Lupa: and so taken and nourished till they grew unto such years, that
they revenged them selfs, slew Amulius, and made their graundefather Numitor
king.

Romulus and Remus together found the mean to slay him, and than builded the
city of Rome. The edificacion of Rome.
Before which time these Latin kings had reigned in all about.620. years.

Remus was slain.

The first king of the Romans.
And within.4. years after the edificacio^ of the city, because the
inhabitauntes (being men assembled of diverse nations) had no women to maintain
succession, he devised sacrifices and plays, to the which the Sabines as well
men as women resorted. So that by order of Romulus all the Sabine maidens, that
came to the feast, were taken and married among the Romans. Whereupon the
Sabines made war against Romulus, and procured diverse other of their
neighbors to do the like: but the Roman prevailed against them all.
Finally as he perused his soldiers on a day in a great tempest, he was
stricken with a thunderbolte: and because he could never more be heard of, the
Romans imagined, he was ascended to heaven: and therefore worshipped him as a
God.

Numa Pompilius reigned.41. years, and kept the

Tullus Hostilius reigned.33. years, and conquered the Alba, which he rased to
the earth, and at last both he and his house were burned with thundre.

Ancus Martius reigned.xxiiii. years, and subdued

Tarquinus Priscus reigned.37. years, he doubled Ancus Martius.

Seruius Tullius reigned.34. years, he ordained first

Lucius Tarquinius reigned.35. years, he was the The end of the Roman
kings.
and the astate changed from kings to Consules, after that the kings had
reigned above.230. years. Consules.


Than did the Romans ordeine two Consules remoueable from year to year. The
first were Lucius Iunius Brutus, and Lucius Tarquinius Collatinus, housbande to
the dead Lucretia: under which order of Consules (a few chaunges excepted) the
Romans mainteigned their common wealth, well nere.500. years: and so
prevailed in conquestes over the world, that none other monarchy is to be
compared unto theyrs: nor almost so many other worthy men to be read of in all
the histories written, as were found in that city for the time: as he that
reads Liuie shall see. But because the only writing of their names would
occupy a greatter part of my book than should be requisite to my purpose, I
shall beseech all gentill readers to be contented that I refer them over
unto the Roman histories, which are common to the whole world.

Finally, about.700. years after the edificacion of Rome, and.47. before the
coming of Christ, the libertee of the Roman common wealth ceased, by reason
that Julius Caesar, The first emperor.
after the death of Pompeius, having quieted the civil contencions, took on
him by force the whole empire, and had at his commandment the greatest part
of all the world. From whom unto the time of Constantine the first, there
reigned, 38. emperors, as by their names hereafter it appears, and they all
kept their principal seat in Rome, as the head city of their monarchy.

Brutus and Cassius, with diverse other senators conspired against him, and
slew him in the senate house.

Octauianus Augustus reigned.56. years, and.vi. months, but the first.xii.
years he had Marcus Antonius and Lepidus as parteners of the empire, till by
force, with consent of the senate, he subdued them both: and because he was
happy in his enterprises, the senators surnamed him Augustus. In the.42. year
of his reign, our Savior Christ was borne.

Tyberius, son in law unto Octauian, reigned.xxiii. Tyberius of the miracles
that he had done, wherefore Tyberius commanded he should be woorshipped as a
God: but the senators would not grant unto it, because he had proclaimed it
without their consentes.

Caius Caligula reigned.iii. years and.x. months. A

Claudius reigned.xiii. years and.viii. months, and Claudius reign, Peter
the apostle came to Rome, and there continued.xxv. years after. Which other
some do disallow, groundyng them upon Peter's age, that reckenyng the time it
was impossible Peter should live so long after Christ's passion.

Neroe reigned.xiiii. years and.vii. months, whose Seneca, and diverse other
excellent men: so that his own soldiers rebelled against him, and the whole
Senate condemned him: wherefore he fled, and because he could not escape,
desperately slew him self.

Galba Sergius reigned but.vii. months, by reason that his next successor
lay in wait for him, and slew him in the baines.



Vitellius chased Sabinus Uespasians brother with diverse into the capitol, and
there set fire on them. Wherefore Uespasian came straight to Rome, took
Vitellius, made him to be drawn through the streets, and hewn to pieces.

Nero and the other emperors after him were much corrupted, and began the
Amphitheater, now called Colliseo. And this was he that destroyed Jerusalem in
fulfillyng of Christ's prophecy.



Titus, but like Nero in conditions: for he delited in unnatural vices, and in
cruel death of men* so that he slew diverse senators, persecuted learned men and
Christians, had ill success in his wars, and finally through conspiracy was
slain.



Nerua and a Spaniarde borne, reigned.xix. years and.vi. months: so benign
and courteise a prince, that for a proverb, men used to say: God make the
happier than August, and better than Traiane. For being sometime advertised of
his friends, that he used him self to much familiarly, he aunsweared, that a
prince ought to be unto his subjects such as they should be to him: and
geuyng the swoorde to a Praetor, that he had newly made, he said, use this
against mine enemies, but see the cause be just: and if I deal unjustly, than
spare not me: He prospered much in his wars, and greatly augmented the
Roman empire.

Adrianus reigned.xxi. years, the most part in peace, Messiah among the Jews,
which Adrian overcame with much a do.

Antonius Pius adopted son unto Adrian reigned

Marcus Aurelius Antonius reigned.xix. years and Lucius Verus was ioigned with
him: but he lived not long. This Marcus was an excellent philosopher, wrote
diverse good books, and prospered in the wars, where finally he died.

Commodus, son to Marcus Aurelius reigned.13. years Nero, than to his father:
so that at last he was both poisoned and strangled.

Helius was surnamed Pertinax, because he took the vi. months, but that his
next successor caused him to be slain.



Seuerus reigned.xviii. years, and restored much the

Geta to be slain, married his stepmother Iulia, used much tyranny, and was
at last slain by one of his own soldiers.



Tyber.



him, so that his own soldiers slew him.

Gordianus reigned.vi. years, and prospered much in Gordianus was slain.

Julius Philippus with his son reigned.vii. years

Decius with his son reigned.ii. years and.iii. months,

Uirius Gallus with his son reigned.ii, years and were slain both of their
own army, as they were going Emilianus, that than would have usurped the
empire.

Ualerianus with his son Galienus, reigned.xv. years. Valerian in the.v. year
was taken in battle against Sapor king of Persia, who put out his eyes, and
used him always for his foot stool when he went to horseback: and Galienus
became so viciouse, that he was feign to flee from Rome, and finally was slain
of his own men.

Claudius elected by the senate, reigned one year and ix. months, fought
against the Goths and Germans, Quintilianus emperor, who within.xvii. days
after was slain.

Eutropius compares him unto Alexander the great, or Caesar. But at last he
was slain through craft of one of his own soldiers.

Florianus elected, but he lived little more than.ii. months.

Probus reigned.vi. years.iiii. months, he recovered Saturninus and Proculus,
that had made them selfs emperoures, and finally was slain of his own
soldiers.



Dioclesianus reigned.xx. years, a great persecutour Maximianus with him: and
either of them made a deputy, Dioclesianus took Galerius, and Maximianus took
Constantius. Finally when they had brought the empire to a good stay,
Dioclesian and Maximian both renounced their astates and became private, though
Maximian would gladly have taken it upon him again, to have exalted his son
Maxentius. Wherefore his son in law Constantine caused him to be slain.

Galerius with Constantius reigned together.ii. years, Galerius had the east
part, and Constantius the west. Constantius, husband to the Queen Eleyn,
died in York: and Galerius, being fallen sick, slew him self. Nevertheless
er he dyed Maxentius had gotten the Roman soldiers called Pretoriani on his
part, and so usurped the name of emperor. Against whom Galerius first sent
his captain Seuerus, and afterward Licinius, but they prevailed not, for
Maxentius continued til the coming of Constantine to Rome, who fought with him,
and so discomfited him, that in fleing he was drowned in Tyber.

CONSTANTINVS the first, reduced the Roman astate to tranquillitee, and took
Licinius as compagnion in the empire: to whom he gave his Licinius rebelled
against Constantine, and being overcome, was deposed, and (as some write)
slain. So that Constantine reigned alone, the time of whose reign in all
was.xxx. years and.x. months. He was converted to the Christian faieth by
bisshoppe Siluester, unto whom (as the name, which was Bizantium, yet many
allow not Constantines donacion to Siluester to be true: but say, that some
one of those bisshops of Rome long after Siluester, that usurped the name of
Peter's successor, to enlarge their creadite and auctoritee, and to mainteigne
their pomp, Donacion of Constantine.
invented this donacion. So that though Constantine or his successors removed
their dwelling from Rome to Constantinople, yet did they nevertheless reteigne
continually both the dominion of Rome and also the name of the Roman empire,
until the taking of Rome by Alaricus king of the Goths, between whose
coming and the reign of Constantine were these ix. emperors following.

COnstantinus, Constantius, and Constans sons of Constantine, and had the
empire divided between the^. But Constantine, not contented with Constans, and
was slain, and Constans at length was also slain by treason of one of his own
capitaines named Magnentius: who usurped the empire, and after many battles,
being overcome by Conctantius, at last slew him self. So that Constantius
remaigned emperor alone: the time of whose reign, with his brethern
togethers, was.xxiiii. years.

Constantius, that had made him Caesar, and after his death (being made
emperor) he persecuted cruelly the Christian religion, and at length was
slain in battaille against the Persians.

unto the king of Persia a great part of Mesopotamia. Which was the first
time that ever the Romans or any emperor consented to diminisshe the Roman
dominion.

Ualentinianus reigned.xii. years, and was a good

Ualens reigned.iiii. years, favored much the Artian Goths in Thracia, was
discoumfited, besieged, and burned.

Gratianus reigned.vi. years, and he with his son Maximus and Arbogastus

Theodosius reigned.xi. years, subdued the Goths, Maximus and Arbogastus,

Archadius and Honorius reigned together.xiii. years,

Honorius after his brothers death reigned.xv. years. Alaricus, beforenamed
king of the Goths, Stillicon themperours captain a Uandale borne, turned
his army, that than was going into France, against the emperor: and so
ouerrennyng all Italy, at length besieged Rome, and Goths. Uandales* Hunes
Lumbardes.
that is to wete, the Goths, the Vandales, the Hunes and Lumbardes, with
diverse others, triumphed not only over Italy, but also over France, Spain
and part of Affrike, in such wise, that though many of their armies were
discoumfited by diverse of the emperors capitaines and others: yet in process
of time they myngled them selfs so with the other nations, that they were no
more known for strangers, but became Italians, Spaniardes, Frenchemen, and so
forth.

After this first destruction of Italy, with the taking and spoylyng of Rome,
the common people began to cry out, saying: that syns they left the
woorshippyng of their ancient gods, and had embraced the new faith of Christ,
all these afflictions through vengeance of the gods were fallen on them: so
that many doubted whether it were good to believe or not. But surely, the
remouyng of the imperial seat from Rome to Constantinople, was the greatest
occasion of the Roman empyres decaie. For when the emperors began to dwell
in Greece, Diuidyng of the empire.
and to leave Italy, now and than diuidyng the empire, one to rule in the
orient, and an other in the occident, their ancient reputacion declined so
much, that their own private capitaines enterprised many times not only to
rebel, but also to usurp the name of emperors* By reason whereof it came to
pass, that within the space of.^0. years there entered.vii. strange kings
into Italy, with so puissaunt armies, that they put either the whole country,
or at least a great part thereof to swoorde and fire.

Brutij, and finally died in the city of Cosenza.

After whom succeeded his kynsman Athaulfus, that married Placidia sister of the
emperor Honorius, taken among the prisoners of Rome, so wise a woman, that
when her husband following the trade of Alaricus, determined to go to Rome,
and to raze it to the earth, she with fair words dissuaded him, and brought
him to accord with her brother, in such wise that through the emperors
procuremente, he with all his nation of Goths left Italy, and went to
conquer Spain, where in the city of Barcelona he was of his own folk
traitorously slay^e.

The second was Attila king of the Hunes, who with Lumbardie unto the Appenine
hills, and as far as Florence, which he rased to the earth, not withstandyng
it was yielded unto him without resistance. But finally as he was going to
Rome, entendyng to do likewise there: Leo the first, than bishop of the same,
met him by the way, and so entreated him, that ceasyng from further crueltee,
he withdrewe him and all his into Hungary, where not long after he died of a
sodeine death.

Thirdly Gensericus entered into Italy with a great Vandales through this
occasion,

Theodosius the.ii. assigned his cosen Valentinian to rule the weast part of
the empire, who died within few years: so that Maximianus a Romayne, by force
took on him the occidentall empie^, and married Eudossa late wife of the same
Valentinian: who disdeigning this Maximian, practiced secretly with Gensericus
then reigning in Africa, and did so much, that he came to Rome, took it by
force, slew Maximian, spoiled and burned the city, and finally for a worthy
reward, led Eudossa and her daughter prisoners with him at his return into
Affrike.

Biorgus king of the Alani, afterward called Alemani, who entered into Italy
by the Trent, and ouerran all Istria, La Marca Triuisana, and a great part of
Lumbardie, till at last by Seuerianus one of the emperors capitaines, he was
fought withal, slain and his host discomfited.

Odoacrus king of the Eruli, that sometime Valachia beyond the river of
Danubie, who with an infinite number of men twice in.xiiii. year ouerran all
Italy, calling him self king thereof, till the emperor Zenon sent Theodoricus
king of the Goths against him, who fought with him, discomfited all his host,
and finally slew him.

Theodoricus him self, who by the emperor Zenon was invested king of Italy,
in Odoacrus, but at last he establisshed his royal seat in Rauenna, where he
reigned.25. years, and died of the flux, leauyng behind him a perpetual fame
of his worthynesse and virtue.

Gundebalde king of Gorgoyne, who with a great multitude passed the Alps,
ouerranne a

Now ye shall understand, that after Theodoriche was made king of Italy by
the emperors consent, his daughter Amalasuntha followed in succession of the
dominion, who after the death of her own son Atalaricus, accepted her cousin
Theodatus for companion in her kingdom, but he rendryng ill for good, found
means not only to exile her, but also to make her die: to the intent he might
reign alone. Which unkind dealyng so much offended his own Gothish nation,
that they elected an other king in Rome, named Vitigius, who shortly caused
Theodatus to be slain by treason, and yet he him self prospered not long
after. For er he had fully reigned.v. years, Bellisarius, a captain sent by
the emperor Justinian, recovered all Italy, besieged Vitigius in Rauenna, and
finally took him prisoner, and so led him to Constantinople.

When the Goths had a litel renewed their strength, they made Totila their
king, ouerranne all Italy, and Narses, an other of the emperors capitaines
came puissantly into Lumbardy, and in a sore foughten battle slew Totila,
with a great number of his nation.

Notwithstanding that discoumfiture the Goths a Teia, a veraie valiant man,
that wonderfully defended his dominion against the power of Narses: but finally
in plain battle Narses slew him, and so discoumfited his army, that the
Goths were constreigned to submit them selfs unto the emperors
obeisaunce, and from that time forth (being borne of two or three descen^es
in Italy) they were no more known for Goths, but taken for Italians, and
there ended the Gothishe name: Which from the coming of Theodoricus, before
named, had reigned in Italy the space of.72. years.

A meruailouse mattier to see the instabilitee of these worldely things: that
the Roman empire, which so many years before had triumphed in richesse and
wealth over the whole world, should now be subject unto all calamitee and
affliction. Rome it self.iiii. times taken by force within the space of.140.
years, Rome destroyed.iiii. times.
the walls in many places thrown to the earth, the inestimable goodly
buildings of temples and palaices burned and spoiled, the infinite treasures
of money, iewelles, and other ornaments put to sack, or hid under the
ground by the owners, where it could never be found: neither man woman nor
child spared of the enemies furiouse swoorde, and finally brought to that
case, that it was more than an whole year desolate without any creature to
dwell in it, other than the wild beasts. And not Rome alone, but also the
most part of all the notable citees of Italy were thus afflicted for the time.

But when the Gothish nation was thus subdued, Italy returned to the obedience
of the empire: and was governed by the forenamed Narses, by the space of.17.
years: till after the death of the emperor Justinian, Iustine the secounde of
that name succeeded, whose wife Sophia, thorough instigacion of some gentilmen
of the Narses) kendled her housband the emperor so much, that he revoked
Narses from the rule of Italy, with injurious words of the empress, that had
bosted, she would set him amongst her women to spinne and to make clothe,
which she said was meeter for him than to rule such a country. But the
noble heart of Narses conceived so great an unkindness of this, that (after he
had answered her) he would spinne such a clothe, as another she nor her vile
housbande should be hable to wear out, he secre^ly sent into Pannonia to
Alboinus king of the Longobardi, now called Lumbardes, exhortyng him to come
into Italy: how be it, ere he came, Narses repented him, and did what he
could to have let^ed it: but as he travailed therein (being come to Rome) with
John^ the third bishop of the same, having now delaied the Lumbardes coming a
few years, he died, had his body carried to Constantinople, and there was
honorably buried.

This Narses with Bellisarius before named, were two of the noblest capitaines
that ever served the Romayne Emperors.

Incontinently after the death of Narses, the forenamed Alboinus, with an
infinite number of men women Alps and the Appenine hills, naming it after
their name Lumbardie. And not withstandyng that the emperors for the space
of.180. years, made continual wars against them by their generalles, whom
they called Exarkes, yet could they never so abate and vanquishe the glory of
those Lumbardes, but that sometimes they would right well be revenged: so that
in effect they reigned over Lumbardie above, 200. years, till the coming of
Charlemaine, who in favor of the Romayne bishops, Desiderius.
warred against Desiderius last king of the said Lumbardes, took and led him
prisoner into France.

In all which time of the Lumbardes prosperytee, there reigned amongst
them.23. kings, whose names hereafter follow.

Rosamunda.



Flauius, took to wife Theodolinda, the kings daughter of Bauarie, a woman
that by persuasion of Gregory the first, bishop of Rome, secretly embraced
the Christian faieth, and after converted her next housdande to the same.

Turine, married Theodolinda after the death of her other housbande, and so
being made king, through his wifes procurement, he became a Christian.

Theodolinda, and after her death, was driven out of his realm.

Arioldus, of whom I find nothing notable.



Rotharius was slain by one that found him in adoultrie with his wife.

Arithpertus, through feigned flight obtained a notable

Gundibertus, son unto Arithpertus, contended so

Grimoaldus, took the astate from the children of Arithpert, Theodorus the
Ex^rke, that the emperor in a great rage came him self with a mighty army
into Italy, and after he had ouerranne the country of Puglia, and taken the
city of Luceria, which he put to fire and swoorde, at last he besieged
Beneuento, where happened one notable thing worthy the rehersall.

Romoaldus son to the king Grimoaldus was than within Beneuento, and
^aliauntly defended the city against the Greeks, sendyng word by a foster
father of his named Gensualdus, unto his father, that unless he would shortly
send succors, the city must needs be taken. Gensualde did his message, and
retournyng with answer was taken of the enemies, and brought before the
emperor. Where being straightly examined, he confessed, that Grimoalde withal
the power of Lumbardie was departed from Pauia, and came to reise the siege:
and that he him self was the messenger of his coming. Wherefore the emperor
hopyng incontinently to have the town, and so to depart before the coming of
Grimoalde, partly with thretenyng, and partly with fair offers, persuaded
Gensualde, that being brought before the town, he should show Romoalde, how
his father through other business of importance could not than succor him.
Gensualde promisyng so to do, was brought to the walls, and called for
Romoalde, who forthwith appeared. Romoalde (said he) thy father is here at
hand, with a puissaunt army to succor the. I left him passing the river of
Sanguine: be good to my wife and children, for I am but dead, and so it proved*
for his head was stricken of, and for despite with an engine thrown into the
town. Whereupon Constantine with his army retired to Naples, and from thense
to Rome, where he was most honorably received of bishop Vitellian, withal
the clergy and nobilitee. But he in recompense of that honor, fell to robbyng
and spoylyng of all the goodly things that he found there, as well marble,
brass and peinture, as other richesse, insomuche that he took the tile of
brass, wherewith the temple of Pantheon was covered, and shipped all that he
got. So that Rome in a manner suffered more hurt and spoil in.vii. days that
he remaigned there, than it did by any overthrow from the first coming of the
Lumbardes. And yet he enjoyed not, for retournyng toward Greece he was slain
by his own men in the city of Syracusa: and all those preciouse things taken
afterward by the Sarasines, and carried to Alexandria in Egypt: where many of
them may be seen at this day. But to return unto my purpose. Grimoaldus
died of to much streignyng his arm after he had been letten bloudde.

Grimoaldus, reigned.iii. months only and died.

Partharus, soonne of Arithpert before named, that

Iunipertus or Compertus, son of Partharus succeeded

Laimpertus, or Luitpertus, son of Iunipertus, being Asprandus fully.viii.
months, but that Raimpertus Duke of Turine rebelled, and in plain battle
overcame Asprandus, and so usurped the kingdom.

Raimpertus reigned not fully a year.

Arithpertus, son of Raimpertus, was much disturbed Asprandus. Nevertheless
in the.xi. year of his reign Asprandus, with help of the king of Bauarie,
returned puissantly unto Italy, fought with Arithpert, and so discomfited him,
that in his flight passing the river of Tesino, he was drowned, by reason he
had ouerladen him self with gold.

Asprandus reigned but.iii. months and died.

Luitprandus, son of Asprandus, was a great warrior, Rauenna, and many other
citees from the emperors Exarke, at last he besieged Rome. Nevertheless at
the intercession of his gossippe the french king, he leauied his siege, and
restored to the Romans those castles and towns that he before had taken from
them.

Aldeprandus, nephewe of Luitprandus, lived not

Rachis or Lachis, as some call him, Duke of Turine, was next king, who after
many gifts made to the church of Rome, when he had reigned.vi. years, left
his crown, and became a monk.

Stephen then bishop, called Pepine the French king twice into Italy against
him, and constreigned him to obey the Romayne See, and at last being on a day a
huntyng, he died sodeinely of an appoplexi.

Desiderius, his wife and children prisoners with him into France, furnyshyng
the whole regyon of Lumbardie with officers and rulers of his own nation.

The end of the Lumbardes reign.
Thus ended the reign of the Lumbardes, which had continued more than.200.
years.

It is now to be understood, that shortly upon the coming of Alboinus into
Italy, diverse citees and provinces of the same (as their strength and time did
serve them) used their own libertees, and leauyng the imperial laws, made
new orders and officers amongst them selfs. Wherefore the emperor Justinius
sent a general of his into Italy, named Longinus, ordeinyng him to be called
Exarke, which should be chief over all other officers.

This Exarke passing by Rome, came to Rauenna, and there kept his astate,
appoynctyng the governance of Rome to a Duke: so that many years after there
were no mo Consulles made: which office together with the most part of all
the other Romayne magistrates, kept their ancient form unto that time, not
withstandyng that the emperors had taken from them all manner of auctoritee,
except the only governance of the city.

From Longinus unto the coming of king Pepine into Italy, the emperors held
in manner contynuall war with the kings of Lumbardy by their Exarkes: but
after Pepine had overcome the king Aristolphe (who before had subdued the
Exarke of Rauenna) he gave the lands of that Exarcate to the church: A great
part whereof the bishop of Rome holds to this day.

And because that from the time of Honorius hitherwardes I can not find that
any emperor had quiet dominion over Italy, or was at any time resident there,
I therefore omit to rehearse the emperors names that have reigned syns, and
woull conclude, how by Charlemaines time, the empire that before had none other
title than of Rome, (whereof it took original) was utterly divided in two,
Oriental^ and Occidentall, the occasion whereof was this.

Leo the.iii. successor unto Adrian bishop of Rome, was chased away by the
Romans, and fled to king Charlemaine for succor, who not only restored
him to his bishopriche, but also for a more terror to the Romans, with a
great power came to Rome in his own person: where on Christmas day, for a
reward of his travail, the bishop and clergy proclaimed him emperor.

Some write, that Charlemaine was very loath to take it upon him, till he had
practiced first with Hirena, than Empress of Constantinople, and after with
Niceforus next emperor following, and obteygned both their consentes.

In effect Charlemaine was crowned, took on him the empire: and his son Pepine
was entitled king of Italy. And after they had attempted to chase the greeks
clean out of the same, they accorded with Niceforus to divide the east empire
from the weast, limittyng the Duchi^ of Beneuento to be as a confyne or bound
between them both.

And thus, sens Charlemaine, the occidentall empire continued under the French
dominion, Elecion of the emperor.
till Gregory the.v. bishop of Rome transported the election of the emperor
unto the princes of Germany, which to this dai endures. Like as on the other
side the Oriental empire continued in Constantinople in the hands of
Christians, till Machome^ the second of that name emperor of the Turks, took
the city by force, slew the emperor Sigismonde, and consequently enjoyed the
whole Greekish empire, as his successors do unto this day.

The descripcion of Rome.
THynkyng to find a great contentacion in the sight of Rome, because that
amongst all the citees of the world none has been more famous than it, I
disposed my self to go thither. But when I came there, and beheld the
wonderful maiestee of buildings that the only roots thereof do yet
represent, the huge temples, the infinite great palaices, the unmeasurable
pillars, most part of one piece, fine marble, and well wrought, the goodly
arches of triumph, the baines, the cunductes of water, the images as well of
brass as of marble, the Obeliskes, and a noumbre of other like things, not to
be found again thoroughout an whole world: imaginyng withal, what maiestee
the city might be of, when all these things flourished, Than did it grieve
me to see the only jewel, myrrour, maistres, and beauty of this world,
that never had her like, nor (as I think) never shall, lie so desolate and
disfigured, that there is no lamentable case to be hard, or lothesome thing to
be seen, that may be compared to a small part of it. Nevertheless when I
remembered again the occasions, whereof these gloriouse things have grown,
what noumbres of wars the Romans have mainteygned, with infinite
bloudsheddyng, destructions of whole countries, rauishmentes of chaste women,
sack, spoil, tributes, oppression of common welthes, and a thousand other
tyrannies, without the which the Romans could never have achieued the
perfection of so many wonders as mine eye did there behold: Than perceived I,
how just the judgment of god is, that has made those antiquitees to remain
as a foul spoil of the Roman pride, and for a witness to the worlds end
of their tyranny. So that I wot not whether of these two is greater either the
glory of that fame, that the Romans purchased with their wonderful
conquestes: or their present miserable astate, with the deformitee of their
antiquities.

Of the river of Tyber.
THE river of Tyber, which renneth through Rome, divides Tuscane and
Champaigne, so that Transtyberim, and the Vaticane, wherein stands S. Peter's
church, with the bishops palaice and castle Saint Angelo, are in Tuscane: and
the rest on the other side of the water, which is very Rome in deed, is in
Champaigne.

The distance between the city and the sea called Mare Tirrhenum, is.xv.
miles. And all be it, the river be great, deep, and large enoughe for an
haven, from the sea to Rome, yet most commonly the ships can come no nearer
than Ostia, which is.xii. miles from Rome, partly by reason of the stream
that reuneth very swift, and partly by reason of the wonderful quantitee of
mudde, that being brought down with the swift course of the water, lies
commonly at the mouth of the haven. So that all the merchandise, vittails, and
other things that come by ship, ar discharged at Ostia into certain small
vessels, and so brought to Rome: either drawn by cord, or rowed up by force
of ores.

The head or first spryng of Tyber is in the Appenine hills, The head^ of
Tyber,
somewhat higher than the head of the river Arno, that renneth through
Florence, and er ever it come at Rome, it receives.42. other rivers: So that
it is no marvel, though it be deep, specially in Rome and to the seawardes,
where it appears, that the natural breadth of it is restreigned: and by force
of strong banks made much narower than his ancient course has been.

Of the bridges.
Upon this river of Tyber in Rome be.iiii. bridges, the first and fairest is it
that passes from the city unto castle. S. Angelo, Ponte di S* Angelo. Ponte
del Castello. Ponte Sisto Ponte rotto
under the which the river coming from the North toward the South, enters
into the city. And is commonly called Ponte di Sant' Angelo, or del Castello.

The second is Ponte Sisto otherwise called Ponte rotto, a very goodly bridge,
that leads from the street now called Iulia, unto the foot of the hylle
aunciently called Ianiculus in Transtyberim.

The third is called Ponte de Pisola, Ponte de Pisona. Ponte di S.
Bertholomeo, Ponte di quatuor Capora. Ponte di S. Maria*
Ponte di San Bartholomeo, or Ponte di quatuor Capora, which passes from the
heart of the city through the island Tyberina into Transtyberim.

The fourth next to the going forth of the river out of the city at the South
is called Ponte di Santa Maria.

But to satisfy them that be learned, I think mete to rehearse here the names
of the.viii. bridges, Sublicius, Palatinus, Fabricius, Cestius, Ianuclensis,
Vaticanus, Elius and Miluius: and to declare where they stood.

Sublicius.
First Sublicius, which Horatius alone defended in the wars of Porsena, was
at the foot of the hill Auentine, where now is no bridge at all, and first it
was made of timber, afterward of stone by Emilius Lepidus, for the which he
was surnamed Lapideus, but finally it was made of marble by Antonius Pius, and
now decayed to the foundacions: whereof part are yet to be seen.

Palatinus. Fabricius. Cestius.
The second Palatinus, is now called di Santa Maria.

The third and fourth, Fabricius next the city side, and Cestius, on the
side of Transtyberim, ar the two bridges that pass through the island Tyberina.

Januclensis Vaticanus.
The.v. Ianuclensis, is now called Ponte Sisto.

The.vi. Vaticanus, is decayed to the foundation, part whereof is seen against
the hospital di San Spirito.

The.vii. Elius, is now called del Castello.

Elius. Miluius.
The.viii. Miluius, is.ii. mile northwardes out at the gate called del popolo,
in the way to Tuscane: and is called at this day Ponte Molle.

Of the walls.
THe circuit of the city about by the walls, as Pliny writes, was in his
time.xx. miles: and Flauius Vopiscus says, that the emperor Aurelius.200.
years before the coming of the Goths, enlarged the circuit of Rome to.50.
miles: whether these authors included the suburbs I can not tell: but ones
there can be seen no sign or token of any walls, that should conteigne so
much compass: nor yet of the walls that Liuie mencioneth, should be made of
square stone* For the walls now about Rome are of brick, and in my judgment
pass not.xiiii. miles in compass. Nor I can not perceive, either by mine own
eye, or by writing of authors, or yet by report, that ever the walls were of
greater circuit than they be at this present. It is evident, that many parts
of the same wall have been thrown to the earth by diverse enemies, and repaired
again. For notwithstanding it be builded of brick, yet does it show such
an antike maiestee (having.365. towers agreeable with the noumbre of days in
the year) that he who sees it, must needs confess, it could never be builded
but in time of the Romans glory. Perchance some will marvel, how brick
should so long continue: but their brick, whether it be long of good
making, or of the heat of the soonne that dries much better than with us, is
wonderful durable. For there be many buildings in Rome of brick, that have
continued these.1000. years and more: and yet to this hour are nothing worn
or decayed. In deed many gates of the city are of square stone, wrought after
the most antike facion: so that it is not incredible, as Liuie writes, that
the walls have been of square stone, but it should not seem so, because that
in making of a new wall in the same place, it is to be supposed, the builders
would have used the old square stone, rather than brick.

Of the gates.
Pliny writes, that in his time were.xxx. gates open, and.vii. closed, but
because he has not written their names, I woull not travail to try what they
were. For I can find but.xvi. that are used: Of which.iiii. are in the
Vaticane, that many years after Pliny, was walled by Leo the.4. bishop of
Rome, for defense of his own palaice and of saint Peter's church.

Porta de popolo. flu tuentana. Flaminia. P. Pinciana. Collatina. P. Salaria.
Quirinalis. Aegonalis. P. di sant' Agnese. Uiminalis. Figulensis Numentana. P.
di San Lorenzo. Tiburtina Exquilina. P. Maggi ore Neuia. Labicana. Prenestina
P. di. San Hioanni. Celimo^tana. Asinaria. P. Latina* P. di S. sebastiano.
Appia. Capena. Triumphalis. P. di San Paolo. Trigemina. P. Portese di Ripa. P.
di. S. Pancratio Aurelia. P. del Torrione. P. Portusa. P. di Beluedere. di San
Piero. del Giardino. di. S. Peregrino. P. del Castello. Posterula
First next unto the coming down of Tyber on the northsyde, is the gate called
Porta del popolo, which aunciently has had diverse names, as Flumentana and
Flaminia of the way Flaminia that went out thereat.

Than coming about toward the East, the next gate is called Pinciana,
sometime Collatina.

The.iii. Salaria, anciently called Quirinalis, or Aegonalis.

The.iiii. Porta di Sant' Agnese, sometime Viminalis, Figulensis and Numentana.

The v. Porta di San Lorenzo, sometime called Tiburtina after some authors,
and after other Exquilina, though Andreas Fuluius affirms plainly Exquilina
to be between this and the next gate.

The.vi. Porta maggiore was sometime called Neuia, Labicana and Prenestina.

The.vii. Porta di San Hioanni has been called Celimontana, and Asinaria, by
reason it lies toward the reame of Naples, that bredeth many asses.

The.viii. Porta Latina has not changed name, or if it be changed, the
aunciente name can not be known now,

The.ix. Porta di San Sebastiano, was sometime called Appia and Capena, and
after most opinions was also called Triumphalis.

The.x. Porta di San Paolo, was sometime called Trigemina. All which.x. gates
are on the Champaigne side of the river.

The.xi. Porta portese, or Porta di Ripa.

The.xii. Porta di San Pancratio, sometime called Aurelia.

The.xiii. Porta del Torrione.

The.xiiii. Porta portusa, on the top of the hill behind saint Peter's.

The.xv. has diverse names, as Porta di Beluedere, di San Piero, del Giardino,
or di Santo Peregrino, and is hard under the bishops palaice.

The.xvi. Porta del Castello, sometime Posterula, lies under Castle Sant'
Angelo, and serves to go into the meadows. As for those ancient names,
Carmentalis Pandana, Mugonia, Queruetulana, Iauernalis, Rudusculana,
Rhuttumena, Carthularia, and diverse others, which as I suppose were old
gates, that lost their places as the walls were enlarged: I could never learn
where they should be, and therefore do believe they have been converted to the
use of other buildings.

These gates and walls about Rome are not strong, nor yet fortified with
rampires of earth or otherwise to defend shot of artillery, and in many
places are so decayed, that to assaute there needs not much battery. Many of
the gates have been excedyng fair, but like as most notable things there be
decayed: so are these rather a figure of their antiquitee, thanne any thing
else.

Of the.vii. hills.
THe.vii. hills, whereon Rome stands, are but of a small height, standing a
rewe upon the river side.

Auentinus.
The greatest of them Eastwardes is called Auentinus, wherein was the cave of
Cacus the giaunt that Hercules slew: and the fountain, where the gods Picus
and Faunus were taken by the policy of Numa, who geuyng them wine instead of
water, made them drunk, and so took them a sleep. And albeit, that on this
hill have been many goodly edifices, as the temples of Matuta, Diana, Minerua,
Lucina, Liberta, with diverse others, yet at this day there is nothing to be
seen, not so much as a token of Claudius notable conducte, that Frontinus and
Cassiodorus treat so much upon. For there is now none other buildyng, but the
monasteries of Santa Sabina, and Sant' Alesso, with a few other little
churches. The rest is either covered with rubbell, or occupied with vines.

Capitolinus
The next hille, first called Tarpeius, after Capitolinus, and now Campidoglio,
was the principal place of the city, such as for example the yield haul is
in London. For thither came all they that happened to be received with
triumph: and amongst all the buildings of the world Capitolium was compted
the goodlyest. For Cassiodorus says, It is a great wonder to behold the
market place of Traiane: But to clymbe up into the capitol, O there is the
excellency of all humayne wits to be regarded. Cicero calls it in many
places the habitacion of the gods: and Virgile the golden Capitoline. Whereof
at this day remains no more but an old house called the Senate, and the
church of Araceli. They say, that the temple of Jupiter optimus maximus was
there, where the church of San Saluator in massimi is now: and the temple of
Ianus custos, where the prisons be now called La Cancellaria. But of their
antiquitee appears at this day not so much as the bare foundacions.

Next unto Campidoglio is the hill Palatinus, Palatinus.
on the which the emperors, kings, consuls, and other chief officers had
their palaices, besides many famous temples that have been built there, whereof
remains none other now but the old ruins, and a church of saint Nicolas
not yet finisshed.

Here is to be noted, that these.iii. hills Auentinus, Capitolinus, and
Palatinus were only closed with walls by Romulus: so that Rome was nothing so
great in circuit at the first as it is now. But as the people multiplied, so
the other hills were taken in: as he that reads Liuie shall well perceive.
In effect, setting the rubbell and old monstruouse foundacions aparte, Rome
(as touching these.iii. hills) is returned deserte, pasture, and vineyardes,
as it was before the first foundation.

Next is the hill Celius, wherein is seen unto this day a part of the ancient
Roman maiestee, Celius.
by the meruailouse buildings that yet remaigne, not whole, but so that the
magnificence thereof may be comprehended: as the Amphitheatrum, now called
Colliseo, the conduites and baines, the great palaice, and a noumbre of fair
churches, translated from old temples.

Next unto this is Exquilius, which as Varro says, are two hills, Exquilius.
but they seem not so to me. In this part are Therme Dioclesiani, the pillar
of Adrian, the toure de i Conti, Trosei de Caio Mario, the gardeyn and toure of
Mecena^es so much renoumed, with diverse other things, and is well enhabited.

Viminalis. Quirinalis
Finally the hills, Viminalis and Quirinalis, lie so together, that I could
not divide them: But by estimacion and report they begin at the gate of S.
Agnes, and stretche down by Monte Cauallo unto Tyber, In which are few
notable things to be seen, except Monte Cauallo, Therme Constantiniane, Torre
delle militie, and a few others.

Now that part of the city that is called Transtyberim, Transtyberim.
is divided in two, that is to wete the Vaticane and Ianiculum.

The Uaticane was walled about by Leo the.iiii. bishop, Vaticane.
and called Citta Leonina after his own name, and is well known from
Ianiculum, because that going from the one to the other, Porta Septimiana.
Subtus Janum. Fontinalis. Janiculum.
it behooves to pass through the gate called Septimiana, sometimes called
Subtus Ianum, or Fontinalis: Whereby it is evident, that the Vaticane or Borgo
San Piero (as they now call it) was never any part of Rome until Leos time.
But Ianiculum in Transtyberim was iuigned unto Rome by Ancus Martius.iiii. king
of the Romans, and is affyrmed to be the same city, that the god Ianus
builded and dwelled in, like as many write Saturnia, that Saturn builded, was
against it on the other side of the water, in the place that we call now
Campidoglio: though some hold opinion it should be at Sutri.

Of the conduites of water.
FRontinus writes, that for the space of.441. years after the edificacion of
Rome, the Romans used none other but the water of Tyber, or of such wells
and sprynges as were found within the city. But from the time of Appius
Claudius they have had so much water brought by conduites upon arches, through
the mountains, and some under ground, that no city of all the world could
be better served. And the manner was this. When they had taken a spryng, and had
brought the water of it to the city, than was there a place made to receive
it, closed about with walls like a castle: from the which, pipes were laid
to serve as well the common people in the open streets, as also the nobility,
and such as were hable to have water in their own houses. And so (as Strabo
writes) it seemed that rivers ran haboundauntly through the city, and almost
every house had chanelles and conduites with cesternes to preserve the water.
For Marcus Agrippa in one year caused.700. pondes.105. fountaignes, and 130.
castelles to be made, besides a number of other goodly edifices for the
maintenance of these fresh waters: amongst which I shall recite the
principallest.

First the water called Appia was conueyghed upon high arches of stone out of
the Lucullane territory the space of.viii. miles, Aqua Appia.
and brought in between the hill Auentine and the hill Celius: but now there
remains nothing of them that can be seen.

Aqua Martia. Anfeia. Traiana.
An other, Aqua Martia, sometime called Anfeia, lastly Traiana, came out of the
lake Fucinus, and served principally to drink, where most part of the rest
served for other uses: and this was brought by mine through the mountains and
by arches above ground.xxiii. miles.

Claudia.
Aqua Claudia was brought.35. miles from.ii. fountains Ceruleus, and Curtius,
part of the way upon wonderful arches of square stone, which are yet to be
seen both within and many miles without the city. Pliny says, Pli. li.
36. not. histor.
that the conueighaunce of this water did cost.555. thousand sextertia, which
make above.lx. thousand talentes, and rekenyng every talent at.130.li.
sterlyng (which I think was the least) the sum amounts to.vii. millions
and.viii. hundred thousand pounds of our money: which as it seems a sum
impossible to be gathered together, and more incredible to be spent in one
work, so is the maiestee of that buildyng wonderful, that in manner I am
abashed to write the troth thereof: for I would not have believed it my self,
if I had not seen it. And Frontinus writes, that these arches in some places
were.109. foot high.

Than was there the old and the new Auiena, the one whereof was brought.xlii.
miles of, Auiena.
and at length ioygneth with the water Claudia, and is received upon those
arches before mentioned.

Diverse other waters there were, to long here to reckon, because of all these
waters that were wont to come to Rome, can be found no more at this day but
one, called Triuiana, and aunciently named Virginia, which renneth under the
ground by the gate Pinciana, Triuiana. Virginia.
and sourgeth under the hill called Monte degli hortuli: from whense it is
conueighed abroad to serve al parts of the city, because in Rome there is
none other good water to drink.

Of the decaie not only of these conduites, Opinions of the decai of the
antiquitees.
but also of the other antiquitees be diverse opinions. Some affirm, that the
Goths, the Vandales, and the other barbarouse nations, that so often destroyed
Rome, were causers and doers of it. Some other ascribe the fault to time,
mother and consumer of all things. Other say, that another the barbarouse
nations, nor yet time ought to be blamed for it, but rather the greedy
beastliness of them, that both within the city and without, regarded not to
spoil those noble antiquitees, to garnisshe and beautify therewith their
private buildings.

Of the Thermes.
YOu shall understand, that the Romans used oftentimes to bathe them
selfs, wherefore at the first, private men made them stewfes or hotehouses of
their own: But afterward (as a thing necessary for the common wealth) The
emperors gave them selfs to the making of these Thermae. Of which Blondus
rekeneth.xii. and Fuluius says.xviii. namyng them Agrippine, Neroniane,
Alexandrine, Titiane, Dioclesiane, and the rest. These were not only common
baines for washyng, but also sumptuouse haules, goodly chaumbres, fair walkyng
places, and every other gallaunt buildyng, that might serve for the commoditee
of them that thither resorted. The pauementes were of fine marble wrought in
colors, the vaultes susteigned on rich pillars of porfirie and finest marble
of one piece, A noumbre of hotehouses in every Therme, some several, and some
common, with lodginges according, and offices assigned for the service of them
that would eat there, besides all other pleasures that were to be imagined.
Insomuche that the emperors them selfs many times would come thither
openly, and be washed in the common houses. For it is written that the
emperor Adrian entered on a day into one of the baynes, and findyng an old
soldier there rubbing him self against the marble stones, asked him why he
did so: The soldier answered, because he had no servant. Adrians courtesy,
and wisdom.
This aunsweare so much pleased the emperor, that straight way he not only
gave this soldier a servant, but also honestly wherewith to mainteigne him.
Through the fame whereof the next day when the emperor came to the same bayne,
diverse old men were gotten in before, and were likewise rubbyng them selfs:
who being demanded why they did so, aunsweared, because they had no
servants. But Adrian perceiuyng their entente, called them to him, and
showed them how they might well enough one rub an other.

Of all these goodly Thermes, there remains none other but the broken
walls, and the old monstruouse ruins, specially of those two that were the
greatest, Antoniane, and Dioclesiane, whose hugeness may be reckened as a
wonder amongeste the buildings of the world.

Of the Naumachie.
THere were certain pondes of water called Naumachiae, made of purpose so
large, that small ships might mete in them. For like as the Romans were
diligent in bryngyng up their youth in feats of cheualrie, So also they
exercised them in practice of the water, to make them no less expert by sea
than by land. For the which these Naumachie were made, specially for the
triumphyng days, when they used to fight ship with ship: and when also on the
land the horsemen should be prouyng of their strengthes. So that in one
spectacle you should behold the feats of arms both by sea and land, as
most commonly in Circulo maximo it was wont to be. But at this day there
scarcely appears any sign or token of those pondes, save that every man
there can tell where some of them have been: as that before the froute of
Palazzo maggiore, an other under Monte de glihortuli, and one of Neros in the
Uaticane. For now thorough lack of water, sens the decaie of the conduites,
they are become dry ground, and converted into gardens, pastures, and other
uses.

Of the arches of triumph.
THe Romans used to edify certain arches, and to dedicate them unto the
names and memory of such as had conquered strange countries, or returned
victorious^ly from daungerouse battles. For the which they were received
triumphantly into the city, sittyng on a rich chario^te, drawn with.iiii.
white steedes, and their notable prisoners and spoil before them, with goodly
representacions of the gotten citees, towns, countries and other things: and
so passing through the city, should ride unto the temple of Jupiter in
Capitolio.

There have been many of these arches, but at this day.iiii. only are to be
known, that is to wete of Constantine, of Titus, of Seuerus, and of Domitian.

Arcus Constantini.
The first of Constantine stands on the corner of the hill Palatinus, a little
besides Coliseo, and is yet me^ely fair to behold, were it not that the fine
carved figures on both sides wrought in the hard marble, are battered, and
almost defaced by the weather.

Arcus Titi.
The next of Titus and Vespasianus, is in the midst of the way called Sacra,
wherein may be seen the representacion of the chariotte of triumph, with the
*xii. sergeauntes on the one side, and on the other the spoils of Jerusalem,
that is to wete the golden candeltricke of seven branches, the two tables of
Moses, the golden table* and vessel of the temple, with diverse other things:
which as Joseph writes, were laid up in the temple of peace.

Arcus Se^eri.
The arche of Septimius Seuerus stands in the old market place, now called
Piazza Romana, at the foot of Campidoglio: and this is the fairest of all the
other, having finely graven on both sides the representacions of his battles
and victories, as well by sea, as by land, with the title in fair Roman
letters, to whom it was dedicated.

Finally in the way Flaminia, Arcus Domitiani.
hard by the church of saint Laurence in Lucina, is the arche of Domitian
as they say: and is now called L'arco di Tripoli, nothing of beauty
comparable to any of the rest.

These arches are as it were gatehouses to pass thorough, but the finesse of
the marble, and curiouse workemanshippe shows well, that they were excedyng
sumptuouse, and more beautiful than any other kind of buildyng.

Of Theaters.
LIke as the Romans in their wars, triumphs, and buildings exceded all
other nations of the world, even so did they in their feasts and spectacles:
that is to wete in their plays and sightes devised for pleasure and recreacion.

One while they recited comedies, an other while they used diverse soundes of
instruments to the Pandomimo, who was one that with signs would counterfayte
all manner of men, and declare his conceit as evidently, as if he should have
spoken. Sometime they had a number of wild beasts brought in, as Elephantes,
Lions, Tygres, and other like, against whom, men that were either condemned to
death, taken in the wars, or foolehardie fellows thereunto hired, should be
put to fight: and toren to pieces, unless their chance were wonderful.
Sometime again the masters of fence with their scholars, and many times the
soldiers, would enter with their sharp swoordes, and there kill one another,
to try them selfs valiant. Sometime they wrastled, sometime they iusted,
and sometime they fought as it were in plain battle, as well by water as by
land, with other like pastymes to long here to rehearse.

To behold these things, at the beginning every man took such place as he
could get, but in process of years when their common wealth flourished, than
they devised certain skaffoldes of board, with grices or steps one above an
other, and fastened them on great beams made after the form of an half
circle, for the commoditee of the more number of people to sit upon. Whereof
Pliny says thus: Behold the people Conqueror of other countries, and lord
of all the world, they that overthrow realms and nations, give law to
strangers, and be as it were a certain divine thing amongst the humayne
generacyon, stand here nevertheless dangerously on an engine, reioysyng
while they be in peril.

Theatrum.
This engine of tymbre was called Theater, and the first that ever made any in
Rome was Marcus Scaurus, whose Theater received fourscore thousand persons,
and served for.30. days only. But to ease the great charges that the buyldyng
of such Theaters required from time to time, Pompeius builded one of square
stone, sufficient for.80. thousand persons: which Theater Nero at the
receiuyng of Tiridates king of Armenie, caused to be gilte clean over in a
day.

Many of these Theaters have been in Rome, but the most notable were these.iii.
of Pompeius, or Marcellus and of Cornelius Balbus: of which there remaigneth
so little memory at this day, that almost no man can tell where they stood.

Finally the Amphitheatre, now called Coliseo, Amphitheatrum. Coliseo.
is yet standing, one of the perfectest to be seen amongeste all the
antiquitees of Rome, and may in deed be accounted one of the wonders of the
world. For though part of it be already fallen down, and the rest decaiyng
daily, yet is it not so defaced, but that you may see perfectelie, what it
has been, as well for the meruaylouse height, great circuit, and fair stone:
as also for the excellent workmanship and proporcion. It is round both
without and within, from the ground within vpwardes, it ryseth uniformly one
step above an other staierwise to a very great height: so that to behold the
show in the bottom, which I think is above.300. yardes in compass, there
might sit an hundred thousand persons at their ease. And because they used
to gravel the ground, when any great pastyme should be, therefore in the
latin tongue some aucthours have called it Arena: Arena.
notwithstanding they have known the name to be Amphitheatrum, which
signifies two Theaters ioygned togethers, and after most opinions this
Amphitheatre was builded by Vespasian and his son Titus.

There is also an other Amphitheatre yet to be seen, edified by Statilius
Taurus: but it is so decayed, that it scarcely deserves to be spoken of.

Of the cercles.
AS for the cercles, Circu^^.
which served to like purposes of spectacles, because there is none of them
at this day, that has any similitude of their ancient being: I can say
nothing to them.

Of the porches.
OF the solemn and sumptuouse porches or vaultes, that many aucthours write,
were made thorough all the principal streets of Rome, to cover the people from
son and rain, there be none now any thing like, neither for the pillars, nor
yet for the proporcion. Where is the porche of Nero, that Tranquillus writes,
extended foorthright.iii. thousand paces? Where be the porches of Liuia, or
Octauius, and of his sister Octauia, of Pompeius, of Seuerus, and of many
others? Amongst all of that sort there is but one remaignyng, which stands
before the door of the temple Pantheon, situate on.xvi. wonderful fair
pillars, set in.iii. rows.

Of temples.
THe temple of Pantheon is the perfectest of all the antiquitees, Pantheon.
and stands whole unto this day. It is round, and has but one gate to
enter in at: the doors whereof are of brass, very great and antike. The
circuit within forth is very large, and the height proporcionable. The roof
is all vaulted like the half of an egg, of so great compass, that it is a
wonder to behold: and in the very top is a great round hole, through
which the temple receives light. For other wyndow it has none, and yet is
the light so much, that if all the sides were made in wyndowes, it could give
no more: under the which in midst of the floor is such holow provision
made, that the rain passes away without offendyng the eye or the place.
Finally the walls are furnisshed round about with fair marble, and a noumbre
of goodly pillars: so that the temple being old, S. Maria Rotonda.
is yet thought goodlier than any new buildyng that can be found, and is now
called Santa Maria Rotonda.

Many other temples have been in Rome, that for the most part are likewise
converted into churches, which to descriue should be an endless work. But
because of the alteracion and ruin that time has wroughte, their true
antiquitee can not be declared: Wherefore I will show where some stood, and into
what churches some other have been converted.

The ancient temple of Romulus is now called San Cosmo^e Damiano, Templuni
Romuli.
not much unlike the buildyng of Pantheon, with the porche before, and the
gates likewise of brass.

The ruin of the temple of peace, T. Pa^is.
which was the beautifullest and richest of all the world, is yet to be seen
between Palazzo and Exquilie.

The temple of Ianus, T. Jani.
which was never open but in time of war, was nere unto the church now
called San Georgio in Velabro.

The temple of Isis is now called, T. I^idis.
Santa Maria in Aquiro.

The temple of Minerua is now a house of friars called Santa Maria Sopra la
Minerua. T. Minerue.


And the temple of Pallas was in the place before the T. Palladis*
porche of Faustina, now called Pallara.

As for the temples of Fortune and Concord, which were many, besides a
noumbre of temples dedicated to the other gods and goddesses, there is none
now worthy to be seen.

Of the pyllers.
IT shall be necessary to declare, that there be.iii. kind of pyllers, round,
square, and stryped. These are always of one piece, and the chapter of the
pillar called in latin Epistylium, is the stone that stands on the top of
the pyller, like as the base called basis in latin, is the stone that the
pillar stands on. Of which bases there be.iiii. sundry facions, Ionici,
Dorici, Italici, and Corinthij, or Tusculani, as Vitruuius writes. These
kinds of pyllers were so common amongeste the Romans, that almost he was no
man, that had not a number of pyllers in his house, of white, red, or diverse
colored marble, or of porphyrie, or other like rich stone: for the graie is
not accoumpted marble in Italy, but graie stone. So that to consider the
infinite number of these pyllers that were in Rome, and that yet amongeste the
old ruins are to be seen, it seems a wonder where they should be had, and
what a treasure they cost. For I have seen diverse almost two fathom about,
and above.40. foot high. And nothing more earnestly desired I, than to see
some of those wonderful temples or edifices upon pyllers in their old facion,
with the presence of some of those ancient Romans, that with their naked
maiestee durst pass through the power of their victoriouse ennemies, as Liuie
writes, that Caius Fabius did, when the frenchemen had gotten Rome, and
besieged the Capitol. But to my purpose.

Besides these pillars of one stone they used in Rome certain pyllers called
Structiles, Structiles*
that were made of diverse stones. These were dedicated to the perpetual
memory of the worthy emperors, as the two that yet stand do well
witness.

The tone is called the pillar of Traiane, Columna Traiani.
which is 123. foot high, and has a staier of.195. steps withinfoorth,
whereby I have gone to the top. It has 45. little wyndowes that give light
inward, and is all of white marble, so well and finely graven, with the
stories of all Traians wars and victories, that it should seem impossible to
peincte a thing better.

The other pillar dedicate unto Antoninus Pius, Piazza Colonna.
much after the same sort, has his wars and doings set forth in figures
graven, and is.63. foot higher, but much more decayed than Traianes pillar:
for it is clefte almost from the top to the base, so that if it be not looked
unto the sooner (as I think it shall not) it must needs fall.

There was such an other pillar made all of porphirie, which Constantine took
down, and carried to Constantinople. Besides diverse other pillars, as one of
Caesar, an other called Milliarium aureum, Moenia, and Lactaria, and many more,
whereof no part remaigneth now that can be known.

Of Obeliskes.
OBeliscus is a stone, that being broad and square at the foot, ascends
proporcionally to a sharp poincte. Of which sort of stones, there be but
viii. now to be seen in Rome: notwithstanding that Fuluius affyrmeth, there
have been.vi. great and.42. small.

These Obeliskes were first invented by the Egyptians, and dedicated to the
son, not only because it has the likeness of the son beam, but also
because they used by the shadow thereof to try diverse conclusions of
Astronomy, and specially the hours of the day: as by diverse caractes and
figures that are yet seen in some of them, it does evidently appear.

And a wonder it is to think, what an unreasonable entreprise it was to dig
one of them out of the mountain, seeing it could not be had but by cuttyng
away all the ground and rock about it.

In effect there is but one of them standing, which is in the Vaticane, on
the southsyde of saint Peter's church, La Guglia
called La Guglia, being.72. foot high of the very stone it self, besides the
base and.iiii. great Lions of marble that it is set upon: and has on the top
a great ball of brass gilte, with the ashes of Caesar in it, as some hold
opinion.

Octauian August brought two very great ones from Heliopoli in Egypt, the one
whereof being.122. foot high, brake in two pieces, as they would have erected
it, and the other of.110. foot lies in Campo Mar^io.

There lies one in Girulo, that sometime was Salu^tus gardeine, and two other
lie besides the church of saint Roke, the one of them in the high way.

The other two are but small, and seem rather pieces than whole stones, the
one is in the gardeine of Araceli in the Capitol: and the other is in the
street of San Macutio.

Of Pyramides.
THere is no more Pyramides in Rome but one, which the common people take to
be the sepulcher of Remus, but the letters graue^ therein witness it to be the
sepulcher of Caius Cestius, one of the.vii. men that was ordained over the
feasts of the solemn sacrifices. And whereas Liuie writes, that Remus was
buried in the hill Auentine, whereof it was named Remuria, it is manifest, that
this Pyramides was not his sepulcher, for it stands in the plain, and in the
very wall of the city, between the gate of San Paolo, and the hill
Testacchio. The facion of it is like unto a pointed dyamante, and is made of
square stone, so great at the foot, that ascendyng uniformly to the top, it
is higher than any tower of the wall.

In the high ways wihout the city specially Flaminia, Salaria, and Appia be
many like seen of much less quantitee: But for the most part they are
either decayed or decaiyng. Like as the Cimiteri, which were vaultes under
earth, that served of later time for Christian sepultures, which with other
like kind of buildings, by process of years are woren and come to naught.

Of Colosses and images.
COlossus signifies an unreasonable great image, such as that of Apollo, that
was brought out of Apollonia in Ponto, and set in the Capitol, whose height
was.xxx. cubits. Or that of Jupiter in Campo Martio, commonly called
Pompeianus. But above all that ever were, the Collose at Rodes exceded. For it
was.70. cubits high, and so proporcionate to that heighte, that liyng on the
earth (after it was shaken down by an earthquake) few men could embrace one
of the fingers, and many of the holowe places in the iointes, seemed valeis or
deep bottomes: so that it is written, the Sarasines after they had gotten
Rodes, laded above.900. Camelles with the brass that they piked out of that
Collose.

Nero caused one to be made of.120. foot high to his own likeness, and set
it in the porche of his golden house, which afterward was removed thense
unto the Amphitheatre, and thereof it is thought it took the name of Coliseo.

Finally I can find no more of these Colossi whole at this day but one head,
one hand, and a foot, that lie before the doors of the Conseruatori in the
Capitol.

It is true that in many places of Rome are seen wonderful pieces of marble,
that should seem to have been members of those Colossi: but they are in manner
clean defaced.

Likewise of the excellent images, both of brass and marble, as well of men as
of horse, many pieces yet remaigne: though scarcely worth the name of good
images, as they appear now.

Fuluius writes, that there were in Rome.24. horses of brass gilte, and.114.
of Iuorie, besides a number of men's images on horsbacke and on foot of marble
and other mattier. But of all these there are now none to be seen, saving one
of brass on horseback at Saint John Lateranes, which some ascribe unto
Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, some to Lucius Verus, and some to Seuerus: and an
other there is in the Capitol called, Jl gran Villano.

In deed there be diverse bodies without heads, I think because some
strangers delityng in those antiquitees, have broken of the heads to carry
them away.

Amongst all other Constantius, son of Constantine, being come out of Greece
to see Rome: and arriuyng in the street called Forum Traiani, rested all amassed
to behold the wonderful beauty thereof: and despayryng with him self to be
hable to bring to pass any of those things that were before his eyes, said,
he would see, whether he could make such an other horse of brass as was
there under Traiane in the midst of the markette place. Whereunto one of his
skillful men present, named Ormisda, aunsweared, that he were best first to
make such an other stable to put his horse in. And if emperors them selfs
have meruailed at these things, why should not other men wonder at them?

Of the hill Testacchio.
IF the common report be true, this hill is one of the notablest things
amongst the antiquitees of Rome: because (as they say) the Romans ordained,
that all tributes, which were brought yearly to Rome, should be laid in
pottes made of the earth of the countries from whens it came, which pottes
after the money was paid, should be brought to the place where this ^ill lies,
there to be broken and remaigne on an heap for a perpetual memory of the
Roman empire. And being well considered, it shall appear, that there can be
no devise like unto this, to have a thing endure for ever. For if the hill had
been made of any matter worth the cariyng away, it should have been spoiled
long er this time: but because there is nothing to be gotten, saving
potshardes, therefore it remaigneth whole as none other antiquitee does. And
although learned men allow not this vulgar opinion, thinking it has grown
rather of the broken pottes, that have been thrown out of the.vii. college of
potters, founded by Numa Pompilius, yet beholding advisedly the place, whereon
it stands, being the fairest plain within the walls of Rome, me seems it
half incredible, that the Romans would suffer so fair a ground to be
occupied with potshardes: unless there were some further purpose in it, than I
can imagine. For the hill is little lack of half a mile compass, higher a
great deal than any toure in the town wall, and so easy to get up on every
side, that I have ridden up at the one end, and down at the other: and yet is
the earth of it so thynne, that diggyng.iii. inches deep, you shall find
potshardes.

De Hippodromo.
Between this Testacchio and the hill Auentine is a fair grene aunciently
called Hippodromus, where some years at shroftide, the Romans use to this
day, to tourney on horsbacke, and among other pastimes, they tie two bulls to
the tail of a carte, and so drive the carte from the top of Testacchio down
into the plain, and he that first can take the carte and bulls, shall have
them: But if the bulls break lose, as many times they do, they make foul
work amongst the people er they be taken, so that sometimes they are feign to
kill them. Some hold opinion, that this play was first devised by
Tarquinius Priscus, to be celebrated in February in honor of the infernal
gods.

Of Graners and Arsenales.
ON the other side between Testacchio and Tyber have been.140. graners for
corn, long and large, as by some of the old foundacions it does yet
appear. And somewhat never the foot of the hill Auentine, were the sellers
and ^aultes for saulte, and all manner of merchaundise: with the Arsenales,
where their ships and galleys were made: of which at this day is scarce any
sign to be perceived.

Finally it were to tediouse a matter for me to speak of every notable thing
in Rome. For if Blondus, nor yet Fuluius Italians borne, dwelling in Rome, and
well learned men, have trauayled therein, and would not yet undertake fully to
descriue those antiquitees, should I a stranger, that tarried there but a
small time, enterprise to do it? And yet amongst all other I had almost
forgotten the sepulcher of Bacchus, that lies in a little old temple besides
the church of Saint Agnes without the walls, Sepulchru^ B^cchi.
more notable for the value of the stone than for the woorkemanship. For it is
of fine read porphirie, plain and square like a cheste, and so great, that
the only cover woull require a great force to lift it up: so that my guide
said meriely, if I had company sufficient to raise up this stone, I would one
night see what were within: meaning that the god Bacchus could not be buried
there without some treasure.

And to the intent that generally men may the better understand the sorts of
marble, and manners of buildyng, wherewith the city has been aunciently
beautified, I shall here rehearse one saying of Fuluius.

The saying of Fuluius.
The aunciente great buildings, as well public as private, for the most part
were founded upon great square stones, to the end that the weight and
substance of the buyldyng should be the more steadfast, every stone so ioigned
to other with iron claspes, that they neded no mortar. And than the wall from
the foundation vpwardes was made of stones, that weighed not paste a pound
weight a piece, laid together proporcionallie chekerwise. The front of the
buyldyng was most commonly wrought after the manner of a net, or pergetted
either with a fair white mixture, or else with Iesse, and some covered
finely with thin marble, or with certain plates of laten gilte. The vaultes
and roofes of the chaumbres were trymmed either with glass, with lead, with
Iesse, orels with very fine peintynges: and the floores under foot made some
of glass and some of the finest marble, or other pleasant devises of diverse
making.

They had many kinds of strange marble, Kinds of Marbles.
as white marble of the I Will of Paro and of Carrara, and that which comes from
Laconia the pleasauntest of all. The red marble not unlike the masarde, with
certain white spots, which they call porphirie. The blouddie marble that
grows in Troade. The black marble called Luculleus. The spotted marble
called Serpentine. The Onichite brought out of Arabie. The alabaster, and some
marble transparent, that is to be seen through, as the Fengite, with diverse
others.

Of the present astate of Rome.
OF the ground conteigned within the walls scarcely the thyrdde part is now
inhabited, and that not where the beauty of Rome has been, but for the most
part on the plain to the water side, and in the Uaticane: because that sens
the bisshoppes began to reign, every man has coueted to build as near the
court as might be. Nevertheless those streets and buildings that are there
at this time are so fair, that I think no city does excel it, by reason
they have had the beautifullest things of the antiquitees before rehearsed to
garnishe their houses withal. Specially the bishop, his Cardinals, prelates
and other members of his church, who have all at their commandment. For
though the Romans have in their hertes unto this day a certain memory of
their ancient libertee, which they have attempted many times to recover: yet
does the bishop keep them in such subjection, that they dare not ones steerre
for their lives, but speak they may what they list, so it be no treason: and
therefore many times you shall here them rail on the bishop and his officers
that it is a wonder. In effect the present astate of Rome in comparison of the
ancient astate deserves not to be spoken of, and yet I believe, that in the
Romans most glory, there was never half so much pomp used as now. O what
a world it is to see the pride and abhominacion, that the Churchemen there
mainteigne? What is a king? wha^ is an emperor in his maiestee? Any thing
like to the Roman bishop? No surely, nor I would not wisshe them so to be.
And to the intent you may the better perceive it, you shall understand, that
on Christmas day, the year of our lord 1547. Paul the third being bishop, I
noted his coming to church, because it was a principal feast celebrated in
Pontificalibus. Wherefore early in the morning I resorted to the palaice, and
there waited the coming of the Cardinals, that for the most part lie in the
city, and to come to saint Peter's, must pass Ponte Sant' Angelo, where is an
old order, that when so ever any Cardinal passes the bridge, there is a
piece of ordinance shot of in the castle: for an honor that the bishop is
bound to observe toward his brethren.

I had not ben long in the palaice, but I hard two pieces shot of at ones,
whereby I knew that two Cardinals were coming, and therefore resorted to the
gate to see them and their train.

From Castle Sant' Angelo to Saint Peter's staiers, there is an excedyng fair
street, straight and level more than a quarter of a mile long, called Borgo
San Piero, in the further end whereof I saw these Cardinals come, and
therewith out of the bisshops palaice came his guard of Suizzers all in white
harueis, and there alongest before the gate made a laue half on one side and
half on the other, with their.ii. drums and a fife before them. And as soon
as the Cardinals approached, the drums and fife began to play, and so
continued till the Cardinals were well entered amongst the guard. Than the
trumpettes blewe up an other while, till the Cardinals were almost at the
gate, and as they should enter, the shalmes began to play, and ceased not till
they were alighted, and mounted up the stayers to the bisshoppes lodgeyng.

The like cerymonies were used unto all the Cardinals that came, whether one
came alone or many togethers. And there tarried more than.ii. hours harkenyng
to this gunneshot and merry pipyng, and rekened above.40. Cardinals that came
thus rydyng, sometime one alone, and sometime.iii. or.iiii. together.

There was no Cardinal that came without a great train of gentilmen and
prelates, well horsed and appointed, some had.40. some.50. and some.60. or mo,
and next before every of them rode.ii. henchemen, the one cariyng a coushin
and a rich clothe, and the other a pillar of silver, and the Cardinals them
selfs aparayled in robes of crymsen chamlet, with read hattes on their
heads, rode on moyles.

When they were all come to the palaice, and had waited awhile in the chaumbre
of presence, the bishop him self with the.iii. crowned miter full of
iewelles, in a veraie rich cope, with shoes of crimsen veluette, sect with
preciouse stones, and in all his other pontifical apparaile, came forth, and
at the chamber door sat him down in a chaier of crymsen velvet, through the
which reuneth two staves covered with the same. Thus being set, the prelates
and clergy, with the other officers passed on before him. Which are such a
number, as were able to make the muster of a battle, if they were well ordered
in the field, Dataries, Threasorers, Clerks of the Chamber, Penitentiaries,
Prebendaries, Notaries, Protonotaries, and a thousand mo, each order of them
in his diverse devise of parliamente robes, all in skarlet, and for the most
part finely furred. Than came the double cross, the swoorde and the imperial
hatte, and after that the Cardinals by two and two, and between every two a
great route of gentilmen. Than came the ambassadors, and next them the bishop
him self blessyng all the way, and carried in his chair by.viii. men clothed
in long robes of skarlet: and on either side of him went his guard making
Rome, and criyng abasso abasso, for they that woull not willyngly kneel,
shall be made kneel by force. And I think verily the foremost of this order was
distant from the hindermost more than a quarter of a mile.

Thus when he came into the midst of the church against the sacrament of the
altar, he turned him self toward it, and bowyng his head a little, seemed
to make a certain familiare reverence.

Than was he carried into the chapel, brought behind the altar (for the altar
stands in the midst open every way) and there in a trone of wonderful
maiestee was set up as a god.

The Cardinals then bestowed them selfs after their auncientees in certain
stalles, somewhat lower about the queere. Than sat the Ambassadors, and other
prelates at their feet. And so when they were set, the chapel began the
offitorie of the mass, and sange so sweetly, that me thought I never heard
the like. At the communion of the mass the Cardinal that celebrated, brake
the host in.iii. pieces, whereof he eat one him self, and the other two he
delivered upon the paten to a Cardinal appoincted, that brought it to the
bishop, and in his presence (for fear of poysonyng) took assaie of the second
piece: and delivered him the third.

When the mass was finisshed, the bishop gave his benediction, with many years
of pardon, and than returned to the palaice in like order as he came.

As for the pomp he uses when he rides abroad, I need not to speak of it,
considering what I have said, saving that you shall understand, how Corpus
domini is always carried in a tabernacle before him on a white hackeney, that
is taught to kneel both at the setting up, and also at the taking down of it.

In deed the bishop for his own ordinary keeps no great house, but his
train excedeth all that I have seen. For every Cardinal and prelate keeps
house according to his habilitee, and some of them are so precise, that if one
of their retinewe be myssyng, when they go out of their doors, be it gentilman
or other, he forfeiteth a certain piece of money, which he is constreigned
forthwith to pay. And lightly there is none of them without iii. or.iiii.
paiges trymmed like young princes, for what purpose I would be loath to tell.

If I should say, that under their long robes they hyde the greattest pride
of the world, it might happen some men would believe it, but that they are the
vaynest men of all other, their own acres do well declare. For their
ordinary pastime is to disguise them selfs, to go laugh at the Courtisanes
houses, and in the shrouyng time, to ride maskyng about with them, which is
the occasion that Rome wants no iolie dames, specially the street called
Iulia, which is more than half a mile long, fair builded on both sides, in
manner inhabited with none other but Courtisanes, some woorthe.x. and some
woorthe.xx. thousand crowns more or less as their reputacion is. And many
times you shall see a Courtisane ride into the country, with.x. or.xii. horse
waityng on her.

Briefly by report, Rome is not without.40000. harlottes mainteigned for the
most part by the clergy and their folowers. So that the Romans them selfs
suffer their wifes to go seldom abroad, either to church or other place, and
some of them scarcely to look out at a lattise wyndow, whereof their proverb
says, Jn Roma vale piu la putana, che la moglie Romana, that is to say, In
Rome the harlotte has a better life, than she that is a Romans wife.

In their apparaile they are as gorgeouse as may be, and have in their going
such a solemn pace, as I never saw. In conclusion to live in Rome is more
costly than in any other place, but he that has money may have there what him
likes. But now remaigneth to speak of the new buildings.

Of saint Peter's church.
THe church of saint Peter stands somewhat alofte on the hill Vaticane,
and has before it a very fair and large room, as it were a market place: in
the midst whereof is a goodly fountain of marble, that gussheth out water of
a great height.

From this place up to the church are about.30. steps or grices of square
stone, the solemnest that I have seen. For they are almost.30. paces long. At
the top of this staire, over the midst of a goodly porche, is a great image
of saint Peter of fine marble. Within that is a large court paued with fine
marble, in the midst whereof is an antike pineaple of brass of a wonderful
biggenesse, and so many images, pillars and other rich stones, that have been
gathered out of the antiquitees, and brought thither to furnishe the new
buildings withal, that it should be an endelesse work to descriue them.
Out of this court is the entry into the church, which has.iii. great gates
of brass, wherein the stories of the acts of Eugenie the.iiii. are finely
graven.

This church within is nothing fair to the eye, but it has in it many
beautyfull and fine things, as the tabernacle of marble, where (they say)
Christ's sudarie, and one of the.iii. nails lies, the goodly brazen sepulture
of Sixtus the.iiii. the brazen images of saint Peter and Paul, a number of
goodly pillars, and diverse other things.

But above all the new buildyng, if it were finished, would be the goodliest
thing of this world, not only for the antike pillars that have been taken
out of the antiquitees, and bestowed there, but also for the greatness and
excellent good proporcion that it has. Nevertheless it has been so many
years adoyng, and is yet so imperfect, that most men stand in dout, whether
ever it shall be finished or no.

In the midst of this new buildyng is a preaty chapel, wherein the bishop,
with all his Cardinals and clergy, use to celebrate their solemn ceremonies.

Of the bishops palaice with Beluedere.
THe bishops palaice ioigneth to the church, which to mine eye seems much
greatter than goodly: notwithstanding the lodgings within forth are fair,
but I can most commend the staier, that goes down from the palaice to the
church, almost a quarter of a mile about, so fair paued and plain, that a
man may easily ride up and down.

About.iii. quarters of a mile from the palaice is the bisshops bankettyng
house, called Beluedere, one of the finest buildings that is to be seen, so
rich, so pleasant, and of so goodly a prospecte, that it seems almost an
other paradyse. The garden walled round about, is full of fair oringe trees,
and has in the midst a goodly fountain with perfeite plottes in molde of
the river of Nile in Egypt, and of Tyber, that renneth through Rome. Besides
the images of fine marble of Romulus and Remus plaiyng with a woulfes teates,
of Apollo with his bow and arowes, of Laocoonte, with his.ii. children wrapped
about with serpents, of Venus beholding little Cupido, of the sorrowful
Cleopatra, liyng by the river side, and of diverse other to long to rehearse.

Of Castle Sant' Angelo.
THis Castle is no less notable than some of the rest. It stands on the
bank of Tyber in manner clean without the town, and has.iii. wards, one
within an other: excellently well builded and strong, and after most men's
opinions is impregnable, unless it be by famine. The two inner wards stand
upon the sepulcher of the emperor Adrian, which is a certain black mass of
earth of a great heyght, compounded of certain mixtures, which being dried, is
harder and more durable than stone it self. Upon this foundation Adrian made
his tomb, and decked it with such ornaments of marble and other sumptuouse
things, as made it seem one of the rarest things of the world. But after it
came to the bishops hands, considering the force of the place and strong
foundation, they converted it to a fortress, and have edified many goodly
lodgeynges upon it: so that oftentimes the bishop him self lies in it, and
keeps his court there.

Of buildings in general.
Finally there be a noumbre of as fair palaices in Rome as in any other place
of the world, whereof it should be to long here to make particular mention:
but specially the palaice that Paul now bisshoppe there has builded, by the
place called Campo di fiore, where Pompeius house stood in the old time,
deserves not to be forgotten. For he has rooted out of the ruins of the
antiquitees such goodly marble pillars and other fine stone, which he has
bestowed on that house, that if he finisshe it, as it is begun, it woull be
the galauntest thing old or new, that shall be found again in all Europe,
and he has called it after his own name Palazzo Farnese.

Abbridgement of the lives of the Roman Bishops.
BEcause my principal purpose tends to descriue the astates of Italy, I
need not to use much circumstance, either in mattiers of religion, or yet in
writing all the lives of the bishops of Rome. Wherefore entendyng to begin at
Siluester, the first bishop there that had any thing in perpetuitee, I have
thought good to declare the diverse opinions of their original.

Peter the ^postle.
Some ancient authors affirm, that Peter one of Christ's Apostles, after that
he had sufficiently confirmed the church in Asia, and confuted the error of
those Christians that allowed circumsicion, came to Rome the second year of
Claudius Empire, and there was received of the congregation as bishop. In
which office he ministered.25. years, and at last was crucified with the head
downewardes, the same day that Paul the apostle was beheaded, the last year
of Neros reign, and the 37. year after Christ's death.

Contrariwyse many learned men at these days are of opinion, that Peter never
came in Rome, groundyng them selfs upon diverse reasons, as this. If Peter had
commen thither, it could not have been unwritten in the holy scriptures,
either by Luke in the acts of the apostelles, or else by Paul in some of his
epistelles. Or if Peter were of that age, that it should seem he was at
Christ's death, and after continued in Antioche and other places so many years
as is to be proved, it seems impossyble he should come to Rome, and there
live.25. years. Wherefore they say, the ambiciouse bishops of Rome, to cover
their usurped auctoritee, have feygned this coming of Peter thither.

But this is clear, that from Peter to Siluester they reckon.33. bishops:
which for the most part were persecuted, and many of them martyred by the
emperors officers. So that in manner they always kept them selfs out of
sight, preaching and ministryng secretly without pomp astate or solemn
ceremony. But from the time of Siluester hitherwardes, as they grew in
wealth, so increased their worldely maiestee and ambicion, as hereafter more
plainly appears.

As for the bisshops names, the time of their reygne, and the date of our
Lord, because that in a table I have put them all togethers, I need not
perticulerly to rehearse every one of them, but such as the occasion of my
purpose shall necessarily require.

Siluester.1
SIluester the first of that name, after he had been a certain space in the
hill Soratto, now called Monte di San Siluestro, where for fear of
persecucion, he hid him self, hearing of the good inclinacion that the
emperor Constantine the first was of, toward Christian religion, came to
Rome, and so discretely behaved him self that the emperor was converted to
the right faieth, and baptized.

Some write, that the occasion thereof proceeded of a miracle done on
Constantine, in recoueryng his health from the leaprie. But Platina thinks
that to be a fable, and in manner proves it, thynkyng rather it proceeded of the
sign of the cross, that Constantine did see in the firmament, under which he
was promised victory, and so cariyng a red cross in his standarde before
him, he overcame his enemy Maxentius, whereupon he gave ear to Siluesters
preaching, and was converted. But what so ever the occasion was, it is agreed,
that Siluester baptized Constantine, who being christened, turned many of the
gentiles temples to Christian churches: enduyng them with ornaments and
possessions.

Not long after, leauyng Rome to Siluester and his successors, as the clergy
say, Constantine went to dwell at Bizantium, which he had than newly
reedified, calling it Constantinople after his own name. So that from
thensfoorth the Christian faieth began to flourishe over all the world: and
therefore most part of all Christian churches sent to the bishops of Rome to
learn of them the ceremonies and ordres necessary to be used in the church,
by reason whereof the emperors being residente elsewhere, the Romayne bishops
grew in such reputacion, that at length they became emperors them selfs.

And there is an ancient writing in the Vaticane library, called the Donacion
of Constantine, The donacion of Constantine.
which is so vehement liberal, that it should seem the emperor spoiled him
self of all his glory and honor, and of a great part of his dominion, to
give them to the church of Rome: by aucthoritee whereof the Roman bishops
have taken upon them the imperial vestementes, maiestee, commandments and
dominion over some countries.

In deed Laurentius Valla, an excellent learned man, Ualla against the
donacion*
and a Roman borne, has written a book to confound this Donacion of
Constantine, and proves by so many reasons, that it has been feigned by some
bishop of later time than Siluester, that I am persuaded rather to believe him
than the Donacion. In effect this Siluester was the first that prescribed a
direct order of ministers in the church, and how they should be known in
their degrees from the highest to the lowest: by whose time there spronge
diverse sects amongst the Christians, as the Arrianes, Photines, Sabellianes,
and others: for whose reformacion the Nicene counsel was called, Nicene
counsel,
but for all that those errors ceased not many years after.

Next unto Siluester Mark succeeded, Marcus,
who made his clergy like unto a common wealth, exemptyng the same from all
temporal jurisdiction, and further established a certain order for the
solemn consecracion of the Roman bishops, that before used no pomp at all.

Julius.
Iulie the first contended with the church of the Orient, partly for the
Arrian sect, but most of all for the supremacy of the church. For this Iulie
was the first that claimed the inheritance of Peter's keys, for the which
Constantius, the son of Constantine, banished him out of Rome. But ere he had
fully been away.x. months the emperor died, and than returned he from
exile.

Liberius.
Liberius the first was bishop after him, who by the power of the Arrianes,
after the counsel holden at Myllaine, was banished, and Felix the second
chosen in his place. But at length through the emperors displeasure, Felix.2.
Felix was deposed, and Liberius restored, who from that time forward favored
the Arrianes, and ordained that every bishop should be resident on his
benefice, and apply him self to feed his flock.

Damasus.
Damasus succeeded Liberius, who contented with Vrcisinus, one of the decons of
the church, that was likewise elected unto the bishoprike. For the Romans at
that time were divided into sects, so that a number of either side were
slain, but finally Damasus prevailed: and Vrcisinus was confyned to Naples.

This Damasus was afterward accused of adultery: and therefore called.40.
bishops together, and cleryng him self of the crime, not only punished his
accusers, but also made a decree, Sub poena tallionis, that none of the clergy
from thensefoorth should be accused: which Poena tallionis condemns the
accuser to the pain of the accusacion, in case he prouet it not.

At this time lived saint Hierome, Hierome.
that than had newly translated the bible out of Hebrew into the latin
tongue, and had set it forth to the edificacion of the church, which before
had none other but the.70. interpretours.

Syritius was next bishop, in whose time, Syritius,
the sect of the Manichees increased much: of all other most pestilent to our
Christian religion. It began thorough one Maneph, a Persian borne, who named
him self Christ, chose unto him.12. apostles, reproved the old testament,
followed the new, and said, that Christ had but a fantastical and a feigned
body: and with wonders gate him such creadite, that in manner all the east
partees were corrupted with his heresies.

Finally Syritius, to refourme this and other like sects, called a general
counsel in Constantinople of 1350. bishops, where these opinions were
universally condemned: though they could not be clearly extinguished many years
after.

But because it apperteygneth not to my purpose, to write of sects and
opinions, seeing that till the time of Gregory the second, about the year of
our lord.720. the Roman bishops travailed most in mattiers of religion,
being always obedient and ruled by the emperors without peculier dominion: I
woull pass them over for that space.

True it is, that in the time of Phoca the emperor, upon controversy moved
between the Patriarch of Constantinople and the bishop of Rome, for the
supremacy of the church, Supremacy of the church.
Boniface the.iii. obtained a privilege of the emperor, that he and his
successors from thensefoorth should be taken for Primates and chief of all
Christian bishops. By reason of which preferrement not long after the Roman
bishops, not only took on them the direction of all other bishops, with
grauntyng of Dispensacions, Jubilees, and Pardons, but also would put forth
their feet to be kissed of princes: yea and of emperors them selfs, as
appears by the example of the emperor Justinian, who kissed the feet of
bishop Constantine the first, as Platina affirms: like as other emperors
sens have accustomed to do. But for all that I find not, that any bishop
openly contended with the emperors till the time of this Gregory the second.

Gredori^s.2. Images put out of churches.
Leo the.iii. emperor commanded throughout his dominion, that all manner of
images should be clean had out of the churches for auoydyng of Idolatry, but
the most part of the people disalowed this ordinance. Through comfort whereof
this Gregory so contended against it, that in most parts of Italy, the
emperors officers executyng their princes commandment in this behalf, were
hewe^ to pieces: as the exarke of Rauenna with his son, Marinus Spatarius duke
of Rome with his son, and diverse other. Insomuche that Gregory not only
sequestered from the emperor the customs and taxes due unto him out of Rome
and many other citees in Italy, but also called a counsel, and
excomunicated the emperor as an heritike, and leauyng the church in that
astate died. Blondus says, that the doer hereof was Stephen the secounde, who
was bishop before this Gregory: but by agreement of most authors it should
not seem to be so.

Than succeeded Gregory the.iii. who following the example of his predecessor,
Gregorius. ^.
called a counsel in Rome of a.1000. bishops, wherein the emperor was not
only excomunicate again, but also by decree deprived of his imperial title
and jurisdiction, and the Italian nation procured to rebel against him.

By reason whereof when Luitprandus king of the Lumbardes, had besieged the
city of Rome, the bishop could not for shame require succors of the emperor,
but was feign to send to Charles Martell, Charles Martell*
than being chief ruler in France: by whose fair mean and entreatie, the
Lumbarde withdrew his siege, the rather because Charles Martell had made him
his gossippe. And here began the first amitee between the kings of France
and the Roman church.

Zachary succeeded Gregory, Zacharias*
who to increase the reputacion of the Roman church, at the intercession of
Pepine, son unto Charles Martell, than great master of the french kings
house, Chilperike deposed.
deposed Chilperike than being king, and made him a monk closed up in a
cloister, and afterward invested Pepine king of France. For which act the
heirs of Pepine were ever after earnest friends to the Roman See.

This Zachary upon occasion went to Narnia to Luitprandus king of Lumbardes,
and there partly with making a sermon, and partly with his humble behavior,
entered in such grace with the king, that he gave to the church of Rome.iii.
citees, Narnia, Ancona, and Humana, with a great valey in Sutri: which were
the first notable possessions that the church of Rome obtained. For until
this time if the church had any temporaltees, they were so small, that they
served scarcely to the necessary findyng of the ornaments and ministers. But
after this they increased so much, that they passed princely astates.

Stephanus.2.
After Zachary followed Stephen the secounde, in whose time Aristolfus or
Aistolfus, king of Lumbardes, troubled all the astates of Italy, by reason he
had gotten Rauenna, with diverse other citees, and was like to have subdued the
rest. Wherefore the bishop, that than had taken upon him to rule the Romans,
sent for aid unto Constantine the.v. than emperor. From whom he received so
small coumfort, that for his last refuge, he repaired to Pepine king of France,
and procured him to come into Italy.

Pepine to gratify the Roman church, used all his power, and two several
times passed the Alps against Aristolfe. At the first he besieged Pauia, and
there constreigned Aristolfe to promise more than he performed in deed: and
at the secounde time, for breach of that promise, to forgo the exarkate of
Rauenna, which he had before taken by force from the emperors exarke there:
so that Pepine at his last viage gave unto the Romans, although the bishop
under that name received it as his own, all the territory of Pentapoli and
Aemilia, from Placentia to Pesaro, liyng between the Appenine hills, the Po,
and the Adriatike sea: which are at the least.xi. or.xii. citees, with the
countries about them. Through the gift whereof the Roman bishoprike
increased no less in power than before time it had dooen in aucthoritee.

True it is, that the emperor sent his ambassadou^rs unto Pepine, to claim
this exarkate, whereof he and his predecessors had been in possession.170.
years: but those ambassadors could not be heard.

Blondus says, that these things happened in the time of bishop Gregory
the.iii.

Of this Paul I find nothing notable, Paulus.
saving he did his best to dissuade Constantine the.v. emperor from the
defacyng and hurlyng of images out of the christian churches: but Constantine,
following the exaumple of his father Leo, Images.
not only extirped the images, but also put diverse to death that went about
to resist it.

After the death of Paul, Desiderius, king of the Lumbardes made Constantine
bishop by force, Constantinus.2.
but within a year, the clergy of Rome deposed him, and elected Stephen
the.iii. in his place, Stephanus.3.
in whose time happened no notable thing in the church, saving that he with
all the clergy immediately after his election, in token of humilitee, went
barefoote in procession from the Laterane church to Saint Peter's.

This Adrian was so haulte of courage, Adrianus.
that when Desiderius the king sent ambassadors to congratulate his election,
and to enter in amitee with him, he answered them, how may I trust him,
that so often has broken his faith? wherewith Desiderius took such displeasure,
that he invaded the churches dominion, and took by force Faenza, Ferrara,
Comacchio, Montefeltro, Vrbino, Senegalia, and was come as far as Spoleti,
entendyng to go to Rome, had not.iii. bishops met him there with an
excomunicacion: for fear whereof he returned to Pauia without any more ado.
But because he held still in possession the foresaied citees, the bishop of
Rome procured Charlemaigne, than french king, to come into Italy, who with a
mighty power besieged Pauia, took Desiderius with his wife and children
prisoners, restored to the church all that his father Pepine had given, with
more, and reserved unto him self the dominion of Lumbardie.

In this bishops time Tyber rose so high, that Rome was in manner clean drowned.

Leo.3.
After Adrian succeeded Leo the.iii. who because the Romans conspyred against
him, fled unto Charlemaigne, and by him was restored with great pomp into
his astate, and for pacifiyng this Romayn fury against the bishop,
Charlemaigne him self with a great army came to Rome, where for the high
service he had done to holy church, the Roman bishop anointed and
proclaimed him emperor August: Thempire divided.
and his son Pepine king of Italy. So that from this time forewardes the
emperors of Constantinople were no more reputed Romayne emperors: but
emperors of Greece. For Charlemaigne did so much, that at length the empires
were divided by confines, and the Greek Emperors consented to suffer the
Frenchemen in quyette both with the name and dominion of the Occidentall
empire.

After the death of Charlemaigne and of Pepine, this Leo remembryng the old
conspiracy made against him, caused many of the chief Romans his enemies to
be put to death. For the which at last he was feign to withdraw him from
Rome, and liyng at Blera, the Romans in a sudden rage spoiled and rased to
the earth all the buildings that he had made or procured to be made in Rome.
And because the bishop died shortelie thereupon, Lewys the french king and
emperor, sent his cousin Bernarde as king into Italy, to be a stay against
the inconveniences that of this fury might have followed: which Bernarde
within few years after rebelled, but at last he was constreigned to yield him
self, and so being brought into France, was beheaded.

This Stephen went into France, Stephanus.4.
and there crowned the forenamed Lewys emperor, who for his great courtesy and
gentilnesse was called Lewys the meek: and at his return to Rome, this
bishop brought many Romans home with him, that his predecessor had exiled.

After Stephen succeeded Pascall, Pascalis*
who crowned Lotharius, son of Lewys the meek, king of Italy, and
successor to his father in the empire: and with fair persuasions obtained of
Lewys the election or confyrmacion of all bishops, which before that time
depended only upon the emperors pleasure. And further procured the confines
and limits of the churches dominion to be made certain, and that with the
largest.

But Gregory the.iiii. would not take upon him the bishoprike, Gregorius.4.
till he had received his confyrmacion from the emperor Lewys before named.

In his time, the Sarasines in great noumbre landed in Italy, besieged Rome,
took it, spoiled it, and all the country about: but at last they were repulsed
by the Marquis Guido of Lumbardie, with help of the frenchemen.

Sergius the secounde, Sergius* ^
first gave president to all his successors to change their names: by reason
that his own name Bocca di porco that is to say, swynesmouth, was so
unseemly, that he thought it not agreeable to his dignitee. He repaired the
walls of the Vaticane, and builded Castle Sant' Angelo upon the tomb of
Adrian.

Johannes.8.
Johan the.viii. was an english woman, that in her youth disguised in a boys
apparaile was brought to Athenes in Greece, where she profited so much in
learning, that when she returned to Rome, for her good behavior and singler
reputacion she was elected bishop: and so continued more than two years, till
at last going in procession toward saint John Lateranes, she fell in
travail of child in the high way, and there died. For which cause the
bishops to this day do forsake that way, and (as they say) when any new
bishop is elected, he is brought to saint John Lateranes, and there set in a
chair with an hole, that the eldest Deacon of the Cardinals may feel vtrum
habet testiculos.

Adrianus.2.
Adrian the second was elected and establisshed bishop without the emperors
consent, wherewith the emperors ambassadors, than resident in Rome, began
somewhat to be moved: but at length the emperor him self was so contented
withal, that from thensefoorth the clergy in manner esteemed not the emperors.

Johannes.9.
John the.ix. succeeded Adrian, and willing to crown Lodouicus Balbus french
king emperor: the Romans (that favored more Charles the.iii. king of
Germany, who than was entered into Italy with an army) put the bishop in
prison: but he was shortly conueighed out, and fled into France, where he
anointed the king emperor. Nevertheless within a while after the french
king dyed, and than was the bishop reconsiled to the foresaied king Charles,
whom he afterward crowned emperor.

Adrian the.iii. bishop made a law, Adrianus ^
that from thensfoorth the emperors should have naught to do with his
successors elections.

Stephen the.vi. bearyng malice in his heart against his predecessor Formosus,
Stephanus.6.
caused him to be taken out of his grave, to be spoiled of his pontifical
vestementes, his fingers to be cut of, and his body to be thrown into Tyber,
as an excomunicate and damned person. For which act there grew heinous
contencion amongst the Romans, that ceased not many years after.

At this place Platina began to lament the tyranny of the Roman bishops,
because from hense foorthf there reigned no more humilitee, temperance,
religion, troth nor charitee among them: but instead thereof ambicion,
disdeygne, auaryce, falshead, and tyranny. For shortly after Leo the.v. was by
force deposed, and put in prison by Christofer the first, one of his own
bryngyng up: who continued scarcely.vii. months, but was likewise served by
Sergius the.iii.

Here, I have thought good to make a little digression, because of the notable
change of the empire.

About this time began the contencion between Lewis the French king, and
Berengarius Duke of Friuli for the empire and dominion of Lumbardie.

The Italians would not, that the bishops of Rome should crown any other
emperor than one of their own nation, whereupon Berengarius took on him the
name of emperor and king of Italy, and in that quarrel fought twice with
Lewys. The first battle he lost, but the second he wan: in the which Lewys
was taken prisoner, and one of his eyes put out. And thus ended the empire in
Charlemaignes descent, Change of the empire.
for the which was no small contencion awhile between the.iii. nations, Italian,
French and Douche.

Berengarius.1.
First this Berengarius reigned with the name of emperor.iiii. years, and had
no small wars, specially with the Conte Guido di Spoleti: who at the last
was discomfited and slain in the field. And as some write, the bishop Lando
gave Berengarius the crown.

Berengarius.2.
After him reigned Berengarius the secound.vii. years, who suffered the
Hungariens to pass into Italy, upon condition they should not offend his
subjects: but they kept not their covenant with him.

Raulfe Duke of Burgoyne*
And than came Raulfe Duke of Burgoyne, and drove him out of Italy: which he
ruled for the space of.iii. years, till Berengarius, with help of the
Hungariens recovered it again.

Hugo C^nte d' Arli.
Than came Hugh, Conte d' Arli, and reigned after Berengarius.x. years askyng of
Italy.

Berengarius.3.
The last of the Italians was Berengarius the.iii. who reigned about.xi. years,
and was expulsed, as you shall here afterward.

Johannes.11.
John the.xi. (a better warrior than churchman) with the help of Alberico
Marquis of Tuscane, gathered an army, and fought with the Sarasines, that than
had ouerronne Puglia and Calabria, and were coming to Rome, and in effect so
discomfited them, that they fled to Monte Gargano, where they fortified them
selfs, and did much hurt afterward in the realm of Naples. Finally he
fell at variaunce with the forenamed Marquis, who therefore called the
Hungarians into Italy, and scourged the whole nation, as well his own
subjects as others: So that the Romans to be avenged took Alberico and
beheaded him, and the soldiers took the bishop and strangeled him.

Agapet the second, Agapitus.2.
seeing the puissance of Berengarius the.iii. and fearyng to come under his
subjection, with consent of the Romans procured Otho, than newly chosen
emperor in Germany, Otho.
with a great army to come into Italy. Where he fought twyse with
Berengarius, and at either time took him and his soonne Albert prisoners. The
first time he restored him to the astate of Lumbardie upon conditions. But the
secounde time he and his son both were led away, and confined the one to
Bamborough in Almaigne, and the other to Constantinople: where they died
miserably.

John the.xii. not by free election, but by the power of his father Alberico
than chief of the Romans, Johannes.12.
was made bishop. For though the bishops had long time continued like kings,
I mean for their astate and temporal possessions: yet for all that the
Romans created yearly certain Consules and other officers after their old
facion, and had belongyng to their common wealth diverse towns near unto
Tuscane, between Vrbeuentano, and Tudertino, and all that is between Naples,
Marsi, Riete, and Rome, so that the chief Romans bare a great stroke in the
bisshops elections.

This bishop crowned Otho beforenamed first emperor of the Germans. For
neither Henry Duke of Saxony last emperor before him, nor yet Conrade
successor to Lewys before named of Charlemaignes descent, were ever crowned:
though they both took upon them the imperial aucthoritee.

This John was a man of so ill living, that two of his Cardinals complained
on him to the emperor: besechyng him to see a reformacion for an exaumple to
the world. But the bishop hearing of this, was soon euin with them. For he
cut of the ones nose, and the others hands: and afterward received the
emperor with so good a countinance, that he seemed nothing guilty, till the
clergy with one voice accused him, whereupon he fled into the mountains and
hid him self: so that the emperor with consent of the clergy chose Leo
the.viii. But as soon as the emperor returned home, John by force of his
friends expulsed Leo, recovered his bishoprike, and so continued till he died.

Some write, that this was John the.xiii. For amongst the aucthours is some
confusion in the number of these John's, specially because some reckon the
english Johan for one, and some reckon her not: but how so ever it be, this
John succeeded Agapet the secounde: and as some write, was taken in adoulterie
and slain by the woman's housbande.

Johannes.13
John the.xiii. elected by the clergy against the Romans will, was taken by
Geffroie Conte di Campania and exiled, till this Geffroie and his son were
slain by an other lord of Campania. Insomuche that the emperor Otho, hearing
of this bishops exile, made an army, and came to Rome, where after a solemn
entrey, he took all the senators and put them in prison, sent the Consules
prisoners into Almaigne: and one Peter that had been chief of the conspiracy
against John, was drawn througe the streets, whipped naked, hanged by the
hear of the head, and finally in manner half dead sent prisoner into Germany,
where he finished his days. For which courtesy this John crowned Otho the
secounde (son of this first Otho) emperor, by the fathers consent, and his
wife Theophila empress.

Benedict the.vi. was taken by Cinthio, Benedictus.6.
a noble man of Rome, and being laid in prison in Castle Sant' Angelo, was
either strangled or famished to death.

Boniface the.vii. being constreyned to forsake Rome, Bonifatius.7.
took all the richesse of S. Peter's church with him to Constantinople, and
there sold it: and at length returned to Rome, where after he was well
received, he put out one of his Cardinals eyes.

Gregory the.v. by reason of a commocion in Rome, Gregorius.5.
fled first into Tuscane, and afterward into Germany, because he would not
consent to crown Crescentius emperor: who being the noblest amongst the
Romans, was provoked by the Italians to take the empire upon him. So that
when Gregory was fled, they made one that had been bishop of Placentia
bishop of Rome, and named him John the.17. but Otho the.iii. than emperor,
with a puisant army came to Rome, and would have besieged it, had not the
Romans received him, so that Crescentius and the bishop John both fled into
Castle Sant' Angelo, and there held them till they had so fair offres made on
themperours behalf, that upon trust thereof they came forth and submitted
them selfs. But for all that they were both turmented, and at last put to
death. Whereupon it followed, that this Gregory, who was a Saxon borne,
transferred the election of emperors unto.vii. princis of his own nation,
that is to wete, The king of Boeme, cupbearer, the Marquis of Brandenburgh
chamberlayne, Electours of the empire.
the Conte Palatine sewer, and the Duke of Saxony swoordbearer, with.iii.
Archebishops of Mentes, Treue^e, and Coleyn. And ordained further, that from
the emperors election to his coronacion, he should be called none other but
Caesar and king of Romans, Caesar.
and after that the bishop of Rome had crowned him, he should be called
Emperor and August, Augustus.
which order by consent of the forenamed Otho, was established about.200.
years after Charlemaignes coronacion.

Benedictus.8.
Benedicte the.viii. crowned Henry the secounde, emperor: who was the first
that according to the order of Gregory the.v. was elected by the princis of
Germany. Some call him Henry the first, because Henry Duke of Saxony, that
succeeded Conrade, never came to Rome to be crowned.

Benedictus.9.
Benedict the.ix. for his naughty behavior was expulsed, and Siluester
the.iii. placed in his room, who held it.40. days, and than was Benedict
restored. Nevertheless Benedict mistrustyng that he could not keep it long,
sold his jurisdiction unto Gregory the vi. but the emperor, Shiftyng and
poysonyng of Romayne bishops.
Henry the.iii. came to Rome, deposed these.iii. bishops, and created Clement
the second, who lived not fully.x. months, by reason that his next
successor Damasus the second found mean to poison him, being after so
served him self the.23. day next following his election.

Leo the.ix. being sent as bishop to Rome, Leo.9*
at the Romans request, that desired the emperor to send them a good man,
met with.ii. monks by the way, who persuaded him so much, that he put of
his pontifical habit, and privately came to Rome, saying that he repented
him to have taken of the emperor, that which apperteined to the clergies free
election. For which humilitee the clergy embraced him, and nevertheless made
him their bishop.

He made an army against the Normains, than reignyng in the realm of Naples,
to recover Beneuento, that they had won from the church, where his army was
discoumfited, and he with diverse of his Cardinals taken prisoners. But the
Normaines freely delivered him, and honorably sent him home.

In his time was the counsel of Vercelli called against the opinion of
Berengarius for the sacrament of communion.

Stephen the.ix. brought the church of Myllaine to the obedience of the
church of Rome, Stephanus.9.
which for.200. years before would never knowlage Rome for her superior.

Nicolas the.ii. after the clergy had deposed Benedicte the.x. was elected,
who made a decree, Nicolaus, 2.
that from thensefoorth the Cardinals only should choose the bishop.

He created Robert Guiscarde Duke of Calabria and Puglia, and made him
lieutenaunt of the church, by whose power he subdued to the churches dominion
the Prenestini, Tusculani, and Numentani: with diverse other territories about
Rome.

Alexandre.2.
Alexandre the.ii. in the beginning of his astate was disturbed by Gadolo bishop
of Parma: for the which they fought two battles, but finally Alexandre
prevailed, by reason that at a counsel holden in Mantua, where the emperor
was present, the whole clergy agreed upon Alexander, and exempted from all
emperors the aucthoritee of confyrmacion of the Roman bishops: which
afterward was occasion of many inconveniences.

Gregorius.7.
Gregory the.vii. incontinently upon his election began to prove maistries
with the emperor Henry the.iii. First he would not be confyrmed of the
emperor, and afterward, where the emperor before time had used to give
bishoprikes, Gregory would give them him self. So that when a bishop died,
the emperor would name one, and Gregory an other. Whereof followed
excomunicacions as thick as hayle, so that at last the emperor him self was
not only excomunicate, but also by the ecclesiastical power deposed of the
empire. And yet had religion so much power in him, that when he was come into
Italy, and had besieged his enemy Gregory within the town of Canosso, the
emperor him self went barefooted to the town gates in the hard frost and
snow, to ask forgiveness of the bishop: who for all that stood styfe.iii.
or.iiii. days ere he would assoyle him. At length they agreed upon
condition, that the emperor should obey the bishops commandments.

But the bishop not yet contented, within a while after so offended the
emperor again, that he came to Rome, and was there received of the Romans.
Wherefore Gregory fled into Castle Angelo, and there kept him, till he was
rescued by Robert Guiscarde, for fear of whose coming the emperor retired
into Germany. Where by the bishops procurement the princes had elected
Radulphus de Sueuia emperor, between whom and Henry were many blouddy
battles foughten, and not only Radulphus him self slain at length, but
also the emperors own son so suborned, that he warred against his natural
father, and besieged him in the town of Mentz. Nevertheless (much against
the bishops will) nature and friends wrought a peace between them at last.

And though Guiscarde delivered this bishop out of themperours hands, yet he
was so hated of the Romans, that he durst not abide in Rome, but went with
Guiscarde into the realm of Naples, and there died.

Some write, Priests marriage.
that this Gregory was the first that prohibited matrimony unto priests.

Uictor the.iii. was poisoned by the emperors procuremente, as some write,
Uictor.3.
but some hold that he died of a natural infirmitee.

Pascall the.ii. fell at varyaunce with the family of Colonna in Rome, by
reason whereof, Pascalis*
whiles he was at the gettyng of Beneuento (which by the help of Roger Duke of
Puglia he obtained) the Colonesi by force took the town of Caua apperteinyng
to the church. But the bishop at his return both recovered Caua, and also
took from them Zagarolo, and Colonna their own enheritaunce. Whereupon followed
so much business, that almost no man could pass in quiet any where
through Campania.

This Pascall went into France to reform the disordinate life of the clergy
there.

After his return into Italy, he condemned the doings of Henry the.iiii.
emperor, so that when the emperor him self was come as far as Sutri, with a
great army, the bishop forbade him the coming to Rome, till he had promised
not to meddle with the church matters: and further to cause those bishops that
he had made, to renounce their bishoprikes.

But when the emperor had kyssed the bishops foot at the head of S. Peter's
staiers, and was received with solemn procession into the church, than he
required Pascall to confirm his bishops, who refusyng so to do, he with
diverse of his cardinals and prelates, were taken, spoiled of their myters and
copes, and so led into the army that lay without the city, and from thense
into a strong hold, till the bishop so consented to the emperors will, that
he not only crowned him there, but also confyrmed his bishops. How be it,
shortly after the emperors return into Germany, Pascall called a counsel
in Laterano, and revoked all his doings to the emperor, because they had been
done through compulsion and not of free will. Wherefore the emperor with a
puisaunt army returned to Rome, and findyng that Pascall was withdrawn into
Puglia, for fear of displeasure, he caused him self to be crowned a new by
the archbishop of Barcare, of whom he also took auctoritee to dispose the
bishoprikes at his pleasure.

Matilda.
About this time died the Countess Matilda, that gave unto the church of Rome
all the territory from the river Pissea and San Quirico upon the Senese, unto
Ceperano between the Appenine hills and the sea, with the Feodariship of
Ferrara.

And in this bishops time was the great viage made of the Christians into the
holy land, U^age into the holy land,
where Jerusalem was won, and Godfrey of Boloigne crowned king.

Gelasius the.ii. succeeded Pascall by the clergies election, but the family of
Frangipani in Rome, Gelasius.2
which were of the imperial faction, took him by force: and put him the first
night in prison, but there was such a commocion of the people the next
morning, that the chief of his enemies was feign to kiss his feet, and to
let him go. Wherefore shortly after the emperor came so soddeinly to Rome,
that no man knew thereof, till he was in saint Peter's church, so that the
bishop incontinently fled, and by boot escaped down Tyber unto Ostia, and
so into France, where he died. After whose departure, the emperor created the
abouenamed bishop of Bracare in his place, calling him Clement: and so
committyng him to the protection of the Frangipani, returned into Almaigne.

Calixt the second, before archbishop of Vienna, Calixtus. ^
was elected successor unto Gelasius by the Cardinals that than were
resident in France: how be it, he would not take the dignitee upon him: till
he had word from Rome, that the clergy there were contented withal. Upon
good advertisement whereof he repaired thither: and findyng the imperial bishop
to be fled, settled his astate there: sendyng to the emperor for peace and
favor, which he easily obtained.

And hearing that the imperial bishop was gone to Sutri, and there had
fortified, he made an army, went thither, besieged Sutri, took his adversary,
brought him to Rome, made him ride about the streets on a camel, with the
tail in his hand: and at last closed him up in an abbey. He travailed much
for William Duke of Puglia in the defense of his country against Roger Earl of
Sicile, but it auailed not.

Innocent the second immediately after his coronacion, Innocen^ius.2.
sodeinly reised an army, and went against the forenamed Roger that than wrote
him self king of Sicile: whom he found so unprovided, that he made him flee
to Castle Galuzzo, and there besieged him: till his son William with a great
power came to the rescue, fought with the bishops army, and took the bishop
withal his Cardinals prisoners. Nevertheless they were afterward
courtesly let go, and accompanied toward Rome, where in the mean season was
a new bishop made, named Anaclete. And this new bishop vsyng the iewelles
of saint Peter's as his own, made so many friends, that Innocent was feign to
flee from thense to Pisa, from Pisa to Genoa, and so into France. Finally he
went unto Lotharius the.iii. than elected Caesar, and by his means was
restored to his bishoprike again. For the which he rewarded Lotharius with
the imperial crown as the custom was, causyng him afterward so to invade
the realm of Naples, that Roger, who than called him self king thereof,
forsook Italy clean for a time.

The emperor was no sooner returned into Germany, but the bishop, thinkyng
him self in peace, fell at variaunce with the Romans for chosyng of
senators, because somewhat before that time the other bishops his
predicessours, had taken all temporal power clearly from the citesins, and
used it privately as their own. In the heat of which contencion Innocence
died.

Eugenius the.iii. incontinently upon his election forsook Rome, Eugenius.3.
because the Romans were resolutely determined to mainteigne their Senators:
and he to the contrary, vsyng his uttermost power, constreigned them to cry
him mercy, and to commit the order of all magistrates unto him.
Nevertheless after his return, the people (that could not brook the loss
of their lybertees) so rebelled against him, that he was feign to flee, and
went into France: where declaryng his case unto Lewys the king, he obtained
such succors, that in manner by force he returned to Rome, and had his own
will.

Adrian the.iiii. an englishman borne, Adrianus* 4.
constreigned the Consulles and Senators of Rome to depose them selfs, and
to commit all their rule unto the church. He crowned Frederike Barbarossa
emperor, though afterward he did excommunicate him. He also granted the
title of king to William the third, descended of the Normaine blood, being than
lord of Sicile, and of the realm of Naples. He increased not a little the
Churches territory, but he was much hated of the Romans for taking away of
their libertees. Finally before his death he repented the exco^municacion of
the emperor, saying, that there could be none so miserable an astate, as the
Roman bishoprike gotten with bloudde.

Alexander. ^.
Alexander the.iii. had unto his election the voices of 22. Cardinals, and
Octauian had but.iii. as most authors agree. Nevertheless between them two
grew so great a Schism, that the emperor Frederike was feign to call diverse
counsayles for the mattyer: cityng both the parties there to appear, that the
mattier might be rightuously judged. Octauian came at the emperors calling,
but Alexander would never appear. Wherefore the emperor became so much his
ennemie, that he was feign to flee from Rome into France and other regions, to
procure help of other princes. So that there happened much bloudde, fire, and
destruction for this mattier many years together.

Some write, that Alexander was so pursued of the emperor, that in a cooks
apparayle he was feign to flee unknown, from place to place, till at last he
came to Uenice, and there in a monastarie took a gardeyners wages, and served
in the kitchen. Where he was discovered by a pilgrim, and thereupon apparailed,
and brought in Pontificalibus with procession to S. Marks church, remaignyng
there honorably enterteigned, till after fore feight by sea, between the
emperor and the Uenecians, Otho the emperors son was taken prisoner, by whose
means a peace was made between Alexander and the emperor. Some writers make
no mention of this history: but say, that by appoin^tment Alexander came
honorably to Uenice, to mete the emperor for a treaty of peace, whereby the
other history of the cookish apparaile should seem untrue. In effect how
so ever it were there they met, and the emperor in presence of all the
people kneled down to kiss the bishops foot. At which kissyng, some
affirm, that the bishop used these words: Super aspidem et Basiliscum
ambulabis et conculcabis leonem et draconem: And the emperor aunsweared, Non
tibi sed Petro. whereunto the bishop replied: et Petro et mihi. Nevertheless
there they concluded such a peace, that the bishop returned to Rome and
enjoyed his place. Immediately whereupon he called a counsel in Laterano, in
the which iiii. bishops (that sens his first election had been created by the
emperor) were condemned body and soul.

In his time Thomas Beckette, Thomas Beckette*
bishop of Caunterburie, was slain. And the king of England (as some write)
sent ambassadors to this Alexandre, protestyng the same to be done unknowing
to him. But the bishop not credityng the ambassadors, sent two Cardinals
into England to examine the troth: who compelled the king to swear, that he
was not guilty of Beckettes death: and nevertheless they enioigned him in
penance, to send.200. soldiers to serve an whole year in Jerusalem: and
within the term of.iii. years to go against the infidelles him self, to
maintain all the libertees of the church, and to permit mattiers to be
appealed to the court of Rome.

Lucie the.iii. would have deprived the Roman Consules of their dignitee, but
the people so resisted, Lucius.3*
that he was feign to flee, and as many as were taken of his party, had their
eyes put out. Wherefore the bishop went to Verona, called a counsel, and
there died.

Celestine the.iii. enuiyng the succession of Tancredi, Celestinus* 3*
bastard son of Roger, brother to the good king William of Sicile, called
into Italy Henry the.vi. than elected Caesar* And after he had crowned him
emperor in Rome, took Constantia a Nonne out of her cloys^er: and because of
the Normanes royal blood, married her to this emperor: endowyng him and her
both with the titles of the realms of Naples and Sicile: and so transferred
the Napolitane astate from the Norman succession to the Germains, whereof there
followed great bloudshedyng.

Innocen^ius.3.
Innocence the.iii. because Philip Duke of Sueuia, son unto Barbarossa, was
chosen emperor against his will, not only excommunicated him, but also caused
Otho the.iiii. to be elected, and crowned him in Rome.

This bishop contendyng with the forenamed Philip was wont to say, either
shall Philip take from me my myter, or I from him his crown.

Otho had not long enjoyed the crown, but the bishop with his
exco^municacions made his princes to forsake him, and he the emperor him self
to forsake Italy: because he had moved wars against the church, and gotten
Montefiascone and Radicofano, entendyng also to invade the realm of Naples,
than belongyng to young Frederike son of Henry the.vi. who by his parents
was committed to the bishops protection.

Finally he deposed Otho, and named this Frederike emperor. Whereof there
followed so sharp wars, that at length, when Frederike had afterward
received the crown of Honorius the.iii. the Roman bishops persecuted
Frederike, and he them.

This Innocence being of the family of Conti in Rome, builded a notable fair
toure of brick there, which yet is to be seen, called La torre d' i Conti.

Honorius the.iii. crowned Frederike the.ii. emperor, and after excommunicated
him, Honorius.3.
for what cause I can not tell.

Gregory the.ix. did likewise excommunicate the emperor, Gregorius 9.
because he would not at his appoinctment go into Asia against the
infidelles. Afterward he ass^yled him upon his humble submission at Anagnia,
for.120. thousand ounces of gold paid by the emperor.

Than fell he in contencion with the Romans for the tribute of the territories
about the city, which the Romans alleged that the bishops usurped upon
their common wealth. And because Frederike favored the Romans cause, the
bishop did excommunicate him again, whereof followed cruel wars between the
emperor and the confederate citees of Lumbardie, with the battle besides
Corte noua, where the Mylanese and Lumbardes were so miserably slain, and
their Caroccio taken.

Than began also the civil sedicion of the two parties in Italy, Guelfi and
Ghibellini, that caused so much mischief.

The Romans after they had been ones by force subdued of this bishop, began to
rebel again: For the pacifiyng whereof the bishop carried about saint Peter's
and Paul's heads in procession, and so quyeted the people.

Finally being hardly handled by the emperor Frederike, who had taken diverse
legates, cardinals, and prelates prisoners, in their coming to Rome, he died
for sorrow.

Innocence the, iiii, before he was elected bishop, Innocentius.4.
was very friend to the emperor Frederike, but after he became so mortal
enemy unto him, that they ceased not the one to persecute the other as long as
they lived: not withstandyng that principally for respect of his old amitee
with the emperor, Innocence was elected bishop. And the emperor against this
election set at libertee diverse cardinals, that he had taken prisoners in the
wars, between him and Gregory the.ix.

This Innocence was occasion of the great discomfiture that Frederike had
before Parma, and yet was the authority of the Romans so great in his later
dais, that he durst not come in Rome.

Cardinal hattes.
He first ordained the Cardinals to ride with read hattes: and went to the
city of Naples, entendyng to have conquered the realm, where trauaylyng to
set forth an army he died.

Urbanus.4.
Urbane the.iiii. seeing the army prepared of Innocence, discomfited by
Manfredo, than governor of the realm of Naples, and him self unable to
resist both Manfredos power and the Romans also, Manfredo.
that newly had recovered their libertee, practiced with the French king,
that Charles Duke of Angiowe might come to conquer Naples and Sicile: but he
died er his purpose could take effect.

Clemens 4
Clement the.iiii. following the practice of Vrbane, received the forenamed Duke
Charles, that came with.30. galeys from Marsiles to Rome, and there created him
Senator. Which office he exercised for a time. Afterward he invested him
king of Naples and of Sicile, upon condition, he should hold it of the church
in fee, paiyng tribute yerelie.40000. ducketes: and by this mean brought the
Frenchemen to war against Manfredo. In which wars Charles prevailed, and
the German blood ceased: not only by the death of Manfredo slain in the
field, but also by the death of Corradino the right heir, who being taken
prisoner, through this bishops counsel was beheaded.

After long contencion amongst the Cardinals, and two years vacacion of the sea, Gregorius 1^*
Gregory the.x. was elected bishop. He incontinently pacified the wars
between the Uenetians and Genowaies, and called a counsel in Lions, unto the
which the emperor of Greece came with a noble company: and amongst other
certain infidel Tartares, who there received baptism.

He confyrmed Radulphus Earl of Holsatia emperor, though he came not to Rome
to receive the crown.

Nicolas the.iii. deprived Charles king of Naples of the vicarage of the
empire, Nicolaus.3.
that Clement the.iiii. had given him in Tuscane: and took from him also the
Senatourship of Rome, taking the use of that office into his own hands: and
made a law, that no prince from thensfoorth should be Senator of Rome. He
repulsed the Uenetian ambassadors with foul words, because of the siege
that they had laid to the city of Ancona. He took many citees in Flaminia by
force and practice, and brought them from obedience of the emperor to the
churches subjection. He went about to make two of his own kynne of the house
of Vrsina in Rome kings, the one in Tuscane, and the other in Lumbardie: but
he could not bring it to pass.

Finally he procured Peter king of Aragon, to challenge the realms of Naples
and Sicile, as the inheritance of his wife Constantia, daughter to the king
Manfredo. Whereof there followed sharp wars.

Martine the.iiii. a frencheman borne, after long contencion amongst the
Cardinals was elected bishop, Martinus.4.
who incontinently restored unto Charles than king of Naples, the office of
Senator of Rome, against the Romans will. For the which there happened much
bloudsheedyng: But at last the frenchemen so prevailed, that Richard
Hanniball, chief of the Romans, was feign to come with an halter about his
neck to ask pardon at the bishops feet. Whereupon the bishop made two new
Senators, and so ruled Rome at his will.

He excommunicated king Peter of Aragone, and cried the croisie against him,
because he had prevailed in winnyng of the realm of Sicile against king
Charles of Naples: and the excommunicacion was such, that all men might
lawfully take his lands and goods, where or how so ever they could come by
them. But this let not king Peter of his purpose.

Honorius.4.
Honorius the.iiii. confyrmed the excommunicacion of Martine against king Peter:
entitlyng the French king to the realm of Aragone, and the Earl of Arras, the
French kings son, to the realm of Sicile. Which both with several
powers enforced them selfs to occupy both those realms, according to the
bishops gift: but in effect they prevailed not.

Celestinus 5.
After long contencion, at length the Cardinals chose Celestine the.v. being an
hermit, who was so simple a man, continuyng still the old manner of his
abstinent life, that the Cardinals could not well supporte him.

Wherefore the Cardinal Benedicte Gaietane began a new practice, and fell at
composicion with his brethren, that if he could make Celestine resign, they
should elect him. So he made one with a cave thorough a wall cry to Celestine
in the night, as he lay in his bed: that God commanded him to resign his
bishoprike unto Benedict. Whereupon this simple man, beleuyng the voice to come
from heaven, gave over his dignitee, and caused Benedict to be chosen in his
place, namyng him Boniface the.viii. who for reward, fearyng least Celestines
life might be a trouble to his glory, caused the poor man to be taken by the
way as he returned toward his heremitage, and laid in prison in Castle
Fumone: where shortly after he was famished to death.

Boniface the.viii. cleauyng earnestly to the Guelfe part, Bonifa^ius.8.
persecuted cruelly two Cardinals of the house of Colonna, that than were
chief of the Ghibellines: and did so much hurt to that family, that after he
had rased their towns and houses to the earth, none of them durst appear.
For Sarra Colonna, chief of that house, fled so much the persecucion of this
bishop, that after he had lived a certain space in the woddes poorly amongst
the sheeppeherdes, at last he was taken of Pirates upon the sea costs, and
made a slave to the ore in the galeys.

This bishop giving ashes on ashewednesday to Porchetto archbishop of Genoa,
said to him in latin, remember man that thou art a Ghibelline, and with the
Ghibellines shall return into ashes, and therwithall threw the ashes in
his eyes.

He also was the first that ordained the year of Iubiley amongst the
Christians, year of Iubili^.
which caused wonderful resort from all parties to Rome.

He excommunicated Phi^ip the french king, because he would not go into the
holy land at his appointment, and deposed him of his crown, entitlyng Albert
Duke of Austriche to the same. To the intent the Almaines might avenge his
quarrel against the Frenchemen. But at length Sarra Colonna happened to arrive
in the port of Marsicles in France, where disclosyng him self, he was taken
out of the galey, had to the french court, and finally sent so strongely into
Italy with.200* men of arms, that he came sodeynlie on a night to Anagnia,
took the bishop in his bed, and led him to Rome prisoner: where within less
than.24. days he died for sorrow. So that there followed a saying of him: he
entered like a fox, reigned like a woulfe, and died as a dog.

Benedictus.11.
Benedict the.xi. assoyled the french king, reconsiled the two Cardinals of
the house of Colonna, and condemnyng the acts of his predecessor, did
nevertheless excommunicate the authors of his death.

Clement the.v. a Gascoygne borne, and bishop of Burdeux, Clemens.5
was after.xii. months contencion amongst the Cardinals elected bishop of
Rome: who for affection to his country, transferred the sea of Rome to Lions
in France: and called all the Cardinals thither to his consecracion. Whereat the
french king, with many other princes was present: and the Duke of Britain,
and diverse other slain, with the falling of a wall. For fear whereof Clement
fell from his horse, and lost a carboncle of his myter: esteemed to be
woorthe.vi. thousand duckates.

Than incontinently he made.xii. french Cardinallee, three of the which he
sent to Rome, with senators aucthoritee, to rule the city and all Italy. He
oppressed the sect called Fratic^lli: that were than newly risen in Lumbardie,
who would have had all things in common, without magistrates or rulers.

He interdited the Uenetians, because they succored the house of Este against
the church.

The Cardinal Orsino, than legate in Tuscane, excu^municated the citees of
Florence and Luke, because they would not be ordered by him, but the
Florentines provided a speedy remedy. For they laid such taxes on the
spiritual men, that the bishop, for his members sake, was glad to assoyle
them.

The French king practiced with the bishop, to reduce the imperial astate
unto him: but at length they agreed so ill, that Clement caused the Germans
to ^lecte emperor Henry the.vii. of Luxemburgh, who by the bishops procurement
passed into Italy with a mighty army, streigned sore the Italians, was
crowned of the Cardinals in Rome, and finally waxed so great, that the
bishop, mistrustyng his power, threatened to excommunicate him, if he departed
not the rather out of Italy. Wherefore the emperor fortified him self and his
army in the Theaters and Thermes of Rome, resistyng the bishops fauters, and
specially them of the house of Orsina: but at length for lack of victualles,
he was feign to forsake Rome, and to retire into Tuscane: where being at
Arezzo, he somoned Robert king of Naples, to appear before him, and for lack
of apparaunce deposed him of his realm by imperial sentence, which was by
Clement disanulled.

Finally the emperor by means of the bishops legate was poisoned in
receiuyng the sacrament of communion, in the town of Bonconuento. After whose
death the bishop him self lived not long.

When John^ the.xxii. had received the myter in Lions, Johannes.22.
he went streigthe to Auignion and there created viii. Cardinals, of the
which two only were Italians.

Shortly after he degraded a french bishop, and put him cruelly to death for a
conspiracy that he was accused of.

In this time the electours of Germany, not agreeyng togethers, chose two
emperors, Lewys of Bauarie, and Frederike of Austriche: each of them having
iii. voices: but the bishop allowyng Frederike, did excommunicate Lewys.
Wherefore Lewys after he had fought and taken Frederike prisoner, went with a
power into Italy, and received in Rome the imperial crown at the hands of
the Cardinal Colonna, both by assent of all the clergy there, and of the
Romans: who than had recovered to them selfs a manner of libertee, to chose
their own officers, and used yearly to take for their rulers two presidentes
of their own nobilitee, namyng them vicars of the empire. And because the
emperor had diverse ways sought to the bishop for his absolution, and could
not obtain it: therefore immediately after his coronacion he created a new
bishop in Rome, namyng him Nicolas the.vii. who took it upon him, gave
bishoprikes, and granted dispensacions, till after the emperors departure out
of Italy, he was taken by the Conte Bonifacio of Pisa, and sent prisoner to
the bishop John^ in Auignion, where he was laid in a stinkyng prison, and
miserably died.

This John^ condemned them as haeretikes, that would have had the churchemen
live poorly, as Christ's disciples did, and burned diverse of the.iii. order of
saint Fraunces, that than followed this profession.

Finally he died in Auignion, leauyng to his friends much more treasure, than
ever any of his predecessors had dooen.

Benedict the.xii. confyrmed the excommunicacion against the emperor Lewys of
Bauarie, Benedictus* 12*
not of his own will (as some write) but in manner by constreinct of the kings
of France and Naples. And the better to maintain his quarrel, he assoyled all
the astates of Italy of their feaultie to the empire, confyrmyng them free
princes in the same as vicars of the church. So that ever sens, the Dukes of
Mylaine, with the houses of Este, of Gonzaga, and the common wealths, of
Florence, Lucca, and others esteemed themperours less than they did before.

Besides this he made the Senators of Rome confess them selfs subjects to
the church only, and not to any other power. Frauncis Petrarke*
And by his time Frauncis Petrarke, as a Laureate poet was crowned with
Laurel in the Capitol of Rome, by Orso Earl of Anguillara than Senator there.

Finally this bishop died very rich in Auignion, and left his gooddes to the
church.

Clement the.vi. changed the Iubiley, Clemens Iubiley*
that was first ordained to be but ones every hundredth years to be kept
every.50. year, and to hold the astates of Italy in amitee with him, he
confyrmed each lord as vicare of the church in his own astate, Visconti in
Mylaine, Malatesta in Rimino, Pes^ro, and Fano, Feltrano in Vrbino, and a
noumbre of other.

In his time the Romans recovered their libertee again, and created their
officers without the bishops consent: so that one Nicolas Renzo, a Roman,
being entered into a wonderful favor and credit with the people, took upon
him the name and aucthoritee of emperor, writing him self Nicolaus Seuerus et
Clemens, Tribunus libertatis pacis et iustitiae, et liberator illustris sacrae
reipublicae Romanae. At whose beginning all Italy was in such admiracion,
that every prince sent to salute him as emperor: thinking he should restore
the Roman empire to his ancient astate. But his own folly destroyed him.
For he took part with one of the factions that were than in Rome: so that where
before he had no man against him, now had he a great noumbre, which brought
him at last into such a fear, that sodeinly he disguised him self, and
fled from Rome to Charles the.iiii. than emperor in Almaine, who took him as
a lewd person, and for a present sent him to bishop Clement to Auignion: and
he cast him in prison, sendyng certain Cardinals to Rome to settle the
astate there: which by means aforesaied had been a certain space disobedient.

Iubiley.
In this bishops time fell the year of Iubiley, which caused great noumbres of
people from all countries to resort to Rome, Plague of pestilence,
by reason whereof there fell such a plague of pestilence, as the like has not
been heard of. For (as some aucthours affirm) it endured continually the space
of three years throughout all Italy, and in most parts of the whole world,
so vehemently, that of every hundred there remaigned not.x. persons alive: and
in many countries not.x. of a thousand. Some write, that this plague began in
the east parts of Asia.

Finally this Clement procured the restitucion of the realm of Naples to
Queen Johan the first. For the which, and for his other good practices at her
being with him in Auignion, she sold the city of Auignion with the dominion
apperteignyng to the same, to the church: and was contented to accept for
paiement thereof, the arrerages of such tributes, as the bishop pretended,
that she and her predecessors did owe unto the church, for the realm of
Naples: whereof they claimed to be lords in chief.

Innocence the.vi. was more given to religion than diverse of his predecessors.
Innocentius.6.
For he reformed the courtly pomp that the Cardinals and prelates before time
used, and commanded spiritual men to be resident upon their benefices, with
diverse other good ordres, which took little effect.

The Romans in his time took on them their libertee: creatyng a Senator of
their own: so that the bishop, to recover his astate, delivered Nicolas Renzo
out of prison, and sent him to Rome, where on the bishops behalf he prevailed.
But through parttakyng he was again constreigned to flee disguised, and being
met, was known and slain.

This Innocence travailed much to have appeased our king Edward the.iii. with
the french king John^ in the time of the sharp wars between them, trustyng
always to have brought them to some good end: till he heard that king John^
was taken and led prisoner into England.

He caused Charles the.iiii. to be crowned emperor in Rome, and would have
quieted the Christian princes and powers, and united them in an enterprise
against the Turks: but his purpose could not take place.

Urbanus. ^*
Urbane the.v. sent Giles a Spaniarde, as his legate into Italy, which Giles,
with help of the other Italian princes, so sore oppressed the house of
Visconti, that it was like to have been destroyed, had not the kings of
England, France, and Cypres by their ambassadors procured a peace.

This Urbane withal his court went to Rome, where after long search (as they
write) he found the heads of saint Peter and Paul.

Finally returnyng into France, he died by the way, of poison as some think.

Gregorius 11.
Gregory the.xi. removed the seat of his bishoprike from Auignion to Rome,
after it had been holden in France.70. years. 1^76.
Some say he did it because of the cruel wars that were among the princes
and lords of Italy: which was ascribed to the bishop of Romes absence: for
their residence there stayed the Italian nation in peace.

Some say he did it upon a check given him by a bishop, that was his
familiare: whom he asked, why he was not resident upon his bishoprike, as the
Canon laws commanded? Whereunto the bishop answered: And why holy father are
not you resident upon yours? But what so ever the occasion was, he conueighed
him self with all his court from Auignion to Rome: where of the Romans and
clergy, he was received with Iubilate.

After when he had pacified most part of the Italian princes, because the
Florentines would neither be entreated, nor reformed by excommunicacion, he
made war against them: and during the same died of the stone.

In his time John^ Acton, Sir John Acton*
with.v. or.vi. thousand english horsemen, sought the adventure of the wars
in Italy, and first served the citesins of Pisa against the Floren^^nes, than
the Visconti against the church, in which service he was taken prisoner, but
afterward the bishop of Rome made him his general, whilst the bishop lay
in France. And than did John^ Acton get the towns of Faenza and
Bagnacauallo, whereof he sold one to the Marquis of Este for.20000. crowns, and
the other he kept to him self. But when the bishop was come to Rome, and had
not so rewarded him as he deserved, he forsook the bishop, and was made
general of the Florentines. Under whom he served very honorably, with such
a number of our nation, both horsemen and footmen, that all Italy feared him:
and glad was that prince that might reteigne him. For in all his enterprises he
behaved him self so woorthyly, that the Florentines after his death buried him
honorably in their cathedral church, as a singular defender of their common
wealth.

Urbane the.vi. was elected by.xvii. Cardinals, Urbanus.6.
whereof.xiii. were frenchemen, that would feign have chosen a bishop of their
own nation. But for fear of the people that cried a Roman or an Italian,
they consented to this election: and did honor Urbane the space of.iii.
months and more.

The season than waxyng hot, they desired license to go abroad into the
realm of Naples: where by maintenance of Queen Johan.viii. of the french
Cardinals elected a new bishop of their own nation, namyng him Clement
the.vii. whereof followed a great Schism. For Germany, Italy, and Hungary,
held with Urbane, and the other realms with Clement. So that Urbane, being of
nature a cruel man, to make his party the stronger, called Charles Durace out
of Hungary to conquer Naples from Queen Johan.

This Clement upon displeasure deprived Charles, and gave the title of the
realm of Naples to Lewys Duke of A^giowe, who with a puissant army of
frenchemen entered into Italy, purposyng not only to expel Charles, but also
to take Peter's mantel from Urbane: but he prospered not. For after he had made
war in Puglia about.xii. months, at last he was slain in battle. Whereof
Urbane waxed so proud, that because Charles king of Naples would not consent
to make his nephiew prince of Campania, he did excommunicate him, and if his
power had been equal to his will, had deposed him of his crown. But Charles
handled the bishop so streictely, that he was feign to flee to Genoa: In which
journey he sacked.v. of his Cardinals, and threw them into the sea,
Cardinals sacked and baked.
and caused two other to be baken to poudre: cariyng their ashes in sackes
upon moyles before him for a terror to the rest.

After this Charles death, he returned to Rome, and did as much as in him
lay to destroy Charles children. Wherein he prevailed not: but rather procured
him self a great danger, if he had not prevented his mischief with creatyng
of.xxix. Cardinals, whereof.xxvi. were Napolitanes. And finally by most
opinions he was poisoned and died in Rome, to the peoples great contentacion,
that for his crueltee much abhorred him.

Boniface the.ix. of.xxx. years of age succeeded him, which had not ben seen
before. Bonifa^^us.9.
And because he would bridle the Romans from the libertee that the people
had used many years in chosyng of their officers, he absented him self with
his court from Rome, and lay at Ascisa: so that when the year of Iubiley
came, the Romans could by no mean get him to Rome, till they had promised to
renounce their libertees unto him, which sens that time they could never
recover. For incontinently as he was entered into the city, he made Castle
Sant' Angelo so strong, that it has been and shall be a continual bridle to the
people: and a great stay against emperors.

This bishop ordained the Annates, that all spiritual promocions should pay
to the church of Rome, Annates.
half a years value at every change: which decre took place in all realms,
saving in England. For the king and his barons would suffer none other but
bishops to be bound to this Annates.

In his time the year before the Iubiley, a certain priest passed the
mountains into Italy clothed in lynnen, who drew a world of people after
him, called the white company: persuadyng them, that a certain crucifixe,
which he carried before them, did many times weep. All the day long they
should travail on their journey, and at night like beasts lie them down,
whereas the day light failed them. But the bishop, fearyng this multitude,
as they were coming toward Rome, sent men of war against them, dispersed
the company, and brought the priest to Rome: where for his abusion he was
burned. After whose death partly through this fond assembly, and partly
through the great resort of people to Rome for the Iubiley, there followed a
wonderful great pestilence over all Italy.

About this time Crisolora a Constantinopolitane, revived the Greek letters in
Italy, where they had not been used.500. years before.

And like as this Boniface succeeded Urbane in Rome, even so did one Peter Luna
succeed Clement in Auignion, and was called Benedict the.xiii.

Innocence governed the Romans with so much tirannie, Innocentius.7.
that they openly murmured against him, and at length sent.xi. of their chief
citesins to require their libertee, with the fortresses that he held, as
Campidoglio, Castle Sant' Angelo, and Ponte Molle, but all in vain. For he
kendled with ire thoroughe the message, caused those.xi. citesins to be put to
death, and thrown out at the wyndowes of his nephiewes house. So that the
Romans assembled, and not only caused the bishop to flee to Viterbo, but
also sacked and spoiled the houses and richesses of all his prelates and
Courtisanes, and the Capitol with Ponte Molle, and would have gotten Castle
Sant' Angelo, had it not been impregnable.

Than called they Ladislaus king of Naples to aid them, but Paulo Orsino,
with the bishops power, discoumfited Ladislaus, and so constreigned the Romans
to ask mercy, to receive their bishop home again, and to obey him as he
would. Whereupon the bishop made his nephiew Lewys Marquis of Ancona, and
prince of Fermo, and so died.

Gregory the.xii. was than chosen upon condition, Gregorius 12.
that if Bennet the.xiii. than resident in Auignion, for the union of the
church, would consent to be deposed, he also should depose him self.
Whereupon a counsel was called at Pisa, in the which they two were deposed,
and Alexander the.v. elected. But for all that the Schism ceased not till the
counsel of Constance.

Whilst this Gregory was absent, Ladislaus king of Naples came to Rome, and
there was received of the Romans as their sovereign lord. But he enjoyed it
not long. For Paolo Orsino fought with him to so much advantage, that
Ladislaus was feign to retire into his own realm: and diverse of the
principal Romans were for this cause beheaded.

Alexandre the.v. gave the title of the realm of Naples to Lewys Duke of
Angiowe, Alexandre.5.
and by his ecclesiastical aucthoritee deposed Ladislaus, and did what he
could in helpyng Lewys to subdue him: but it prevailed not.

John^ the.xxiii. succeeded Alexandre, Johannes.23.
more by force than by free election, by reason that he, being legate in
Bononia, where Alexander died, and having the men of war at his
commandment, threatened so the Cardinals, that they durst chose none other.

He in deed resembled more a man of war than a prelate.

He moved war against the king Ladislaus, but at length he was repulsed,
and constreigned to forsaken Rome. And being by the whole consent of the
astates of Christendom called to the counsel of Constance, where diverse
crimes were laid unto him, he fled away thense: was taken, laid in prison:
and finally he with Gregory the.xii. and Benedict the.xiii. all three than
living, deposed of their pontificalitee, and Martine the.v. elected in their
place.

Martinus 5.
Martine the.v. rested.xii. months after his election at the counsel in
Constance, the better to establish his own aucthoritee, and than went into
Italy, where he pacified the wars between the Duke of Mylaine and the
Uenetians. By force he constreigned Braccio di Montone, a notable man of war,
to humble him self at his feet: and to restore certain towns that he before
had taken from the church: and finally so behaved him self, that he was over
all quietely accepted for supreme bishop: so that the Schisms, that had so
long continued ceased. And coming to Rome, which was greatly decayed, he so
disposed him self to the repayryng of it, that in short time it became
indifferent fair and pleasant.

Eugenie the.iiii. had so great prease of people at his consecration,
Eugenius.4.
that the bishop of Senegalia was styfled to death. And shortly after, being
persuaded, that his predecessor Martine, had left a great treasure hid, he
caused Oddo Poccio, that had been Martines vice-chambrelaine, to be sent for,
by his capitain Stephen Colonna: who only of the house of Colonnesi favored
the bishop. And because the servants of this Stephen sacked Oddos goods, and
brought him like a thief to the bishop, whereas he commanded no violence to be
used: therefore the bishop fell out with Stephen: so that Stephen fled to
Preneste to the prince Colonna, enformyng him, that Eugenie purposed the
destruction of their whole name and family. Whereupon the Colonnesi made an
army, came to Rome, entered in at the gate called Appia, and going forth as
far as saint Marks without hurt doing, met there with the bishops power:
and fought a sore battle: so that at length, contrary to all men's expectacion
the Romans took the bishops part, and constreigned the Colonnesi to withdraw.
In which retyryng they took prisoners and prays as in open war: and after
that used such practices for poysonyng of the bishop, and betraiyng of Costel
Sant' Angelo, with other like feats, that Eugenie was glad to entreat them
for peace: which he easily obtained.

Than came Edmonde son of Charles the.iiii. emperor to Rome, and there with
great solenmitee and pomp received the imperial crown of Eugenie, and
returned into his country without attemptyng any thing of importance.

Not long after the Duke of Mylaine made war against the bishop, and sent
Nicolas Fortebraccio with a great noumbre of chosen men to Rome: who arrived
there with so much diligence, that he passed Ponte Molle, and came to the gate
Flaminia, ere ever the bishop was ware of him.

This Nicolas Fortebraccio had served the bishop before in a certain
enterprise that was made at Vetrala and Ciuita Vecchia: and because he had
gotten there many fair booties, therefore at his return the bishop refused to
pay him his wages, saying, that his fair gayue ought to suffice him. For the
which Nicolas departed: and now retournyng under the Duke of Mylaine, with
help of the Colonnesi, encouraged the Romans so to challenge their libertee,
that Eugenie was feign to disguise him self in a monks habit, and to take
his bote toward Ostia. And yet ere he were far onwardes on his way, the
people hearing of his departure followed him down the river, with hurlyng of
stones and shot of arrows: and than created new magistrates after their own
manner, deposyng and chasyng away all such as had ought to do in the bishops
name: and laid siege unto Castle Sant' Angelo, which was all their vndooyng.
For the captain thereof wrought this policy, he sent his me^ forth daily to
skyrmishe, and ordained certain of them to suffer them selfs to be taken: who
for their libertee and money withal, should promise to slay their captain,
and to betraie the castle. It came to pass as it was devised, so that after
their return to the castle, A witty policy.
they showed out a dead man's head, and requyryng their money offered to deliver
up the castle. Whereupon certain of the principal Romans entered, and so
being taken, were occasion that within the space of.v. months after the
Romans returned to their former obedience: the bishop than being at Florence.

This mean while the princes and prelates of all Christendom began to
assemble for keeping of the general counsel at Basile: and by one agreement
cited.iii. times Eugenie to come thither, with his Cardinals. And because he
came not, they threatened to depose him. Wherefore he sent his apostolical
bulls thither with certain Cardinals to confyrme all things there
determined.

Than sent he the Patriarch Vitelesco to Rome, who there used many cruel
tourmentes and deaths against the enemies of Eugenie: and after went into the
realm of Naples: pretending title thereunto in the churches right. In which
quarrel he fought with the prince of Taranto, and took him prisoner with two
thousand horse: and missed little of taking the king Alfonse under color of
truese.

In his return to Rome he utterly destroyed Preneste, the chief town
belongyng to the house of Colonna: but at last his chance was to be betrayed
and slain him self.

After this Eugenie called a counsel in Ferrara, whereunto John Paleologo
emperor of Constantinople, with the principal of the greek church came, and
disputed certain articles of religion, which were agreed upon in the
counsel following at Florence. And all be it, that Eugenie had great
assemblies at both these counsels, yet were there a noumbre of bishops, that
sat still at Basile, always sommonyng Eugenie to repair thither: and at last
for lack of appearance (partly through instaunce of Philip Duke of Mylaine,
than enemy to Eugenie) the counsel of Basile deposed him, and created in his
place one Amideus, than being an heremite, that before had been Duke of Sauoie:
namyng him Felix. By reason whereof Christendom was divided into.iii. parts:
Two held with these.ii. bishops, and the.iii. with another of both.

Than returned Eugenie unto Rome, where he was joyfully received of the
people, and lodged the first night at the gate Flaminia: but the second day,
as he went in Pontificalibus toward saint Peter's, because the custom of the
city was raised double, the people began to cry, down with the customs,
and with the inuentours of them: so that the bishop was feign to promise them
it should be no more levied.

Shortly after he made war in the Mark of Ancona, and recovered it out of
the hands of Francesco Sforza: and finally provoked Charles than Dolphin of
France, by plain force to drive away the bishops that held the counsel at
Basile: and so remaigned in his astate till he died.

Nicolaus.5. Amideus.
Nicolas the.v. succeeded Eugenie, unto whom Amideus renounced his title by
compulsion of the emperor Frederike. For which renunciacion Nicolas created
him Cardinal and legate in Germany. He crowned the same Frederike and his
wife with the imperial crowns in Rome, and travailed much, partly by fair
means, and partly by threatninges to appease the war between the princes
and states of Italy: but his excommunicacions could not rule them.

Calixtus.3
Calixt the.iii. incontinently after his election prepared an army against the
Turks, armed.xvi. galeys of his own, and under the leadyng of the patriarch
of Aquileia sent them into the Leuant seas: and ceased not to persuade all
Christian princes, as much as in him lay, Alfonse.
to that expedicion. Amongst whom Alfonse king of Naples, and Lewys Duke of
Burgoyne, took ones the cross on them toward that viage: but thorough some
occasions they changed purpose.

Not long after the king Alfonse died. Whereupon Calixt, under pretense of
title to the realm of Naples, made great preparacion of war against
Ferdinando son to Alfonse: but being prevented by death, both the rumor and
fear thereof ceased.

When he died, he left.150. thousand dukates in his coffers, which he said
he had prepared for the wars against the Turk.

Pius the secounde, Pius.2^
shortly after his election called a counsel in Mantua: Unto the which came
ambassadors from all Christen princes. And all be it, that through the bishops
persuasion, who was him self an excellent Orator, it was there concluded,
that to the expedicion against the Turks, at the bishops devise, every prince
and astate should be contributour, as well for sendyng of men and municion, as
also for maintenance with money, yet when it came to the poinct there was
nothing dooen.

During this counsel, many rumors were reised in Tuscane, yea and in Rome:
that one Tiburtio, son of Angelo Massiano with certain companions, had taken
the temple of Pantheon, and there fortifiyng him, disturbed the whole city.

The party called Auersana, enemies to the bishop, had also taken Viterbo:
which the bishop at his return recovered.

All which things, with a noumbre of commocions in the Mark of Ancona, in
Vmbria, and in the confines there, at length the bishop appesed either by
policy or by force.

He caused Lewys the french king to renounce certain exactions, granted him
of the church in the counsel at Basile: and defended Ferdinando king of
Naples against John^ son to Raynolde Duke of Angiow.

Finally disposyng him self altogether to the enterprise against the Turks,
and being arrived in Ancona, to meet with the Uenetian galeys and captain,
named Christofer Moro, for the same purpose, he died of a continual fever.

And leauyng behynd him.40000. dukates, with certain ships and galeys prepared
for that viage: the Cardinals delivered both the one and other to the
Uenetian captain. The money to be sent to the king of Hungary, to relieve
his need, and the ships to serve on the seas with the Uenetian army.

Paulus.2.
Paul the secounde so much abhorred learned men, that he accoumpted all them
that were of Platos Academie, to be heretics: and deprived a noumbre of
virtuous and learned men of such offices and promocions as his predecessors
had called them to: amongst whom was Platina. And being entreated to be more
graciouse unto them, considering they were old men, had followed the court
all their days, and many also had bought their livings dear, so that neither
by law, nor yet by reason, he ought to deprive them: he aunsweared, that
forasmuch as the law and reason rested in his breast, to allow or disallow what
he thought good: his will being so, it was both sufficient law and reason.

Than picked he a quarrel to the family of Auersa, and with help of certain
men of war, sent to him by Ferdinando king of Naples, he assaulted them,
and took.9. of their castles. Of the which ^ame were so strong, that they
seemed impossible to be won. And because the bishop, through the kings
help, had atteined these fortresses and possessions, the king required
certain small benefits at his hands: but the vncourteyse bishop would grant
nothing: wherefore they squared a little: and than agreed again.

After this, the bishop gave him self to idleness and plays, and in the
shrouyng time devised a noumbre of games and prices to be won, and distributed
much money amongst boys, the better to maintain his pastyme. In the end
whereof happened him such a fear, that he wist not what to do. For it was
told him, that certain young men had conspyred against him by the
procurement of one Calimaco a simple man. And further, that one Luca Totio a
banished Roman had been seen with a noumbre of banisshed men in the wooddes
there by. Upon which enformacions he caused diverse men of reputacion to be
taken, as well courtiers as other, and without any matter or good ground of
suspicion, put them to such terrible tourmentes, that it would grieve and
gentill heart to hear it.

He attempted the winnyng of Tolfa, first by treason, than by siege, and
lastly, when he could not so get it, he purchased it for.7000. dukates.

Likewise he assaulted the city of Rimino, to have taken it from the family
of Mala^esta, but he failed of that enterprise.

He used very great Symonie: and when any bishoprike fell, he would translate
the bishops from one see to an other for the gain of their first fruits: by
reason whereof he gathered a great treasure, and delited very much in iewelles.

Finally he persuaded all men to keep their children at schole till they could
write and read: and no longer: and died sodeinly.

Sixtus.4.
Sixtus the.iiii. was both learned and eloquent, and contrary to his
predecessors nature delited in learned men.

He did his best to succor the princes that were driven out of their
countries by the Turk, as the queen of Bossina, the Paleologi, the Despoti,
and diverse other. And yet did he unjustly both reise wars him self, and
also cause other princes to do the like.

First he began with the Florentines, because they had emprisoned his nephiew
a Cardinal, and had hanged the archbishop of Pisa for killyng of Iuliano di
Medici.

He made war to Ferdinando king of Naples, because he had not aided the Duke
of Ferrara against the Uenetians.

He made war also to the Uenetians, and gathered all the astates of Italy
into a leage against them: leauyng them excommunicate when he died.

He levied many dismes and subsidies of the clergy through all Christendom,
and was very beneficial to his own kynne and friends.

Finally by his time Macomet the.ii. emperor of the Turks had taken Otronto
in Puglia: and prepared him self to the conquest of Italy. Wherefore the
bishop made him ready to flee into France, and had fled in deed, if God by
preuentyng of that enterprise had not set a stay to the Turkisshe fury with
Macometes death.

Innocence the.iiii. assoyled the Uenetians, and travailed much to agree the
Christian princes together. Innocentius.4.
Nevertheless because his last predecessor had released to the king of Naples
certain pretended duties of the church: therefore, procuryng first certain
astates of the realm to rebel, he moved war against Ferdinando, and at
length constreigned him to agree at his own appoinctment.

He pacified also a great contencion between the families of Colonna and
Orsina, whose variaunce had been cause of no small fire, bloudde, and spoil.
He had a son and a daughter, whom he left very rich: and was nevertheless
reputed both liberal and pitiful.

Alexander the.vi. was a Spaniarde borne, Alexander.6.
and a great philosophier. He entered in league with Alfonse king of Naples
against Charles the.viii. French king, who than prepared him self to come
into Italy. Nevertheless Charles power was such, that the bishop not only
gave him passage, but also received him in Rome honorably. And yet
mistrustyng the french kings high courage, seeing he feared but little the
ecclesiastical power, the bishop withdrew him self into Castle Sant' Angelo,
though by fair entreatie he came out again, and yielded all his dominion at
the kings will: and besides that delivered him Zizimo, brother to the great
Turk, that before was the bishops prisoner.

But ere ever Charles returned out of the realm of Naples, which was within
less than half a year after, the bishop had wrought a new league against him,
wherein the emperor Maximilian, the king of Aragone, the Uenetians, and the
Duke of Mylaine were his colleges. So that Charles in his return toward
France was fought withal, and sore handled.

Finally Charles being thus departed, this bishop began to wax high, and
imaginyng how to extol his own name, he created his son Valentino Borgia
Duke, causyng him first to renounce his cardinal hatte, which at his fathers
creacion was given him, and than made he him captain of an army sent into
Romagnia: where first he warred against Katherine lady of Imola and Furli, and
not only took her just possessions from her, but also sent her prisoner to
Rome: and than proceeded further against the other lords theraboutes. So that
having chased away the families of Manfredi, Ordelaffi, Malateste, Feltrani,
Veranei, and diverse other, in manner of no less astate than princes, he gatte
into his possession the countries of Romagnia, and Marca d' Ancona, with the
dukedomes of Vrbino, Camerino, and Spoleti. Of all the which his father
entitled him Duke, and entered into so great a pride with his sons
prosperitee, that he would say to him, either a Caesar or nothing.

Through coumfort whereof, being given to ouermuche couetousenesse, in hope of
empire, he poisoned diverse rich Cardinals to have their goods: and amongst
his other practices he appoincted poisoned coumfettes for a Cardinal that
dined with his father, but the father him self was served of the wrong box
and died. And the son not long after slain in the midst of all his
glory: notwithstanding that by his fathers time he was coupled in marriage with
the daughter of the Duke of Ferrara.

Pius the.iii. died within a month, Pius.3.
not without suspicion of venim.

Iulie the.ii. being a man more given to arms than to prayer, more like Julius
Caesar, than Simon Peter, Julius.2*
was wont to say, that Maximilian had been meet to be bishop, and he emperor.

First he procured such a league against the Uenetians, that they had never a
foot of ground left them on the maine land: so that he had for his part
Rauenna, with the other citees of Romagnia.

He destroyed the family of Borgia: and quieted much the civil sedicion,
that had long time reigned in the Roman nobilitee.

He made war against the Bentiuogli, that tha^ were lords of Bononia, and
having chased them away, entered into that city with like triumph, as the
ancient Roman conquerours were wont to do into Rome.

Many times he would go armed him self, specially in the enterprise against
Lodouicus Picus of Mirandula.

Finally fearyng the french kings to much prosperitee, he entered in league
with the Uenetians, and the king of Spain against the French king, which was
occasion of the notable battle of Rauenna, fought on Easter day: where on
both sides were slain about 30000. men. For as I have been credibly
informed, wha^ both battles were ioigned, Spaniardes on the one side, and
frenchemen on the other, the Duke of Ferrara that came on the french part,
shot of his artillery amongst the thickest, and slew a multitude as well of
his friends as enemies: but they were all strangers to him.

In conclusion the Frenchemen took Rauenna, with diverse other citees of the
bishops, which they enjoyed not long. For the bishop immediately gatte into
his league the emperor, the king of England, the Germans, and the Suizers.
So that the French king, being vexed on all sides, was easily constreigned to
forgo his conquestes and dominions in Italy: specially through force of the
Suizers, that under the leadyng of their Cardinal Sedunese, came in great
number to the bishops service: who rewarded them with the title of defendours
of the church, and gave them a gilt sword, and an hatte of maintenance.

Somewhat before his death he established his cousin Francesco Maria Duke of
Vrbine.

Leo.10.
Leo the.x. of the house of Medici, a Florentine borne, was a pleasant man of
nature, and gave him self more to humanitee and pleasures of this life, than
either to religion, or to increase of dominion.

He increased much the reputacion of his house, but because he expulsed by
force Francesco Maria, Duke of Urbine out of his astate, and placed in the
same, first his brother Julian, and after his nephiew Laurence, the world
accused him of tyranny. For he attempted to do the like unto the Duke of
Ferrare, but he prevailed not.

Some ill was suspected of him for his to much delicateness in bringyng up of
children, and for his opinion of immortalitee.

Adrian the.vii. by contencion amongst the Cardinals happened to be elected,
Adrian.7.
reputed of them for an ignorant man, though some other had a good opinion
both of his virtue and learning. But because his life was nothing courtely, or
agreeable to the Cardinals, either through gods visitacion, or (as most men
think) thoroughe their poison practices, he was soon dispatched.

Clement the.vii. brother, Cleme^s* 7*
unto Leo the.x. immediately after his election, took part with the French
king against the emperor. So that, when the french king was taken before
Pauia, the family of Colonna, which has been always imperial, through help
of Don Hugo Moncada, began to war with the bishop: and after diverse subtle
practices and persuasions, so handled the mattier, that they entered into Rome,
and missed but a little to have taken the bishop: who hearing the rumor,
sodeinly fled to Castle Sant' Angelo. Wherefore after the bishop had drawn Don
Hugo Moncada to his part, the Colonnesi endured cruel war to their great
damage.

Than came the Duke of Bourbone, who was slain with the shot of an handgun
from the walls of Rome* but the emperors army, whereof he was captain, took
the city by assault, sacked, spoiled, and burned it: and for the space of.xv.
days used such triumph, that for their passetyme they would make such
Cardinals and prelates as were their prisoners, ride scornefully about the
town upon asses, with their faces to the tail: and so streictly besieged
Clement, that he was feign to give them.400000. dukates for his ransom, and
to yield the castle into the emperors hands.

But within less than.iii. years after, the emperor came him self into
Italy, and having made peace with the bishop, received of him the imperial
crown in Bononia, with so great triumph and pomp, that the like has not been
heard of in our days. During the which there came ambassadors to Clement
with letters from Preter John^ of great commendacions, desire of amitee, and
union of religion.

Before their departure from Bononia, the emperor granted the bishop his
army against the Florentines, and concluded the marriage of his bastard
daughter to Clementes nephiew, Alexander di Medici, that afterward was Duke
of Florence. But ere the Florentines would lose their libertees, they
susteigned a notable war for the space of.xii. months.

And like as by force he oppressed the Florentines, so by treason he subdued
Ancona. For under pretense of amitee and counsel, persuadyng them that the
Turks army by sea, was coming against them, he sent a captain of his,
called Bernardin, who with certain men of war was received into the city,
and so usurped the dominion for the church.

In this bishops time happened such a sodeine rage of water in Rome, that the
high toures were drowned, and a great number of people, with infinite richesse
lost: so that the bishop him self had much adooe to escape it: which may
well be thought a plage of god, sent for the abhominacion that reigns there.

Finally Clement met with the french king at Marseiles in Prouaunce, and
there concluded the marriage that followed between Katherine Clementes niece, and
Henry now french king, than but secounde son to the french king. Shortly
after whose marriage Clement died.

Paul the.iii. that now is bishop, Paulus.3.
before the time of his election, held him self so indifferent between the
factions imperial and french, that no man could know to whether part he was
most inclined.

In the beginning of his time he procured all Christian princes to war
against the Turk, so that the emperor, that Uenetians, and he made an army
by sea under the leadyng of Andrea Doria, who met with Barbarossa besides
Corfu, but they fought no battle, though the Christians were more in noumbre
and better furnisshed than the Turks: whether Andrea Doria were blame worthy
I can not tell. But ones the Uenetian Galeon, a notable ship, was left alone
in the midst of the Turkishe navy, that assaulted her.iiii. or v. hours,
and yet at length came clean away in despite of them all.

This bishop went to Nisa in Prouaunce, where by his procurement the emperor
and french king met, and concluded a peace, which dured not long.

Than died the Duke of Urbine. Incontinently upon whose death, the bishop made
war to the young Duke Guido Vbaldo for the state of Camerino, and
constreigned him for a little sum of money to give over the astate. In in
which the bishop establisshed his own son Pietro Aluigi Duke.

After this upon a light occasion the bishop made war to Ascanio Colonna,
thief of that family: and Peter Aluigi, being general of the bishops army,
handled Ascanio Colonna and his adherentes so cruelly, that they were feign to
abandone their own towns and castelles, and to live in exile as banished men,
till by the emperors means they were restored to the bishops favor and
absolucion.

This Paul, to exalte his own bloudde, by consent of his Cardinals
exchaunged the Duchy of Camerino with the church, for the citees and
territories of Placentia and Parma. Whereof he invested his forenamed son as
Duke: whose behavior was such, that he continued not fully two years: for the
nobilitee of the same, detestyng his wicked life and tyranny, conspyred
against him, and slew him in his own house in Placentia: yeldyng that city
the next day into the emperors hands.

The bishop sent a fair army both of horsemen and footmen, to succcour the
emperor in his enterprise against the Germans: and made his sons son,
called the Duke Ottauio general.

Finally he is a great astronomer, and so old a man, that (as they say) for
the most part he is nourished with the suck of a woman's breasts: and to help
his cold nature, has two young girls to lie by him in his bed a nights.

Anno do. Nu^bre of b. Names. Years. Months. 33 1 Petrus. 25 7 70 2 Linus. 11
3 81 3 Cletus. 11 1 92 4 Clemens. 9 2 101 5 Anacletus. 9 2 110 6 Euaristus. 9
10 119 7 Alexander. 10 7 129 8 Sixtus. 10 3 139 9 Thelesforus. 11 143 10
Iginius. 4 3 147 11 Pius. 12 159 12 Anicetus. 9 4 168 13 Sotherus. 9 3 177 14
Eleutherius. 21 6 198 15 Uictor. 10 3 208 16 Zeferinus. 9 2 217 17 Calixtus. 5
2 222 18 Urbanus. 8 2 230 19 Pontianus. 5 2 239 20 Antherus. 3 1 242 21
Fabianus. 14 255 22 Cornelius. 3 258 23 Lucius. 3 2 261 24 Stephanus. 3 2 264
25 Sixtus.2. 2 9 266 26 Dyonisius. 6 272 27 Phelix. 4 3 276 28 Eutitianus. 8 10
284 29 Caius. 11 4 295 30 Marcellinus. 9 4 304 31 Marcellus. 5 6 309 32
Eusebius. 2 7 311 33 Melchiades. 4 7 315 34 Siluester. 21 336 35 Marcus. 2 8
338 36 Julius. 16 4 354 37 Liberius. 16 7 370 38 Phelix.2. 1 4 371 39 Damasus.
18 2 389 40 Siritius. 15 11 404 41 Anastasius. 3 408 42 Innocentius. 15 2 424
43 Zosimus. 1 8 425 44 Bonifatius. 3 4 428 45 Celestinus. 8 436 46 Sixtus.3. 8
444 47 Leo. 21 1 465 48 Hilarious. 6 3 471 49 Simplicius. 15 1 486 50 Phelix.3.
8 11 494 51 Gelasius. 4 8 498 52 Anastasius.2. 1 10 499 53 Symacus. 15 6 514 54
Hormisda. 9 523 55 Johannes. 2 8 525 56 Phelix.4. 4 2 529 57 Bonifatius.2. 2 1
531 58 Johannes.2. 2 4 533 59 Agapitus. 1 534 60 Siluerius. 1 5 535 61
Uigilius. 17 6 552 62 Pelagius. 11 563 63 Johannes.3. 13 576 64 Benedictus. 4 1
580 65 Pelagius.2. 10 2 590 66 Gregorius. 13 6 603 67 Sabinianus. 1 605 68
Bonifatius.3. 8 606 69 Bonifatius.4. 6 8 613 70 Deodatus. 4 617 71
Bonifatius.5. 5 622 72 Honorius. 12 11 634 73 Seuerinus. 1 635 74 Johannes.4. 1
9 636 75 Theodorus. 6 5 643 76 Martinus. 6 1 650 77 Eugenius. 3 653 78
Uitellianus. 14 6 667 79 Adeodatus. 4 7 672 80 Donus. 1 2 673 81 Agatho. 2 6
676 82 Leo.2. 10 677 83 Benedictus.2. 10 679 84 Johannes.5. 1 11 682 85 Conon.
684 86 Sergius. 14 8 698 87 Johannes.6. 3 3 701 88 Johannes.7. 2 7 707 89
Sisimus. 20. days. 713 90 Constantinus. 7 729 91 Gregorius.2. 2 9 740 92
Gregorius.3. 10 8 752 93 Zacharias. 10 2 757 94 Stephanus.2. 5 1 768 95 Paulus.
10 769 96 Constantinus.2 10 1 772 97 Stephanus.3. 1 5 796 98 Adrianus. 3 10 817
99 Leo.3. 23 5 820 100 Stephanus.4. 20 7 827 101 Paschalis. 3 3 830 102
Eugenius.2. 7 831 103 Ualentinus. 4 40. days 846 104 Gregorius.4. 16 848 105
Sergius.2. 2 3 858 106 Leo.4. 2 5 860 106 Johannes. foe.7 2 5 863 107
Benedictus.3. 9 2 871 108 Nicolaus.9 5 9 877 109 Adrianus.2. 10 887 110
Johannes.8. 1 5 888 111 Martinus.2. 1 3 890 112 Adrianus.3. 6 896 113
Stephanus.5. 5 6 901 114 Formosus. 15. days. 901 115 Bonifatius.6. 1 3 902 116
Stephanus.6. 3 902 117 Romanus. 20. days. 902 118 Theodorus.2. 2 904 119
Johannes.9. 3 4 907 120 Benedictus.4. 40. days 907 121 Leo.5. 7 907 122
Christopherus. 3 914 123 Sergius.3. 7 2 916 124 Anastasius.3. 2 6 917 125
Lando. 930 126 Johannes.10. 13 2 930 127 Leo.6. 6 933 128 Stephanus.7. 2 1 937
129 Johannes.11. 4 10 941 130 Leo.7. 3 6 131 Stephanus.8. 3 4 944 132
Martinus.3. 3 6 948 133 Agapitus.2. 9 7 958 134 Johannes.12. 4 10 962 135
Benedictus.5. 2 962 136 Leo.8. 1 4 963 137 Johannes.13. 6 11 969 138
Benedictus.6. 1 6 971 139 Donus.2. 1 6 971 140 Bonifatius.7. 6 973 141
Benedictus.7. 8 5 981 142 Johannes.14. 8 932 143 Johannes.15. 4 982 144
Johannes.16. 10 6 992 145 Gregorius.5. 2 5 994 146 Johannes.17. 10 995 147
Siluester.2. 4 1 999 148 Johannes.18. 5 1000 149 Johannes.19. 4 4 1004 350
Sergius.4. 2 6 1006 151 Benedictus.8. 11 11 1018 152 Johannes.20. 9 1027 153
Benedictus.9. 10 4 1038 154 Siluester.3. 2 1038 155 Gregorius.6. 2 3 1040 156
Clemens.2. 9 1040 157 Damasus.2. 1 1040 158 Leo.9. 13 2 1053 159 Uictor.3. 1 3
1055 160 Stephanus.9. 4 1060 161 Benedictus.10. 8 1061 162 Nicolaus.2. 3 6 1063
163 Alexander.2. 11 6 1073 164 Gregorius.7. 12 1 1085 165 Uictor.3. 1 4 1086
166 Urbanus.2. 12 4 1100 167 Paschalis.2. 18 3 1118 168 Gelasius.2. 1 5 1120
169 Calixtus.2. 5 10 1126 170 Honorius.2. 5 5 1131 171 Innocentius.2. 14 8 1145
172 Celestinus.2. 5 1146 173 Lucius.2. 11 1147 174 Eugenius.3. 8 7 1155 175
Anastasius.4. 2 4 1158 176 Adrianus.4. 4 10 1161 177 Alexander.3. 21 1181 178
Lucius.3. 4 2 1185 179 Urbanus.3. 1 11 1186 180 Gregorius.8. 2 1186 181
Clemens.3. 2 1188 182 Celestinus.3. 6 7 1195 183 Innocentius.3. 18 4 1214 184
Honorius.3. 10 7 1225 185 Gregorius.9. 14 3 1240 186 Celestinus.4. 18. days.
1242 187 Innocentius.4. 11 6 1254 188 Alexander.4. 6 6 1262 189 Urbanus.4. 3 1
1265 190 Clemens.4. 3 9 1271 191 Gregorius.10. 1 2 1273 192 Innocentius.5. 5
1273 193 Adrianus.5. 40. days 1273 194 Johannes.21. 8 1276 195 Nicolaus.3. 3 8
1280 196 Martinus.4. 4 1 1284 197 Honorius.4. 2 1 1286 198 Nicolaus.4. 4 1 1290
199 Celestinus.5. 5 1291 200 Bonifatius.8. 8 9 1300 201 Benedictus.11. 9 1302
202 Clemens.5. 8 10 1317 203 Johannes.22. 19 3 1336 204 Benedictus.12. 7 3 1343
205 Clemens.6. 10 8 1353 206 Innocentius.6. 10 1362 207 Urbanus.5. 8 5 1371 208
Gregorius.11. 8 1379 209 Urbanus.6. 11 8 1380 210 Bonifatius.9. 14 9 1390 211
Celestinus.6. 15 1399 212 Benedictus.13. 21 1404 213 Innocentius.7. 2 1407 214
Gregorius.12. 2 7 1409 215 Alexander.5. 8 1410 216 Johannes.23. 4 10 1415 217
Martinus.5. 14 3 1430 218 Eugenius.4. 15 1438 219 Phelix.5. 9 1447 220
Nicolaus.5. 8 1455 221 Calixtus.3. 3 3 1458 222 Pius.2. 5 11 1464 223 Paulus.3.
6 1471 224 Sixtus.4. 13 1484 225 Innocentius.8. 5 11 1492 226 Alexander.6. 11
1503 227 Pius.3. 1 1503 228 Julius.2. 9 4 1513 229 Leo.10. 9 3 1522 230
Adrianus.6. 1 7 1523 231 Clemens.7. 11 1535 232 Paulus.3. 14

Authors do vary somewhat in the times of these bishops, but I have
agreed the best togethers, and so have set it forth.

The Uenetian astate.
BEcause the meruailouse Situacion of the city of Uenice, amongst other
things seems unto me most notable, I therefore have thought good first to
treat thereof: and than consequently to proceed unto the declaracion of the
Uenetians astate, their customs and procedynges.

Of the meruailouse Site.
When I consider what things necessitee causes (having an earnest proof for
my part thereof) I nothing marvel, to see the wonders that it works. For he
that beholds the place, where Uenice stands, and would imagine it to be
without any buildyng or habitacion, should say it were the rudest, vnmeerest,
and vnholsomest place to build upon or to enhabite, that were again to be
found thoroughout an whole world: It stands open upon the maine sea, four
miles from the nearest maine land, in such a marishe, as at every low water
leaves the muddy ground uncovered, and at every full sea drowneth it clean.
And yet men (constreigned of necessitee) have brought this marishe to such a
pass, that it is now not only excedyng full of people, and rich of treasure
and buildings: but so wholesome withal (through the much haunte of people
and the great noumbre of continual fyres) that I think none other city hable
to show so many old men. But were it not, that as it seems nature has of
purpose made a bank two or three miles of, between it and the sea, it were
impossible to be enhabited: Because the city standing equal with the water,
the floudde by reason should pass through the houses at every full sea. But
this bank, that begins at Chiozza, and stretches toward the city of
Concordia, 60. miles of length, does so defend the water floudde, that
within those marshes it has nothing the like force as on the other sea
costs. For it is a great mattier when the sea swells in Uenice.iiii. or v.
foot above the low water mark: Notwithstanding that the city seems to be
rather in a part of the sea, than in a marisshe. For every channel (as who
would say every street) is full of water, and the channels are so many, that
you may row through all parts of the city: though there be ways also, to
go on land if you list. Which streets for the most part are very narow,
and the houses nothing so fair as on the water side. And in the marisshe,
between the city and the maine land, when the water is low, the most part of
the channels are so shalow, that the botes have much a do to pass to and
fro. For the mudde increases daiely, by reason of the land flouddes, that a
noumbre of rivers falling into the same, do carry with them. And a
wonderful treasure the Uenetians spend in continual diggyng and cariyng away
of that mudde, to preserve their foresaied chanelles, and to defend, that
their city ioygne not to the maine land.

The bank before rehearsed, is broken in.vii. places, through the which botes
may come in: but no ship can pass to Uenice, saving at the port of
Malamoco, or at the two Castelles of Lio. The entry whereof is so dangerous
(by reason the sands are mouable here and there) that when any ship comes
in, she takes first pilottes to sound the way: which in effect is reputed
to be one of the greatest sureties, that the Uenetians have for defense of
their city, against all ennemies by sea: and than by land it is impossible to
hurt or besiege it, unless the enemy were hable to occupy.150. mile compass
with his army.

Of buildings.
Next unto the situacion, the manner of their buildyng is most to be meruailed
at. For almost every man that builds an house, makes his foundation lower
than the water: and er ever he set in hand withal, is constreigned to make
such a strong pale of pyles and mudde between his buildyng and the water, as
shall be hable to defend his work, when (after he has closed it well) the
water and mudde that rests within, is cleansed and emptied out. Than causes
he strong pyles of timber of a great length, to be driven in, and thereupon
with stone and gravel begins his foundation. So that when he has brought
it to the full sea mark, he rekenneth to have furnished one half of his
buildyng: notwithstanding that above water I think no place of all Europe,
hable at this day to compare with that city for number of sumptuouse houses,
specially for their frontes. For he that woull row through the Canale grande,
and mark well the frontes of the houses on both sides, shall see them, more
like the doings of princes than private men. And I have been with good reason
persuaded, that in Uenice be above.200. palaices able to lodge any king.

But now to the particular of their notable buildings: The new Castle, at the
mouth of the haven Lio, for strength and beauty is one of the rarest things
dooen in these days.

The church of S. Mark is a very antike thing, furnisshed with goodly
pillars of fine marble, to the noumbre of.900. (as they say) besides the
floor under foot of small marble stones, wrought in knottes of diverse
colors, and four fair brazen horses over the front.

The Dukes palaice is a very sumptuouse buildyng, and not yet finished.

The street called, La Piazza di San Marco, is very fair and large, and the
one side is built of hard stone, all uniformly with fair glasen wyndowes,
and the street by low, paued over with brick.

Saint Marks steeple is a veraie high and fair toure of brick, so well
built, that within forth an horse may be led up unto the bellfroy.

The Rialto is a goodly place in the heart of the city, where the merchauntes
twyse a day assemble.

The schools of S. Rock and S. Mark, are two notable things: the frontes
whereof are the fairest and costliest that ever I have seen.

Finally, the Arsenale in mine eye excedeth all the rest: For there they have
well near two hundred galeys in such an order, that upon a very small
warnyng they may be furnisshed out unto the sea. Besides, that for every day
in the year (when they would go to the cost) they should be hable to make a
new galey: having such a staple of timber (which in the water within
Th'arsenale has lien a seasonyng, some.20. year, some.40. some an.100. and
some I wot not how long) that it is a wonder to see it. And every of these
galeys has his coueryng or house by him self on the dry land: so that the
long liyng unoccupied can not hurt them. Their mastes, cables, sails,
ankers, rooders, ores, and every other thing are ready in houses of offices by
them selfs, that unseen it is almost incredible: with such a quantitee of
artillery, both for sea and land, as made me to wonder, besides the harneyse
and weapons, that suffice (as they say) to arm an ^00000. men. Finally the
noumbre of woorkemen waged for term of life about those exercises, is
wonderful. For by all that I could learn, their ordinary is never less
than.600. woorkyng in the Arsenale, be it peace or war. And because they have
such a number of botemen, that continually live by gain upon the water within
the city: they need not to seek further for mariners to furnishe their
galeys withal. For it was credibly told me, that there are no less than
12000. botes daiely seruyng in those their chanelles: and almost no bote rowed,
but of a sufficient mariner. So that if the Uenetians had been men, as the
Romans were, given as well unto chivalry by land, as unto the exercise on
the water: no doubt they might many years agoen have subdued the world. But
sure their power has been more warely governed, than valiantly enlarged. For
sens Constantinople was gotten by the Turks, their dominion has decreased,
both by reason (as the ^ame gothe) they rather practice with money, to bie and
sell countries, peace and war: than to exercise deeds of arms: and for that
most Uenetians are at these days become better merchauntes than men of war.

And now methynketh it convenient to speak in this place, of the armorie that
is in an hall of the Dukes palaice, called La Sala del Consiglio d'i dieci,
which surely is a very notable thing.

There be (as they reckon) a thousand cotes of plate, part covered with
clothe of gold and veluette, with gilte nails so fair, that princes might
wear them: besides diverse other fair harneyses made of late, which are
bestowed in so fair an order, with their diverse kinds of weapons, furnisshed
of the best sort, that a great while lookyng on, could not satisfy me. This
hall is divided into diverse several porcions, as the house does give it, and
every portion has his sort by him self very handsomely.

Finally for provision of fresshe water it is a wonder to see their noumbre of
costly wells, made only to receive the rain that falls from the houses. I
call them costly, because first every well has his bottom as low as the salt
water, and must therefore be so surely walled and stopped with sand on the
utter side, that it defend the salt water from sokyng in. And on the inner
side it must have his vent to receive the water, that falls from the houses,
gravel within to pass thorough, and last of all a fair pauyng of brick or
stone in the bottom closed about like a cester^e, to preserve the purged water.

And though they have a great noumbre of those wells, and plenty of rain,
yet the poor men, that dwell in the country, do gain yearly above.20000.
crowns, by bringyng their botes laden with fresshe water from the rivers to
Uenice. Yet all this notwithstanding, you shall many times hear much
lamentacion among the poor folk for lack of water.

Of the dominion.
BEsides all those towns and habitacions that are in their marshes, and on
that long bank between them and the sea, as Murano, Mazzorbo, Torcello,
Malamoco, Chiozza, and others, they have on the maine land the country of
Friuli, anciently called Forum Iulij, the citees of Treuiso, Padoa, Vicenza,
Verona, Bressa, Bergamo, and Crema, with their appurtenaunces.

The most part of the country of Istria, and upon the costs of Dalmatia (now
called Schlauonia) they have Zara and Zebenico: In the mouth of the Adriatike
sea the i will of Corfu: and in the Leuant seas, otherwise called Mare
Mediterraneum, the notable islands of Candia and Cyprus. So that if the ground
that they be lords of, were in one man's hands, he should be no less worthy
to be called a king, than most kings that are known at these days. For not
long agoen Cyprus (a part of this) has had a king alone. And how and when
they got these things, this brief history, hereafter following particulerly
declares.

Of revenue.
AS I have been credibly informed by some gentilmen Uenetians, that have had
to do therein, they leauey of their subjects little less than.4. millions of
gold by the year, which (after our old reckenyng) amounts to the sum of
ten hundred thousand pounds sterlyng. A thing rather to be wondered at than
believed, considering they reyse it not upon lands, but upon customs after so
extreme a sort, that it would make any honest heart sorrowful to hear it. For
there is not a grain of corn, a spoonefull of wine, a corn of salt, egg,
bird, beast, foul, or fisshe bought or sold, that paieth not a certain
custom. And in Uenice specially the customers part in many things, is more
than the owners. And if any thing be taken by the way uncustomed, be it
merchaundise or other, never so great or small, it is forfeited. For those
customers keep such a sort of prollers to search all things as they come to
and fro, that I think Cerberus was never so greedy at the gates of hell as
they be in the chanelles about Uenice. And though they in serchyng a boat,
find no forfeiture, yet woull they not depart without drinkyng money. And
many times the meanest labourer or craftesman throughout all their dominion,
paieth a rate for the Poll by the month. Insomuche that a Candiote my friend
(one that had dwelled in Constantinople) swear to me by his faieth, the
Christians lived a great deal better under the Turk, than under the
Uenetians. It is almost incredible, what gain the Uenetians receive by the
usury of the Jews, both privately and in common. For in every city the
Jews keep open shops of usury, taking gaiges of ordinary for.xv. in the
hundred by the year: and if at the years end, the gaige be not redeemed, it is
forfeite, or at the least dooen away to a great disadvantage: by reason whereof
the Jews are out of measure wealthy in those parties.

Of dignitees and offices.
They have a Duke called after their manner, Doge, who only (amongst all the
rest of the nobilitee) has his office immutable for term of life: with a
certain yearly provision of.4000. duckates or theraboutes. But that is so
appoincted unto him for certain ordinary feasts, and other like charges,
that his own advantage thereof can be but small. And though in apparaunce he
seems of great astate, yet in veraie deed his power is but small. He keeps
no house, lives privately, and is in so much servitude, that I have heard
some of the Uenetians them selfs call him an honorable slave: For he can not
go a mile out of the town without the counsels license, nor in the town
depart extraordinarily out of the palaice, but privately and secretly: And in
his apparaile he is prescribed an order: so that in effect, he has no manner of
preeminence but the bare honor, the gift of a few small offices, and the
libertee, Di mettere vna part, which is no more, but to propounde unto any of
the counsels his opinion, touching the order, reformacion, or correction of
any thing: and that opinion every counsel is bound taccepte into a trial of
their sentences by Ballot: (the manner of which ballottyng shall hereafter
appear) and this privilege, to have his only opinion ballotted, no man has
but he. And whereas many have reported, that the Duke in ballottyng should have
two voices, it is nothing so: for in geuyng his voice he has but one ballot,
as all others have.

Next unto the Duke are three called the Signori Capi, or Cai, which outwardly
seem inferior to the Duke, and yet are of more auctoritee than he. For their
power is so absolute, that if there happen cause why, they may arrest the
Duke. And all such proclamacions as concern the maiestee of their common
wealth, go forth always under their name: Like as we use to say in the
kings name, so say they, Da part de i Signori Cai. Two of which Cai, or one
of them, with one of the Auogadori, have power, Di metter vna part, such as
is before rehearsed of the Duke.

Than have they.vi. counsaillours of the most worthy among them, who are
ioygned with the Duke to sit in the college for audience of ambassadors, and
other mattiers of importance: and these specially are called La Signoria. For
notwithstanding there be diverse ioygned in the same college with them, as, Gli
^auij della terra ferma, and other more: yet those.vi. counsaillours are of most
reputacion in that place: and accordyngly go always apparailled in skarlet or
crimsen silks.

In deed, La Signoria, is commonly used as the name of their whole maiestee,
and principally it does include the Duke, with the rest of the chief
officers or senators (to the number of three score) that accompanies him,
when in his solemnitee he comes to church, or goes unto any of the ordinary
ceremonies abroad in the city.

Now of such as have auctoritee to consulte upon mattiers of importance (as
we should say, the kings maiestees privy counsel) they have.xvii. persons
appoincted, called Il Consiglio di dieci: Of which the Duke, the three Cai,
and the.vi. counsailours are part.

For mattiers of conclusion of peace, of war, of astate, or of other like
greatest importance, they have a counsel called, Pregadi, into the which
enters the Duke, with the Consiglio de dieci, and of the other principal
officers, to the number of.200. or theraboutes.

For mattiers of justice, there be diverse other offices, as Il Consiglio di
Quaranta, Il Consiglio di trenta, gl' auogadori, ^ Signori di notte, gl'
Auditori uecchie nuoui, and many more: which have their degrees and orders so
appoincted, that not one of them woulle meddle with an others office: b^yng a
thing no less fearful unto them than poison. For their principal
profession is libertee: and he that should usurp upon an other, should
incontinently be reputed a tyranne: which name of all things they can not
abide. For when a subject of theyrs says: sir, you are my lord, you are my
master, he takes it for the greatest villainy of the world.

The Signor della Sanita has the charge to see the city kept clean, and the
sick provided for. And as for other particular officers, that have the
oversight of all manner provisions and assise of vittailes, it shall suffice to
say, that there comes nothing unto their city, but it is viewed, and an
ordinary price appoincted unto the seller, to the intent the bier be not
deceived.

Of the great counsel.
Now it behooves me to say somewhat of their great counsel, which seems
to be the whole stay of their common wealth.

There be about.200. families of name, as Contarini, Morosini, Donati, Badoeri,
Foscari, and such others: of which families be welneere the noumbre of 2500.
gentilmen. And all they that are of the age of 25. and vpwardes, do enter
into the great counsel: the order of whose admission into the same is: When a
gentilman is grown unto.20. year old, his father or friends do present
him unto the Auogadori, who takes his name, and with other names of the same
sort, puts it into a box, until the.iiii. of Decembre: being the day
appoincted, that all they of that age resort unto the Duke, unto whom (besides
this box) there is brought an other box, with so many balls, as the names
amount unto: of which every fifte ball is gold, and all the rest silver. Than
takes the Duke a bill out of one box, and a ball out of an other, and if the
bill meet with a golden ball, than is that gentilman allowed: and if he meet
not, than must he abide a better chance the next year, orels the age of.25.

This foresaied great counsel may be lykened to our parliament: For unto it
many mattiers of importance are appealed, and that that it does, is
vnreformable. By it all offices are given. And into it enters the Duke, and
all the other officers. And finally there pass so many things through that
great counsel (specially offices) that ordinarily every holidaie, and many
times the worken days, the same sits from diner till night. The order being
this.

They have an hall very fair and large, in the principal part whereof, at
the tone end, sits the Duke with certain counsailours. And over against
him at the other end the Cai: and on the sides the Auogadori, with the other
magistrates. Than in the body of the hall there be ten long benches from the
one end thereof unto the other, and so made, that the gentilmen may sit by
two rewes on a benche back to back. And so every man being set, in what place
it shall please him to take at his coming in, the doors are shut: and the
chancellor stands up, and reads the office that is void, with the names
of them that desire it: and he that in the election has most ballottes (so
that they pass the half noumbre) is admitted officer. If there be none that
has more than half the voices as of a 1000. to have.501: than is the election
put over till an other day. This manner of geuyng their voices by ballotte, is
one of the laudablest things used amongst them. For there is no man can
know what an other does.

The boxes are made with an holow place at the top, that a man may put in his
hand, and at the end of that place hang.ii. or.iii. boxes, into which he
will, he may let fall his ballot, that no man can perceive him. If there be
but two boxes (as commonly it is in election) the one says yea, and the other
says naie: And if there be.iii. boxes (which for the most part happens in
cases of judgment) the one says yea, the other says naie, and the third
says nothing: and they are all well enough known by their diverse colors. By
this order of ballottyng they proceed in judgment thorough all offices, upon
all manner of causes: being reputed a sovereign preseruacion of justice. For
oftentimes the judges may grant their voices, and nevertheless (when they
come to the hearing of the mattier) do as their consciences shall lead
them: aunswearyng afterward, that they did their best, but they could not
prevail.

Finally in the disposyng of their offices they use this order: that all
offices of preeminence, as of the Signoria, that are before rehearsed, or the
being Potestate, Captain, or Governor of any city, castle, town, or
country, may be given to none other, but unto gentilmen Uenetians. All
offices, that be under commandment, as chancellor, secretaries, and such
others, are bestowed amongst their best known citesins. For though there be
many of those offices of commandment very profitable, yet can no gentilman
have the benefit thereof. Either because they woull mainteyne in their
personages a certain maiestee, with their lybertee, or else because they woull
aduoide the inconveniences that may grow of perpetuitee. For all manner of
gentilmens offices, from the highest to the lowest (the Dukes dignitee only
excepted) ar remouable, some from year to year, some every.ix. months, some
more, some less (for no gentilman may long enioie one office): So all
offices, that appertain unto their citesins, are durable for term of live
without any change.

Amongst all other, this notable order they have, that two gentilmen of one
family can not be in one magistrate or high office together at ones. By reason
whereof those gentilmen, that of one name are fewest in number, grow a great
deal sooner and oftener to authoritee, than they that be of the most: which is
thought a wonderful help of their unity and concord. For if many of one
name should rule at ones, they might happen so to agree, that it should be an
undoing of their common wealth.

Of the proctours and treasure.
THere be certain principal officers, which should seem exempted from their
common wealth, and be nevertheless heads of the same, that is to were xii. of
the principallest called Procuratori di San Marco, out of which number the
Duke is alwaie chosen: and those have their offices for term of life, with a
certain stipende of an hundredth dukates a year, or there about. Their charge
is, seem to govern the revenues and treasure of the common wealth, and some
the rentes and treasure of saint Marks church.

As for the treasure of their common wealth I could never find the mean to
see it: but I have been credibly informed, that it is a great sum of ready
money locked up in chestes, (that no man may come at) which is sometime more
and sometime less, as their wealth or charges increase. And though their
reuenewe be very great, yet considering the often wars that they have, the
great wages that the senators and officers receive, the noumbre of strange
capitaines that they wage for term of life, the noumbre of castles and
fortresses that they maintain, fortified with watch and ward, their
continual costly buildings, and finally the unreasonable charge of their
Arsenale, and of their galeys abroad, I think they can not lay up any great
some at the years end.

The other treasure of saint Marks church, I have seen: the principal thing
whereof is a table on the high altar, plated over with silver, graven and
enameled, and set full of preciouse stones of all sorts. And than in a little
strong corner on the southsyde of the church are certain plates of gold
much like women's partelettes set full of rich stones, a goodly imperial
crown for their Duke, two fair unicorns horns, and diverse other things,
the value whereof consists only in the preciouse stones: For the gold that
is about them is but small in quantitee, but the stones are many in number,
excellent great and fair, and almost inestimable of price.

Finally to return unto the Proctours, their reputacion is the greatest next
the Dukes, and there is none can clymbe unto that dignitee, but either he must
be so worthy, ancient and notable a man, as few like are to be found
amongst them: or else so rich, that in time of need he has before his
election releaued the common wealth with the lone of a notable sum of money.
Which second sort of election is also commen up of late, sens money (as
some say) has entered in more reputacion than virtue.

Of laws.
Their advocates (as we should say our men of law) study principally the
civil laws, and besides that the statutes and customs of the city: which
are so many, that in manner they suffice of them selfs. But he that
substancially considers the manner of their procedynges, shall plainly see,
that all mattiers are determined by the judges consciences, and not by the
civil, nor yet by their own laws. For in every office there be diverse
judges, and that part that has most ballottes, prevails ever: be it in
mattier of debt, of title of land, upon life and death, or otherwise. And in
every trial of theft, murder, or such other, the party him self is never
suffered to speak. But there be certain advocates waged of the common
reuenewe, which with no less study plead in their defense, than the
Auogadori, in the contrary. One day the Auogador comes into the court, and
lays against the felon that, that either by examinacion, by torture, or by
witness has been proved: And an other day comes in th'aduocate, and
defends the felon with the best aunsweare he can devise: so that many times
the prisoner tarieth.ii.iii. and sometime.iiii. years, er ever he come unto his
trial of life and death.

This order they observe in Uenice only. For out of Uenice the gentilman
Uenetian, that is Potestate of the city, town, or place, has absolute power
to judge upon all mattiers him self alone: how be it every of them, has a
counsel of learned men, to advise him what the law commands. Besides that,
every.v. years there be certain inquisitours, called Sindici, sent forth to
refourme extorcions, and all other things that they find amiss, throughout
their whole dominion.

Finally there is a law in Uenice, that no gentilman Uenetian may speak with
any ambassador, without license of the Signoria, for fear of intelligence, or
of daungerouse practice. And because they fear, least civil sedicion might be
the destruction of their common wealth, as of diverse other it has been,
therefore they have provided an order, that when any two gentilmen happen to
fall out, either they do so dissemble it, that their malice never appears
to the world, or else they agree within them selfs. For if it come to the
Signorias knowlage, it can not be chosen, but he that is most faulty receives
a great rebuke, and many times in those cases diverse are banished, or sharply
punished. As for their other laws, though I were sufficiently expert in them,
yet partly for briefness, and partly because they are not so much necessary
to my purpose, I pass them over. But this is clear, there can be no better
order of Justice in a common wealth than theirs, if it were duly observed. How
be it corrupcion (by the advocates means) is so crept in amongst the judges,
that poor men many times can want no delays in the process of their mattiers.

Of war.
I Find two sorts of war, one by sea, an other by land.

By sea the Uenetians them selfs govern the whole, and by land they are
served of strangers, both for general, for capitaines, and for all other men
of war: because their law permits not any Uenetian to be captain over
an army by land. (Fearyng I think Caesar's example) Nevertheless with their
army by land, they send forth diverse of their gentilmen, some as legates,
some as paiemaisters. So that their general, (what noble man so ever he be)
has always a counsel of the Uenetians about him: by who^ in manner all
things are dooen.

And by sea every Galey has one gentilman Uenetian for captain, by the name
of Sopracomito: and over a noumbre of galeys one Legate (as it were an
admyrall) that may hang and punisshe at his pleasure. This is ordinary both
in peace and war. For though the peace be never so sure and quiet, yet fail
they not to send forth yearly certain armed galeis to keep the seas against
Corsales, and Pirates: not only because their merchaundise may pass saufely
to and fro, but also for the honor that they claim in the dominion thereof.
For yearly on the ascension day, the Duke, with the senate, in their best
araie use to go into the haven at Lio, and there by throwyng a ring into the
water, to take the sea as their espouse.

Finally when they hap to have any daungerouse war by sea or land, they
create a Proueditore, who (out of Uenice) is of no less authoritee, than the
Dictatour was wont to be in Rome: specially by sea. And lightly they never make
a Proueditore, but either they be in great fear, or peril. And throughout all
their dominion, within any city or walled town, no man may carry weapon
without a special license.

Of common provision, and charitable deeds.
Their diligente use in provision for grain is notable. For be it dear or
good cheap their common graner (which is a myghtie great house) is in manner
always furnisshed. So that lightly in the city can be no great dearth,
because many times of their own common purse, they are contented to lose for
the poor peoples relief (though an other time they pay them selfs the
double).

They have also certain schools or felowships gathered together for devotion,
as one of saint Mark, an other of saint Rooke, one of this saint, an other
of that: which (being for the most part substanciall men) do relieve a
noumbre of the poor after this sort.

Poor people.
They give them ones a year a course liuerey, with a certain small stipende,
for the which the poor man is bound to carry a taper at one of the brethren
or sisters burial, and besides that to attend certain holidaies at the
school, where the principal brethren assemble, to dispose unto the marriage
of poor young women and in other good works, that part of money that their
rate for the time does allow: and afterward (with their priests and
clerks) go a procession a certain circuit, in the which the poor men
likewise carry their tapers before them.

Hospitals.
Furthermore there are certain hospitalles, some for the sick and diseased,
and some for poor orphans, in which they are nourished up till they come
unto years of service: and than is the man child put unto a craft, and the
maidens kept till they be married. If she be fair, she is soon had, and little
money given with her: if she be foul, they auaunce her with a better portion
of money.

For the plague, there is an house of many lodgeynges, two miles from Uenice,
called the Lazaretto, unto the which all they of that house, wherein one has
been infected of the plague, are incontinently sent, and a lodgeyng sufficient
appoincted for them till the infection cease, that they may return.

Finally for prisoners they have this order: Prisoner^
Twyse a year, at Christmas, and Easter, the Auditori do visit all the
prisones in Uenice, and there give audience unto all creaditours that have any
debtour in prison for the sum of.50. duckates and under. If the party be
hable to pay, days are given, and sureties found: and if the debt be
desperate, than do they them selfs agree with the party for more or less,
as the likelyhode is, and pay him of the common purse. So that ere ever they
depart, they empty the prisones of all them that lie for that sum.

Of customs in their living.
TO speak of the gentilman Uenetians private life and customs, I wot not
whether it be best to follow the common report: or to dissemble the mattier.
And yet me seems I can not do more indifferently than recite what is used
to be said on both sides.

If any man would say, there were no worthy men amongst the Uenetians, he
should greatly err. For (as I believe) there be some, and specially of those
old fatherly men, as wise, as honest, as faiethfull, as honorable, and as
virtuous, as in any place can be found. Likewise some of the young men, as
gentill, as liberal, as valiant, as well learned, as full of good qualitees,
as may be. But to speak of the greatter number, strangers use to report,
that the gentilman Uenetian is proud, disdeinfull, couetouse, a great nygarde,
a more leachour, spare of living, tyranne to his tenant, finally never
satisfied with hourdyng up of money. For though (say they) he have.viii.ix.
or.x. thousand duckates of yearly reuenew, yet woull he keep no more persons
in his house, but his wife and children, with ii. or.iii. women servants, and
one man, or two at the most, to row his Gondola. He woull go to the market him
self, and spend so miserably, that many a mean man shall fare better than
he. Of his.10000. duckates a year, if he spend three or.iiii.C. in his house,
he estemeth it a wonderful charge. Besides all this, he has.ii. or.iii.
Jews, that choppe and change with him daiely: by whose usury he gains out
of measure. And yet woull be rather see a poor man statue, than relieve him
with a penie. It is true, he woul have his wife go gaie and sumptuously
apparailed, and on his woman besides, if he be a lover (as in manner they be
all) he woull stick for no cost. To the marriage of his daughter.30.40. or.50.
thousand duckates is no marvel. Finally his greatest triumph is, when
saint Mark has need (for under that name is comprehended their commonwealth) to be hable to disburse an huge sum of money in lone, to receive
yearly till he be repaied.10.12. or.15. of the.hundredth.

This kind of pressed the Signoria uses to take (borowyng of all them that are
hable to lend) when they happen to have wars. And they that may, do the
more willyngly lend: because they are not only well paid again with the
usury, but also the more honored and favored as long as their money is out
of their hands.

This is their trade, says the stranger. But the Uenetian to the contrary
defends him self on this wise.

Admit (says he) that this report were true, If I be proud, I have good
cause, for I am a prince and no subject. If I be spare of living, it is
because my common wealth allows no pomp, and measure is wholesome. If I keep
few servants, it is because I need no more. If I bie my meat my self, it is
because, I woul eat that, that I love, and that (having little a do) I woul
exercise my self withal. As for my tenant, he lives by me, and I am no
tyranne for husbandyng mine own. If I gain, I gain upon my money, and hide
not my talent in the ground. If I love, I hate not: if she be fair, I am the
more worthy. If I spend little, I have the more in my purse. If I spend
largely with my daughter, it is because I woull bestow her on a gentilman
Uenetian, to increase the nobilitee of mine own bloudde, and by mean of such
aliaunce to atteine more habilitee to rule and reign in my common wealth:
Besides that, my money: if her housbande die, is hirs and no man's else. If my
wife go gaie, it is to please mine eye, and to satisfy her. In keeping my
money to lend unto saint Mark, it is both an help to my common wealth, and
a profit unto my self.

And thus defends the Uenetian it, that in manner all the world lays unto
his charge.

But surely many of them trade and bring up their children in so much
libertee, that one is no sooner out of the shell, but he is hayle fellow with
father and friend, and by that time he comes to.xx. years of age, he knows
as much lewdness as is possible to be imagined. For his greatest exercise is
to go amongst his companions, to this good woman's house and that. Of which
in Uenice are many thousands of ordinary, less than honest. And no marvel
of the multitude of their common women, for among the gentilmen is a certain
use, that if there be diverse brethern, lightly but one of them does marie:
because the number of gentilmen should not so increase, that at length their
common wealth might wax vile: wherefore the rest of the brethern do keep
Courtisanes, to the intent they may have no laufull children. And the
bastardes that they begette become most commonly monks, friars, or nuns: who
by their friends means are preferred to the offices of most profit, as
abbottes, priours, and so forth. But specially those Courtisanes are so rich,
that in a mask, or at the feast of a marriage, or in the shrouyng time: you
shall see them decked with iewelles, as they were Queens. So that it is
thought no one city again hable to compare with Uenice, for the number of
gorgeouse dames. As for their beaultie of face, though they be fair in deed,
I woull not highly commend them, because there is in manner none, old or
young vnpeincted. In deed of their stature they are for the most part veraie
goodly and bygge women, well made and strong.

The libertee of strangers.
AL men, specially strangers, have so much libertee there, that though they
speak very ill by the Uenetians, so they attempt nothing in effect against
their astate, no man shall control them for it. And in their Carnouale time
(which we call shroftide) you shall see maskers disguise them selfs in the
Uenetians habit, and come unto their own noses in derision of their customs,
their habit, and misery.

Further, he that dwells in Uenice, may reckon him self exempt from
subjection. For no man there marketh an others doings, or that meddleth with
an other man's living. If thou be a papist, there shall thou want no kind of
supersticion to feed upon. If thou be a gospeller, no man shall ask why thou
come not to church. If thou be a Jew, a Turk, or beleeuest in the devil
(so thou spread not thine opinions abroad) thou art free from all
controllement. To live married or unmarried, no man shall ask the why. For
eating of flesh in thine own house, what day so ever it be, it makes no
mattier. And generally of all other things, so thou offend no man privately,
no man shall offend the: which undoubtedly is one principal cause, that
draws so many strangers thither.

An abbridgement of the Uenetian histories from the edificacion of the city
unto this day.
OMittyng the diverse opinions of many men, touching the beginning of the
Uenetian name, I will recite that which most writers agree upon, (that is to
say) either they are descended of certain people called Heneti, (which after
the destruction of Troie came with Anthenor into Italy: and landyng in those
marshes of the Adriatike sea, enhabited the country theraboutes) orels of
certain Britons called Veneti, part of those Frenchemen that first passed the
mountains, whose habitacion in Britain, at that time called Veneti, is
supposed to be now called Vanes. So that whether it be of Heneti, or of Veneti,
at length they were called Venetiani.

Now to come to the foundation of their city, I find, that between the years
of grace.422. and.456. (about the time that Attila plaged the whole region of
Italy) the gentilmen and citesins, principally of Padoa, and generally of all
the country about, between the Alps and the Uenetian Goolfe (to flee the
fury of the Hunni, that with fire and swoorde consumed all things before
them) resorted with their gooddes and richesse into the marshes, where
Uenice, with her other members now stands: and perceiuyng what a commoditee
or sauegarde those marisshes were against the enemies rage (Italy being so
often scourged with wars at that time) they upon agreement began the
edificacion of that city, in the place Riuo alto, now called Rialto: where was
builded the church of saint James, that yet unto this day remains. And
all be it, that before this time the banks within those marshes had been
occupied and enhabited: yet because the inhabitauntes were poor fisshermen:
the place merited not to be written of or mentioned, until such time as those
gentilmen and citesins resorted thither. Wherefore I say, that the Padoanes
(most of auctoritee amongst the rest) after this first buildyng of the
city, ordained certain consules for the gouernyng thereof: who for a few
years, now one, now other ruled the same: until the city began to wax
great and populous: and that (because the situacion of the places in the water,
would not suffer the city to be one whole thing together, but divided into
diverse islands, as the water did give) they were feign to appoincte yearly over
every island one Tribune to govern them: and for mattiers concerning the
whole common wealth, they ordained a general counsel, whereunto all the
Tribunes, with certain of the chosen citesins, should repair. And so under
these Tribunes began their commonwealth to increase, their citesins to make
ships, as well of war as of merchandise, and so to trafficque abroad the
world. But principally the diligence of their fisshers yielded them no small
gain, by reason that their saltfishe, carried into other places, was bought as
a special merchaundise. So that in process of time their reputacion, wealth
and force began so much to grow: that in the defense of Italy, and favor of
the emperor Justinian (whose captain Bellisario had besieged the Gottishe
king Uitige in Rauenna) they made out certain ships and botes, and upon the
river of Po, met with part of the Gottisshe army, fought with them, and
discomfited them. Again, in company of Valeriano, governor of Rauenna, they
were part of those.40. ships, that discomfited other.40. sail of the king
Totila before Aucona: taking and drowning the most part of them. For the which
doings they were both embraced of the emperor, and also much honored of his
capitains: in so much that the famous Narses, being sent of the emperor to
defend Italy against the foresaid Gotes, what to thank the Uenetians, and to
see the manner of their city, went in person unto Uenice, where he commended
much the diligence of their goodly buildyng: and in that mean while sent his
army by land to Rauenna: in which journey at the passage of the Po, the
Uenetian ships did him great service.

Thus while Narses was in the Rialto of Uenice, the Padoanes sent ambassadors
unto him, complainyng, how the Uenetians had usurped upon them those ma^ishes,
which time out of mind had been theirs: together with the haven of the river
of Brent. Whereunto the Tribune of the Rialto made such an answer: that Narses
curtesely told them, the mattier required longer debatyng, than his hasty
journey would as than permit: wherefore exhorting the Pad^anes to take
patience for the time, he desired them, in the defense and fortifiyng of their
country, to show like diligence, love, and faieth toward the empire, as the
Uenetians had dooen: and than so much the more should he be glad to advance
them.

And so under the favor of diverse emperors those islands of Uenice, as Grado,
Eraclea, Equilo, and Malamoco were governed of private Tribunes, and by a
general counsel for the space of.200. years and more, without any great
incident, worthy to be mentioned: except that between the bishops
(afterward made Patriarchs) of Aquileia, which stands in the maine land:
and of Grado, that lies in the marisshes, there was much war, strife, and
feyghtyng for the interest of their jurisdictions.

Finally in the time of Constantine the.iiii. after Italy through diverse
wars had been sore afflicted, and that from all parts the persons that were
of power (for their sauegarde) fled thither: Uenice increased so much, that
Luipandro, Duke of Friuli, either for enui, or for fear of their towardness,
provoked certain of his neighbors to oppress Uenice. And secretly on a night
made out a certain noumbre of botes down the water, and sodeinely assaulted
Grado, Eraclea, and Rialto: where they took certain ships, laded with
merchaundise, lately comm^n out of the east parts. But incontinently as the
rumor was raised, these assaulters fled, and were so pursued, that many of
them were slain, many hurt, and the most part of their pray recovered.
Nevertheless the noise of the people continued, and specially the lamentacion
of them that had lost their friends or goods. Wherefore in Eraclea they called
a counsel, and much adooe there was through diuersitee of opinions: because
the people laid all the fault in the ill governance of the officers. But at
last the Patriarch of Grado, an ancient learned man, of auctoritee, was prayed
to say his mind. Who with a long oracion persuaded, that without concord it
was impossible to live surely or quiet, and that whereas were diverse heads,
there could be no concord. Wherefore his opinion was, that they should chose
them one only prince, to govern their common wealth, and preserve their
unity. For where any astate (said he) is not governed with one consent and
will, there another haboundaunce of money, strength of place, noumbre of people,
worthiness of capitaines, nor help of friends or neighbors can avail. So
the whole counsel agreeyng to his opinion, resolved upon the election of a
Duke: that should have auctoritee and charge over all mattiers of importance,
to call the counsel, and to have private things referred unto him by the
Tribunes: that the counsel of the clergy should not assemble, but by
license of the Duke: and that the benefices given by the people and clergy,
should be confyrmed by him.

To which dignitee they first elected a worthy citesin Paolo Lucio of
Eraclea, Paolo. Lucio.
geuyng him an oath for the administracion of justice, and for the quiet rule
over them without tyranny.

Thus when Paolo had taken the governance into his hands, he began to agree
those persons, that before contended: which was so much the more easy to
do, by as much as at that time there was almost continual wars between
the Lumbardes, and some of the Dukes, either of Friuli, Spoleti, or Beneuento:
that in manner all their neighbors were in arms.

When he had thus well quieted his citesins, he ordained watch and ward to be
kept at the mouths of the rivers: fortifiyng some of them with castles, as
time and place would serve him.

He commanded every town to have a certain number of botes in a readiness,
when the Duke should give them any token: and restored the Uenetian dominion
unto his old lymites, now called La piaue Secca.

He maynteined amitee with the king Ariperto, and made peace with Luipandro,
with conditions of advauntage. But amongeste all his other doings the
worthiest of memory, was, that he reformed the laws, Laws.
and brought them into such a plain and brief order, that each man might
be his own lawyer: Affirmyng, that nothing can more hinder a man, than the
following of long suites and greedy lawyers. Wherefore in those days they used
none imperial laws: but besides those their few laws written, if there
happened any doubt, incontinentely they resorted unto the law of nature,
chosyng that, which seemed unto them most just and honest.

After Paolo, an other citesin of Eraclea, Marcello.
named Marcello, a very sobre and wise man, was elected Duke, but in diligence
he was nothing comparable unto Paolo.

In the time of this Marcello (except the strife and contencion between the
patriarchs of Aquileia and Grado, which I esteem not worth the writing) I
find no worthy mattier of memory.

Orso.
Next him succeeded Orso, a man not only noble of bloudde, but also worthy of
deeds.

He first used to bring up the youth of Uenice in the exercise of arms. He
augmented the number of soldiers in the ships of war, and thorough his
valiantness restored Paolo, one of the Grekish emperors capitaines, unto the
astate of Rauenna. In which enterprise Perendio, Duke of Vicenza was slain,
and Ildepandro, nephew of Luipandro taken prisoner: who by commission of the
same Luipandro, had (by syege) gotten the said city from the foresaied Paolo.

This victory was one notable thing that first exalted the Uenetian name.

Finally upon contencion spronge between the Eracleani and Equilesi, for the
lymites of their confynes, for the which was daily feightyng between them the
space of two years: This Duke Orso supposed to be the author of that sedicion,
in a tumulte of the people was slain.

Surely a lamentable end, of the gloriouse and happy beginning of so worthy
a man. The more because of an other inconvenience that followed, that the
Patriarch of Aquileia took from the Uenetians the towns of Mossone and
Centenara: though afterward thorough the menaces of Gregory, bishop of Rome,
he restored Mossone, when he had utterly destroyed Centenara.

737
After the death of Orso, there began a new rumor for chosyng of the Duke,
and many grudged, that Eraclea alone had so long time enjoyed the honor
thereof. Wherefore now both the seat and election was translated unto Malamoco,
which at that time was very much increased both in people and richesse.
Nevertheless the counsel in this election could not agree amongst them
selfs, and therefore at length concluded, to chose a new manner of officer,
namyng him, Master of the soldiers, whose authoritee was remoueable from
year to year.

The first was Domenico Leone, and succedyng him was Felice Cornacchino,
the.iii. Deodato son of the Duke Orso, who continued in that office, as some
say, two years. The fourth Iuliano Ipato, and the v. Giouanni Fabritiaco, who
before the end of his year, was put out of his office, and lost both his eyes.
In which mean time the old strife, between the Equilesi and Eracleani,
renewed, in so much that meetyng together, near unto the channel, now called
dell'arco, so many on both sides were slain, that almost they came to naughtes.

The Uenetians (weried with these and such other businesses) returned to
their old governance, Deodato.737.
electing the forenamed Deodato to their Duke: who finally being occupied
aboutes the fortifiyng of Brondolo, was assaulted by Galla, a citisin of
Malamoco, and being taken prisoner, had his eyes put out. The naughty dooyng
whereof so much offended the Uenetians, that ere the year passed, they took
Galla, put out his eyes, deprived him of his usurped astate, and at last took
from him his life: chosyng Domenico Menicaccio or Monagario, in his place.

Domenico Menicaccio.747.
This Domenico had not so great auctoritee as his predecessors, for to abate
the power of their Duke, which by the passed experience the Uenetians thought
to be ouerlarge, they ioygned in company with him two of their Tribunes: which
so much offended this Domenico, that at length he openly contended, to recover
the w^nte absolute power. And therefore was not only deprived of his dignitee,
but also for a punisshement his eyes put out.

Mauritio.7^2.
And than in his place was created a worthy rich man called Mauritio of
Eraclea: who in his time pacified much both the secret grudges, and also the
open contencions between his private citesins: and obtained the sea of a bishop
to be placed in Uenice, in the church of saint Peter. Which bishop was
afterward exalted unto the degree of a Patriarch, by Nicolas the.v. bishop of
Rome.

During the rule of this Mauritio the Uenetians (after great debating of the
mattier in counsel to and fro) granted to aid king Charlemaine with.xxv.
vessels well armed and paueysed, which did Charlemaine great service in the
assault of Pauia, when he took Desiderio king of Lumbardie prisoner.

Finally Mauritio obteining of the Uenetians to have his son Giouanni,
ioygned in the astate with him, and having ruled.xi. years alone, and.vii.
years ioynctly with his son, he died.

Giouanni.768.
Giouanni likewise ruled alone a certain space: and obtained his son
Mauritio to be ioygned with him: who both togethers bare them selfs very ill
toward their citisins. And amongst other things Mauritio, being sent of his
father unto Grado, caused the Patriarch of that place to be thrown down out
of a toure: because he was wont to warn both the father and son of their
ill behauiours. Wherefore they became hateful to their citisins: so that a
conspiracy was wrought against them, the chief whereof was named Obelerio,
that before time had been Tribune of Malamoco.

This conspiracy came so to pass, that the people proclaimed Obelerio Duke:
and the rumor was such, that Giouanni, with his son, and one Christofer a
bishop their friend, fled all three unto Mantua.

Than was Obelerio placed in the astate, Obelerio* 78^.
who shortly obtained his brother Beato to be ioigned with him. In their time
the ancient malice between the Eracleani and the Equilesi renewed, in such
wise that it made a foul slaughter amongst them. Wherefore it was finally
concluded, that both the one and other town should be destroyed, and the
inhabitauntes reduced unto Malamoco and Rialto. And so was it quickly done,
the rather because even than king Pepine, son of Charlemaine was determined
to assail the country and havens of Dalmatia, against the Grekish emperor
Niceforo: toward which enterprise Pepine required passage and vitailes of
the Uenetians. But they would not consent thereto though Obelerio their Duke
favored the french part. For in consultyng upon this matter were great
disputacions, and many reasons laid both for the one part and the other: but
finally this opinion of Agnolo (a worthy citesin of Eraclea) was best
allowed: that for the neweltee of king Pepine, they should not show them
selfs inconstant to break their ancient amitee with the Grekysh emperor:
not withstandyng that Pepine by reason of the haven of Rauenna, might in manner
vndooe their trafficque by sea.

So Pepine to be avenged, made an army at Rauenna, and costyng toward
Uenice, took Brondolo, Chiozza, Pelestrina, Albiola, and came so near, that he
constreigned the Duke and senators of Malamoco, to flee unto Rialto with their
richesse and children. Finally Pepine was discomfited by the imperial
captain Nicea, sent as well to succor the Uenetians, as also to defend
Dalmatia: so that incontinently there followed a peace between all three, that
is to say, the imperial army, king Pepine, and the Uenetians, to their great
contentacion. For if Pepine in that voyage had prevailed, they had been in a
daungerouse case.

This mean while the Uenetians had banished Obelerio and Beato as parciall of
the french part: and elected to their Duke Angelo Particiaco, Angelo*
Particiaco.792.
that before had dissuaded them from Pepines amitee. Who obtained of the
French king a confirmacion of the passed peace: and after reedified the town
of Eraclea, where he was borne, calling it Citta nuoua, and in it began the
palaice of the Signoria, that the Dukes hitherto use to dwell in. And obteinyng
his son Giustiniano to be ioigned with him (after he had builded diverse fair
churches, and done many good deeds) he died.

Giustiniano.810.
Giustiniano thus confyrmed Duke, incontinentelie called home his brother
Giouanni, that for his ill behavior had been before banisshed, and took him as
his companion in the astate. In whose time at the instance of the Greekishe
Emperor, the Uenetians sent an army by sea against the Turks, to defend
Sicilia. And certain merchauntes of Uenice coming from Alexandria in Egypt,
brought with them (as they say) the body of. S. Mark, unto whose honor the
said Giustiniano began the church of Saint Mark before rehearsed: and the
whole city ever sens have taken him for their advocate.

Finally, upon his death bed, he took an order for the continuance of that
buyldyng and died, Giouanni* 813.
Leauyng his brother Giouanni alone in the astate, who ioygned the church of
Saint Mark unto the Dukes palaice: and found provision for priests to sing
and serve in the same. And the war being begun between the Uenetians and
the Narentani, he made an army, and went unto Veglia in the I Will of Corcia,
and took it with Obelerio before named in it: who had begun a preparacion
there to recover his old astate. Wherefore Giouanni caused him to lose his
head, and afterward burned Malamoco, because certain of Obelerio his old
friends fled thither for refuge.

Finally this Duke Giouanni had two conspiracies made against him: the first
was occasion that he fled into France: the secounde (after he was reconsiled
ones again unto his astate) made him to forsake the world, and become a
friere in Grado, where he died.

After Giouanni succeeded Peter Gradenico, Pietro Gradenico* 82^,
who ioigned his son Giouanni in the astate with him: and at the request of
the Greekishe emperor sent.60. sail armed, against the Moors, that were than
newly landed besides Rome. Which.60. sail were all taken or drowned. In
following the victory the same Moors scoured all the Adriatike seas euin to
Caorle: and in ^^eyr way took certain Uenetian ships, laden with
merchaundise, coming out of Soria. So that whether it were for this ill luck,
or through sedicion that than reigned in the city, a conspyracy was made
against this Pietro, and was finally slain in the church of saint Zacheria,
hearing of euensong. Which sodeine death troubled not a little the city, and
caused the office of the three Auogadori to be made, Auogadori
to pursue the trial of manslaughters and murders. An office unto this day of
no small auctoritee amongst the Uenetians.

Orso Particiaco. ^65.
Than was Orso Particiaco made Duke: who with help of his son Giouanni,
discoumfited the Sarasines, that a little before had gotten Candia, robbed
alongest all the costs of Dalmaria, and had run even unto Grado. For the
worthy and valiant dooyng whereof the Greekish emperor Basilio rewarded Orso
with much honor: who for his part again not to seem vncurteyse, Belles.
sent.xii. brazen belles unto the emperor for a present: being (as they say)
the first belles that ever were used amongst the Greeks.

Giouanni. ^84.
After Orso, his son Giouanni as well for his fathers merits, as for his own
worthiness, was confirmed Duke. In whose time the Rauennates received
extreme damages by the Uenetians, and the city of Comacchio was gotten.
Finally this man being fallen sick, and having his brother ioigned with him in
the astate (a man not the me^est to rule such a common wealth) deposed both
him self and his brother, remittyng the counsel to the election of a new
Duke. An act surely not only rare and meruailouse, but also worthy of high
commendacion.

Than Pietro Candiano was elected, Pietro. Landiano 890.
who proved so worthy in arms, that twyse he fought with the Schlauone armies,
and overcame them, although in the last battle he was slain.

After whose death Giouanni Particiaco, before named, was ones again called
unto the dignitee, and continued in the same till the Schlauone wars were
fully quieted, and than again was contented that Pietro Tribuno should be
chosen in his place.

This Pietro discomfited the Hungariens, Pietro Tribuno.893.
that before had ouercomen the emperor Berengario, and ouerranne all Lumbardie,
and approached so nere to Uenice, that they wanne Eraclea, Equilo, and Capo
d'aggere, and were minded to pass unto the Rialto: geuyng such cause of fear
to the Uenetians, as afterward both doubled the glory of Peter's victory,
and exalted highly the Uenenetian name.

Some write, that after this enterprise Pietro fortified the city with a wall
from Santa Maria in Zubenico, unto the Rio del Castello, and that he cast
chains of iron overthwart the Canale grande, but at this day there remains
no memory thereof.

After Pietro followed Orso Baduaro, Orso Baduaro.915*
that first coygned money in Uenice, a man so much given to religion that at
length, renouncyng his astate, he became a friar, and so died.

Than succeeded Pietro Candiano, Pietro Candiano 938.
who conquered many towns of Istria, and other places: and overcame Alberto
son of the emperor Berengario, which being lord of Rauenna, used to spoil
and take the Uenetian ships in their passage.

He recovered certain gorgeous damselles ravished by the Schlauons at a feast
in the church. S. Peter Di Castello, and for memory of that victory ordained
yearly certain plays, called Le Marie. And (as some write) in his time the
Schlauons were made tributaries to the Uenetians, to pay them yearly an
hundredth barelles of wine.

Pietro. Baduaro.956.
After his death followed Pietro Baduaro, In whose time no notable thing
happened.

Pietro. Candiano.958.
Than was Pietro Candiano, son of the other Pietro, revoked from exile: which
for his naughty life was before banished by his father. And albeit that in the
help of Alberto di Rauenna he had showed him self enemy to his own country
(the unkindness whereof was cause of his fathers death) yet did the Uenetians
create him their Duke. But finally his procedynges were such, that the people
rose against him, set fire on the palaice: and as he fled with his son
in his arms they slew him. Wherewith their fury was sooner appeased than the
kendeled fire quenched. For ere it ceased, it burnte a great part of the
church of. S. Mark, with two other churches, and above three hundredth houses.

Pietro. Orseolo.973.
This rumor being pacified, Pietro Orseolo, a man much given to religion, was
elected Duke. The notablest thing in his time was, that the Uenetians succored
the city of Bari, than besieged of the Sarasines. Finally, after he had dooen
many charitable deeds in Uenice, he was persuaded by a pilgrimme monk of
Gascoygne to forsake the world. And so habandonyng wife, children, and
friends sta^e away: and died a friar in Gascoygne.

Than followed Vitale Candiano, who falling sick, Uitale Candiano.97^
renounced the astate, became a friere, and so died.

After whom Tribuno Memmo succeeded, Tribuno Memmo* 975.
which either for fear of the emperor Ottone, or through the great debate
between the families of Morosini, and Caloprini (than the chief of Uenice)
forsook the dignitee, became a friere, and within.vi. days after sickened, and
died for sorrow.

Than followed Pietro Orseolo, Pietro Orseolo.9^7.
who conquered Dalma^ia, with the islands ioygnyng thereunto. And therefore
obtained the first title of Duke of Dalmatia and Venetia.

The emperors Basilio and Alesso granted him free passage for the Uenetians
through their dominions, without custom paiyng. And the emperor Ottone held
his son at the crisme, and for his sake granted many libertees unto Uenice.

After whose death, Ottone Orseolo.1007.
as a recompense of the fathers merit, Ottone Orseolo his son, of the age
of.18. years, was elected Duke, who overcame the Adrianesi, with the king of
Coruatia: and so retournyng victoriousely out of Dalmatia, fell into the hands
of Domenico F^abenio, with others, that had conspyred against him, who shau^d
his bearde for despite, and finally confined him into Greece: where shortly
after he died.

Than folowes Pietro Barbolano, Pietro Barbolano.1026.
who endeavored him self to pacify the rumor of the people, offended for the
oultrage dooen unto Ottone: but all in vain. For at length, by mean of Orso
Patriarch of Grado, brother unto Ottone, Barbolano was taken, his beard cut
of, clothed in a friars weed, and banisshed.

Orso Orseolo.1030.
And because the death of Ottone was than unknown, the Patriarch Orso supplied
the place as his liuetenaunte. But incontinently upon knowlage of his death,
the Patriarch called a counsel, and after a long Oracion, lamentyng the
injury dooen unto his brother, surrendered the astate.

Domenico Orseolo.1031.
Whereupon craftily and in manner by force, Domenico Orseolo took the dignitee
upon him. But finally being expu^sed of the people, he fled unto Rauenna, and
there miserably died.

Domenico Flabenico 1031.
Than succeeded Domenico Flabenico, who made a a law, that from thensfoorthe no
Duke should take a companion to him. He was the principal cause of Ottones
exile, as it well appeared after. For he found the mean, that the family of
Orseoli was clearly put besides the counsel. And finally, having well
pacified and reformed all things, he died.

Domenico Contarini.1042.
After whom succeeded Domenico Contarini, that in his time recovered Zara, which
before rebelled, by returnyng unto the obedience of the king of Coruatia. He
overcame Roberto Guistardo in Puglia, and reedified the city of Grado, that
was half destroyed by Pepo Patriarch of Aquileia: and after died.

Domenico Siluio.1068.
Than was chosen Domenico Siluio the greatest man of reputacion that thitherto
had ruled Uenice. He married the sister of the emperor Niceforo, and at his
request sent an army unto Durazo, against Roberte Duke of Puglia and
Calabria: which army first prevailed, but at length was so discoumfited, that
Domenico was therefore deposed. Though some write that he died in the astate.
His wife was so delicate a woman, that she would have dew gathered to make
her vain withal, with many other curiouse perfumes and tricks, to long here
to rehearse: and yet ere she died, her flesh did rotte, that no creature could
abide her.

Domenico being thus deposed Vitale Falero was elected, who in favor of
Alesso, the Greekish emperor, Uitale Falero.108^.
renewed an army against the forenamed Duke Robert: which army was also
discoumfited. Neuertherlesse he caused the Uenetians to be called lords of
Dalmatia, because he valiauntly conquered the same both by sea and land.

After whose death succeeded Vitale Michele, Uitale Michele.1095.
a worthy warrior on the sea, in whose time the Uenetian navy was
rekened.200. sail armed of ships and galleis. which being sent into Asia,
with Michele his son, fell out with the Pisani a littell besides Rodes, and
fought with them, and took.22. of their galleis.

After which victory he and many other Christians, went against the Infidels,
and gatte Smirna, Soria, and Jerusalem.

Finally this army being returned unto Uenice, was again sent out into
Puglia, and there took Brundizi, and ouerranne all those seas about, and so
returned loded with glory and rich pray.

After him Ordelaffo Falero was created Duke. Ordelaffo* Falero.1098.
In whose time the Uenetians sent an other army into Soria to succor
Bawdewyne king of Jerusalem to get Ptholemaido, otherwise called Acres.

About the same seasone the emperor Henry the.iiii. agreed the Uenetians and
Padoanes together for their confines: after the Padoanes with great slaughter
had been ones discomfited.

There chanced also a fire, begun in the house of one Henry Zeno, that burned
a great part of Uenice. Which fire was no sooner ceased, but news came, that
Calon^ano, king of Hungary, had passed the mountains of Coroatia, and
constreigned the city of Zara to rebel. Wherefore an army was made out, under
the leading of Ordelaffo, who not only recovered Zara, but also passed the
mountains, and conquered the country of Coruatia, and so victoryously
returned to Uenice: where he rested not long, but word came, that the
Hungariens were comm^n again before Zara. To the succor whereof he sped him,
and there in the fight was slain with a darte, and his army discomfited, so
that the Uenetians were feign to sue to the Hungariens for truce, which for.v.
years (with much ado) they obtained.

Domenico Michele.1115.
Next followed Domenico Michele, who at the intercession of Calixto bishop of
Rome, with.200. sail took his way into Soria* to rescue Ioppe, that time
besieged with.700. sail of Infidelles: against whom he obtained the victory.
And following the same, went unto Tyro, took it, and gave it unto Ualmondo
Patriarch of Jerusalem.

The prosperouse success of which victories was occasion, that Emanuell
emperor of the Greeks sent and forb^dde him, to proc^de any further. But he
being offended with that commandment, bent him self against the emperor,
and by force took from him the ylandes of Sc^o, Rodes, Samo, Metellino, and
Andro, and so with great honor returned to Uenice, where he died.

Than was Pietro Polano chosen his successor, Pietro Polano.1130.
who brought the city of Fano under the Uenetian obedience, and fought first
with the Pisani, and after with the Padoani, both whose armies he overcame: so
that of the Padoani he brought.35^. prisoners unto Uenice, and after released
them without ransom.

This Duke fauouryng the part of the emperor Emanuell against Rogier Duke of
Puglia, went in his own person unto that enterprise, recovered Corfu, and
ouerronne and sacked all Sicilia. And thorough his great travail syckened and
died, was brought to Uenice and buried.

After him Domenico Morosini entered into thastate, Domenico Morosini* 1147.
who besieged Pola, because the inhabitauntes had hindered the Uenetian
passingers: and at last upon agreement, ordained, that in manner of a trybute
the Polani should yearly pay to the church of Saint Mark a thousand
weight of oil. The like whereof he constrei^ned them of Patenzo to do.
Finally, having made a leage with William king of Sicilia successor unto the
forenamed Rogier, of whom he obtained diverse privileges for the Uenetian
merchauntes commoditee, he died.

Than entered Vitale Michele: Uitale Michele, 1^^4*
by whose days the Vero^^si, Ferraresi, and Padoani, through prouocacion of
the emperor Federico Barbar^s^a, did no small damage to the Uenetians. For the
reuengeyng whereof they made out an army, and took the Patriarch of Aquileia,
with.xii. of his canons (of the imperial faction) prisoners: who were after
set at libertee, upon covenant to pay yearly tribute unto the Uenetians at
shroftyde, a fatie bull, and.xii. hogs.

This mean while the emperor Emanuell, entryng secretly into affinitee with
king William of Sicile, took Spalato, Trau, and Raugia from the Uenetians.
Wherefore they armed, and Vitale in person went forth: recovered Trau, threw it
to the earth, with part of the walls of Raugia, and so went to Negroponte:
where by counsel of the governor, he concluded a peace with the emperor.
Notwithstanding, the emperor had a little before taken Scio. For concludyng of
which peace, and for the pestilence that his infected soldiers brought home
with them, the Uenetians at his return slew him.

Much adooe was made for his death, but nothing to effect: save a certain
noumbre were than appoincted unto the election of the Duke: some write.x. and
some xl. but how so ever it were Orio Malipiero was chosen, who refusyng it,
preferred Sebastian Ziani, for his auncientee, richesse, and wisdom. So his
refusal was accepted, his modesty highly commended, and Sebastiano
accordyngly elected.

Sebastian Ziani* 1171*
This Sebastian erected the two notable pillars of marble, that are yet seen in
the markette place of saint Mark: which with an other greatter than either
of them, were brought out of Candia: but the biggest fell into the water (and
for his unmeasurable weight) can not be gotten up again.

The emperor Emanuell, who secretly hated the Uenetians, Emanuel*
constreigned Henry Dandolo their ambassador, to stand so long daryng in an
hot basen, Crueltee,
that he lost his sight. For what cause he wrought this, I find not. And
though it much offended the Uenetians, yet the time served not to revenge it.
For they had taken part with Alexandre bishop of Rome against the emperor
Federike Barbarossa: and with an army by sea Sebastian in person took Ottone
the emperors son, with certain galeis, and brought him prisoner to Uenice.
So that through the practice of Ottone there followed a peace between Federike,
the bishop, and the Uenetians. And the Duke was rewarded of the said bishop
with license for him and his successors to seal in lead, to have a canopie
borne over him, a wa^e taper before him, with trumpettes and standards, and
finally ones a year to espouse the sea, with throwyng a gold ringe into it.
All which ceremonies the Uenetian Dukes use unto this day.

After the death of Sebastian the forenamed Orio Malipiero was created Duke,
Orio Malipiero 1180,
who went unto the enterprise of Zara, that lately had rebelled.

He also sent an army into the holy land, that recovered the city of
Ptholemaida, with those other places, that the Uenetians before time had gotten
there. Finally he became a friar, and so died.

Than succeeded Henry Dandolo, Arrigo Dandolo* 1194,
who banished the Veronesi from the trade of Uenice, so that the Veronesi for
their part would suffer nothing to pass down the river of Adice* But at
length they were feign to agree with the Uenetians, and to restore certain
goods that they before had taken.

The Pisani also enuiyng the Uenetian glory, made an army against them, and
gatte Pola, which by the Uenetian army was inco^tinently recovered, the w^lles
rased to therth, and the enemies ships burned: and before Modone they took two
other Pisane ships, laden with merchandise: and made Trieste and all Istria,
tributors.

After this they recovered Zara also, and semblably rased the walls thereof to
the earth, in so much that many of the inhabitants (being fled before) with
the help of the Hungariens, renewed an army, and ouerron all Dalmatia. But at
length they were constreigned to make peace with the Uenetians, geuyng their
children in ostaige, submittyng their church unto the Patriarch of Grado, and
bindyng them selfs to give yerelie three thousand conie skins to the Duke
for a present.

This mean while came Alesso, son of the emperor Isaac (than lately expulsed
out of Constantinople) unto Uenice for succors: who obtained, that the Duke
with an army, ioignyng him self with an other army of Frenchemen, went to
Constantinople, and after many prosperouse successes by the way, took it, and
restored both Isaac and his son unto the empire. But the emperor lived not
long after: and his son, couetyng to keep his promise with the Uenetians,
was betrayed and strangled by Mirtillo or Murcifone one brought up by his
father from low degree, unto so great reputacion, that after he had murdered
Alesso, he took the empire upon him. Wherefore the Uenetians and Frenchemen
abhorryng this unnatural crueltee, enforced their powers of new, revenged the
death of Alesso, took Constantinople by assault, and divided the dominion
between them: so that of the French part Baldewine a Flemmyng was made
captain or emperor, and of the Uenetians, Thomas Morosini was made
Patriarch: adioignyng unto the Uenetian dominion the i will of Candia, with the
other islands of the seas Ionium and Egeum.

So when they had recovered Raugia, and established the Greekishe empire, this
Duke Dandolo died. And was buried in Constantinople.

The Uenetians being thus entered into an empire, began to contend amongst
them selfs, whether they were better to remove their common wealth to
Constantinople, for the increase of their name and power: or to remain still
in Uenice. But finally it was concluded, that better it was to trust to the
perpetuitee of the Site of Uenice, than to the brittell change of
Constantinoples glory.

Than was Peter Ziani elected Duke in Uenice, Pietro Ziani.1203.
and the army in Greece on the other side elected Mari^^o Ziani Potestate of
Constantinople: on condition that he should receive his confirmacion from
Uenice.

This Peter proved an excellent man: he increased the army in Greece: by mean
whereof Corfu, Modon, Coron, Galipoli, Nasso, Paro, Molo, Erma, and Andro were
gotten: Negroponte was made tributarie* and the Genowaies army fought withal,
and discomfited.

He sent also a Colonia of Uenetians to enhabite Candia, with officers
according: which many times after rebelled.

He overcame the Padoanes, and brought.400. of them prisoners to Uenice:
Finally he waxyng veraie religiouse, renounced the astate, and withdrew him
self into the monastery of saint George, where he died.

James Tiepolo.1225.
After him succeeded James Tiepolo, who with the help of Mark Samuto, rescued
Candia, than molested by the Greekishe Corsales.

Twyse he raised the siege of Constantinople ( Teofilo Ziani being Potestate
there) and gatte many of the enemies ships. And after making truce with the
Genowaies, in the favor of Gregory the.ix. bishop of Rome, he sent an army
against Federike Barbarossa, gatte Terma, Campo Marino, and Bestice: and in the
haven Manfredonia, burned the Cetea: a notable ship that the emperor had
made for his own person, and there slew a thousand men of war.

About this time Ezelino di Romano gatte Padoa from the Uenetians, and entered
into the Uenetian marishe as far as saint Ellero and the Bebbe.

This Duke under the governance of his own son, sent.60. galleis to Durazo
to succor the Genowaies against the emperor and the Pisani: who in his
return recovered Pola and Zara, and than peace was made with the king of
Hungary, upon condition, that from thensfoorth he should never pretend title
to Zara.

Marino Morosini.1247.
Next this James followed Marino Morosini, who was chosen of the counsel
called Pregadi, and being provoked by the Romish legate, made war unto the
forenamed Ezelino, and recovered Padoa, whereof Ausedino, nephew of Ezelino was
captain, whilst Ezelino lay at siege before Mantua. For which loss and
for his labor spente in vain before Mantua, Ezelino retournyng to Uerona,
fell in such a rage, that he caused.12000. Padoanes, part of his army, to be
hewn to pieces. Such a crueltee as has not ben heard of, Crueltee,
sens the time of Silla, who did the like unto.12000. prenestines, friends of
his ennemie Marius.

Of this name Ezelino were four, one after an other, that caused no small
trouble in Italy.

The first Ezelino, a Doucheman borne, came into Italy with the emperor
Otho, the third, and by him was made Conte di Onara, a town of the Marca
Triuigiana. But afterward he gate him self the lordship of Bassano upon the
river of Brent, with maine fair territories theraboutes, and so became great,
both of dominion and also of aliance by marriages.

His son was called Ezelino Balbo, and the.iii. Ezelino Monaco, all three
crowell men of nature. But the.iiii. Ezelino di Romano passed all the other, and
died rather for choler and despite of the discomfiture, Ezelino di Romano.
given him by the Vicentines, than for the hurt that he received in his leg.
Whom Peter Gerardo a Padoan writer, descriueth thus: He was hard of favor,
terrible in word and deed, scarce of laughter or speech, full of despite,
suspiciouse, taking every thing to the worse, daungerouse to enterprise,
prompte to all evil, cruel to all persons, and out of measure delited in
their death and tourmentes, prisons, iron, hunger, cord, fire, and other
such. So that to extirpe the whole stock of so ^^uell a generation, after his
death there was no creature of his blood suffered to live.

Rinieri Zeno.12^0.
After the death of Marino succeeded Rinieri Zeno, who sent an army into Soria
against the Genowaies, that discomfited them between Ptholemaida and Tyro:
besides.vi. other Genowaie ships, that were lost in Candia, and nere unto
Tyro in the secounde and.iii. battle.

In this mean time Baldewyne the captain, and Pantaleon Iustiniano patriarch
of Constantinople, were betrayed of the Greeks, and constreigned to flee to
Negroponte, leaving the city and empire unto Mighell Paleologo, that
afterward through help of the Genowaies, gatte many Islands: trauailyng to
extend his dominion unto Morea. Whereupon the Uenetians made forth more galeys
by.30. at a time, to increase their army, that than was commen out of Soria,
in hope to find their enemies about Sicilia: But all in vain, wherefore
retournyng into Soria, they took the Cetea of the Genowaies, and began to
assault Tyro. In which business, the Uenetians lost a notable ship, called
Castle forte, with.x. others laden with merchaundise. Nevertheless renewyng
their army with part of their staple, that lay in Candia and Dalmatia, they
met again with the Genowaies in Sicilia, where after a long fight, they
took.24. Genowaie galleis, burned the rest, slew above.1200. men, took, 1500.
prisoners, and drowned all the rest.

This notable victory brought the emperor Paleologo in such fear, that he
sued for truce to the Uenetians: and obtained it for.v. years.

This mean while was a great mutteryng in Uenice for the treasure spent,
because the chamber was found empty, and that for the maintenance of those
wars, they were about to leuey subsidies. So that the people assembled, and
furiousely assaulted the Dukes palaice, hurlyng stones at the wyndowes, with
other despitefull deeds.

Finally the army was renewed, and in an other conflict with the Genowaies,
they took.v. of their ships* About which time Rinieri died.

Than followed Lorenzo Tiepolo, Lorenzo Tiepolo.1267.
in whose time happened a wonderful dearth of corn in Uenice: by reason their
neighbors, for envy of their prosperitee, would suffer no corn to come to
them. For remedy whereof the Uenetians made a law, that all merchauntshippes,
passing between the Goolfe of Fano, and the mouth of the river Po, should
pay them custom after a certain rate of their merchandise. Whereby to their
great gain, they revenged them selfs upon their ennemies. But the Bologniese
most of all others, being offended with this law, made out an army against the
Uenetians, and were ouercomen, constreigned to ask peace, to overthrow a
castle that they had made at Primano on the Po, and to grant the Uenetians
free entry into their rivers at all times.

About this time, by mean of Philip the french king, who travailed to succor
the Christians in Soria against the infidelles, the Uenetians, Genowaies, and
Pisani made a league together for.v. years.

After Tiepolo, Iacopo Contarini was Duke, Iacopo Contarini* 1275.
in whose time the war was well near renewed between the Uenetians and
Genowaies, for certain goods that the Genowaies had taken: which being
restored, the army prepared for them, turned against Istria, that than newly
rebelled, through the prouocacion of the Patriarch of Aquileia: who by force
were reduced to their wonted obedience.

They of Ancona being offended with the foresaied law of custom paiyng for
their merchaundise, began to rob and spoil alongest the costs of Istria:
so that the Uenetians, to correct them, besieged the city of Ancona: which
dured not long: for the bishop of Rome entreated the Uenetians, to agree
with them, and break up their siege.

Finally this Contarini perceiuyng him self veraie sickely and unapt to rule
the astate, did willyngly renounce it.

Giouanni Dandolo.1281.
Than succeeded John Dandolo, in whose time the water in Uenice swelled so high,
that in manner the city was drowned: and after that followed a wonderful
earthquake.

He also first coygned duckates of gold. And at the request of Nicolas, than
bishop of Rome, prepared a new army to sail into Soria: but it went not
forth: so that the king of Babylone in Egypt, took and sacked Ptholomaida,
and after rased it to the earth.

Piet^^ Gradenigo.1290.
After Dandolo, Peter Gradenigo was elected Duke. At whose entryng the truce
with the Genowaies expired: so that a new army, under the leadyng of Roger
Morosini proueditore, was sent into the east parts: Where they took Pera, and
Castello delle foglie vecchie: and abode there so long, that the year following
John Zoranzo, with.25. fresshe galleis, was sent thither: who took the city of
Cafa in Chersonesso.

The Genowaies this mean while prepared an army of.70. galeys, and under their
captain Lampado d' oria, entered into the Adriatike seas, entendyng to come to
Uenice. But the Uenetian army (being the greatest that ever they made) caused
them to retire: yet metyng together upon the cost of Dalmatia, they fought,
and the Uenetians were discomfited, and Andrea Dandolo Proueditore taken
prisoner, who so much despaired, that beatyng his head against the galey
bordes, he slew him self. And albeit that the loss of this army was of
great importance and peril unto the Uenetians, yet incontinently they
renforced their power, and in the streict of Gallipoli, sometime called
Hellespontus, met with the Genowaies again, and were there again ouercomen.
But the Genowaies for all their victories were so weried, that they granted
the Uenetians peace, and laid war aside for a season.

Thus the things far of, being appeased, their business at home began to
awake. For one Marino Bocconio conspired against the Duke and Senate, which
being discovered, he and diverse of his accomplices, were put to death between
the pillars of. S. Mark.

The Padoanes began than also to fortify at a certain place, between Chiozza,
and Albano, called Petabubula, which was no littell trouble unto the
Uenetians, for the time, how beit at length they remedied it.

After this they made out an other army by sea under Belletto Iustiniano, who
prospered much in Greece. For after he had ouerronne all those costs, he
returned home with.15000. prisoners, and with a great sum of money recovered
of the Greekish emperor, that before time the Uenetians had lent him. Which
was no small coumforte to the common wealth that long time had suffered.

Shortly after Clement bishop of Rome excommunicated the Uenetians, for aydyng
of Azo da Este unto the astate of Ferrara, and wrote his letters thoroughout
all Europe, condemnyng them as enemies of the church, and geuyng their
gooddes as a laufull pray unto all men, which caused them to sustain great
loss.

Besides this, Baiamonte Tiepolo, their own citesin, entendyng to make him
self lord of Uenice, enterprised to assault the Duke and Senate in the
palaice, where after much blood shed, at last he was slain, and his
parttakers accordynglie punysshed, part in Uenice, and part at a place there
besides, called Malpasso.

Zara about this time rebelled again, and shortelie after this Duke died.

Marino Giorgio.1312.
After whom succeeded Marino Giorgio, that lived but.x. months, in whose time
an army was made out to besiege Zara.

Than followed John Soranzo, who recovered Zara, and brought Noua, John.
Soranzo.1313.
Spalato, Trau, and Sibenzani, towns of Dalmatia, under the Uenetian dominion.

This mean time Fraunces Dandalo, ambassador with bishop Clemente, used such
humilitee, that Uenice was not only assoiled, but also priuileged to be no
more on that wise accursed.

These things finished, they sent out.50. galleys against the Genowaies,
because they had taken the Uenetians goods. But after they had besieged Pera,
and were promised amends and restitucion of their goods, the army returned
without other expedicion.

Than was Iustiniano, that had been captain thereof, sent Proueditore into
Candia, where with his wisdom he quieted the country, that began to rebel.

Finally, after the Uenetians had preserved the Padoanes from the fury of
Mastino della Scala, that would have oppressed them, this Duke Soranzo died.

After him entered Fraunces Dandolo, Fraunces Dandolo.1329.
in whose time happened a great dearth of corn in Uenice: which was reliued
afterward with provision brought out of Sicilia by Nicolas Falero: for that
purpose sent thither.

This Duke accepted the Polani and Valesi under the Uenetian dominion: and ever
after defended them from the power of the Patriarch of Aquileia.

He caused Thomas Viaro Proueditore of the army against the Genowaies, to die
in prison: because he had not borne him self prudently in that enterprise.

He sent Peter Zeno with an army against the Turks, that than had newly
chased the Christians out of Soria. Which Turks were foughten with, and
finally discoumfited.

Than began the wars against the Signori della Scala, the chief whereof was
Mastino before named: who chasyng the Rossi from Parma, got Feltro, Belluno,
and Ceneda, before time taken by the said Rossi from king John^ of Boeme. This
Mastino thus growyng great, attempted to trouble the Uenetians with buildyng of
fortresses and bastilions about Petabubula. Wherefore the Uenetians entered in
league with the king of Boeme, and with the most part of all the states of
Italy, specially with the Florentin^s, against this Mastino: and made P^^er
Rosso general of that league: who (assemblyng an army, of the Uenetians,
Florentines, Bologniese, Ferrarese, and other their colleges) after many
skyrmyshes, taking of fortresses and towns: finally did discomfite Mastino in
two several battles, and brought him by force to require peace: which was
granted on this wise, that he should leave Feltro, Ciuidale di Belluno, and
Ceneda unto Charles son of the king of Boeme: Bergamo and Bressa unto the
Visconti of Myllaine: Treuiso, with the appurtenaunces, Castelbaldo, and
Bassano, to the Uenetians: and.iiii. castelles to the Florentines.

After the happy success of these wars, Dandolo dyed.

Bartholomeo Gradenigo.1340.
Than Bartholomeo Grandenigo, succeeded, in whose time, the water in Uenice for
the space of three days, did swell four yardes higher than his wonted course:
so that they thought to have been all drowned: but at last saint Nicolas,
saint George, and saint Mark came into a poor fisshers bote, and in the
mouth of the haven drowned a ship of devils that wrought all this mischief.
For proof whereof, this poor fissher the next morning after the water ceased,
presented unto the Duke and senate a gold ring that saint Mark had given
him. This was taken there for a miracle, though I think no man would believe
it.

The fear of this water was no sooner ceased, but news came, that the
Candians rebelled. Wherefore a power sent thither, assaulted them on three
sides, and with the correction of the principal rebels, reduced them to
their former obedience.

Shortly after happened a great dearth of corn, and Gradenigo died.

Than followed Andrea Dandolo, Andrea Dandolo* 1343.
a man for his wisdom and ciuilitee much commended of Petrarcha. In whose
time Peter Zeno (in company of other Christian princes) was sent with an army
against the Turks, whom at the first they discomfited, and took Smirna: but
afterward the Turks assembled again, and with great slaughter overcame the
Uenetians, the Cypriotes, and the Rodianes.

This Duke procured license of the king of Babylone, that Uenetian merchauntes
might freely trafficque in Egypt, and sent an army unto Zara* than yielded unto
the king of Hungary, who being come thither with.120000. men, was fought with
by the Uenetians discomfited, and Zara recovered.

This duke ordained the office of the three Auditors, for the better
expedicion of matters, because the Auogadori had to much charge on them to
dispatche well: and he him self wrote a worthy history of the Uenetian
astate and laws for the time than passed.

He sent.vi. ships into Sicilia for corn, whereof two peerished by the way,
the other.iiii. relieved the city in their great dearth. After followed such an
earthquake, that.iii. or.iiii. steples, with diverse other buildings in Uenice
were shaken to the earth: and than such a pestilence that in manner Uenice
became void. Nevertheless a new army was made out against the Genowaies,
that fought with them at Caristo besides Negroponte, where first the
Genowaies were discomfited, than the Uenetians, and thirdelie in Sardegna the
Genowaies again: and thereby brought so low, that they became subjects to
John Visconti, archbishop and Duke of Myllaine, who sent the famous
Petrarcha ambassador to Uenice, to obtain peace for him and the Genowaies.
But the Uenetians would not grant it. Wherefore the Visconti sent his army
into Dalmatia, sacked the towns of Faro and Corfu, took Parenzo in Istria, and
spoiled a Uenetian ship, going into Candia, of value (by report) of.800000.
duckates.

Thus while the Uenetians for ease of this trouble were making a leage with the
king of Boeme, to bring him against the Uisconti, this Duke Dandolo died.

Marino. Falerio.1354.
Marino Falerio succeeded him, in whose days the common wealth lacked littell
of utter undoing. First their army was sore discomfited by the Genowaies,
Pagano Doria being captain, at the I Will of Sapientia, besides Morea. After
this, the Duke him self conspired against the citees libertee, entendyng to
make him self absolute lord thereof, by puttyng the nobilitee and senate to
death. But his purpose was discovered by Beltrame a skinner, one of the
confederates, so that the Duke was beheaded, and diverse other punyshed, besides
a noumbre that fled, and were banished.

Finally this Beltrame for his reward, was made a gentilman of Uenice, with a
thousand ducates of yearly reuenew. But after a certain space, thinkyng his
reward over littell in respect of so great a service, he lamented him self
unto the senate, and was so importunate, that they not only took from him his
foresaied reuenew, but also deprived him of the gentilmans dignitee, and made
him a skinner again, as he was before.

After this Marco Cornaro as Vice Doge, ruled for a certain space.

Than John Gradenico was elected Duke, John Gradenico.1355.
who sendyng out.vii. galleis against the Genowaies, was occasion of the peace,
that immediately followed between them.

In his time Lewis king of Hungary entered in leage with certain princes and
nobles of Lumbardie against the Uenetians: so that after he had been before
Zara, Spalato, Trau, and Nona, with other places in Dalmatia: he besieged
Treuiso: during which siege Gradenico died.

Than John Delfino was chosen, John Delfino.1356.
who being that time besieged within Treuiso, and advertised of his election,
required the kings saueconducte to pass: which would not be granted.
Wherefore at last in company of certain men of arms, he secretly departed, and
came to Uenice: and was no sooner in the auctoritee, but he revoked the
Potestate of Padoa, and took from the Padoanes the trade of salt. A mattier
unto them of great importance. This did he to be revenged on Carraro, a
principal of the Padoanes, who was entered into intelligence with the
Hungariens.

Finally this king prospered so much against the Uenetians, that they were
constreigned for a peace to grant him all Dalmatia, from the goolfe Fanatico,
to Durazo, with certain other towns about Ceneda and Treuiso, that he had
than newly gotten.

To this peace the Uenetians at that time, were glad to agree, for eschewyng of
more danger. And not long after this Delfino died.

Whom Lorenzo Celso, than captain of the army upon the goolfe, Lorenzo
Celso.13^0.
was elected, who being advertised thereof, incontinently repaired unto Uenice:
where he was received with such pomp as the Uenetians use. But his own
father, would in no wise go against him: thinkyng it unmeet, that the father
should use any reverence to his son.

In his time, first the Duke of Austriche, and after the king of Cyprus came
to see Uenice for their passetime, where they were received and honored
accordyngly.

Than of new Candia rebelled, for the great taxes that the Uenetians levied of
them. Wherefore first one, and than an other army was sent thither: which with
much adooe (by reason of the Greeks defense) at last recovered it: and so
with triumph returned to Uenice.

About this time the king of Cyprus took and sacked Alexandria in Egypt, from
whens he returned laden with a wonderful pray. And not long after this Duke
Celso died.

Marco Cornaro.1365.
His successor was Marco Cornaro, who forthwith had word that Candia again
rebelled. Against whom a new army was prepared, with privilege obtained of
the bishop of Rome, of clear pardon and remission of sins, for all them that
should bear arms in that enterprise.

Finally the Candiottes were so oppressed, that they were constreigned to ask
peace, and with sharp punyshementes were brought to their wonted obedience.

The business of Candia being thus well quieted and reformed, Cornaro lived
not long after.

Than entered Andrea Contarini, Andrea Contarini* 1367.
notwithstanding that he oftentimes refused the dignitee, perchance through
foresighte of things to come. For first they of Trieste through succor of
the Duke of Austria, rebelled, and being in a sharp battaill ouercommen, were
constreigned to return to the Uenetian obedience.

Than began a new bickeryng between the Carrari, lords of Padoa, and the
Uenetians, for the interest of certain confines, between whom were many
skirmishes with variable fortune on both sides. But the Uenetians had ever the
better, until the Carrari had gotten in leage the king of Hungary, the Duke
of Austria, the Genowaies, and the Patriarch of Aquileia, who on all sides by
land and sea, oppressed the Uenetians sore. For notwithstanding that in this
mean while, with help of the king of Cyprus on the one side, they first
discomfited Andronico son of the emperor Caloianni with the Greeks in the
I Will of Tenedo, and after that diverse of the Genowaies by sea. And than on the
the other side with the help of Bernabo Visconti, by land discomfited the
Carraro on the Padoan territory, with gettyng of some towns: yet fortune
turned so against them, that at Pola they lost.xv. galleis at one time, and
by littell and littell lost Vmago, Grado, Caorle, Chiozza, Loreo, Le Bebbe,
Capo d'aggere, Malamoco, and Pouiglia: lokyng every foot, when they should be
assaulted in Uenice. Insomuche, that they sent a blanke Charter unto Peter
Doria, than captain of the Genowaies army, besechyng him to prescribe them
what conditions he would, and they gladly would accept them: but as it happens
commonly in prosperitee, men are not contented with reasonable advantage: he
would not have them but at his own descrecion. And so drove forth the time
till Carlo Zeno, with the Uenetian army, scoured all the leuaunte seas, took
many rich ships, of their ennemies: and with the slaughter of.300.
Genowaies, restored the fortress of Constantinople unto Caloianni emperor of
Greece, besieged Pera, and finally after many worthy victories in those
parties (advertised of the peril that Uenice was in) retired homewardes:
ioigned with Vettorio Pisani captain of the rest of the Uenetian army, and
near unto Brondolo, Chiozza, and th^se other places theraboutes, fought diverse
times with them, with diverse fortune, and at last slew their captain
beforenamed, recovered Chiozza through famine, and took ^0. Padoan botes,
with.19. Genowaie galleis, besides certain ships laden with salt, and a
noumbre of prisoners.

This great victory thus obtained by Vettorio Pisani and Carlo zeno, was not
yet enough to end this war: For the rest of the Genowaies army discoumfited
at Chiozza, departed to Trieste, causyng it to rebel. And than leauyng Istria
in governance of the Patriarch of Aquileia, returned again to attempt the
gettyng of Brondolo and Chiozza. But findyng the passages closed against them,
they made toward Pirano and Parenzo, dooyng their best to get them: wherein
they prevailed not, and so at last withdrew them into the haven of Marano.

This mean while the Uenetians endeavored them selfs to recover again
Bebbe, and the other places nere about them. All which they obtained, Capo
d'aggere only except, that was holden by the Carraro.

Than came news, that Pola was taken, and that the Genowaies, renuyng their
army, had also taken Arbe in the i will of Scardona. Wherefore a new power was
made out, which passing into Istria, sacked Iustinopoli, and besieged Zara. In
which enterprise Vettorio Pisani died, so that Carlo Zeno rested captain
alone: who with.viii. galleis of new, scoured all the costs of Dalmatia,
took.xii. Schlauon ships, and went forth into the river of Genoa, where he
wrought wonders: whilst the Genowaies and their colleges on the other side
sacked Capo d' Istria, took Conigliano, Nouale and Treuiso before yielded to the
Duke of Austria: besides.xiiii. Uenetian ships, that the Genowaies took in
the port of Pesaro.

And so long contended they thus warryng one upon an other, that at last both
parties were weried, and by mean of the Duke of Sauoie, accorded. In the
concludyng of which peace the Uenetians rendered the I Will of Tenedo unto the
Genowaies (that by the mean of the emperor Caloianni, came before to their
hands.)

Finally, after the Carraro of Padoa had gotten Treuiso by force from the Duke
of Austria (the king of Hungary being dead) this Duke Contarini finished his
life.

Than followed Michele Morosini, Michele Morosini.1383.
that living but.4. months, made a new law for the trial of murders and
manslaughters.

Next succeeded Antonio Veniero, a pleasant wise man, that in the governance
of Tenedo, Antonio Ueniero* 138^.
had behaved him self prudently.

He bare so earnest a zeal to Justice, that hearing a complainte against his
own son, for certain dishonest parts played about a gentilmans door, of
whose wife he was en^moured, caused him to be laid in prison, where he
miserably died of the plage. And though he knew, that the infection was
entered into that prison, yet would he not at no friends intercession remove
his son into any other. Which act one way seems commendable* an other
way unnatural and cruel.

About this time the Uenet^ans entered in leage with Giangaleazo Visconti, Duke
of Myllaine, and with the marchese Da Este of Ferrara, against Carraro of
Padoa: so that between these three the territory of Carraro was divided.

First the Uenetians had Treuiso, the marchese of Este had certain ca^^^lles,
that he had before lost, and the Visconti had Padoa, Feltro, and Ciuidale di
Belluno: which with Vicenza and Verona, that he had also gotten a littell
before, set the Uisconti of Myllaine on such a height, that immediately he
moved war against the Bologniese and Florentines, whereby he began to be had
in Ialousie and mistruste, of all the other astates, about him. Wherefore the
Uenetians, with those other two beforenamed, the Manroan, the Ferrarese, Carlo
Ma^atesta, and Robert Duke of Bauiera (unto whom the young Nouello Carraro was
fled for succors) entered all into a leage against him: by reason whereof Verona
was sacked, Padoa besieged, and the Visconti at length in such wise
discomfited, that he was feign to require peace, which was granted for.x.
years following.

After the death of Veniero succeeded Michele Steno, Michele Steno.1400.
in whose time.iiii. Uenetian galleis, laden with merchaundise were lost in
the Arcipelago.

Than Zeno, with.xi. galleis was sent out against the Genowaies: who had been
in Soria, sacked Baru^ti, and taken certain Uenetian ships. But in their
return, between Modone, and Giunchio, Zeno discoumfited them:
notwithstanding that in manner they were double as many.

This mean time the young Carraro being (partly through the Uenetians favor)
restored unto the dominion of Padoa, besieged Vicenza, and streigned it so
sore, that in despite of him they yielded them selfs to the Uenetians: who
took occasion of unkindness toward Carraro, because he had been the
principal mouer of the Genowaies against them: and that also he had
counseled william Scala to take on him the dominion of Verona. Insomuche that
the Uenetians armed, and first chastised Alberto da Este of Ferra^a for
parttakyng with Carraro, and finally by plain force, gattebothe Pad^a and
Verona: and led this Nouello Carraro, with his two sons prisoners to
Uenice, where by night they were all three straungled.

And albeit, that the Uenetians were esteemed to have spent in those Padoane
wars better than two millyons of gold: yet this victory over their approved
enemy was so grateful unto them, that forgettyng all expenses, they triumphed
with feasts and bon^fiers so long, that they set the top of saint
Marks steple on fire: which afterward (to their cost) was made up again
and clean gilte over.

Thus the Uenetians rested not long, but that Ladislao, king of Naples and of
Hungary, warred on them in Dalmatia, and took Zara: which they redeemed of
him for the sum of an.100000. duckates, taking also truce with him for.v.
years. And than died Steno.

Thomas Mocenigo 1413.
Next followed Thomas Mocenigo, that reformed certain offices in the Rialto.

He also recovered certain towns in Friuli, that one Pippo, a captain of
the kings of Hungary had in the last wars before taken from them. And was
author also of the renewyng of the palaice of Saint Mark, for the mocionyng
whereof, he willyngly paid a thousand duckates, forfaited by an ancient law
made against him that should first mocion the alteracion of that palaice from
his old facion.

Fraunces Foscaro.14^4.
When Mocenigo was dead, Fraunces Foscaro entered into the astate* who being
prayed thereunto, entered in league with the Florentines, against Philip Duke of
Myllaine: and sent Carmignuola their captain to Bressa, which by mean of
intelligence was soon gotten: though the forteresse held a certain space. On
the other side the Florentines took Nicolos da Este, marchese of Ferrara for
their captain, and sent him into the territory of the Genowaies, where was
gotten no small booties. So that Duke Phillip thus troubled, fearyng least the
country of Romagnia should return to the Florentines dominion, yielded up the
fame to the use of the church of Rome, into the hands of the legate of
Bononia, and for aduoidyng of further inconvenience, caused the same legate to
procure him a peace, which was sooner obtained than well observed. For Phillip
encouraged with the money and large offers of the Mylanese, would not suffer
the articles to be observed* and inuadyng the Mantuane territory, provoked his
ennemies the colleges, to renew their power, with which, and by the power of
the general Carmignuola, the Duke received such a discomfiture, besides
Terentiano, with loss of his carriage, plate and money, that if Carmignuola had
followed the victory, he had been like enough to have driven Phillip out of his
Duchy.

Finally after sundry conclusions and breaches, at last a full peace was
concluded, that Bergamo and Bressa, with their apportenaunces, should remain
to the Uenetians, Cremona, with his territory should be given to Sforza for the
dower of his wife Bianca, daughter to Phillip Romaningo, with the fortresses of
Gieradadda to be restored to Phillip by the Uenetians ( P^schiera and Lanado
only excepted) that Conzaga should have the rest of the Mantuane confines,
and that in those quarters Legniago, Porto, Riua, Torboli, Penetra, and
Rauenna, should remain to the Uenetians. That within the term of two years
Nicolas Piccinino should restore Bononia to the church. That Astorre di Faenza
should deliver unto the Florentines their fortresses, and finally that Phillip
should no more meddle with the Genowaies.

This peace satisfied, all the colleges (the bishop of Romes legate only
excepted) whose part in Bononia seemed nothing honorable in this behalf.

During these businesses in Lumbardie, the Turks assaulted Thessalonica, a
city of the Uenetians in Macedonia, and by force took it* with James Dandolo,
and Andrea Donato, governors of the same.

Not long after Andrea Dandolo was sent ambassodour unto the Sultan of Egypt,
to excuse the senate of Uenice, for the taking of certain of his vessels,
without their consent.

In this time the water in manner drowned all Uenice, so that when the floudde
was past, the hurt that it had done, was esteemed above a myllion of gold.

The daughter of the king of Arragon, wife of Lionello da Este of Ferrara,
came to see Uenice: and the fury of the people was so great to see her, that
they brake the bridge of the Rialto: in the fall whereof.xx. men were slain,
besides a noumbre maimed and hurt.

Eugenius the bishop of Rome, impacient that Piccinino should so long keep
Bononia, entered in league with Alfonso king of Naples, and with Duke Philip,
against Sforza: and so renuyng the wars in Italy, the Bologniese, thorough
help of the Uenetians and Florentines, recovered their libertee, and for
advantage, gatte diverse of their enemies castles. By mean whereof Phillip fell
in hand again with the Uenetians and Florentines, that came to their succor:
so that their captain Michelle Attendulo fought with him besides Casale
Maggiore, put him to flight, took four thousand horse of his, ran to the
gates of Myllaine, and brought Phillip so low, that besides Myllaine he had no
more left, but Crema and Lodi. Wherefore he sought peace of new: but it would
not be granted him.

This mean time James Foscaro, son unto the Duke, for certain his ill
demeanours, was twice confined into Candia, and there died.

Than Sforza taking part with Duke Phillip lost Casale Maggiore, and the
Marca d' Ancona, that the bishop of Rome took from him, but finally Phillip
diseased both with a fever and the flux, died.

Incontinently upon whose death Lodi and Vicenza, submitted them selfs to the
Uenetians. Wherefore Sforza, captain of the Milanese, came with an army to
Vicenza, took it, and sacked it. And A^tendulo on the other side wasted a great
part of the Milanese, until such time as Sforza agreed him with the
Uenetians, to have.4000. men, and.13000. duckates of yearly provision, until
he might get the state of Myllaine: promisyng them, when he were Duke, he
would be contented to renounce to them all that, that Phillip had gotten on
that side the river of Adda. So that when Sforza obtained the state of Myllaine
(which happened shortly after) he observed his promise, and peace followed.

About this time a certain Greek, called Stamato, robbed the trea^ure of
saint Marks church, after he had been two years in cuttyng an hole through a
very myghtie stone wall: but being bewraied through a tailour, that he
trusted, the treasure was recovered, the Greek taken, and for his long
patience and worthy theft, hanged with a golden halter.

Than came news out of Sicilia, that Loredano, captain of the Uenetian
army, had foughten with the Genowaies and Sicilians: and had burned.47. of
their ships. After which victory a general peace followed for a time.

The king of Bossina sent for a present to the Uenetians certain vessels of
silver.iiii. goodly horses, and many Faulcones.

Liberalitee
Federike the emperor, retournyng from his coronacion at Rome toward Almaine,
passed by Uenice, where the Senate presented to the Empress a rich crown,
set with iewelles, whereof some one stone was esteemed at.3000. duckates, and
besides that gave her two couerynges for a cradell, richely embrodered with
stone and perle: because she was at that time great with child.

A new leage made between the Uenetians, and the Senesi, the Duke of Sauoie,
the marquis of Monferrato, and the lords of Correggio, against Sforza, than
newly made Duke of Myllaine. For defense whereof Sforza had secret help of the
Florentines: so that the Uenetians, with their colleges, procured Alfonse king
of Naples, against the Florentines: who after made war upon them in Tuscane,
whilst the gentill Leonesio, captain of the leage on the the other side, took
Lodi, Gotolengo, Manerbio, Pontoglio, and ran even to the gates of Myllaine.

About this time the Turk won Constantinople, in the taking whereof the
emperor of Greece, with diverse gentilmen Uenetians, valiauntelie resistyng
their ennemies, both by sea and land, were slain, besides a number of others
taken prisoners, with the lo^se of their navy and substance. Wherefore the
bishop of Rome took upon him the appeasyng of the Italian wars: agreyng the
parties on this wise: that Sforza should restore unto the Uenetians all that
that he had taken from them in those wars (the castelles of Gieradadda only
excepted) that the king of Naples should do the like to the Florentines (
Castiglione excepted) and the Florentines to do the like to the Senese. And
that when any controversy should happen of new between them, the bishop of
Rome should order the mattier without any business of war.

The Genowaies were left out of this peace, by mean of the king of Naples.

Federike emperor of Almaine required ambassadors from all the princes of
Europe, to make a new league against the Turk.

But this mean while Bartholomeo Marcello returned from Constantinople with
an ambassador of the Turks, that brought certain articles of agreement to
the senate, which the Uenetians accepted: and thereupon was confyrmed amitee
between the Turk and them.

After the death of Foscaro succeeded Pasquale Malipiero, of whom I find
nothing of importance, Pasquale Malipiero 14^7.
saving that in his time happened the terrible earthquake in Italy, that
specially in the realm of Naples did so much hurt: and that emprintyng was
than first invented.

After him succeeded Christofero Moro, Christofero Moro.14^2.
in whose time the Turks wanne by force, and rased to the earth the Uenetian
wall, made upon Istmus of Morea, and after did in manner what they would
thoroughout all that region.

This Morea, aunciently called Peloponnessu^, Morea.
is the chief part of Greece, a very rich country, compassed about with
the sea, except in one narow place, that it seems racked unto the maine
land: in which place being about six mile over, was such a wall made, as
with reasonable furniture had been sufficient to resist a wonderful power.
But the Uenetians (because they first of Christian princes, entered in amitee
with those infidelles) trustyng to much in their new friendship, attended
more to the undoing of their neighbors at home, than to the earnest provision
that so worthy a country, against so puissaunte an ennemie, the Turk,
required. So that shortly after the loss of that wall, they were shamefully
discoumfited at Patrasso: James Barbarico being their Proueditore. And than
also they lost Negroponte, where was such a slaughter of Christians, as
would make any Christian heart weep to hear it. Besides a huge sum of
money, that they were constreigned to give to the king of Hungary, to resist
the Turks passage, that with an other army by land was than coming toward
Dalmatia.

Than succeeded Nicolo Trono, who was cause of the establisheme^t of Ercole da
Este in the duchy of Ferrara. Nicolo Trono.1471.


He entered in league with Vsnucassan king of Persia (whose successor is now
called Sophie) against the Turk.

In his time the Uenetians gatte the realm of Cyprus by this mean. James,
last king of the same, for the great amitee between his forefathers and the
Uenetians, came unto Uenice, and required the Signoria to adopte one of their
daughters, as daughter of their common wealth: and than would he be contented
to accept her unto his wife.

This large offer was soon accepted, and Katheryn Cornaro, a goodly young
gentilwoman espowsed to the king, who thereupon returned into his realm
continuyng in peace the time of his life. At his death, (leauyng his wife
great with child) he ordained, that she and her child not yet borne, should
enjoy the realm* But the child after the birth lived not long. As Soon as
the Uenetians heard of the kings death, Cyprus won.
they armed certain galleis, and sent them with Georgio Cornaro, brother to
the Queen into Cyprus, to comfort her on the Signorias behalf: with this
wile, that when Cornaro should arrive before Famagosta (the principal city
of Cyprus) he should feign him self so sick, that he might not go out of
the ship, and when his sister the Queen, with her barons should come to
visit him, than should he keep them sure from retournyng, and sodeinelye
enter the city, subduyng it with the whole realm, unto the Uenetian
obedience. As it was devised, so it happened from poinct to poinct, albeit that
the Queen was counseled not to go abourde the galey, and that some business
was made after for it, yet in effect the Uenetians prevailed, and the Queen was
brought to Uenice, where she passed the rest of her years.

Some esteem this doing treason, but many men allow it for a good policy.

After Trono followed Nicolas Marcello, in whose time happened no notable thing,
Nicolo Marcello 147^.
other than the victoriouse defense of the town of Scodra in Albania against
an infinite number of Turks.

Next him succeeded Peter Mocenigo, Pietro Mocen^go.1474.
which at the time of his election, was captain of an army by sea, wherewith
he had in Cyprus quie^ed a great rebellyon, preserved Scodra from the Turks
fury, and restored the king of Carramania to his astate.

For these worthy deeds, and for his other virtues was in his absence first
made Proctour of. S. Mark, and than (as I said) created Duke. And being
called home from the army, to govern the dominion, Antonio Loredano was sent
forth in his stead: who delivered Lepanto from the Turks siege, and used
great diligence in the conseruacion of the country of Morea.

Andrea Vendramino.1476.
After Mocenigo, Andrea Vendramino was elected Duke. In whose time the Turks
retournyng into Albania, came first before Cro^a, and after ouerran all the
countries between that and the river of Tagliamento in F^riuli: so that the
Uenetians were feign to call back the captain Carlo Montone, who not long
before put out of wages was than gone into Tuscane.

This Duke attempted a peace with the Turks, but his purpose was interrupted
by means of the king of Hungary and of Naples.

John Mocenigo 1478.
After Vendramino followed John Mocenigo, brother to Peter beforenamed.

This man agreed with the Turk, after they had warred with him.17. years. The
articles of accord were, that the Uenetians should yield into the Turks
hands Scodra, the principal city of Albania, with the islands of Corfu,
Tenaro, and Lemno, and besides that should pay him.8000. duckates a year. In
consideracion whereof the Turk for his part granted them safe passage for
trafficque of merchaundise into the sea now called Mare Maggiore, and
auncientlie named Pontus Euxinus: and that the Uenetians should have power to
send an officer of theirs under the name of Bailo to Constantinople, to judge
and order all their merchauntes business.

Not long after this agreement, the I Will of Corritta in Dalmatia, was brought
under the Uenetian dominion.

And in the.iiii. year of this man's rule, war was moved against Ercole Duke
of Ferrara, for the breach of certain articles between him and the Uenetians.

After that Robert of. S. Seuerino was sent with an army against Ferrando
king of Naples, in which enterprise the Uenetians discomfited Alfonse Duke of
Calabria, son of the foresaied king. But those wars, by mean of the other
Princes of Italy, were soon appeased, when the Duke of Ferrara (besides the
loss of Comacchio) had sustained very great damage, for his part taking.

Next to Vendramino succeeded, Marco Barbarico, Marco Barbarico 1485.
who never seking to be avenged on his enemy, would say, It suffised a
discreate prince, to have power to revenge, whereby his ennemie should have
cause to fear him. Therefore he used seueritee against the transgressors of
the common wealth, and not against them that privately offended him. In his
days happened littell ado.

The contrary whereof followed in the time of his successor Agostino Barbarico.
Agostino Barbarico 1486.


First by reason of the wars with Edmonde Duke of Austriche, for the
interest of certain mines of iron: in which enterprise the Uenetian captain
Robert of. S. Seuerino died: than thoroughe the coming of Charles the.viii.
French king into Italy, who at length, partly through the Uenetian force
was constreigned to retire into France: but most of all they were troubled
with the Turks, who fell out with them, oueranne all their countries as far
as Tagliomento, slew above. 7000. persons of the Uenetian part, and took from
them Lepanto, Modone, Corone, and Durazo. Nevertheless this mean while the
Uenetians gatte Cremona, and diverse other towns in Italy, which is rather a
reproach to the^, than an honor that would lieffer war upon their christen
neighbors, than bend their power to resist the Turks.

After Barbarico, Leonardo Loredano was elected to the astate: Leonardo
Loredano.15^1.
in whose time all Christian princes about the Uenetians, conspyred by one
accord utterly to destroy them. And the league was such, that in one self
time the emperor Maximilian, Lewys the.xii. French king, Ferrando king of
Spain and of Naples, Julius bishop of Rome, with the Dukes of Mantua and
Ferrara, should war upon them, beginning about the year of grace.1509. So
partly by force, after many discoumfitures of the Uenetians power, partly by
accord: in manner all the Uenetian dominion with in the maine land was divided
amongst these princes. The french king had Bressa, Bergamo, Cremona, and
Crema: the emperor Maximilian, Verona, Vicenza, Padoa, and part of Friuli:
The king of Spain, the citees and ports in Puglia, that the Uenetians before
had gotten: The bishop of Rome, Arimino, Faenza, Rauenna, and Ceruia, with the
rest of Romagnia: and the Duke of Ferrara the Pollisene di Rouigo. So that the
Uenetians had so little dominion left on the maine land* that the emperor
Maximilian came to Maestie: v. little miles from Uenice, as near as the sea
would suffer him to approach: and there for a triumph or despite, shot of
his artillery to Uenicewardes: though he could do it no hurt. Wherefore the
Uenetians, provoked in manner by despair, and through an oracion made by their
Duke, that encouraged them rather to die like men, than to suffer them selfs
thus vilie to be eaten by and despised, renewed an army by land, recovered
Padoa, than negligently kept, fortified it and Treuiso, fought diverse times
with variable fortune against their enemies, fought to be revenged on the Duke
of Ferrara, against whom they sent.xvii. galleis and 400. botes to assail the
Ferrarese dominion by the river of Po: and finally behaved them selfs so
manfully, that the king of Spain, and the bishop of Rome, made a new leage
with them against the french king: who at that time, besides the state of
Myllaine, had gotten Bononia, and was become so great in Italy, that they were
all afearde of him. Upon conclusion of which league the citesins of Bressa
returned to the Uenetian obedience, so that for defense of that city against
the Frenchemen, Andrea Gr^tti, with certain other noble Uenetians and
capitaines, and a convenient noumbre of soldiers, were sent thither: where
after a sore conflict with the Frenchemen, they were all discoumfited, slain
or taken, and the principal prisoners sent to Myllaine to Mounser du Foys,
than governor there, who s^nt Andrea Gritti, as a singular present, prisoner
to the French king.

The Uenetians not a little troubled for this loss, caused the camp of the
league, that than lay before Bononia to draw toward Ferrara: and in succor
of that camp, made a new army by water, wherewith they sacked Argenta, took
Mirandula, and did much hurt to the Ferrarese dominion, till at last the
Vice Roy, of Spain general of the said camp, came before Bononia, and from
thense to Rauenna for fear of the French host, that from Myllaine pursued
him. Unto which French army the Duke of Ferrara united his power, and so
together followed the army of the league to Rauenna: where on Easterdaie in the
morning was fought the blouddiest battle between them, that has been heard
of in our days: and so many thousands slain on both sides, that it could
scarcely be judged who had the better: Saving that the Frenchemen obtained the
victory, took Rauenna, put it to sack, and after gatte diverse other towns in
Romagnia.

Douchemens hall in Uenice.
Whilst these things were doing, the Douchemens hall in Uenice, called il
fondago di Tedeschi, was reedified: a very fair and great house: and of a
meruailouse rent. For they affirm, that it yeldeth to the Uenetians above.100.
duckates a day: which after our old reckenyng amounts above.7000. pound
sterlyng by the year.

Antonio G^imani.
After Loredano succeeded Antonio Grimani, who being in exile, was called home,
made proctour of saint Mark, and finally Duke.

Andrea Gritti.
Than Andrea Gritti, before named, newly returned out of France, was elected
Duke: by whose means the Uenetians entered in league with the french king: and
so recovered Bressa, redeemed Verona for a great sum of money, and aided the
Frenchemen to recover Myllaine, and to do many feats in the realm of Naples:
how be it, the frenchemen not long after, lost all again through their ill
governance and tyranny.

Finally practisyng now with France, now with the emperor, now with the
bishop of Rome, as best served for the common wealth: this Duke left it in good
order, tranquillitee and peace, and so died, greatly bewailed of his citesins.

Than followed Peter Lando, in whose days the Turk made war to the
Uenetians, Petro Lando.
because they ioigned with the emperor against him: so that they to obtain
peace, were feign to give him the strong and notable citees in Napoli, and
Maluagia in Greece: and beside that the sum of.300000. duckates.

It was thought, that the Turk would have been appeased with a much less
gift, but being secretly advertised by the French ambassador, how the
Uenetians had given their Bailo or ambassador commission, that rather than the
war should continue to make this offer: he would none other wise agree with
them.

This knowlage came through intelligence, that the french ambassador had with
one of the Uenetian Secretaries, who through corrupcion of money, disclosed all
the procedynges of the privy counsel: which at length being discovered, the
same Secretary fled into France, and.ii. other Uenetians of his
confederacy were taken and hanged.

By this man's time Andrea Doria, with a great navy of the emperors, of the
bishop of Romes, and of the Uenetians together, enterprised a journey against
Barbarossa, admiral of the Turkish navy: and yet metyng with him at great
advantage, both of power, and place, Doria retired: for what cause no man can
tell. He left the Uenetian Galeon, the notablesse vessel of the world, in
the midst of the Turks navy. And yet after she had been assailed.v. houers
on all sides, she came her ways safe, in despite of them all, leauyng an
infinite number of her shot in the Turkish beten ships and galleis.

Francesco Donato.
After Lando Francesco Donato was elected unto the astate, about two years and
an half before the writing hereof. And because in his time hitherto has not
happened any worthy thing to the Uenetians, I woull refer the rest to them
that hereafter shall find occasion to write.

The descripcion of Naples.
THe city of Naples (some time called Parthenope) is one of the fairest citees
of the world, for goodly streets and beautiful buildyng of temples and
houses, Castle Nouo.
specially the Castle Nouo, wherein the kings were wont (as the Uicere now
is) to be most commonly resident: being one of the rarest buildings for
greatness and strength, that any where is lightly to be found. The country
about is so pleasant, that in manner every village deserves to be spoken of,
as well for sumptuouse buildings and noumbre of commoditees, namely
haboundaunce of delicate fruits, as also for the wholesome air. For in most
places it seems always (yea at the deadest of the winter) to be continual
spring time. Temperature of Naples.
In deed the heat of summer does somewhat grieve them, but they are so
provided of large and open buildings, that it does not much annoye them.

And one thing amongst all the rest is to be meruailed at, whereof it should
proceed, that many times the fire breaks out of the earth in diverse places
upon the sea costs, like to the flambes of Mongibello, aunciently called Ethna
in Sicile, as in the first year of the emperor Titus, it happened besides Naples
in the hill Veseuio, now called Summi, Plinies death.
where Pliny the same time (seeking the cause thereof) ended his life, not by
violence of the fire (for he approached not so nere) but by the vehement
opilacion of the sulfure, that stopped his breath. It is true, Hot baynes.
that the natural hot baines (whereof there be many in Italy, and namely, in
the realm of Naples) come of the natural heat that is in the sulfure,
thorough the veins whereof the water makes his course: but what should be cause
of this flambe, that (as it were against nature) ascends out of the cold
earth? almost no man can make any reason. In deed, the best opinion that I
gather, Fire breakyng out of the earth.
is, that the vein of sulfure in the earth, receiuyng sometimes through the
extreme heat of the son, a certain kind of fire, kendleth: and as the
vein is great or small, so works it the effect. If it be nere the upper part
of thearth, and have vent, it breaks out in fire or smoke: if it be so deep,
that for the great weight of the earth, it can not issue, than does it cause
thearth to quake: as in those parties (most subject to the son) earthquakes
are common, and sometime whole towns and countries ar destroyed withal.

Fertilitee of Naples
Some think the fertilitee of the realm should proceed much of the heat
that this sulfure gives the ground (seeing there is more plenty than elsewhere)
but whereof so ever it comes the country is surely replenished of all things
necessary for man's life, and so plesaunt withal, that Pandolfo Collenuccio (a
notable writer of the Neapolitane histories) thinks, the wonderful mutacious
that have happened in the same, to proceed of the desire that men had unto the
pleasers and commoditees of the country. And further speaking of the
inconstancy of the people, he says these words: It seems, that the
realm of Naples is predestinate to have in it continual tyrannies, sedicions,
falshead, rebellions, wars, destruction of citees, rauishementes, and flambe,
with all the other calamitees that of avarice and ambicion (true mothers of
such plages) may grow. And allegeyng the auctoritee of diverse aunciente
writers, affirms, that the provinces of the realm, which he calls
Regnicoli, do persevere without rebellion as long as they find none to rebel
against. Nevertheless Titus Liuius, and the ancient Roman histories show,
that Naples it self was of all other citees most constante in their faieth
toward the Romans, as well in time of danger as of prosperitee. And for the
space of these.30. years and more they have perseuered in quiet obedience
under their princes. Nevertheless in this the abbridgemente of their histories
ye shall see, that sens the decaie of the Romain empire, no realm in all the
world has been so much subject to alteracions and wars, principally through
occasion of the inhabitauntes them selfs, who always were divided in
partetakynges to their own confusion. And you shall yet to this hour see,
that the Neapolitanes are scarcely trusted on their words. Not that I think
they deserve less credit than other men, but because the wonted general ill
opinion of their unsteadfastness, is not taken out of men's hertes. Yet is the
Neapolitane for his good enterteimente reckened to be the varaie courtesy of
the world, though most men repute him to be a great flatterer and full of
craft. What woll you more? They are rich, for almost every gentilman is lord
and king within him self, they have very fair women, and the world at
will, in so much as Naples contendeth with Uenice, whether should be
preferred for sumptuouse dames. Finally the court about the Vicere, was wont to
be very princely, and greatter than that of Myllaine for train of gentilmen:
but now it is somewhat diminished as you shall perceive in the end of this
history.

The saying (of them that best can guess) is, that it yeldeth the
emperor.iii. millions of gold by the year, which after our reckenyng is
about.700000. pound. A great part whereof is consumed in mainteignyng the
Uiceres astate, and keeping of many fortresses, and in the wages of.300. men of
arms, continually mainteigned there, that must keep every one his.iii.
horse, for the which he has as good as.50. pound stipende yerelie, and many
of them have more. And one great fault there is, for almost no stranger can
travail the realm vnrobbed, specially between Rome and Naples. It is in
manner closed about with the sea, except.150. mile, that is cut over from the
mouth of the river of Vfente now called Maseno, unto the mouth of Tronto, and
is of compass in all, measuryng it by the bank, about.1400. miles, having
upon the sea costs such a number of havens and good towns, as few realms
christened have the like.

The history of Naples.
AFter Charlemaine had taken on him the occidentall empire, and agreed with
Niceforo emperor of Constantinople for their confines, leuing (as I said
before) the Duchy of Beneue^to for a mere between both, wherein he placed
Grymoalde a noble man descended of the Lumbardes nation, the realm of Naples
rested in peace aboutes the space of.27. years, till the coming of the
Sarasines into Italy, 829.
who landed at Ciuita Vecchia, rased it to the earth, went to Rome, spoylyng
and burning there what they would, The first coming of the Sarasines into
Italy.
passed by Monte Casino and by the monastary of. S. Bennet, destroiyng all
before them, and laded with wonderful richesse, returned to their navy in
the river Garigliano, and so passed home into their own country again.

Not long after the Sarasines under their Captain Sabba, returned into the
realm, and besieged Taranto, 845.
to the succors whereof the Greekish emperor sent his captain Theodosius,
with a great army by sea, of the which.60. sail were Uenetians, who metyng
with the Sarasines, fought with them, were discoumfited, many taken, slain,
and drowned: and finally Theodo^ius him self put to flight.

Than the Sarasines took the i will of Candia, 864.
and the more part of them arriuyng in Italy, took all the towns on the sea
costs from Ancona to Otranto, and so about to Taranto, spoylyng and burning
over all, until at last, the Uenetian army met with them, discoumfited
them, and drove them clean away.

Within a while after Constantine a child, son unto Leo late emperor of
Constantinople, was deprived of his astate by one Romano, general of his
fathers (...). And this Romano (being also a Roman bor^e (...) condition)
usurped the empire by force* which (...) much rufflyng, and namely the (...)
Puglia rebelled against him. (...) on them, caused the Sarasines (...) who not
only ouerronne those two countries, but also all the rest of the realm of
Naples, and Campaine almost to Rome: entendyng to assault and sack it, had
not John the.x. than bishop of the same made a great army, that so fought
with, and discoumfited them, that they were feign to flee unto the mount of
Gargano, now called saint Angelo: where they fortified them selfs and
dwelled many years, rennyng now here now there through the realm, burning,
spoylyng, and killyng in such wise that when they came before any town, and
promised, not to kill the people nor to burn the houses, incontinently the
inhabitants would yield them selfs: because they had been so often beten,
that they thought resistance naught auayleable.

And thus triumphed the Sarasines in one part and an other of the realm, but
most in Calabria and Puglia, Otho the first.
till the coming of Otho, the first of that name, emperor of Almaine, into
Italy. Who being arrived at Rome (for pacifiyng of certain rumors moved
against John the.xiii. than bishop there) was persuaded by Pandolfe, prince of
Capua, to send the army he had brought out of Germany into the realm: it
should be an easy mattier for him to drive all the Sarasines away. And so it
proved: for the emperor had no sooner sent his son (also named Otho) with
his power into those parts, but incontinently the Sarasens made what they
could to carry with them, 964.
and so departed. By reason whereof, Otho the ii.
this Otho the secounde, held the realm as his own certain years, till the
Greekish emperor Basilio, sent a mighty army of Greeks and Sarasines into
Puglia, and there discomfited Otho in such wise, that if the Greeks had
known how to have used their victory, they might easily have recovered Rome
and all Italy. But they contented with the recouerey of Calabria and Puglia,
fortified the same and kept it, not without war, sometime of one prince,
sometime of an other, and many times of the Sarasines, that (still enioiyng the
i will of Sicilia) would by stelth, here and there, be doing mischief against
their Christian neighbors.

Finally Henry the first emperor of Almaine, Mighell Catalaico emperor of
Constantinople, 100^.
and Sergius the.iiii. bishop of Rome, the realm of Naples stood thus divided
into sundry dominions, Calabria and Puglia (as I have said) was in possession
of the Greeks: the Romans some here, some there in Campaine and theraboutes,
had their parts, and some other under the name of princes, occupied the rest.

Than one Tan^redi, Conte d' alta villa, Tanered^ the Normain.
a Normain borne, came into Italy, who having.xii. sons of his own, and a
certain noumbre of other Normaines besides, took wages of Pandolfe prince of
Capua, to serve in his wars against Guaimaro prince of Salerne: in which
wars the Normains served so well, that Pandolfe prevailed as he would wish
him self. But because he seemed to set little by those Normaines, after he had
obtained his purpose, therefore when the time of their appoinctment was expired,
they left Pandolfe, and went to serve Guaimato, whose astate by their help
was shortly after much increased.

Finally Tancredi being dead, his son Guglielmo Ferrabach, was made general
over the Normains, Guglielmo Ferrabach
that were than a great noumbre: insomuche that the emperor of Constantinople
determinyng utterly to drive away the Sarasines, that than occupied the i will of
Sicile, required his help, promisyng for his reward, the iiii. part of all
that should be gotten. But when the Sarasines were all driven away, Molocco
the emperors captain, took the whole realm of Sicile into his own hands
to the emperors use, and would assygne no part thereof to the Normains. Which
wrong Ferrabach dissembled for the time, and so withdrew him withal his into
Puglia, taking the most part of the country by force, and entryng into Melfi
(a veraie strong place before fortified by the Normans, for safegarde of their
goods, wifes and children) he prepared all things necessary for the war.
And tarried till the forenamed Molocco came to besiege him with a notable army,
and than (as an expert captain) considering the Greeks to be werie of their
great travail from Sicile thither, incontinently issued out against them,
and discomfited Molocco, slew the most part of his army, and drove him in
manner clean out of Puglia, taking the possession of it into his own hands,
and naming him self Earl of Puglia, and so continued the rest of his life,
which was not long.

This Guglielmo Ferrabach than being dead, his brother Drogone, Drogone.
succeeded in the dominion of Puglia, who had diverse conflictes with the Grekish
armies, and diverse fortune withal, but finally in a great battile, between the
river Ofanto and the castle Oliue^^o, the Greeks were overthrown, and from
that time forth, the Normains enjoyed the whole country of Puglia, as their
own quiet possession.

After the death of Drogone, Hunfredo.
followed his brother Hunfredo, who continued.vii. years in the astate without
any notable thing that happened in his time.

Than succeeded Godfrey an other brother, Godfrey.
in whose time the prince of Salern happened to be slain of his own men, and
Gisulfo a Normaine made prince in his place. This Gisulfo had diverse times
attempted the gettyng of Beneuento, and now of new made preperacion for the
same, wherefore Leo the.ix. than bishop of Rome, required succors of Henry
the.ii. emperor of Almaine than being in Rome. So the emperor sent for his
Germans, that lay at Uercelly in Lumbardie, and delivered them to the
bishop, that in his own person, with the rest of those Italians he could
make, entered into the realm, entendyng utterly to expulse the Normans. But
Gisulfo, heryng of his coming, hasted to Beneuento, took and fortified it, and
afterward abyd the bishops army at a place called Ciuita, where in
conclusion was stricken a sore battle, but the Normains gatte the victory,
taking the bishop with certain of his Cardinals prisoners, whom (after very
gentill intreatyng they let go without ransom. For reward of which
courtesy, the bishop afterward confirmed unto the Normaines, all that they
held in Italy, to be their laufull possessions.

Not long after this died Godfrey, and left the Erledome of Puglia to his
son Bagelardo. Bagelardo.
Wherewith Roberte (surnamed Guiscardo) brother unto Godfrey, was so much
offended, that by force he chased his nephew out of the astate, and than
occupied both the countries of Puglia and Calabria, adioignyng also unto it,
the city of Troia, which unto that day perteined to the Romans.

Robert Guiscardo
This Robert was a man strong, hardy, and wise, who perceiuyng the great
contencion between the Romans and Nicolas the secounde their bishop (the
better to establisshe his dominion) he sent his ambassadors to the bishop,
who in company of those ambassadors came to the city Aquila, and there met
with Robert: and had such communicacion to gethers, that Robert was contented
to restore to the bishop, the citees of Beneuento and Troia, with those other
lands, that he before had taken from the church, Roberte created Duke.
for the which the bishop created him laufull Duke of Puglia and Calabria, and
invested him in the same duchy, with gift of the standarde of the church, so
that Robert became liege man and vassaile of the Romain see, and by the bishops
commandment brought his army to Rome, where he so chastised the Romans,
that they gladly obeyed their holy Roman father.

Not long after, leauyng his brother Guglielmo in Puglia, he passed into
Calabria, and fortified the town of S. Mark, and departing thense encamped
besides the river Moccato, nere to the baynes, and shortly after gatte Cosenza
and Martirano. Than went he to Squillaci and so a long the sea costs to
Reggio: which he besieged, and finally did so much, that he gatte whole Puglia
and Calabria, the land of Brutij, and the rest of the whole realm of Naples,
geuyng unto certain of his brethern such part as pleased him. By reason whereof
the same brethren (who a little before had been his contraries) consented wholly
to call him from thensfoorth Duke of Calabria and Puglia.

And though I covet to be brief, yet I woull not pass over one thing that
happened in the time of this Roberte.

There was found in Puglia a certain image of marble, with a cercle of brass
in manner of a garlande about his head, in which were written these words
Kalendis Maijs Orient Sole aureum caput habebo, the exposicion or meaning of
this sentence was diligently sought for by Robert, but none could declare it,
till at last a Sarasine, learned in artemagike came forth, and (being
prisoner) required his libertee for the intrepreting of it, which being
granted, incontinently he said: The first day of the kalendes of May, at
the risyng of the son, mark where the end of the shadow of this head shall be,
and diggyng there, you shall know the meaning of these words, which time was
observed, and ere they had dygged deep, they found a wonderful treasure*
Treasure found under ground.
that afterward did no small service unto Roberte in his wars.

Than was the realm of Sicile under the Moors, whose prince Bestauetto, made
one Bettimino his admyrall or chief captain over the same. This Bettimino
came secretly into Puglia to Roger, Duke Robertes brother, and showed him, how
Sicile was in poincte to rebel, so that for a reward and other agreementes
between them, he finally opened to Roger the means, how he might get it.
Which Roger by the help of his brother Robert, immediately enterprised, and
passing with a power into Sicile, the first town he took was Messina, and at
length chased away all the Sarasines, (...) conquered by the Normains
the whole island became subject unto him and his brother, so that for a token
of this victory, Roger sent unto Alexandre the secounde: than bishop of
Rome.iiii. camelles laden with part of the pray of the Sarasines, for a
present. And wonder it was to see the speed of these victories, for Robert
Guiscardo and his brethren, had brought all these dominions before rehearsed
under them within the space of.xviii. years.

Not long after, Gregory the.vii. bishop of Rome, first fell out with
Robert, but afterward being sore persecuted by Henry the.iii. emperor of
Almaine, he agreed with Roberte, and receiuyng of him only the mark of
Ancona, he confyrmed to him all that Nicolas the.ii. had before granted with
rather more. For the which, when the same Gregory was after besieged in the
castle. S. Angelo at Rome, by the forenamed emperor, Bishop of Rome
besieged.
Robert Guiscardo came thither with an army, and raised the siege, leadyng the
bishop (who was much hated of the Romans) with him to Salerno for his more
surety, where he shortly after died.

Thus Robert, after many worthy feats dooen in Italy and Sicile, by
occasion at last minded to drive Alessio, emperor of Constantinople out of his
astate, and to be emperor him self, so that he passed the sea with an huge
army, conquered Durazo, Valona, and diverse other citees in Dalmatia, Albania
and Gretia: fought by sea with the Greekishe and Uenetian armies both, and
overcame them: and was like to have prevailed in his enterprise, had not death
prevented him.

Finally as he was going into Greece at Cassiopoli, in the i will of Corfu, he
sickened and died, 108^.
ledyng a gloriouse and victoriouse life.60. years.

Than succeeded him in the duchy of Calabria and puglia Roger his younger son,
Roger.
who in the cou^sail holden at Melfi, was confyrmed by Urbane the second
bishop of Rome. But Boemonde the elder brother (who ever had followed the
father, and at that time remained captain over the army in Greece) heryng
that no part of the dominion in Italy was reserved for him, waxed so wroth
withal, that (habandonyng all his fathers enterprise) passed the sea with his
army, to drive his brother out of the astate: and did so much, that after
much feyghtyng, by agreement part of Puglia was assigned unto him, though he
enioied it not long. For immediately after followed the great viage into the
holy land upon the conclusion of the counsel made in Chiaramon^e d' aluerina
in France. 1094.
In which viage amongst the other princes, Boemonde him self would needs
go, and so woorthily behaved him, that by assent of all men he was made prince
of Antioche, and so continued honorably till his last day. By reason whereof
his brother Roger remained quietely Duke of Puglia and Calabria, from the
beginning of his reign about xxv. years.

Next him succeeded his son Guglielmo, Guglielmo.2.
that thynkyng to marie one of the daughters of Alessio emperor of
Constantinople, ^oke shippyng to go thither: and commended his astate to the
protection of Calixt the second than bishop of Rome. But while Guglielmo was
absent, Roger than Earl of Sicil^, son unto Roger brother of Robert
Guiscardo, without any regard of the bishop, assaulted Calabria, and got the
better part ere ever Calixt could succor it. And albeit the bishop reised
such an army as the hasty time would serve, and came forth as far as
Beneuento, sendyng a Cardinal before with exhortacions and excommunicacions,
yet would Roger nothing decline from his purpose: but was rather more hot in
his enterprise, and fortune so much favored him, that after a noumbre of the
bishops army were fallen sick, and many of his dear friends dead, the
bishop him self sickened so sore that he was carried in a horselitter back to
Rome, and all his people desperpled. By reason whereof Roger in manner without
resistance, in short time gatte all Puglia and Calabria into his own
possession, and so kept it, that when Guglielmo returned, deceived of his
pretended marriage (findyng him self also spoiled of his dominion) he was feign
to repaired to his cosen the prince of Saern, where not long after he died,
leaving none issue.

Roger.2.
So Roger remaignyng successor by inheritance, would no more be called Duke,
but entitled him self king of Italy, which Calixt and Honorius (next bishop
after him) dissembled, because they could not chose: but Innocence the second,
their next successor would not abide that name, and therefore moved of
disdeine without measuryng his force, sodenlely assembled such people as he
could make, and went against Roger with so great a fury, that ere ever Roger
could make any preparacion, he drove him from. S. Germans, and out of all
the abbey lauds (where Roger thought to have defended him self) and finally
constreigned him to flee into the castle Galuzzo, and there besieged him, till
William Duke of Calabria, son of Roger, coming with an army to succor his
father, discoumfited the bishops power, and finally took the bishop him self,
withal his Cardinals prisoners: who^ Roger the father entreated very
courtesly, and at last licenced them to depart at their pleasure. In
consideracion whereof the bishop granted Roger all his own requests, the
title of king only excepted: The citi^ of Naples gotten by the Normains.
and amongst other things the city of Naples, which till that time had
always ben the emperors. For joy whereof Roger at his entry made an hundredth
and fifty knights. But Innocence returnyng to Rome, found a new bishop made
in his absence, one Peter, son of Pierleone, and was called Anacletus.
Wherefore Innocence fled with certain ships of Pisa, into France. Roger
entitled king of Sicile*
The mean while Roger visityng this other bishop Anaclete, obtained of him the
title of king of both the Siciles, on this side and beyond the Faro. But
within three years after, Innocence by help of the Pisani returned, and
brought with him Lothayre Duke of Saxony, whom he crowned emperor. After
which Coronacion they both with a puissaunt army went against Roger, and
took from him all that he had gotten in Italy, as far as the Faro di
Messina, but within few years, when Innocent was dead, Roger recovered again
all that they took from him, and did afterward many notable feats against
Emanuell emperor of Constantinople, whose islands and towns he took by force,
as Corfu, Corinthe, Tebes, and Negroponte, and burned the suburbs of
Constantinople, assaulted the emperors palaice, and for a memory of his being
there, gathered apples in his Orcharde.

He also fought with the Sarasines and rescued Lewys the.vii. French king out
of their hands, taken by them by the way, 11^9.
going into the holy land. And so reigning.24. years lord of Sicile, he died
in the city of Palermo.

Guglielmo iii.
Than succeeded his son William before named, who immediately ouerran the
church lands, and was therefore excommunicated, insomuche that many of his
own barons conspired with Adrian bishop of Rome against him. But finally
after much a do he humbled him self to the bishop, of whom he was assoiled,
and invested king of ^ewe in the dominion of both the Siciles. And after that
made an army into Barbary, where by force he took and sacked the city of
Tunyse: In his return from thense he vanquished the Grekish army by sea,
though they were many more in number than he. But because he waxed afterward
somewhat couetouse, and burdeined the people with taxes and subsidies, his
barons rebelled, took him in his palaice at Palermo, and put him in prison.
Than took they his eldest son Roger, and made him ride through the streets.
After whom the people went criyng: William deposed.
Life to king Roger, and death to the tiranne king William.

But the inconstante people repentyng them of their error, or fearyng lest
Roger would revenge the injury done to his father, returned to the palaice
with a new rumor, and findyng it closed, began to assault it, so that Roger
thinkyng to appease them, came to a window, and as he would have spoken, was
shot in to the head with an arrowe, whereof he died.

Than was William taken out of prison and restored to his kingdom, William
restored.
wherein after he had reigned in all.21. years. he died, ^euyng his son also
named William in the astate.

This William for his good and peasible governance was surnamed, The good king
William. Guglielmo iiii.
For in 26. years reign, he never had war with any christian prince, except
that littell, that (moved only of a noble courage) he made against
Andronico, who being left tutour to Emanuell the second, a child, usurped
his empire of Constantinople. But the Constantinopolitans them selfs arose
against him, and hewed him to pieces, creatyng Isaac emperor in his place.

Many worthy feats did this William with his galleis against the infidelles:
1191.
specially in the v^age that the two kings Phillip of France, and Richard of
England made into the holy land. During whose being at the siege of Acres,
the good king William died in Palermo, without issue of his body.

Than the barons fearyng the bishop of Rome should subdue them (whose
subjects they would in no wise be) incontinently elected Tancredi (bastard
soonne of the last Roger before named) to be their king. Tancred^*
But shortly Celestine the.iii. bishop of Rome, found mean to trouble him on
this wise.

He crowned Henry the.vi. emperor on condycion, that he at his own charges
should conquer the realm of both Siciles, to hold it in fee of the church,
restoryng certain citees, and paiyng a certain tribute. And to make his
mattier the better, he secretly took out of the monastarie of Palermo
Constance a nun, daughter of the forenamed Roger, and (dispensyng withal)
gave her in marriage to this emperor Henry, crownyng them both with the title
of the foresaied realm. And so following that title the emperor besieged
Naples, 1191.
but by reason of a great plage in his army, he was feign to leave his siege
and return into Almaine. Before whose return (which was.iiii. years after)
Tancredi dyed, not reignyng fully.ix. years.

Immediately after, his wife Sibile caused William their son to be crowned.
Guglielmo.5.
But the forenamed emperor (pretending title in the right of his wife) with a
puissaunt army entered the realm, 1195.
and in manner without resistance obtained the whole, driving the Queen and her
son William from place to place so long, that at length he besieged them in a
strong hold, where falling to composicion, it was agreed, that William should
enioie the principate of Taranto, with the Erledome of Leccio, yeldyng
therefore due obedience to the emperor, who was sworen to observe this
covenant. But contrary to his promise the emperor as soon as he had the
mother and son in his hands, sent them both into Almaine, and made William
to be gelded, to the entente there should follow no more issue of that bloudde.
And so ended that noble house of the Normaines miserably, End of the house of
Normains
that about the space of.200. years had prospered, and at length reigned in
Italy and Sicile, as you have heard.

Henrico.6 Imperato^e.
After Henry the.vi. emperor of Almaine (borne of the house of Sueuia) had
thus extinguisshed the dominion and power of the Normaine bloudde in Italy, he
obtained the realm of Naples and Sicile, and reigned over them well
near.iiii. years, and died. 119^
Leauyng the realm by testament unto his son Federike, whom his wife
Constance bare after she was.50. years old: which being but a baabe, he
committed to the protection of his mother Constance, of Innocent the.iii. than
bishop of Rome, and of his brother Phillip Duke of Sueuia.

So Federike not fully.iii. years old was crowned king in Palermo: Federike*
shortly after whose Coronacion his mother Constance died, commendyng the
tuicion of the astate wholly to the bishop of Rome, that accordyngly
mainteigned the same to his power: notwithstanding that during the no^eage of
Federike, diverse businesses happened in the realm. First by Marquarde an Almain,
made Marquis of Ancona: by Henry the.vi. after by Gualtiero di Brenna a
Frencheman, who in the right of his wife, one of the systers of the last king
William the Normain, pretended title to the realm. Finally by Ottho Duke of
Saxony, which after he had obtained the imperial crown at Rome, disposed
him self wholly to conquer Naples and Sicile: till the forenamed Innocent by
way of excommunicacion had made so many of his nobles and prelates to forsake
him, that he was feign to leave his enterprise. At last Federike being grewen
sufficiently in years, was called into Almaine, and there elected emperor
after the death of Ottho, so that returnyng to Rome, he was triumphantly
crowned by Honorius the.iii. than bishop: 122^*
in recompense whereof he gave the Erledome of Fondi, with certain other lands
to the church: but shortly after Honorius excommunicated Federike, the cause
why I find not: so that Federike to annoy the lands of the church, gathered
together a noumbre of disperpled Sarasines, placyng them in Luceria: and did
so much hurt, that neither Honorius, nor yet Gregory the.ix. that was bishop
after him.xiiii. years, had in manner any good days rest. Some hold opinion,
that Gregory died only for sorrow. Nevertheless this Federike was a worthy
man. He had.iii. wyfes, the first named Constance, sister to the king of
Castile, by whom he had a son named Henry, that afterward for rebellyng
against his father died in prison: the second was Iolante, daughter of John di
Brenna, the kings of Naples entitled kings of Jerusalem
king of Jerusalem, with whose marriage the title of the realm of Jerusalem was
given him, which title all the Napolitane kings have kept ever sens, as the
emperor does at this day: the third was Isabell, daughter to the king of
England. This Federike went into the holy land with a puissaunt army, and
there behaved him self so valiauntly, that the Soldane sued to him for truce,
and upon agreement delivered to him the city of Jerusalem, with the whole
realm thereunto belongyng (a few small fortresses only excepted) insomuche,
that in the myddest of Lent, 1229.
he was in Jerusalem crowned, and before his return reedified the city of
Ioppa, now called Zaffo. And after a notable victory had against the
Milanese, with other their confederates of Lumbardie, he entered into Cremona in
manner of a triumph, leadyng after him a noumbre of prisoners with their
Carroccio, on the which Piero Tiepolo Potestate of Myllaine was hanged by one
of the arms with an halter about his neck. Carroccio.
This Carroccio was a carte drawn by certain oxen, trimmed about with greeces
or steps in manner of a kyngly seat, and decked with ornaments of tapestrie
and silks of the best sort, with the standards and baners of all the
confederate citees and nobles. Unto which as to the principal place of
judgment or of audience all men used to resort. And when so ever the
Carroccio, in any battle was lost, than was the field won, for about it
was always the strength of the battle.

Of this battle and triumph one wrote these words, Hae occisis non
sufficient sepulturae, nec Cremonae palatia multitudinem non capiunt
captiuorum, which is as much to say, To them that are slain sepultures
suffice not, nor the palaices of Cremona are not able to receive the multitude
of prisoners.

Than Gregory let cry the Croisie against him, and so much provoked him,
that all the priests he took, he caused their shaven crowns to be cut a
cross, with a number of other despites. And being at siege before the city of
Faenza (which he took at last by composition) wantyng money to pay his
soldiers, ^eather ^oygned for money*
he coygned leather, and valewed it, which for the time served as well as
silver or gold. Afterward being returned into the realm, he received the
lether and gave the valewe in gold for it again.

Entio king of Sardegna, and son of this emperor Federike, by his fathers
commandment, fought with the Genowaies by sea, and overcame.40. sail of
them, in which.iii. of the bishop of Romes legates, with a number of other
prelates (going to the counsel at Rome made against Federike) were taken
prisoners. And Entio writing to his father, to know what he should do with
them, was answered thus in two verses. Omnes praelati pap^mandante vocati,
Et tres legati Veniant huc vsque ligati.
Which is as much to say, Send me those prelates called by the pope,
With their.iii. legates bound in a rope.


Finally Gregory the.ix. (as I said before) seeing he could by no mean
prevail against Federike, sickened for sorrow and died.

Than succeeded Innocent the.iiii. who before being a Cardinal, was fast
friend to the emperor. But as soon as he was bishop he became his mortal
enemy: as Federike him self said, when the news of his election was brought
him: now of a good friend shall I have an ennemie. For in deed Innocent all
his days ceased not to work against Federike all the mischief he could
imagine. He fled into France: and called a general counsel in Lions,
where Federike was double accursed: but he esteemed it not, answearyng always,
that as long as the bishop went about temporal persecucion, he would defend
him self temporally.

Finally after many notable battles and victories, he finisshed his life in
Fiorentino, 1250*
a little town of Puglia, leauyng general heir of the realm of Naples, his
son Conrado, borne of his second wife Iolante, who by election of the
princes of Germany, succeeded his father in the empire. One other laufull
child he had named Henry borne of Isabell his.iii. wife, to whom he assigned
the island of Sicile from the Faro di Messina forewardes. Than of bastardes he
had Entio beforenamed, king of Sardegna, Manfredo prince of Taranto, and
Federike Prince of Antioche, with diverse others not so notable.

As soon as Conrade being in Almaine, Conrade.
heard of his fathers death, he came with a great army, first into
Lumbardie, where he recovered many citees that newly had rebelled: and after
passed into the realm, reducyng also unto his obedience those towns that
before his coming were in a rumor, of which some he destroyed and put to
sack, as Capua and Aquino, and so finally besieged Naples, which at length he
took by famine: overthrowing the walls and principal houses thereof, with
banisshement of diverse of the nobles. Thus when he had got Naples, the whole
realm was clearly his own: so after he gave him self altogether to huntyng
and ha^kyng with other like pastymes. And being so in peace, his mother Isabell
sent his brother Henry, than tender of years, to do reverence unto him, whom
Conrade caused secretly to be murdered by the way. A child in wit and
beauty very toward. Crueltee*
But the crueltee was not long unpunished. For Conrade him self, by
procurement of his bastard brother Manfredo (as it was said) was poisoned
within.v. months after.

Now it is to be understood, that Henry the eldest son of the emperor
Federike, Corradino neri heir unto Conrade.
who (as I said before) died in prison, had a laufull son named Corradino,
to whom after the death of Conrade all the dominion of Federike descended. But
Innocent the.iiii. yet living, and considering Corradino being but a child in
Almaine, made an army, and withal speed went to Naples, where he was
received, and (as it was thought) had in short space obtained the realm, 1254*
had he not died immediately.

Manfredo
By reason of whose death, Manfredo by title of tutour of the young Corradino
(yet still in Germany) sodeynely assaulted and discoumfited the bishops army,
and within very short space brought the whole realm to obedience, ere the
right tutours of Corradino in Almaine, knew of this victory.

Than craftily he hired certain Almaines to feign, that they came straight
out of their countrei with news of Corradines death: wherefore Manfredo with
all his, clothed in black seemed greatly to lamente the thing, insomuch that
he caused the funeralles honorably to be executed.

Not long after appeared him self in kyngelie habit, and was saluted and
called king. Wherewith Alexander the.iiii. than bishop of Rome was sore
offended, excommunicated Manfredo, and sent an army against him, which was
discomfited. For Manfredo gathering into his hands the treasures of his
predecessors, waged so many Sarasynes, and banisshed men of the Florentines
and Lumbardes, that he was always to strong for the bishop.

After Alexander succeeded Urbane the.iiii. who to overcome Manfredo let cry
a Croysie, under color to expulse the Sarasines out of Italy and Sicile. But
the army of that Croysie was not sufficient to furnish the enterprise. So that
Urbane of new began to devise a better way, calling Charles Duke of Angio and
earl of Prouance, brother unto Lewys the.x. French king unto Rome, where
first he made him Senator, and after crowned him king of Sicile and of
Jerusalem, upon condition, that he should pay yerelie to the church.48000.
duckates. Pursuyng the title, Charles with his french army invaded the
realm, and at last in plain battaill fought with Manfredo besides Beneuent^,
where Manfredo was slain, 1265.
and his power discomfited, so that Charles findyng after in manner no
resistance, gatte the dominion over the whole realm, End of the house of
Sueuia in the dominion of Naples. Carlo Duca d' Angio.
and at length took the wife and son of Manfredo prisoners, which son bad
his eyes put out, and after died miserably in prison in the castle De Louo.

Than went Charles royally to Naples, where he found an infinite treasure that
Manfredo had gathered, the third part whereof he distributed amongst his
soldiers: and waxed so great, that Clemente the.iiii. who succeeded Urbane,
made him vicare of the empire in Italy: so that at his pleasure he rode about
to Utterbo and into Tuscane until the coming of Corradino beforenamed, right
heir by title of the house of Sueuia unto the crown of Naples, who having
certain intelligence in Italy, came with a mighty power out of Almaine to
recover his enheritaunce. But Charles overcame him more by policy than
strength in the plain of Palenta. 1268.


And albeit Corradino and his cosen the Duke of Austriche very young men,
Corradino beheaded*
fled in the discomfiture of the battle, and did disguise them selfs in
vile appara^l, trustyng to escape: yet their ill fortune at last discovered
them, so that they were taken, brought to Naples, and there after a years
imprisonment (against all law of arms or reason) openly beheaded: some say,
through counsaille of the bishop of Rome. For when Charles had asked counsel
of the bishop, what he should do with Corradino, he answered these words,
Vita Corradini mors Caroli, mors Corradini ui^a Caroli.

But surely Peter, than king of Aragone, justly reproved this crueltee in a
letter written to Charles with these words, Crueltee.
Tu Nerone Neronior, et Sarracenis crudelior, that is to say, thou art more
Nero than Nero him self, and more crewell than the Sarasines. For in deed
Charles went into the holy land with his brother Lewys the French king, and
there being taken prisoners of the Sarasines, were courteisly entreated and
set to their ransom. Which thing gentilnesse and reason would he should
have used toward Corradino.

But see what followed. The french officers and soldiers in Sicile, behaved
them self to proudly with a certain kind of tyranny, as well against women
as men, that the Sicilians conspyred against them, through the instigacion of
one John di Procida, sometime physician to the king Manfredo, who after he had
obtained promise of maintenance by king Peter of Aragone, wrought this
conspiracy the space of.xviii. months (a wonder it could so long be kept
secret) and so well it came to pass, that at the day appoincted, with the
first ringyng of a bell to euensonge, the Sicilians being armed, slew all the
frenchemen, where so ever they found them, Rebellion in Sicile. Slaughter of
Frenchmen.
they left not in all Sicile one frencheman on live, nor one woman that was
known to be with child of a frencheman. Whereof yet unto this day, the
Sicilians euensonge, is used as a proverb in Italy.

And than by accord came the king of Aragone and received Sicile unto his
dominion, Peter king of Aragone.
the rather because he had a certain title thereunto, as in the right of his
wife Constance, daughter to the late king Manfredo. Unto whom also the bishop
of Rome granted his consent, and in deed invested him king thereof by his
ecclesiastical power.

Many things happened between king Charles and king Peter, and amongst other
a defiance to feight hand to hand with the place appoincted at Bordeaux, before
our prince Edward, than ruler of Gascoygne: where both kings kept their
day: but another met, nor fought. And ere ever king Charles returned, Roger
di Loria, admyrall to king Peter, had foughten by sea with Charles prince of
Sal^rn, only son of king Charles, before Naples, and taken him prisoner,
Charles son take prisoner.
with a number of the Neapolitane barons and gentilmen, that were all sent
(except Charles with.ix. of the chiefest) into Sicile, Crueltee.
and there for a reuengement of Corradinos death.200. of those nobles and
gentilmen were beheaded on a day.

Finally king Charles upon his reiourne, made excedyng great preparacion to
invade Sicile, but er he could bring it to pass, he died for anger and
melancholy, 1274.
after he had reigned.xix. years.

And for as much as some hold opinion, that this Charles was the first
Neapolitane king, Title of the kingdom of Jerusalem 1276.
that obtained the title of king of Jerusalem, it is necessary to declare, by
what mean.

The lady Marie, daughter of the prince of Antioche, resigned into the hands
of this king Charles all her title to the realm of Jerusalem, whereupon be
caused him self to be crowned king of Jerusalem, and with help of the
Uenetians, sent Roger Di San Seuerino to be governor, to receive feaultee and
homage of the christen barons there. Thus and not by the interest of Federike,
the kings of Naples used the title of Jerusalem: though I find not who was
Mary's father, by name, nor yet by what reason that realm should apperteine
to her.

When king Charles was dead, his only soonne and heir, Carlo 2.
Charles prince of Salerne remained prisoner in Sicile, under the keeping of
queen Constance, wife to king Peter of Aragone: and was by consent of the
barons condemned to die, as it were for a full reuengement of Corradinos death:
but the noble heart of Constance, would not suffer it: Excusing the mattier,
that before she knew her housbandes mind, she would not attempt so great a
thing. Wherefore she sent him into Aragone, Prince Edward of England.
where he continued prisoner till king Peter died: and than by procurement of
prince Edward, lord of Gascoygne, he was delivered and restored to his realm
of Naples. Who was raunsomed at.30000. marks: and for perfourmance of
couenauntes.iii. of his sons, and.100. gentilmen lay in hostage.

Here is to be noted, that within the space of one year died.iii. kings and a
bishop of Rome, that is to we^e, Phillip king of France, Charles king of
Naples, Peter king of Aragon, and Martine the.4. bishop of Rome.

After Peter succeeded in the realm of Aragon his eldest son Aufus, in Sicile
his son James, that held in prison the forenamed Charles the secounde.

Finally Aufus the elder brother being dead, James, to have the kingdom of
Aragon in peace (sore vexed at that time by the French king) fell at
composicion with Charles, to renounce Sicile unto him, and so did. But Federike
younger brother to James, Federike king of Sicile.
as soon as he heard thereof, got a certain power, went into Sicile, and gatte
it to him self: by reason whereof between Charles and Federike was continual
war many years, till at last Charles to have Calabria in peace (the most
part whereof Federike had gotten by force) consented, that Federike during his
life, should quetlie enjoy Sicile.

So Charles bringing all his things to a quiet, 1309.
reigned.24. years, and died, leauyng issue by his wife (Mary daughter of king
Stephen of Hungary) ix. sons and v. daughters. The eldeste named Charles
Martell, afterward king of Hungary by the mothers title, Lewis the secounde
son bishop of Tolouse in Spain, Robert the third son king of Naples. As
for the rest, though they were princes, Queen's and princesses, yet I pass
them over, and will only speak of Lewys Duke of Durazzo, because Charles Da
Durazzo (who was next king after the first queen Johan) descended of him.

At the death of Charles, Robert.
Robert his.iii. son being in Auignion, was called from thens to the dominion
of Naples, and confirmed king by Clemente the.v. than bishop of Rome, howebeit
not long after Caronumberto king of Hungary, and son of his elder brother
Charles, pretended title thereunto: but after long debatyng thereof, the lawiers
finally determined, that Robert should continue, and Caronumberto should
content him with the realm of Hungary. And though Robert was much troubled
by the coming of the emperor Henry the.vii. into Italy, yet (after the
emperor was poisoned by a black friar, in ministryng him the sacrament of
communion at Bonconuento besides Siena, by order (as they say) of the Romish
legate, king Robert prospered so well in Italy (by reason he was taken as
head of the Guelfi) that he subdued Genoa: and the Florentines with their
whole astate submitted them selfs unto him, and accepted his son Carlo senza
terra to be their lord. Which Charles not long after his establishment in
that dominion, returned to Naples and died.

Finally Robert him self sickened and died, without heirs males. 1342.
And so the inheritance remained in the iii. daughters of his forenamed son
Charles. Unto the eldest named Johan, he by his testament left the realm,
upon condition, that she should marie with his nephew Andrew, younger son of
the abouenamed Caronumberto. In whose time lived Petrarcha and Bocchacio,
Petrarcha Bocchacius
the one for verse, and the other for prose, famous in their Italian tongue:
and for their virtues much cherisshed of this king Robert.

According to the testament of king Robert, his nephiew Andrew came out of
Hungary, Giouanna prima. Queen Iohans. Husband strangled.
and married Queen Johan, with whom he reigned scarcely.iii. years: but that
she caused him to be hanged out at her chamber wyndow, because (as the same
went) he was not cockie enough to satisfy her appetite.

Than married she Lewys prince of Taranto, an excellent beautiful man. But
Lewys king of Hungary, elder brother to Andrew, to revenge his brothers
death, came with a puissaunt army into the realm, insomuch that the Queen
and her husband both fled to Auignion in Prouance, leauyng Charles da
Durazzo, son of Lewys da Durazzo beforenamed, their lieuetenant to defend:
but the Hungarien so much prospered, that in short space he gatte the whole
realm, and took this Charles da Durazzo, with his son Charles prisoners. The
father was beheaded, as guilty of the death of Andrew, being of secret faction
in arms with the Queen: the son was led prisoner into Hungary. Finally
king Lewys, after he had been.iii. months in the realm, leauyng a strong
garrison of Hungariens at Naples, returned into his country.

Than Clement the.v. bishop of Rome entreated a peace between king Lewys and
the Queen, in such wise, that Johan returned into her state, with covenant,
that her housband should in no wise bear the title of king. But what auailed
that: for she was no sooner in possession of the realm again, but she by
favor of Clement, caused her husband to be crowned king in Naples, and by
Clementes procurement, 135^.
got the consent of the king of Hungary thereunto. For the which she gave
to the bishop the city of Auignion, that the church ever sens has kept. But
Lewys couetyng to satisfy her flesshely appetite, fell in a consumpcion, and
died, within.iii. years after.

Than she mari^d James of Ta^racone, a young gentilman borne in Maiorica, than
reputed the goodliest fellow in the world: But to him she granted not the
title of king. Within few years he died: some say by natural infyrmitee:
other say, she caused his head to be stricken of, for companiyng with an other
woman.

After she married Ottho, Duke of Brainswich in Saxony* who than at that time
served in the wars of Italy, reteigned with the bishop of Rome.

Finally, Queen Johan, who favored not Urbane the.vi. elected bishop,
immediately procured certain Cardinals to elect one of the French faction:
so they elected Clement the.vii. by reason whereof grew a great schism in the
church. For Italy, Hungary and Almaine favored Urbane: France and Spain
favored Clem^nie. And Urbane to be revenged on the queen, made an army, and
did so much, that he constreigned both Clement and the queen, to flee from
Naples to Auignion: where the queen considering she had no child, adopted
Lewys Luke of Angio secounde son to king John of France to be her heir of
the realms of Naples and Sicile, ^itle of the second line of the house of
Angio.
and thereof made sufficient writing: whereupon the secounde line of the house
of Angio have ever sens mainteigned their title that they have to the realm.

Shortly after the queen returned to Naples. But Urbane this mean while, had
invested Charles da Durazzo (who as you have herd before, was led prisoner
into Hungary) king of Naples, and wroughte so well, that Charles by help of
the king of Hungary (that than favored him much) brought a great army with
him, and inconclusion took Naples and the queen with her husband prisoners.
1^^1.


The husband Ottho was set at libertee upon condition he should depart out
of the realm. But the queen by sentence of the king of Hungary, Queen Johan
hanged.
was hanged at the same wyndowe, where she caused her first husband to be
hanged. Her sister Marie (of her counsel in that mattier) was beheaded.

This Marie was she, Marie.
of whom Boccace was enamoured, and for whose sake he wrote the two books,
F^amme^^a and Filocolo. And amongst other verses written of this queen Johan, I
find.ii. veraie notable. Regna regunt vuluae, gens tota clamat simul, oh, veh,
Interitus regni est a muliere regi,
Which in english are of this effect, Helas crien the people all,
A woman's shappe wears the crown,
Woman's rulyng the wealth turn shall,
Of realms, quite vpside down.


Queen Johan being thus dyspatched, Carlo.3.
Charles remeigned peasablie in possession of the realm, till Lewis Duke of
Angio beforenamed (heir adopted) came with a great army out of France to
recover the realm as his enheritaunce: and by the help of certain princes of
Italy, passed through Lumbardy, La Romagnia, and La Marca, and so entered into
Puglia, where many towns yielded unto him: continuyng so a year and more, and
to strength his army, Mounser de Couci was sent after him with.12000.
h^rsemen from the French king. But he not following the Duke, passed through
Tuscane, and besiegeyng the Castle of Arezzo tarried so long, that er ^u^r he
could come to the succors, the Co^^e Alberico, gen^rall of the kings army,
had discomfited the french army, and slain the Duke in the field. For whose
death Charles withal his court, mourned in black a month, Mounser de Couci
hearing of the Dukes death, sold the town of Arezzo to the Florentines
for.40000. ducka^es, and immediately returned into France: so Charles had the
realm in peace, till Urbane the bishop, who called him unto the realm, fell
out with him, because Charles would not consent to make Butillo the bishops
nephew, borne of a vile stock, prince of Capua. Upon which breach Urbane
cursed him: and because he had not power to revenge him upon Charles, he
turned his wrath upon.vii. Cardinals that he suspected. Of whom he put.v.
into sackes, and threw them into the sea, and the other two he put to death
at Genoa, and dried their bodies in a furneise, cariyng them afterward on
moyles before him for an example to the rest.

Finally king Lewys of Hungary deceasyng without heir male, the barons of
the realm called king Charles to the dominion thereof, who at last went
thither, and was crowned in Alba, but afterward going to Buda, he was
frendely called to a supper by the old queen and her daughter, Murder. 13^6.
and there traitelously slain at the table.

This Charles had given to him to wife by Lewys king of Hungary, Margarete
youngest sister of queen Johan before mentioned, on whom ^e begatte two
children, Ladislaus and Johan. But as soon as the Napolitanes heard of Charles
death, they took their own libertee upon them, so that queen Margarete, with
her children, was feign to flee to Gae^ta, where she remained in much care and
trouble.iiii. years, why lest the whole realm was turned and tossed: first
by Ottho late husband to queen Johan, who gatte a great part thereof, and died
at Foggia, than by Lewys the secounde Duke of Angio, who following his fathers
title, sent certain galle^s to Naples to mainteigne those Napolines that took
his part.

Finally Boniface the.ix. than bishop of Rome, admitted the excommunicacion
made against Charles: Ladislaus* 1370.
and caused Ladislaus to be crowned king at Gaetta. And albeit the forenamed
Lewys of Angio, came to Naples with an army by sea, and was there received:
yet Ladislaus by littell and littell so allured the barons to him, that he not
only constreigned Lewys to withdraw him into Prouance, but also brougte Naples
and the rest of the realm obediente to him. Thries he attemted the gettyng of
Rome, which the fourth time he obteigned, Rome gotten.1408.
insomuche that entryng tryumphantly, the Romain nobilitee did him homage. But
what followed? Alexander the.v. being made bishop of Rome in the counsel at
Pisa, received the forenamed Lewys of Angio that than was newely comen thither
to do him honor. For the which he obteigned of Alexander the inuestiture of
the realm of Naples, and provision was made for recouerey of Rome and the other
lands of the church, which within short time was brought to pass.

Finally Lewys conducted an army out of France, and augmentyng it with the
Florentine and bishop of Romes powers, entered the realm: where in plain
battle he so discomfited Ladislaus, that if Lewys had known how to use his
victory, he might have had Ladislaus in his hands, and also the whole
realm: as Ladislaus, talkyng of this battle was wont to say, the first
day (said Ladislaus) if they had followed it, they might have been lords
both of my realm and person, the second day of the realm, but not of my
person, and the third day another of my realm nor person. For the leisure
that Ladislaus had after this discomfiture, served him so to fortify the
passages, that Lewys notwithstanding his victory, was feign to retire to Rome,
and so back into France. By reason whereof, Ladislaus remainyng quiet in his
astate, Rome the secounde time gotten by Ladislaus.
disposed him self of new, to recover Rome, and partly by intelligence, partly
by force did so: puttyng to sack only the Florentines gooddes, that he found
there. And at last sickened in Perugia, some say of a fever, some say of
poison: so that he died, 1414.
when he had reigned.29. years. And le^uyng none issue of his own body, the
realm descended to his sister Johan Da Durazzo.

Giouanna ^.
Thue Johan, late Duchess of Sterlich, atteined the realm, without impediment,
by reason of.xvi. thousand horsemen that served her brother at his death, with
good capitains, as Sforza da Corigniola, gli A^^endoli, lacopuccio, and diverse
others. But beca^se she was somewhat noted for keepyng company with a goodly
young man named Pandolfello, whom she made her cha^berlaine, her barons
persuaded her to marie: so that she took to husband James of Nerbona in
Pro^ance, than Earl de La Marca in Italy, upon condition, that he should in no
wise take on him the title of king. But he was not long married till by comfort
of the barons: he took the kyngly name upon him, and caused Pandolfello to lose
his head: vsyng Sforza v^raie hardly, and all thoroughe the instigacion of
Iulio Caesar da Capua^ who therefore by the queen's policy lost his head.

And though the Earl James (suspectyng his wyfes courage) would not suffer
her to go out of the Castle where they lay: yet at last with lowly
behavior, growyng out of suspicion with her housbande, she had libertee to go
so often abroad into the town of Naples, that finally she made a conspyracie
against him, and gat him into prison: reignyng afterward her self alone.
Than took the John Caracciolo to be her high steward, whom she loved more than
enough: so that by him all things were governed. And upon contencion between
him and Sforza (who was in manner as a general amongst the men of war) the
Queen defied Sforza. Much a do there was, but at length Sforza was
reconsiled, and the steward banished. And partly thorough the bishop of
Romes intercession, the Earl James was delivered out of prison, and restored to
the Queen's favor. But for all that, not long after the Earl James began to
work against Sforza, who (perceiving it) found the mean to bring the
steward home again, and thereby not only purchased the Queen's favor, but also
brought the mattier so to pass, that the Earl James fled into France, 141^*
became an heremite and there died. After whose departure, by commission of the
bishop of Rome, Queen Johan was crowned in Naples: but er the year was ended,
the Queen lost the bishops favor and banished Sforza: who by the bishops
procurement, became captain under Lewis, the.iii. Duke of Angio, than newly
entitled king of Naples) and reysyng an army, camped before Naples, abydyng
the coming of Duke Lewys: who with an other army arrived there.

This mean while, Queen Johan (seeing the power of her enemy Duke Lewis,
Alfonse adopted heir to Queen Johan.
to be to strong for her alone) practiced with king Alfonse of Aragone, to
accept him as her son, to enherite the realm after her: and thereof made
sufficient writing, with deliuerey of two strong Castelles in Naples, Castle
Nouo, and Castle di Louo, that in king Alfonse name were received as a pledge
of possession. Whereupon king Alfonse in person, with a great army by sea came
to Naples, and th^re fought with the Duke Lewys and his Captain Sforza. And
though fortune for a time was favorable to Duke Lewys, yet at length through
practice and lack of money, Sforza became the Queens man: so that Lewys was
feign to leave the enterprise, and draw to Rome: by reason whereof the Queen
with Alfonse remained in peace: Discord
till discord fell between them. The first occasion was because the
proclamacions were made in the Queen's name, without any mention of Alfonse:
which moved the barons of Aragone to conceive a great dishonor, that a king of
such reputacion, should lie there in that astate. So much grew this mattier,
that at last king Alfonse took the Queen's best beloved steward prisoner, and
besieged the Queen. How be it, Sforza having received her letters, came
straight to Naples, fought with Alfonse power, had the better hand, entered into
Naples, and conueighed the Queen away with him: Wherefore king Alfonse
augmented his power, and after hard feight with Sforza, recovered Naples,
streignyng the realm so much, that by counsel of Sforza, the Queen finally
agreed with Duke Lewys, and adopted him for her soonne and heir: by whose
means Naples was recovered again to the Queens use. And so.x. years after,
1424.
the Queen and Duke Lewys reigned in peace, and than died both. 1434.
The queen by her testament, End of the house of Durazzo. Alfonse.
left the realm to Raynolde Duke of Lorraine, brother to the foresaied Lewys.
Thus ended the succession of Charles of Angio first king of that house.

Whether the Queens testamente were feygned or true, it was uncertain: For
incontinently upon her death, the city of Naples, ordained among them a
common wealth, and made no mention of any testament, until they saw plainly,
that the bishop of Rome went about to bring them under him. Than they not
only publisshed Raynolde to be their king, but also sent for him, to come and
receive the possession of the realm.

This mean while in the wars between England and France, Raynolde happened
to be taken prisoner: so that he could not come to Naples. Than king Alfonse
came into the realm through intelligence that he had with many of the nobles,
and besiegeyng the town of Ga^erra (than defended by certain Genowaies, sent
thither by Duke Filippo Maria of Myllaine) at last fought with the Genowaies
army by sea, King Alphonse taken prisoner.
in which conflicte were slain of the kings part, about.5000. and the king
him self, with his.ii. brethren, the master of saint James in Galice, diverse
of the greatest princes and barons of Spain, and of knights to the number
of.200. taken prisoners: and all brought to the forenamed Duke Phillip to
Myllaine: who after very gentill enterteinment, delivered them without
ransom. So Alfonse being restored to libertee, and wa^yng strong through the
amitee of the Duke of Myllaine, disposed him self to recover the realm, and
came thither immediately with his power, obtained Gaietta, and went to Capua,
which had been always kept for him: how be it, during the time of his
imprisonment, the Neapolitanes seeing they could not have Raynolde, fette his
wife Isabell Duchess of Angio unto Naples, and did their best by way of
assault to win Capua. But now that king Alfonse was reiourned, the part of
Angio so much declined, that Isabell was feign to resort for help to Eugenio
than bishop of Rome, who sent the Patriarch Vitellesco to Naples.

This Patriarch was a stout man, meter for the field than for the church.
Patriarch Uitelesco.
For first he discomfited the army of the prince of Taranto, and took the
prince him self prisoner, and long time valiauntely bare him self in the
wars against Alphonse, one while with force, an other while with policy, so
that being fallen with his army in the danger of the king (through besettyng
of the streictes and lack of vittaile) he handled him self so humbly, that
the king (embracyng his fair offers) granted him truce, and under color of
the same truce, he (being armed, and the king unarmed) came to Villa
Giuliana, and so narowly besette it, that with much ado the king escaped his
hands. Leauyng all his baggage and carriage for a pray to the Patriarch.
Finally Raynolde beforenamed, being put to his ransom, Rainoldes coming to
Naples.
came with.xii. Genowaie galleys to Naples, where with kyngely honors he was
tryumphantlye received: and so much encreaced his power, that it was doubted,
whether of the two parts were the better. Raynolde defied Alfonse body to
body, which Alfonse refused not. Howbeit at the day and place of battaill
appointed, Raynolde appeared not. And albeit that Raynolde for a time prospered
and gatte into his hands the castle Nouo, and castle Di Lo^o, that king
Alfonse had always kept sens he received them at queen Iohans hands, till
that time, yet at last (after the death of Iacomo Caldora, one of the
principallest of the Angioyne part) Alfonses power so much increased, what by
battle, and change of diverse of the barons affections (who leauyng the
Angioyne part became Aragonese) that he recovered Naples and all the whole
realm: entryng into the city in manner of triumph: where for a perpetual
memory of his victory, the Napolitanes before the castle gate, erected a
notable fair arche of marble.

Thus Alfonse, obteignyng the quiet possession of the realm* used new means
of amitee with Eugenio than bishop of Rome: and did so much, that Eugenio
confirmed him in the astate, and invested his bastard son Ferdinando
successor to the crown. For which inuestiture, king Alfonse upon couenaunte
invaded the country De La Marca, and taky^g it by force from Francesco Sforza
(afterward Duke of Myllayne) restored it to the church. And than in
recompense of the great courtesy received of Phillip Duke of Millaine, he made
war in his favor against the Florentines, and achieved many worthy
enterprises, being in manner the only stay of Duke Phillip in his later
days: so that the Duke by his testament made him his heir of the astate of
Myllaine, but he enjoyed it not, as in the history of Myllaine appears.

Finally, after a general leage made in Naples between all the astates of
Italy, except the Genowaies, Alfonse made an army, and besieged Genoa for
breach of certain articles concluded long before at the making of a peace
between them: which the Genowaies were bound to give to the king yearly in
manner of a tribute a basin of gold, and the cause of their witholdyng, was for
that the king would never receive it otherwise than sittyng in his maiestee,
as though he triumphed over them.

The provision made for the continuance of that siege was so great, that by
common opinion the city must needs have been his, 145^.
had he not died, the.66. year of his age, and the.22. year of his reign in
Naples. Leauyng for successors in the realm of Aragone and Sicile his brother
John, and in the realm of Naples his son the forenamed Fernando.

Of this king Alfonse a^e written many great praises, for his valiantness
his temperaunce his learning, his liberalitee and other like virtues.

Ferdinando, bastard son to king Alphonse, succeeded his father, Ferdinando.
in the beginning of whose reign Calisto, than bishop of Rome, pre^endyng the
title of the realm to be fallen to the church for lack of laufull heirs,
excommunicated Fernando: and made great preparacion to invade: but death
prevented him. So that Fernando (warned thereby) used such means of friendship
with Pio his next successor, that he was not only confirmed in the astate,
but also crowned by certain Cardinals sent to Naples for the purpose.

New as soon as the news of Alphonse death was known, Duke John, son of
the forenamed Raynolde (in hope of mutacion in the realm) made an army by
sea, with help of the Genowaies, and landyng within the territory of the Duke
of Sessa, oueranne diverse provinces, and got daielie towns and friends, so
that Fernando was like to be put to the worse, had not the bishop of Rome and
the Duke of Millaine taken his part: by whose help Duke John at length was by
force constreigned to leave his enterprise, and most part of those barons that
took his part came and submitted them selfs unto Ferdinando, who graciously
pardoned them, and restored them to their astates.

Than died Pio, and Paul the secounde succeeded, who oftentimes troubled the
realm.

After the death of king John of Cyprus, Ferdinando coueityng to conquer that
realm, was re^isted by the Uenetians: between whom happened crewell war, so
that the Uenetians took truce with the Turk, The Turk in Italy.
and (as the fame went) were occasyon that he assaulted and took Otronto in
Puglia by force: which should have caused greater mischief in Italy, had
not the Turk (than Mahomet the.ii) died.

Immediately upon whose death king Ferdinando sent his eldest son Alfonse
Duke of Calabria, to conquer Otronto, which after long siege and sore
feight, was (for lack of succors) recovered.

Next Paul the secounde, succeeded Sixte the.iiii. bishop of Rome, and after
him Innocence the.iiii. who both wonderful inconstantly one while were
friends, and an other while foes to the king.

Finally this Ferdinando was noted to be very couetouse. Covetousness.1489.
For, calling a counsel of his barons in the city of Chieti, he would have
increased his subsidies and taxes. And because diverse of his nobles dissuaded
him from it, he put some of them to death, and some he imprisoned: from some he
took their goods, and some willyngly rebelled against him: in which travail
and tirannie he continued till he died, 1494.
leauyng issue males.ii. sons, Alphons and Federike.

Alfonse.2.
After the death of Ferdinando, his son Alphonse, than Duke of Calabria, with
consent of all the barons and nobles, was admitted king, and sendyng to Rome
to Alexander than bishop, for his confirmacion, the Cardinal Borgia, with a
number of prelates was sent to Naples, where by auctoritee of the Romish
bulls, he invested and crowned the king.

Than the king fell at variance with Lodouico Sforza, Duke of Myllaine, because
he usurped the astate that of right apperteined to his nephiewe Giangaleazzo,
son in law to king Alfonse, so that Lodouico (mistrustyng the kings power,
that in deed was bent against him) found the mean to bring Charles the
viii. French king, into Italy, who pretending to go against the Turks,
found no resistance: by reason whereof he not only ouerronne Tuscane and took
thastate of Rome from the bishop, but also conquered the whole realm of
Naples: although he enjoyed it not long: For all the princes of Italy
immediately so colleged them selfs against him: that he was feign to retire
with speed, and was nevertheless overtaken and fought with besides Parma,
where he lost the greatest part of his c^t^ages, and diverse of his nobilitee
were taken prisoners.

Now as soon as king Alfonse heard, that the french king was arrived in
Lumbardy, considering him self to be hated of his barons, and his son
Ferrandino contrariwise well-beloved, incontinently renounced the astate unto his
soonne, took his treasure with him, and sailed into Sicile, where for the time
of his short life (that dured scarce one year) he disposed him self to
study, solitariness, and religion.

Than Ferrandino was embraced of all men, Ferrandino.
in such wise that he was thought hable to resist the French king. Yet
notwithstanding that the streictes and passages were kept, and the Neapolitanes
army great in the field, the french men prevailed not only in the conquest
of the realm, Morb^^ Gallicus.
but also in the gettyng of that disease, that for ever shall be a memory unto
their name.

In effect king Ferrandino, seeing his own debilitee in respect of Charles
force, determined with patience to overcome his adverse fortune: and so
with.vii. galleis departed out of the realm, and went into the i will of Procida,
where he remained till he heard of the French kings departure, and than being
revoked by the Neapolitanes, not only Naples, but also diverse other citees
theraboutes expulsed the Frenchemen, 1496.
and raised their own kings standards.

Upon this, Ferrandino sent for succors to the Uenecians, offering them
Brundusio, and.iii. other haven towns in Puglia, to help him to expel the
Frenchemen out of the realm. Which offer was accepted, and Frauncesco
Gonzaga, Marquis of Mantua, with an army sent thither: who together with the
Neapolitane power, within the space of one year, drove the frenchemen clean
away. Not long after recouerey of his whole astate, Ferrandino (without
issue) died of the flux: Leauyng his uncle Federike inheritour to the realm.

Note here, that within the space of.xvi. months were.iiii* seueralle kings
of Naples, that is to wete, Ferdinando, Alphonso, Ferrandino, and Charles.

Federike.
Finally Federike, brother to the last Alfonse, succeeded to the crown, but er
he had fully reigned.iiii. years, hearing of the French kings coming Lewys
the.xii. and considering him self destitute of money, friendship, and abilitee
to resist, he sold his armures and municion for.30000. duckates to the Duke
Valentino Borgia, son to the bishop of Rome: and with the rest of his
treasure and implementes, went into France, and there yielded both him self
and his realm into the French kings hands: who received him, and
appoinctyng him an honorable provision, End of the house of Aragone in
Naples. Lewys the.12. of France.
kept him in France till he died. And thus ended the reign of the house of
Aragone in the realm of Naples.

And though upon the surrendre of this Federike (who^ many charge with
cowardice for the vile submittyng of him self, without any proof of force)
the french king obtained the whole realm: 1501.
yet he died, not long enioiyng it, either by reason of the intolerable
proud behavior of the French governors, or else through the inconstant
nature of the Neapolitanes, Ferdinando king of Spain (commonly called Il Re
Catholico) coumforted thereunto unto by many of the barons, and specially by
the citesins of Naples, sent a puissaunt army into the realm against the
Frenchemen: Who within less than two years, partly by force and partly by
treaty, were clean expulsed: so that in fine, the realm rested wholly in
peasable possession of the Spanishe king.

Ferdinando the.v. of that name, king of Spain, King Ferdinando of Spaigne.
chasyng away the Frenchemen, enjoyed quietely the realm of Naples unto his
death: and easily recovered of the Uenetians the four ports in Puglia, that
Ferrandino had given them. By reason that when all the Christian princes were
entered into a league at Cambray against the Uenetians, they at that time made
none offer of resistance: but rather consented unto the renderyng of them:
like as in hope of peace they granted unto all the other princes what they
would axe, Uenice only excepted.

Finally Ferdinando deceasyng, Charles the.v. Emperor 1515.
Charles the.v. now emperor of Almaine (son and heir of Phillip Duke of
Burgoyne, and of Johan his wife, eldest daughter and heir of the forenamed
king Ferdinando) suceeded in the realm of Naples, as he did in all the other
realms and dominions that Ferdinando had: and hitherto enjoys the same.

It is true, 1528.
that the French king sent Mounser de Lautrech his general, with a
puissaunte army to conquer the realm. Where between the parties French and
Spanish were done many worthy deeds of arms, Naples it self was besieged by
sea and land, until Andrea Doria, general of the french kings army by
sea, revolted from the French king to the service of the emperor. From which
time the hope of the French armies prosperitee began to abate: and fortune so
much to go against them, that what through extreme plage, and through the
hardiness of the imperialles, that began to take courage, the Frenchemen were
constreigned to reise their assi^ge, Mounser de Lautrech, with many other of
the best French capitaines being dead, some of the plage, and some of the
sword: so that of.60000. which under the French standarde came thither to
the siege, escaped not fully.2000. on live. From which time hitherwardes the
emperor has had no notable trouble there, 1547.
saving that now of late is begone a little striefe between the Vicere Don
Diego di Tolledo, and the barons of the realm, for making of certain laws,
and some bicketing and slaughter has happened between the Spaniardes and them,
and many gentilmen are fled to Rome and other places for fear of
punishmente. But because the thing is not of such importance as should seem
to move war, I shall not need to make further rehersall.

The descripcion of Florence.
Florence, an excellent fair city, stands at the foot of the Appenine
hills, in a little valey named Arno of the river Arno, that renneth through
it. Coming to it (excepted by the river side) the descendyng is such, that a
man may easily behold every part of the city: without the which, down
alonge both sides of the valey are so many fair palaices and sumptuouse
houses, that for the space of.viii. or.x. miles it seems in manner but one
town.

The city it self is esteemed to be.vii. miles in compass, The circuit of the
city.
walled with square stone in manner as hard as flynte, and of a great heighte,
with a number of goodly toures after the ancient buildyng, strong enoughe to
defend, but nothing apt for artillery to offend after the manner of these
days: For they were builded before the inuencion of gunnes.

Over the river within the city are.iiii. very fair bridges of square stone,
on the furthest down the river, Bridges,
has been a little marble image of Mars, which was set there by an astronomer
about the first buildyng of the city, in such a conjunction of the
celestial bodies, that it promised prosperitee to the city aslonge as that
image should stand: thretnyng the decaie of the same, as soon as it were gone.
And as I have been credibly informed, within less than these.20. years, it
fell, and is gone no man can tell how. Shortelie whereupon the empeperours
army besieged the Florentines, and took their libertee from them.

Arno.
The river Arno is not lightly big, but ones a year, when the son has
power to dissolve the snow on the mountains, it swells so, that it may in
manner be compared to Thames at London, saving it serves not for vessel to
come from the sea: by reason of the swyfte stream. Wherefore the Florentines
are feign for the most part to fetch their merchandise that come by sea, from
Pisa.40. miles of by land.

Edifices.
Within the city are many goodly temples and other edefices, amongst the
which the cathedral church is an excellent fair buildyng. For the walls
without are all covered with fine white and black marble, wonderfully well
wrought, and over the queere is an whole vaulte called Cupola, facioned like
the half of an egg, risyng between.iii. isles and the body of the church: so
artificially made, that almost it seems a miracle. For it is so high, that the
pomell on the top being able to conteigne.vii. persons, seems a very small
thing to them that stand by low. And the compass of it by the base, is
about.160. paces. Besides that the floor under this vaulte round about the
quiere is laid with fine marble of diverse colors so fair, that it yeldeth a
delight to them that walk upon it.

The steple standing besides the church, is likewise of fine marble a very
fair and square tower, equal in height to the circute of the base, with
diverse stories and things graven in it, so artificial and costly, that it
deserves singular praise.

The temple of. S. John, called Il Battesimo, is lykewi^e of fine marble both
within and without, having a number of goodly pillars and.iii. ^rasen gates
very sumpiuouse and fair. Many other goodly churches there be, which should
be to long here to rehearse.

The Dukes palaice, with the place before it, represents a very stately and
aunciente maiestee. Wild beasts,
On the backeside thereof, is the house, wherein the wild beasts are kept, as
lions, tigers, bears, wolfes, apes, egles, grypes, and such other, whereof
there be not a few.

The.ii. principal houses of Strozzi and Medici seem rather the buildings of
princes than of private men. And generally the citesins houses for their
beauty are worthy of much praise. Howbeit, they may make them good cheap,
because they have marble and stone plenty in the mountains there by, insomuche
that all their streets: which are very fair, large and straight, are paue^
with flat stone. But amongst all other they have diverse goodly
hospitallles, Hospitalles*
for relieve of the sick and poor, and one very fair, so well ordered, that
it receives a great number of men and women, but into several houses: where
they are applied with good physic, and their beds, their shetes, and every
other thing so clean, that many times right honest men and women be not
ashamed to seek their health there. For that hospital alone may dispende
yerelie above.20000. crowns: by reason whereof they have excellent phisicions,
good poticaries, dilygente ministers, and every other thing necessary.

Finally there is a very fair and strong cas^^ll, called Ci^tadella, more
than a mile and half in compass, builded by the last Duke Alexander, for a
bridell to the Florentines, because he had than newly taken their liberties
from them: they being for the most part so variable and inconstant, that the
other Italians have used to call the^ Bizzari, which signifies wild headed.

Three miles without the city, the Duke has made a gardein at a little house
that was his fathers. Wherein is a laberinth or mase of box full of Cypre
trees, having in the midst one the fairest co^duite of white marble, that
ever I saw: besides that it has diverse other conduites, and such
conueighances, that in manner every flower is served with renning water: and all the channels are of white marble so fair, that it is in my judgment at this
present, one of the excellentest things in all Europe.

The Florentines customs.
THe common opinion is, that the Florentines are commonly great talkers,
couetouse, and spare of living: but they be fine and clenly.

In deed he that bieth at the shambles more meat than their manner there
aloweth, is incontinently noted and spoken of. But for all the lack that is
laid to them as a reproach, yet did I never see it so scarce, that a
reasonable man ought to find fault withal. And if men generally in other
places could follow it, the rich should live more healthfully: and the poor
find more plenty.

I continued there a certain space at mine own charges, and lay a good while
with Master Bartholomew Panciatico, one of the notablest citesins: where I
never saw the fare so sklendre, but any honest gentilman would have been right
well contented withal. And yet I dare auowe, he ex^eded not the ordinary.
Besides that the fine service, the sweetness of the houses, the good order of
all things, and the familiar conversation of those men, were enough to feed a
man: if without meat men might be fed. I woull not deny, but many of them
use much talk, which I think proceeds of the desire they have to seem
eloquent. For he is not reputed a man among them, that can not play the
Orator in his tale, as well in gesture as in word. The Academie.
And therefore I suppose their Academie was first ordained: which is one of the
goodliest ordres that I have s^ene.

A certain number of the chief of them, being well learned, are drawn into
a company, whereof the Duke him self is one. These every holidaie at.iii. of
the clock at after noone, assemble in an halle appoincted, where one of them
mounteth into a place called the Harange, a little higher than the rest, and in
his own mother tongue makes an Oracion of an hour long, of what mattier so
ever he thinks best him self. This Orator has warnyng so to do by an
officer a great space before his day. For they chose every half year a
Consul, who appoincteth a sundry man to the Harange for every holidaie. And
when the hour of assembly approaches, the most part of the company repair
to the Consul, and so bring him honorably to the place: where he sits
highest, though the Duke him self be present. And for my part I never heard
reder in schole, nor preacher in pulpitte handle them selfs better, than I
have heard some of these in the Harange.

Women.
The Florentines wyfes are nothing so gaie as the Uenetians. For they love a
modesty in their women's apparaile: and specially if she pass the age of.xl.
lightly she wears but plain black clothe. And they keep their maidens so
streict, that in manner no stranger may see them.

The common people are very religiouse, and for the most part full of
supersticion: but they that are reckened wysest, believe much with Pliny. And
where they have been much burdeined with Sodomie in time past. I can not
perceive there is any such thing now.

Of the Dukes dominion and reuenew.
Besides Florence, the Duke has under his dominion.vi. citees, Pisa, Volterra,
Pistoia, Arezzo, Cortona, and Borgo, with diverse other good towns, and the
greattest part of Tuscane, and may dispende better than.500000. crowns of
yearly revenue: the greatest part whereof rises upon the.x. that is paid him
of all the lands within his dominion.

Of the edificacion and success of the city of Florence.
COnferryng the discourse of diverse authors togethers, toucheyng the
Florentine histories, and findyng the effects of them all gathered in one by
Nicolas Macchiauegli, a notable learned man, and secretary of late days to
the common wealth there: I determined to take him for mine only auctour in
that behalf.

It is manifest, that from the ancient city of Fiesole (the old rewines
whereof are yet to be seen, on the top of an hill two miles from Florence) the
city of Florence had her beginning principally. For by reason Fiesole slode
high, and was painful for merchantmen to bring their carriage unto, the
citesins kept their market on the side of the river Arno in the plain, where
Florence now stands: and buildyng there shoppes for their wares, from shoppes
they grew to houses, and from a few to many, so that at length it became a
town, which increased much through certain Colonies of the Romans sent
thither first by Sylla, and after by those three Romans, which after the
death of Caesar divided the empire between them.

And albeit, that some have contended upon the name, affyrmyng, that it was
first called Fluentia, and after corrupted Florentia: yet mine opinion agreeyng
with Macchiauegli, is, that from the beginning it was called Florentia. Under
the Roman empire, and about the beginning of themperours, it seems to take
first name and reputacion. For when the empire began to be afflicted of
barbarouse nations (as the Italians call them) than was Florence also
destroyed by Totila king of the east Gotes.250. years after it was reedified by
Charlemaine, Florence destroyed and reedified.
and so continued as one of the principal citees of Italy, unto the year of
our lord.1215. always as subjects, first to the succession of Charlemaine,
after to Berengarii, and lastly to themperours of Almaine, by which time the
Florentines could do nothing worthy of memory, for the power of them whose
subjects they were: Nevertheless in the year.1010. they took Fiesole and
destroyed it utterly, either by the emperors consent, orels between the death
of the one emperor and the election of the other.

But when the bishops of Rome began to grow great, and the emperor
littell, most part of the citees of Italy ganne to govern them selfs with
small regard toward their prince: 1080.
so that in the time of the emperor Henry the.iii. all Italy was divided
between him and the church. Notwithstanding the Florentines in all those
troubles kept them selfs united togethers, and obeyed the strongeste. Until
the year.1215. But like as after long health sickness is more perillouse, so
the longer Florence forbear to follow the sects of Italy, the more affliction
they suffered, when they fell to division among them selfs. The first
occasion whereof was.

Among their noble families were two principal, Bondelmonti, and Vberti,
next them were Amidei and Donati. In the family of Donati was a rich wydowe,
that had a wonderful fair daughter: which she purposed to bestow on a young
knight, chief of the family of Bondelmonti. But he, not knowing either the
fair daughter or the wydowes purpose, was betrouthed to a maid of the house
of Amidei. Wherewith the wydow was wonderfully offended. And thinkyng with the
beauty of her daughter to break that marriage, on a day as the gentilman
passed alone by her door, she called him, and having her daughter with her,
said: I rejoice at your good marige, notwithstanding I have a great while
kept my daughter here for you. At whose beauty the gentilman being astonished,
and considering her dower should be greatter than the others, without respect
to his trought given, or to the inconveniences that might follow for the breach
thereof, forthwith answered, that syns she had kept her for him he should be
much unkind to refure her, and so incontinently married her. Which injury
the family of Amidei, with help of the Vberti, determined to revenge. So
waityng their time on Easter day in the morning at the foot of the bridge
Ponte Vecchio, as master Bondelmonti was ridyng to church, they slew him.
Division.
Whereupon the whole city was divided in two parts, the one with Bondelmonti,
and the other with Vberti. And because these two famimilies had many strong
houses and towers, specially in the countrei, they warred togithers many years
with diverse fortunes. And although they never concluded a full peace, yet many
times they took truce: In which astate Florence continued until the time of
the emperor Federike the.ii. who being king of Naples, and at variaunce with
the church of Rome, to make him self the stronger in Tuscane, took part with
the Vberti: by reason whereof the Ubertine part prevailed, and chased clean
out of the city the Bondelmonti.

Guelfi and Ghibellines faction
Here is to be noted, that in the co^tencion between the emperor and the bishop
of Rome, the whole Italian nation was so divided in two parts, that in many
houses you should have the father against the son, brother against brother,
and commonly one neighbor and one house against an other. And to encrese the
mischief, ii. brethern Dowchemen dwelling in Pistoia (20. miles from Florence)
fell out for this matter, and oftentimes openly fought in maintenance of
their division. Whereupon it followed, that all the imperial named them selfs
Ghibellini, after the name of Ghibell, one of those brethern, and the church
part Guelfi, after the name of Guelfe the other brother. So that the part of
Bondelmonti were Guelfi part: and they that were with Vberti were Ghibellines.
Between whom not only the nobilitee of Florence, but also the most part of
the commons were divided. Thus by the emperors favor the Guelfes were chased
out of Florence, and lived in their fortresses and castelles in the vale of
Arno, defendyng them selfs as well as they could against their ennemies,
until Federike died: and than by mean of certain of the city that were
newters, both parties were reconsiled, and the Ghibellines brought home to
Florence. Where (laiyng all suspicion aparte) they framed them selfs to
procure a libertee unto their city, ere the new emperor should have power
to oppress them. Flore^tines common wealth constituted
And so divided the city into.vi. parts, appointyng.xii. citesins (ii. unto
every part) to govern the same, namyng them Antiani: chaungeable every
year. And to eschew occasion of variaunce, that might happen between the
parties for judgment geuyng, they chose two strange judges, one named
captain of the people, and the other named Potestate, to judge all mattiers
both civil and cryminall. And because there is no certain order, where no
defendour is, they ordained.20. standards or bands in the city: and.76. in
the county, wherein were written all the youth and able men to be ready in
his appoincted kind of armure when so ever they should be called, either of
the captain, or of the Antiani. And the better to establishe the thing, they
devised a carte drawn of two oxen. to carry their baners and ensigns, covered
with white: unto which, as to the maiestee of their common wealth, or as it
were to the general of their army, the men of war should always resort.
For when so ever they set forth any army into the field, than was this carte or
chariote drawn forth into the street called Mercato Nouo, and there by the
people committed to the charge of the chief governors of the army. Besides
that they had a bell called La Martinella, which before the setting forth of
any army should ring a monethe, to the intent their ennemies might
prepare to defend them selfs. This bell did they also carry into the field
with them, to set their watch, and to call the soldiers together.

Their procedynges herein were so commendable and so well handled, that in
short space they grew to a wonderful auctoritee, so that Florence became the
head of all Tuscane: and had (no doubt of it) atteined such reputacion, that
it might have been well compared to the notable citees of the world, if the new
and often divisions within them selfs had not hyndered their prosperitee.

After this manner they endured.x. years, in which time they enforced the
citesins of Pistoria, Arezzo and Siena to enter in league with them: and in
the return of their camp from before Siena, they took Volterra, and
destroyed certain other Castelles, the inhabitauntes whereof they carried with
them to Florence. All this was dooen through counsel of the Guelfes, which
were of greater power in Florence than the Ghibellines, as well because the
Ghibellines through their proud and ill governance had provoked the hate of
the people, when they ruled in time of the emperor Federike: as also because
the commons favored more the church part than the imperial, trustyng with
the help thereof to have their libertee maintained, which at the emperors
hands they feared to lose.

Wherefore the Ghibellines, seeing their reputacion decayed, disposed them
selfs to recover it, thinking their occasion to be good: when Manfredi son
of Federike: had taken the realm of Naples upon him, and had sore troubled the
churches power. Than practiced they secretly with him, to recover their
libertee. But their practices were discovered to the Antiani, who incontinently
sent for the Vberti to appear before them: and they not only disobeied, but
also fortified them selfs in their houses, and so provoked the fury of the
people, that at last the commons arose, and with help of the Guelfes chased
the Ghibellines out of Florence, and co^streigned them to withdraw to Siena.
From whense they sent to king Manfredi for succors, and through the diligence
of Master Farinara delli Vberti obtained such aid, that the Guelfes shortly
after were discomfited upon the river of Albia: with so great a loss, that
they which escaped, fled not to Florence (thynkyng it to be lost) but unto
Lucca. The general of the kings men in this journey was one Conte Iordano, a
man in arms much renoumed, who following his victory wen^e straight to
Florence, and reduced it to the obedience of the king Manfredi, adnullyng all
magistrates and laws, with every other thing that seemed to serve the citees
libertee: the injury whereof bredde double malice against the Ghibellines in the
hertes of the commons, and was occasion of their undoing, as after shall
appear.

The Conte Iordano setlyng Florence after his own facion, was revoked by the
king to the service of the realm: and therefore appoincted as lieuetenaunt
general there, the Conte Guido Nouello, lord of Casentino, who immediately
called a counsel of Ghibellines at Empoli, and there concluded, that (to
maintain their part in Tuscane) it was necessary to destroy Florence: but
Master Farinata Delli Vberti principal of the Ghibellines, only amongst all
the rest withstode this opinion, allegeyng the perilles that he had suffered
were in hope to enjoy his country, and thinkyng him self no less hable to
defend it than to get it, as he had dooen, he professed openly to become no
less enemy to them that should take the contrary, than he was already to the
Guelfes: and so with his only reason and auctoritee dissuaded the rest from
their purpose.

This mean while the Guelfes, which were fled to Lucca, were commanded
thense by the citesins, who feared sore the thretnynges of the Conte: and so
went to Bolognia, and from thense unto Parma to help the Guelfes of Lumbardie
against the Ghibellines there. Where after diverse victories, they grew to so
much wealth and reputacion, that the bishop of Rome took them as his, and
gave them the ensign of the church, which they use in Florence to this day.

Than went the Guelfes with Charles of Angio against Manfredi, and were
partetakers of the victory, which so much increased their reputacion that
the Conte, with the rest of the Ghibellines, that than ruled Florence, devised
how to gratify the commons, to get their favor (which before they had
utterly lost) and therefore divided the city into arts, appoinctyng officers
of the commons unto every art, so that in all there were.36. citesins called
to rule again, and to make new laws as before. And where the Conte with the
Ghibellines thought by these means to draw the peoples favor toward
them, the contrary immediately followed. For when the Conte Guido had set a
tax upon the people, for paiement of his soldiers, they not only refused
the paiement, but also withstode his force and the Ghibellines both, in such
wise, that with loss of diverse men slain in the bickeryng, the Conte with the
Ghibellines (through cowardice of the Conte) forsook the city, and went to
Prato: and willing to return, was more easily kept forth, than he could
have been expelled, in case he had fortified him self while he was within.
Thus the people recovered libertee unto their city, and (in hope to make all
things well) revoked as well the Ghibellines again as the Guelfes. But all in
vain, for the Ghibellines rested still in the ancient mortal hate of the
Guelfes, for diverse injuries, and the people loved them not, as often as they
remembered their passed tyranny: besides that the Ghibellines, when they heard
of the puissaunt coming of Corradino out of Almaigne, to win the realm of
Naples, began to devise how to recover their astate again. Wherefore the
Guelfes sent to the forenamed Charles than king of Naples for help to defend
the^ selfs, whilst Corradino should pass. And upon the coming of aid from
the king, the Ghibellines.ii. days before fled. And so had the Guelfes
liberty to make new laws and new magistrates, which they did immediately.
First deuidyng the Ghibellines goods in.iii. parts, one to the common wealth,
an other to the chief magistrates, and the.iii. to them selfs, in recompense
of their own hurtes. And the bishop of Rome the better to maintain Tuscane
Guelfe, made king Charles imperial vicare of Tuscane.

After this Gregory the.x. passing through Florence toward France, devised
with the Guelfes for reconsiliacion of the Ghibellines, and did so much, that
certain men for the Ghibelline part came into the city, and after long
communicacion agreed thereupon. But because the thing took no effect, therefore
Gregory excommunicated the city. Which Innocent the.v. his next successor
assoyled again.

Thus the Guelfes forgettyng them selfs in their prosperitee, became so
proud, that they regarded neither magistrate nor people, but for every light
occasion would feyght, and many times kill without abidyng any justice: which
moved the people to murmour, and gave occasion to the bishop of Romes legate to
practice the reuocacion of the Ghibellines under pretense of unity, and
brought it to pass in deed: and than was there new orders of magistrates
appoincted, and the citesins so united, that for very werinesse of long
striefe both abroad and at home, the names of division began to decaie, so
that Ghibellines and Guelfes were almost forgotten, when there began a new
division, between the nobilitee and the commons, in such wise that they armed
them selfs, and had tried the mattier with the swoorde, if certain religiouse
and other indifferent men had not taken up the mattier.

In effect the pride of the nobilitee was abated, and part of the commons
will bridled, so that they agreed again, and were quiet a while.

There were two notable families in Florence Cerchi and Donati, between whom
had been an old grudge, but no fightyng of a long time. In Pistoia also two
young gentilmen Lore and Geri at play fell out and fought: so that Lore hurt
Geri. The father of Lore being offended therewith, and thinkyng to pacify the
mattier gentillie, sent his son to the father of Geri, to submit him self
and ask forgiveness: But the father of Geri took him and cut of his hand,
saying, that wounds were healed with iron, and not with words. This mattier
so grew, that the whole city of Pistoia was divided in two parts, the one
calling them selfs Bianchi, that is to say, the white, and the other Neri,
that is to say the black. After long strife within them selfs being weried,
the black band went to Florence, and fell in favor with the Donati: the like
whereof did the white band with the Cerchi: so that the aunciente grudge
between those two families increased, and at last upon a light occasion fell
out and fought in Florence. By reason whereof the whole city as well nobles as
commons were divided, and oftentimes armed, so that the rulers (as newters)
were feign to streigne their power, and partly by force, partly by
auctoritee, causyng the parties to unarm them selfs, they banished certain
of the chief, specially of the Neri: which being exiled, resorted to the
bishop of Rome: and obtained of him that Charles of Ualois, brother to the
French king (than being in Rome for certain practices of the realm of
Naples) should be sent to Florence: by whose mean the Neri recovered the
city, and by force expulsed the Bianchi. And like as the Neri were first by
the bishops means restored, so also the Bianchi at the bishops intercession
were received home, but not to rule: which grieved them so much, that upon
new contencion (their intent being discovered) they were utterly expulsed.

Thus Charles of Ualois (atcheiuyng his purpose in Florence) departed thense,
leauyng the Neri in quiet possession. But it endured not long: for Corso
Dona^i, chief of that part (thinkyng his astate very small to remeigne as a
private man, of the common wealth) moved business in the city, in hope to
have all the rule him self. Wherein he prevailed not, for the commons sent for
the Lucchese to succor them, and by their help did so ouermatche Corso and
his partetakers, that they remaigned still in their libertee: and procured a
legate from Rome, to stablishe an order amongeste them. Who instead of order
(thinkyng to bring certain purposes to pass) set them further out than
ever they were, and departing in great anger excommunicated the city.

Thus as the Florentines were daily at strife and war within them selfs,
there chanced so great a fire, that it burned.1300. of their houses: so that
what through the wonderful blouddeshed, and great loss of the fire, for very
werinesse they laid down their weapons, and though the legate had craftily
gotten.xii. of the chief citesins to Rome, in whose absence he so comforted
the Ghibellines and Bianchi (that than were in exile) that following his advise,
they sodeinelie entered the city. Yet the commons so resisted them, that they
were repulsed. Not long after perceiuyng the purpose of Corso prepensed
against their libertee assaults his house, put him to flighte: and in fleyng
took and slew him. 1308.


After that the Florentines lived in quiet till the coming of Henry the
emperor, who coming from Rome (where he was crowned) besieged Florence on the
one side, and at length departed without doing much hurt, the rather because
the Florentines had received succors from Robert king of Naples, to whom they
had submitted their city for.v. years.

Not long after Vguicione della Faggiola, with help of the Ghibellines,
became lord of Pisa and of Lucca, so that the Florentines for dread of him,
required king Robert of Naples to send his brother Peter to succor them.
Between whom and Vguicione was a battaill stricken in Vale di Nieuole, where
the Florentines were discomfited, lost.2000. men, and the kings brother
slain in the field.

And though the king did his best to succor them, yet of their natural
inconstancy, they began a new division among them selfs, part with and
part against the king. And for lack of other the kings adversaries gatte
one Lando d' Agobio to be their captain, who with the multitude following him,
would kill and murder as he went by the streets such as the people appointed:
so that the city was no less afflicted with bloudshedde within, than
scourched without by Vguicione, that even than ouerranne all the country about.

Net long after Castruccio Castracani, a citesin of Lucca, gatte the dominion
of Lucca and of Pisa, and became so great, that he was made chief capitain of
all the Ghibellines in Tuscane, so that following his good fortune, he attempted
to get Prato, which the Florentines prepared them selfs to defend, so
making out an army, and promisyng reconsilement to their banished men,
Castruccio retired to Lucca: whereof followed two inconveniences: one, the
commons and rulers were divided* for the people would have pursued the
ennemie, but the rulers would not: the other, by reason their enterprise took
small effect, they refused their promise concerning their banished men, who
therefore diverse times attempted by force, to have their promise kept.

Finally making out a new army against Castruccio under the leadyng of
Raimondo da Cardona, the Florentines a little besides Alto Pastio were
discomfited, and Raimondo slain: in such wise that the Florentines were no
more able to hold up their heads, but suffered Castruccio to ouerronne all
their country, spoilyng and burning what he would. Wherefore the Florentines
were feign to sue to king Robert of Naples for help: who enforced them to take
his son Charles, Duke of Calabria, to be their lord, and consequentelie sent
the Duke of Athens, as his liuetenaunt to govern the city, ^326.
until the coming of Charles.

And like as the coming of Charles was a stay against Castruccio: even so it
was in manner as painful to the citesins. For within less than a year, he
levied of the city.400000. Florines, notwithstanding he had couenanted before,
not to take of them above.200000. besides that, after they had gotten Pistoia,
Castruccio laid siege thereunto, so long, that at last he gatte it from the
Florentines: how be it, he immediately thereupon died. and about the same time,
the forenamed Charles, lord of Florence died also. So that the city was at
ones delivered both of the tyranne (as they call him) and of the enemy: and
thereupon recoueryng their libertee, they returned to a new order of their
common wealth.

Not long after the emperor returnyng from Rome, and passing toward
Lumbardie.800. horsemen of his retinue tarried behind him, and sodeinly took
Lucca, which they offered to sell to the Florentines for.20000. Florines, and
being refused, sold it to a Genowaie for ^0000. pound, wherewith the
Florentines were so offended, that they made open war to get it, but all in
vain, though they spent yet a great quantitee of money more than the sum
that quietely they might have had it for.

As for civil contencion within the city happened none from the death of
Castruccio, 1328.
until the year.1340.

Certain of the chief of the city, the better to maintain their own
auctoritee, called strangers to govern some offices, which apperteined to the
election of the commons. Amongst all other one Iacomo Gabriel^ da Gobbi was
made captain of a ward, and did diverse injuries, namely to some of the
nobilitee, as to Pietro Bardi, and Bardo Frescobaldi. So that they (not well
supportyng the wrong, specially at a strangers hand) conspyred with diverse
other against the rulers: mindyng not only to be revenged, but also to reform
the astate of the whole city. And as it happens most commonly, the deferryng
of the mattier was occasion, that some fearful conspiratour disclosed it: so
that the larme bell being ronge, and the people armed assemblyng in the
markette place, the houses of Bardi and Frescobaldi were assaulted in such
wise, that they (with the most part of their friends) forsook the city, and
were banished: some that remained were taken and beheaded.

Not long after the Florentines and Pisani practiced with Mastino della Scala
for the purchase of Lucca, that than was in his possession: so that the Pisani
(seeing their bargain ouerdeere through the offers of the Florentines) disposed
them selfs, with help of Visconti than lord of Myllaine, to get it by
force, and so laid siege to it. That notwithstanding the Florentines went
forth with their bargain, and bought it during the siege. Wherein the Pisani
perseuered with such force, that in despite of all the Florentines succors,
at last they gatte it: so that the Florentines not only lost their money, but
also purchased them selfs dishonor.

This mean while the Florentines, seeing their own debilitee and ill fortune,
procured succors of the king of Naples, who sent the Duke of Athenes to be
their captain. But he in steed of a captain that should defend and
preserve their common wealth, contrarywyse to get into favor with the commons,
and by displeasyng and persecutyng of the nobilitee, took upon him self the
absolute power, and used the whole as his own. He prohibited the rulers any
more to assemble in the palaice, took the ensigns from the Gonfaloners, brake
the orders of justice, delivered all prisoners, reconsiled them that were
exiled, ordained new taxes, and waged strangers, so that the city was full of
Frenchemen, who forbear not to violate all sorts of women.

Thus he continued.x. months, encreasyng daiely in tyranny, to the high
offense of the chief, and great hate of the people (who before favored him)
that at last the whole city in.iii. diverse parts, nobles, people, and
artificers conspyred against him, and in conclusion assaulted and discoumfited
his men, and besieged him in the palaice. Out of the which they enforced him
to send Guglielmo da Scesi and his son. Whom they hewed and gnawed to pe^ces
in the market place.

Finally the Duke fell to accord, and renouncyng his astate and title to the
dominion, departed with bag and baggage. Whereupon not only Florence but also
Arezzo, Volterra, Pistoia, and other citees theraboutes took on them their
libertees: though they within short space after, yielded to Florence their
wonted obedience. Than the citesins devised a new order in their common wealth,
wherein the nobles had so great auctoritee, that they used their libertee in all
things over the people: but that endured not long: for the people rebelled,
and by force deprived them, erectyng magistrates of them selfs. And though
the nobles openly practiced with their friends abroad for succors, and
fortified their houses withinfoorth, in such wise, that Florence was full of
arms: whereupon they attempted to recover their astate. Yet at length after
many skyrmishes, much bloudsheed, and fire, the people prevailed, and brought
the nobilitee so low, Nobilitee suppressed.
that they never durst arm them selfs more, but became in manner vile and
abiecte: so that from that time forth Florence decayed both in courtesy and
chivalry.

Thus they rested in quiet, till the year.1353. In which time happened that
notable plague, that John Boccaccio so pitifully mencioneth in the beginning of
his Decamerone, thoroughe which died in Florence 96000. persons. And though
the nobilitee was than oppressed, yet fortune wanted not mean to reyse new
discencion amongst them again.

Two families in Florence, Albizi and Ricci, fell at variaunce, between whom
the whole city was no less divided, than it was first between Bondelmonti
and Vberti: or between Donati and Cerchi. And where as long before this time
the names of Guelfe and Ghibelline was in manner extincted and forgotten,
Vguicione de Ricci (thynkyng to abate the reputacion of the Albizi) renewed the
old law, 1357.
that no Ghibelline should enioie magistrate within the city. But the purpose
of Ricci was clean disapoincted. For where he thought to prove the Albizi to
be Ghibellines, they contrary wise not only proved them selves Guelfes, but
chief of the Guelfes: and became so great in the city, that at length they
determined to usurp the dominion, which being discovered to the people, was
occasion, that their houses were sacked, and some burned, and they for the
most part fled: and those laws, that the Guelfes had made before in
prejudice of the other citesins, were revoked. So that those which were noted
for Ghibellines, findyng them selfs recovered in credit, not contented to be
partetakers, but rather desiryng to rule their whole common wealth, practiced
a new mean, how by force they might a^chieue their enterprise: and
persuadyng the multitude to rebel against the lords, they did so much, that
(notwithstanding the conspiracy was discovered before) yet the people so
assembled out of all order, rennyng up and down here and there, spoilyng and
burning, where as liked them best, that the power of the rulers could not
refourme the mattier, and at length it grew to so great inconvenience, that the
lords were constreigned not only to habandone the palaice, but also the whole
dominion unto the peoples fury, so that Michell di Lando a carder of woull,
bare legged and all to torn, mounted up in to the hall of the palaice, with
the standarde in his hand, and findyng no man there, turned him toward the
people, saieyng: Now you see this palayce, with the whole city at your
commandment, what woull you due? whereunto the multitude answered, they would
have him their Gonfalonere and lord: which incontinently he took upon him:
and disposyng him self to quiet the rumor, to find the people occupied, he
sent them straighte to seek one Nuto, that had been minister of justice
before: whom he caused to be hanged by the leg in the market place, and there
torn to pieces: and consequentelie proceeded to other reformacions and laws,
as it seemed best to him. But because the commons perceived, that he preferred
the chief men to dignitees and offices, and did not so much regard the
commons as they looked for, they rebelled again against him, and drew them
together to the church of Santa Maria di Nouella, where they began to erecte
new officers, and to make new laws after their own manner. The mean while
Michell making him self strong, departed out of the palaice to mete them:
but missyng one an other by a wrong way, Michell at his return found them
in the high street: assaultyng of the palaice. Where he set on them, and so
discomfited them, that part he constreigned to flee out of the city, and part
to cast away their weapons. And (notwithstanding his vile birthe) he was a
man him self of a right good nature, wise, and able to govern, yet could
not his auctoritee so much bridell the communaltee, but that they divided
them selfs in parts, the one of men of estimacion, which called them
selfs the people, and the other of the mean crafts, which called them
selfs the commons.

Thus as they lived fightyng and braulyng togethers, news came to the
counsel, that Giannozo da Salerno (a captain of Charles of Duras, than
bente to conquer Naples) liyng at Boloigne, determined, with help of the
banished men, to assault the city being promised by them of the city to
have a gate delivered unto them. Whereupon diverse were accused, amongst whom
Piero, the chief of the Albizi was taken and put to execucion, and Charles
Strozi fled.

The Florentines the better to maintain them selfs, reteigned John Sharp
(surnamed Acuto by them) an english captain, John Sharp.
than abidyng in Italy with a great retinewe, whose reputacion was such, that
well was that prince in Italy, that might have his service in time of need.
For his power was so great, that when he was out of wages, he would take one
city or an other, and use it as his own for the time, till occasion of
service happened again, and than would he sell it to that prince or common
wealth, that would give most for it.

About this time two the chiefest citesins in Florence, George Scali and Thomas
Strozzi, with their aucthoritee and credit amongst the people, did what they
would right or wrong, so that when the captain of justice would have put to
execucion a certain offender their friend, they by force assaulted and sacked
the capitaines palaice, and delivered the guilty: which act offended not the
captain alonelie, but also the magistrates, so that George Scali was therefore
taken, and against the common opinion (notwithstanding the great ^auour of the
people, Common people.
which evermore proves inconstante) was beheaded: and diverse of his dearest
friends with him. Upon occasion of whose death most part of the city was
armed to strength the justice. But when he was dead, they were not so soon
unarmed again. For the parties between the people of reputacion and the commons
did so kendle, that for the space of a whole year, there was daielie fightyng
between them: in such wise that at length by agreement of both parts, the
Guelfes were reconsiled and restored to their wonted honor and rule over the
city, 138^.
and the other magistrates and rulers were deposed, amongst whom Michell Lando
before named, was one, whose virtues and merits (being so notable as they
were) could not yet save him from the peoples fury.

Thus the Guelfes being in auctoritee, and fearing no man but Benedetto d'
Alberti (a good man, rich, and of great auctoritee) because he was not of
their sect, they found the mean to banish him, and diverse others that they
thought contrary to them: and so settled the common wealth after their
manner, and kept it in quiet till the year.1387. At which time Giangalcazo
Visconti, Duke of Millaine took his uncle Bernabo prisoner, and made sharp
wars to the Florentines, 1390*
so that (notwithstanding their valiaunte resistance) gettyng all the countries
about, as Bolognia, Pisa, Perugia, and Siena, he was in so great towardness
to win Florence, that he caused a crown of gold to be made, to the intent
to crown him self king of Italy, and had done it in deed, if death had not
prevented him.

Not long after the commons upon light occasion, rebelled of new, and in great
noumbre ran to the house of Very di Medici, offering him the rule of the
astate: but he leadyng them with him to the high street, and leauyng them
there, ascended into the palaice amongst the lords, excusing him self, that
the people made him to come by force, and so with thanks of them returned to
the people, and persuaded them, that they should have their wills, so that
they would lay down their weapons. Which at his request they did.
Immediately whereupon the rulers secretly armed their power, and establisshyng
the order of the city, put diverse of those commons to death, that had been
causers of this disorder.

Not long after certain of them that were banished, being at Bolognia,
determined upon hope of the peoples inconstancy, to attempt the recovery of
their country, and to alter the astate of their city: and so thoroughe
coumforte of one Piggiello, and of Barroccio Cauicci^li, than dwelling in
Florence, secretly they entered the town, and slew one or two: to the rumor
whereof the people being assembled, they declared, how their coming was to
deliver their country from the tirannie of them that ruled. etc. But for all
that, there was none that would assist them. Wherefore they withdrew into a
church, and there some in the taking were slain, and the rest taken, examined
and put to execucion.

Besides this the Duke of Myllaine, whilst he warred with the city, practiced
secretly by mean of the banished men, to win it, but the thing being
discovered, was occasion of the banishement of a noumbre of citesins, 1400.
and than within two years died Giangaleazzo, after he had warred with the
Florentines.xii. years. So that the Florentines being peaced outwardely, and
indifferent quiet within them selfs, made out their power against Pisa, and
valiauntly gatte it. 1409.


Than had they war with Ladislaus king of Naples about the city of Cortona,
which the Florentines had before purchased. And that war was so perillouse,
that (as most writers affirm) they procured a physician of the kings to
poison him. By reason of whose death, they recovered her^, 1414*
being before in manner desperate of the astate of their common wealth: because
the king having already taken Rome, Siena, La Marca, and Romagnia, wanted no
more but Florence only to make his full way into Lumbardie. Where he
determined with his power to prove his fortune. So that the death of these two
princes, the Duke of Myllaine and the king of Naples, was more auailable to
the Florentines, than their own force. But they (whose nature could not well
bear any rest) lived not fully.viii. years in peace, but that not only the
parties within them selfs renewed their wonted contencion again, but also the
city attempted war against Philip, than Duke of Myllaine: in which war
their army at Zagonara was discoumfited, and consequently all their holds in
Romagnia lost, Castracaro and Modigliana excepted. Whereupon they made suite to
the Uenetians, and obtained them in leage against the Duke. By whose mean at
length they recovered their towns in Romagnia: notwithstanding the charges of
that war had been so great (amountyng to the su^me of three millions
and.500000. duckates) and that the Florentines fell out amongst them selfs
about the paiement thereof, which they called Catasto: and the city of
Uolterra rebelled against them, though they were soon brought to obedience
again. 1428.


After this began the Florentines to make war against the town of Lucca,
which endured.iii. years with wonderful damage on both sides: specially on
the Florentines, whose army was discomfited by Nicolo Piccinino, sent by the
Duke of Myllaine to succor the Lucchese.

Than began contencion within the city between Cosmo de Medici and Rinaldo
degli Albizi. Not that Cosmo (who was a just and a virtuous man) gave any
occasion thereof. But upon a consaite that Rinaldo suspected: seeing that Cosmo
with his liberalitee and virtue had gotten the love of the people, he imagined
straight way, that he went about to be lord of al. Wherefore he so conspyred,
and wrought against him, that Cosmo was taken, laid in prison, and in danger
of death. But finally he was confined unto Padoa: where he remaigned the space
of a.xii. month, till by mean of his friends he was reconsiled home, and his
enemies some put to death, and the rest banisshed, and finally the whole
astate of the common wealth reformed after his own manner. During whose time
the Florentines endeavored them selfs much to conquer the city of Lucca,
to the entreprise whereof they enterteined Francesco Sforza (that afterward
was Duke of Myllaine) to be their general. But because he than practiced
marriage with the daughter of Myllaine (whose father Duke Philip was enemy to
the Florentine astate) he so coldly proceeded, that when it came to pass, that
he might have streigned Lucca, he nevertheless was occasion of peace be^wene
the Florentines and the Lucchese, 1432.
in such wise that Lucca still remained in their libertee.

Not long after followed the counsel of Florence: at which the emperor of
Greece, with the chief of the Greekishe church assembled, and agreed with the
Roman church, though they stood not by it long.

Than arose Nicolo Piccinino, and without any just ground moved war to the
Florentines, wherein he did them no small displeasures. But finally he was
discoumfited at Anghiari: and immediately after the Conte di Poppi (who before
had assisted Piccinino) was besieged in his own town: and his whole astate,
with the town of Poppi taken from him by the Florentines.

And though the war, which Piccinino made, was as well against the church
as the Florentines, so that the bishop of Rome, of the victory of Anghiari,
enioied as well his part as the Florentines: yet the charge before, and the
cost that the bishop was at in pursuyng the victory, was such, that for very
need of money: he sold Borgo san Sepolchro, unto the Florentines for 25000.
duckates. All this while were the Florentines in league with the Uenetians
against the Duke of Myllaine, in such wise that the better to disburdeine his
own charge, the Duke steered king Alfonse of Naples against the Florentines,
who entered upon Tuscane and did them much hurt, though at last laiyng siege
to the town of Piombino (through sickness that fell in his army) he was
constreigned to remove his siege, and utterly to habandone his enterprise. But
after Duke Phillip of Millaine was dead, and Francesco Sforza in possession of
the astate, the Florentines (by mean of Cosmo di Medici) did enter in amitee
with him: for which occasion, when the Uenetians were out with Francesco, they
procured king Alfonse to war of new on the Florentines, which war was not
so sharp, but that the Florentines at length did pass it over with out any
great loss.

Than died Cosmo di Medici, when he had governed the city about.31. years.
1464. Cosmo di Medici.
He in his time was one of the notablest men of the world, the richeste
private man that has been heard of many years, and so lyberall withal, that
he relieved a number of his citesins, not only with love, but also with the
gift of large sums of money: and many times he would him self consider who
had need, and help them undesired. His wisdom was such (and was unlearned)
that he ruled the vnruliest city of the world in peace without civil
sedicion, which before his time was never in quiet. And though he might have
taken on him self the absolute power without difficultee, being in such
auctoritee, yet led he still a private life: nor for all his great richesse,
never sought other marriage for his daughters, than amongst his own citesins.
He builded.v. princely houses, one within the cite, and.iiii. without, besides
iiii. monastaries.ii. churches, and diverse chappelles: so that he that well
considerith his doings, shall judge them rather mighty kings than citesins.

Finally his factions were such in Uenice, in Naples, in Rome, and in other
chief citees of trafficque, that when he was so disposed, he would make them
all bare of money: so that with his only reputacion many times he wroughte
such quietness and commoditee to his city, that all the Florentine power was
not able to do.

The rule that he bare was not grounded on force or tirannie, but upon such a
love to the people, that when he died, the commons bewailed him as a father of
the country. The proof whereof was well seen, what time through the ill
procuremente of Diotisalui (one that he held as his dear and secret friend)
a conspiracy was made against his son Peter.

When the old Duke Francesco Sforza was dead, and his son Galeazo
established in the astate, the ambassadors of Millaine came to the Florentines
for confirmacion of their former amitee, which Peter the son of Cosmo,
persuaded, was necessary to be mainteigned. In debatyng of which mattier Peter
began to perceive the intent of his adversaries, and at length fully
ascertained thereof, he wrought so, that all the city armed them selfs in his
favor, in such wise that being very weak of body, and sick on his bed,
the chief magistrates of the city were feign to resort to him, and to offer
them selfs at his pleasure. Whereupon it followed, that the pryncipall of his
ennemies were some banished and some slain, and his reputacion such, that
(though he ruled not in office him self) yet might be at all times command
and do what he would, and following always the steps of his father in the
same reputacyon died.

After whose death Italy happened to be divided, between the king of Naples
and the bishop of Rome on the one part, the Uenetians, the Duke of Millaine,
and the Florentines on the other part: and amongst all the rest the bishop
of Rome hated the Florentines, specially the house of Medici, whereof two
virtuous young men, Julian and Laurence, sons of the forenamed Peter, were
than rulers, and in manner (though they lived privately) princes of Florence,
and this hate was not secret, for the bishop openly in Rome favored the Pazi,
and hindered the Medici, so that after the death of Phillip D' i Medici,
archbishop of Pisa, the bishop of Rome placed in his steed Francesco
Saluiati, a mortal ennemie to the house of Medici, who notwithstanding the
Romish election, could not be received of the Florentines. Practice of a
prelate.
Wherefore with the holy fathers consent this new archbishop began a
practice, to alter the astate of Florence, and consultyng on the mattier with
diverse of his friends, specially of the families of Saluiati and Pazi,
concluded, that without the death of Julian and Laurence D' i Medici, it was
impossible to bring the mattier to pass. Wherefore they procured the Cardinal
of saint George (nephewe unto the bishop of Rome) to come to Florence, to the
intent that in visityng of him, they might have both the brethern togethers,
and so slay them. Of this their purposed intent twice they missed. The therde
time they devised a solemn mass to be song before the Cardinal, unto the
which both the brethern came, and at the eleuacion time Julian was slain, and
Laurence hurt, but he escaped.

This mean while the archbishop crately got into the palaice with certain
men with him, privily armed, in hope that when the rumor should rise he
might have not only the palaice but also all the chief rulers of the city
in his hands: but his purpose being espied er he could atchieue it, he with
certain of his accomplices were immediately hanged and thrown out at the
wyndowes of the palaice. This foul end had their cursed conspiracy: for when
Julian was slain, and Laurence returned to his house, it was a wonder to se^
how soon the people were armed, rennyng up and down the streets, and criyng,
Medici Medici, killyng and drawyng as many as they could know of the contrary
part. And almost there was no citesin of any reputacion, that came not unto
the house of Laurence, to offer him self and his goods to succor him, in
case he neded.

Finally the tumulte being quieted, as many as could be found of the
Saluiati and Pazi, and of the other conspiratours, were put to execucion: and
the rest that fled, were banished.

But for all this their trouble ceased not. For when the bishop of Rome saw
that this pryuie treason took not effect in alteracion of the astate, he
attempted openly the destruction of the city, not under pretense of hate to
the Florentines, but to the house of Medici only. First he excommunicated the
city, and after sent an army of his own against them, and procured the
king of Naples to invade them with an other army: protestyng always, that he
desired no more, but to have Laurence D' i Medici in his hands; which done,
he offered to be at peace. Wherefore Laurence, to be the better assured of his
citesins, called.300. of the best of them togethers, and resonyng the mattier
with them, found them wholly bent to his defense, and thereupon made provision
of resistance, doing all Italy to understand, that the bishop of a shepherde,
became a wolf, and not only practiced this secret treason, but also openly
maynteigned it.

These wars continued so long, that the Florentines being destitute of all
succor, and werie of their great charge and loss of men, determined to fall
into the arms of the tone of their enemies, and esteemyng the kings amitee
more auailable and more durable of the both, Laurence Di Medici went him self
to Naples, and so behaved him toward the king, that where most men suspected,
he should never return, he not only returned, but also brought a perfect
conclusion of peace with him. Whereat the bishop of Rome was out measure
wroth, but at last the Florentines sent their ambassadors to him. Who being
brought to audience in Pontificalibus, at length obtained his absolucion. The
rather because euin than newly the Turk had assaulted and taken Otronto in
Puglia, and minded to conquer Italy: which occasion caused all the princes
of Italy to unite them selfs together, more for fear than love, as
afterward did well appear. For the Turk was no sooner dead, and the fear
of his invasion paste, but they fell out again as far as ever they were. For
between the bishop and the king grew hot wars, and the Florentines in help
of the king assaulted the bishop on the other side, and besides that the cam^e
of the league was like to have taken from the Uenetians all their dominion in
Lumbardie: so that Italy was full of war, 1486.
until by procurement of the king of Spaines ambassadors, a general peace
thorough all the astates of Italy was concluded (the Genowaies excepted). By
mean whereof the Florentines with their more ease warred upon the Genowaies,
and gatte Pietra Santa, with other towns from them, and gave them a notable
discoumfiture besides Serezana.

Finally the most renoumed private man of his time Laurence D' i Medici died,
Laurence d' i Medici*
leauyng one of his sons a Cardinal (who was called thereunto being not
fully 13. years old) and his eldest son Peter in great reputacion, and his
daughters also very well married.

He favored cunnyng men, specially them that were learned: he was eloquente
in reasonyng, quick of invention, wise in determinyng, and hardy in doing.
Besides the conspiracy wrought against him, when his brother was slain, he was
twyse in peril of death by treason, and yet prevented them both to the
confusion of the conspiratours. All the princes of Italy honored him, the
king Matthew of Hungary showed him great signs of love, the Sultan of Egypt
sent him presents and ambassadors, the Turk delivered Bernardo Bandini, that
slew his brother Julian, into his hands: and his own citesins so much loved
him, that I think of his time died no man happier than he. Contrary wise his
son Peter di Medici, who notwithstanding his gentle enterteigment of all men
at the beginning (which made the world to hope well of him) did at length
prove so ambiciouse, so wilful and so indiscreet in his procedynges, that
neither the magistrattes, the citesins, nor yet the people could well bear
him, to the increase whereof, 1495.
when Charles the.viii. French king, passed by Florence toward Naples,
Peter met him on the way, and said to him, that his father commanded
him.iii. things, the first to honor God, the secounde to worship the french
king, and the third to defend his country. So that Charles seeing him thus
well disposed, entreated him so fair, that he delivered into his hands
Serezana, Pietra Santa, and finally set Pisa at libertee, which was so great
a hinderaunce to the Florentine astate, that the magistrates and commons, moved
of just disdeigne, drove him out of the city, took his goods and patrimony
as forfaicte, and condemned him to perpetual exile, with a noumber of his
friends and partetakers: and the fury of the people was such, that they
brake and defaced all the arms that could be found of the Medicies in
Florence.

And albeit that he attempted many ways to recover his country, yet was his
fortune so ill, that the more he sturred, the more was he hated, which at
length was the undoing both of him self, and of a great many mo^ as well of
his adherentes, as of his adversaries.

Thus the family of Medici lost reputacion and credit for the time: so that
the astate of Florence returned unto the common rule of the magistrates and
citesins, 1495.
that endured till the time that Leo the.x. of the family of Medici was made
bishop of Rome, who though he restored not his house unto the full rule they
had before in the city, did nevertheless so much, partly with auctoritee,
and partly by friendship, that diverse of that name were received and made
partetakers of the common wealth: which by little and little so increased
again, that in the time of bishop Clement the.vii. who also was of the Medici,
when the Duke of Burbon passed by Florence to Romewardes, the commons of the
city made a commocion against Hippolito di Medici, then governor of the same:
he than being departed out of the city in company of the Cardinal of
Cortona, to go visit the Duke of Urbine. But as soon as he returned, he did
so much, that they yielded them selfs again unto him, upon covenant he
should hurt no man for that mattier.

Than bishop Clement made this Hippolito a Cardinal, whereupon he left the
administracion of the common wealth, and so was the city at libertee again.
But Clement being determined to make it perpetual subject to his own
famili^, handled him self so well toward the emperor at his coronacion at
Boloigne, that he obteigned the imperial power to the oppression of his own
natural countrei, and brought to pass, that the prince of Orange, 1530.
with the emperors army besieged Florence.

This siege, endured a whole year, which for the many enterprises and battles
fought on both parts, may be compared to the best Troiane, Greekish or
Roman wars, namely because the common wealth alone, with out help of any
other prince or state, susteigned the violence of two so mighty powers as the
emperors and the bishops of Rome, until famine and not force overcame them.

Finally the prince of Orange, and diverse other notable capitaines being slain
in the often battles and skyrmisshes, at last the Florentines for lack of
vittailles, were feign to fall to composicion, and yielded upon these
conditions, that the city should continue in her libertee, referryng the
reformacion of thastate to the emperor, who within the term of.iiii. months
should thereupon declare his pleasure. That all banished men should be
reconciled without remembrance of any injury before passed. That the Medici
should be restored to their goods taken from them by violence of the
magistrates. That the city should pay.80000* crowns to the dispatche of the
army, with other couenauntes of less moment. Upon which accord Bartholomew
Valori, commissarie for the bishop of Rome, entered with diverse of the imperial
capitains, and there behaved them selfs so stoutely, that (notwithstanding
the couenauntes of peace) they found the mean within less than a month to
behead.vi. of the chiefest citesins, and to confine.150. besides a noumbre of
others that habandoned and fled the city of them selfs: so that their
promised libertee was turned into a most cruel servitude.

Shortly after came Alexander Di Medici, nephew to bishop Clement, sent by
the emperor out of Flaunders, who at his first coming made a show of
sobrietee, in going privately unto his house, and receiuyng the citesins
amiably: but yet at length by little and little he usurped the offices and
magistrates, and finally disposed them all at his pleasure, 1532.
causyng him self openly to be called Duke.

1534.
Than died Clemente the Bishop, whereupon the Cardinals Di Medici and Saluiati,
with the principal of the other banished Florentines (couetyng the recovery
of their citees libertee) sent ambassadors to the emperor, besechyng him to
consider the tyranny of Duke Alexandre (who than newly had builded the
Cittadella) and to regard the conditions of peace. Which ambassadors arrived
at Barcelona even as the emperor was taking ship toward the enterprise of
Tunise: so that being returned to Rome, the Cardinal Hippolito di Medici
disposed him self to go unto Tunise therefore. And taking his journey toward
Naples died at Itri by the way: poisoned (as the voice went) by procurement
of Duke Alexander.

This Duke Alexander was yet but young, who by bishop Clementes procurement had
married the emperors bastard daughter, he was so stout, that without any
respect he would have his will in all things, and namely in feats of love
and change of women was his special delight. And amongst all other he delited
more in the company of Laurence di Medici (that should succeed him in the
astate) than of any other man. But Laurence in steed of that love hated the
Duke, and had long time determined to slay him, when he might find occasion,
whether he did it in hope the rather to atteigne to the dominion him self, or
to restore to the city her ancient libertee, be diverse opinions.

In effect without making any man privy to his intent, other than a seruante
of his own, the Duke being on a night all alone in Laurences house, and
slepyng on a bed, Laurence and his man slew him: and thereupon counsailyng
with certain of his friends, and seeing no man disposed to stand with him in
pursuyng of his purpose, the self same night he fled, and went straight to
Uenice, where in company of the S^^ozzi he lived, till of la^e certain
persons, in hope of the Taglia (a reward^ pr^claimed for the kyllyng of notable
offenders) he was also slain

Immediately upon knowlage of the death of Duke Alexander, the three Florentine
Cardinals, that were than in Rome, departed thense, and making all the men
they could by the way, come with an army toward Florence. Wherefore the
Medici, with their friends in Florence (to make their party good, that the
banished men should not prevail to their destruction) el^cted Cosmo di Medici
to be their Duke, a young man of.20. years of age, whose father John Di Medici
had been a man right valiant in arms. And thereupon sen^e to the Cardinals,
praiyng them to state their army by the way, and to come them selfs
privately to Florence, where they should find so much reason offered them,
that they should need to use no force. So they stayed their power besides
Cortona, and being come to Florence were entreated with so fair promises, that
they licenced their men to depart. By reason whereof the Duke that n^we is, with
his friends had time to make them selfs strong, and than would consent to
nothing that the Cardinals looked for: so that with a plain mock they
departed, lamentyng their folly: that they had changed the suretee of their
force, for the vnsuretee of fair words.

This change in Florence, and the mock that the Cardinals received, ^
so much increased their malice, that they with the help of Phillip Strozzi
and Bartholomew Valori, assembled and waged the number of 4000. men: which by
Peter Strozzi (that yet lives and serves the French king) should have be
conducted to Monte Murlo, and from thense to Florence, had not Phillip and
Bartholomew (who with a small company came before to Monte Murlo) ben set
upon by Alexander Vitelli, taken and led away pr^soners to Florence, where
the whole conspiracy of those confederates, that were in the town was
discovered, and diverse taken and put to execucion: and so the whole enterprise
broken and destroyed. Amongst the rest only Phillip Strozzi was preserved
from death: notwithstanding he was kept in prys^n in the Cittadella, and
there died. Some say he killed him self rather than he wo^^e undo his
children by paiyng the ransom that was required of him, being in deed one of
the rychest private men that was in his time, as it does well appear by the
wealth of his son Peter, and of his other children, which being banished
men, and having nothing in their own country, do nevertheless live abroad
in so much reaputacion, that few brethern of christendom under the degree of
princes do the like.

I have spoken before of Cittadella builded by Duke Alexander for the more
suretee of his dominion, Cittadella.
which at his death remaigned in the keeping of one of the Dukes capitaines.
But as soon as Alexander Vitelli (one that had served well the emperor in his
wars) heard of the Dukes death, he came to Florence, and entered into the
castle to speak with the captain, where he handled the matt^er so well,
that he excluded the captain and kept it him self. And though he made many
fair promises to Duke Cosmo, yet at length he delivered it to the emperor:
who therefore rewarded him with fair possessions in the realm of Naples.

This Duke Cosmo sued first to marry with the wife of Duke Alexander the
emperors daughter, but the bishop of Rome that now is, purchaced her (to his
no small cost) for his sons son, Duke Octauio. For the which there has been mortal hate between Duke Cosmo and the bishop. And being thus prevented,
the Duke to obteigne the more stay toward the emperor, married the daughter
of Don Diego di Tolledo, Uice Re of Naples, by whose mean he has redeemed the
Cittadella of the emperor for the sum of.400000. duckates, and is now
absolute lord and king within him self.

He has diverse faier children by his wife, and loves her so well, that in
manner he never goes abroad (unless it be to church) without her, and is
reputed to be a very chaste man. Duke Cosmo*
He is learned and wise, he uses few words, and is nevertheless in his own
tongue eloquente. In the administracion of justice he is so sincere, that syns
the time of his reign, which is now above.x. years, I have not heard, that
he has pardoned any person condemned to die. He has restreigned the Uice of
Sodomie (which heretofore reigned more in Florence than elsewhere in Italy) with
pain of death: and has brought his astate to such quietness, as it has
not ben this.300. years past: so that Florence may well say, that in him she
has found her long desired libertee. For though he absolutely has the whole
revenues to his own use, yet the suretee that the Florentynes have in their
own things (which heretofore they never had) is much more worth to them,
than the common reuenew was beneficial to the city.

Finally the virtue of this Duke Cosmo, besides the worthiness of his
dominion, has brought him in such reputacion, that he is now numbered as one
of the rarest princes of our time, and feared also, as one in whom there be
hid things of greatter moment than the rule of that only astate.

The state of Genoa.
GEnoa stands in manner between the Alps and Appenine hills, and has his
prospecte toward the southe. For it hangs so on the descent of the hill, that
being in the sea underneath, a man may almost discern every part of the city.
It has no plain country near it, but on the one side hills and mountains,
and the sea Mediterraneum on the other. And yet those hills that run alonge
the sea costs, bring forth many kinds of pleasant fruit, with much wine
and oil, for the most part not thoroughe fertilitee of the ground, but
thoroughe the inhabitauntes peinefull diligence.

The circuit of Genoa is little less than.v. miles, the walls about are very
new, fair and strong: specially the.ii. gates Di San Thomaso and Del L'arco
are so large, that they seem almost.ii. fortresses.

The haven that comes into it, is excedyng fair and big enough to receive
any navy, being forced somewhat narowe at the mouth, with a wonderful
costely pie^e of stone made out into the sea: at the end whereof is a strong
toure, called Il Mole: Whereby the haven is defended from all wyndes, the
southweast excepted.

Within this haven they have an Arsenale, hable to receive.xviii. or.xx.
galleys.

Their churches are very fair and sumptuouse, specially the Cathedral
church of. S. Laurence, whose front of white and black marble seems a
very rare piece of work.

Their houses are excedyng fair, the frontes two stories high, for the most
part of fine marble curiousely wrought: For their law allows none to deck
his house any higher with that kind of work, (unless it be in respect of
some notable service) because it would require an infinite charge to garnishe
them of that sort to the top, their houses being for the most part.vi.vii.
and some.viii. stores high. And yet are they so fair, that I wot not unto
what city I may compare their buildings. And not only within the city, but
all alonge the sea costs, called La Riuiera, every village is so furnished
with gallaunt and sumptuouse houses, that it is a world to behold.

Amongst all other the palaice of Andrea Doria, with out the gate of. S.
Thomas, is a notable thing, very fair, sumptuouse and large: And above his
house (a thing wonderful) he has made his slaves to hew out of the hard
rockie mountain, as much space, as has made.vi. gardens one above an other:
and has caused so much earth to be carried up, as suffiseth for the growth
of all manner fruits and herbs, very pleasant to behold.

Likewise within the town, Andrea Doria has the goodliest house that any
private man has builded in our days.

But the streets of the city for the most part are so narow, that it is a
great defacyng to the rest. Which I think the stipe descent of the hill
causes, that they have not room enough to make their streets large.

Half a mile without the town Weastwardes, they have a very fair watch
toure, called Torre della Luminaria, wherein nightly burns a great light: for
a mark to them that be on the sea, because it may be discerned very far
of.

Finally they have a very fair conduite of water conueighed on arches, much
after the ancient Roman facion, for the space of.v. miles or more, out of
the valey of Bisagnio: notwithstanding that they have diverse fair springes,
and one specially that can not be drawn dry.

Of their dominion and governance.
Their dominion is not very great, is passes not the bounds of Lyguria,
which is scarcely.80. miles in length, and nothing so much in breadth. And
may dispende in public reuenew not fully.400000. crowns by the year: as I
have been enfourmed. In deed in time past they had much greater dominion: So
that the common rent has been veraie great: but the Turks prosperitee has
much abated that: Nevertheless it is thought, the private citesins were never
more wealthy than they be at this present.

Of their trade and customs.
ALl the Genowaies in manner are merchaunt men, and very great trauailers of
strange countries. For I have been reasonably persuaded, that there be.5.
or.6. thousand of them continually abroad, either merchauntes or factours: so
that they leave few places of the world unsought: where any gain is to be
had. For the merchaundise that they bring home has spedie dispatche, by
reason their city is as a keye unto all the trade of Lumbardie, and to a great
part of Italy. They at home make such a noumbre of silks and veluettes, as
are hable to serve many countries: which is the chief merchaundise that they
send forth. In deed they are commonly noted to be great usurers.

One thing I am sure of, that if Ouide were now alive, there be in Genoa, that
could teach him a dousen poinctes De Arre Amandi. For if Semiramis were ever
celebrated amongst the Assirians, Venus amongst the Greeks, Circes among
the Italians, sure there be dames in Genoa that deserve to be celebrated and
chronicled for their excellent practice in love. And truly the Genowaies them
selfs deserve that their wyfes should be praised, because I saw in no place
where women have so much libertee. For it is laufull there openly to talk of
love, with what wife so ever she be. insomuche that I have seen young men of
reputacion standing in the street talk of love with young mistresses being in
their wyndowes above: and openly rehearse verses that they had made one to the
other. And in the churches, specially at euensong, they make none other
prayers. So that he that is not a lover there, is meet for none honest
company. Many men esteem this as a reproach to the Genowaies, but they use it
as a policy: thynkyng that their wifes through this libertee of open speech,
are rid of the rage that makes other women to travail so much in secret.

In deed the women there are excedyng fair and best apparailed to my fantasy
of all other. For though their uppermost garment be but plain clothe, by
reason of a law, yet underneath they wear the finest silks that may be had,
and are so finely hosed and shoed, as I never saw the like, open faced, and
for the most part bare headed, with the hear so finely trussed and curled,
that it passes rehersall. So that in mine opinion the supreme court of love
is no where to be sought, out of Genoa.

But like as the women are excellent in this, even so do the men excede all
other in supersticion. For there be within the city.20. schools or companies
of disciplinauntes otherwise called Battuti, whose manner is when they are
called to devotion, as every good fridaie, or in the midst of a plage, of
famine, of war, or of other like occasion, that requires or rogacions such
processions, they assemble and clothe them selfs in sack, linen or
buckeramme: with their backs naked, and their faces covered, saving littell
holes to look out at. And having certain skourges or whippes (some of wire) in
their hands, they go about the town whyppyng them selfs, that the blood
shall run from the back down to the heels, so painefully, that it moves
the poor people to compassion. For when this is done, they think God must
needs fulfill their prayer. The like whereof is used in all other places of
Italy, but because I think no two citees are able to match Genoa in the
number of these Battuti, I thought good to make mention of them here.

Finally, the astate is holden by a Duke, chaungeable every.ii. year: who
with.viii. governors and.viii. proctours assigned unto him, rules the whole
for the time. Nevertheless Andrea Doria the emperors admyrall for the myddell
seas, uses all at his will in mattiers of peace or war, and almost in
every other thing.

The buildyng of Genoa.
OF the edificacion of Genoa be diverse opinions^ but because no certaintee is
written thereof, I will omit their sayings that ascribe it to Ianus, or to
Genuus the son of Saturn: and agreeyng with the opinion of the bishop of
Nebio (that perticularly wrote the Chronicle thereof) I think it to be of such
antiquitee, that neither the time of foundation, nor yet the author thereof can
well be known. As for the name, it is not unlike, but that (because it is the
veraie entry from the seas unto Lumbardie) it was first called Ianua (a gate
or d^ore) and afterward corruptely Genoa. But how or when it was builded, or
for what cause it was so named, this is clear, that in the Romans time,
almost.300. years before the coming of Christ, this city ruled the country
about it, as appears both by a table of brass lately found in the vale of
Poceuera, and also by the mention that Liuie makes of the destruction of it by
Mago Anniballes brother, and of the repairing of it again by the Roman
Consule Lucretius Spurius.

From which time to the coming of Charlemaine into Italy, I find nothing
notable of Genoa, save that it was one of the first citees, that openly
professed the Christian feith. But after Charlemaine was crowned emperor, and
his son Pepine made king of Italy, Ademaro, a baron of France, was sent
thither so be captain: who by commandment of king Pepine, fought by sea
with the Sarasines: and though he was taken prisoner in the battle, yet the
Genowaies overcame their enemies, took.xiii. Sarasine ships, and the i will of
Corsica, which in manner ever sens has remained under the Genowaies dominion:
and so continued Genoa obedient to the emperors capitaines the space of.100.
years.

In the year.936. there happened in a little street than called Fontanella, and
now Bordigoto, nere to the piere of the haven, a littell spryng instead of
water cast forth blood, and ran so a whole day, to the great wonder of the
people: Wonder.
whereupon followed, that the Sarasines army came sodeinely upon the town, and
taking it by force, sacked and rifled it, set it on fire, and carried away
the people, men women and children, in such wise, that they left the town as
a plain wilderness. But the Genowaies army, which was than abroad, met
with these Sarasines on the sea about Sardegnia, where they fought with them,
cut them in pieces, and recovered their prisoners with double pray, and so
restored their city. ^58.


After this the emperor Berengario granted them certain privileges, with
full dominion over the towns that they than possessed. By reason whereof they
shortly increased, not only in wealth but also in such power, that in the
voyage made into the holy land by Godfrey of Boloigne and other princes, 19^9.
the Genowaies army was one of the notablest of that company, first at the
wynnyng of Antioche, and after at the gettyng of Jerusalem, in coming to which
secounde enterprise the Genowaies were feign to drown their own ships in the
haven of Iaffo: because they were not able to resist the Soldanes army, that
came upon them: Policy.
thought better to drown them, than to encrese the enemies power with their
loss and shame both: how be it they first discharged all things that might
be had out of them, which they carried with them unto the siege of Jerusalem,
and there behaved them selfs so worthily, that almost none other company of
the christian army was comparable to them. 1100*


After this they armed.27. galleis and.vi. ships, and sent them into Soria
in aid of Boemonde than king of Jerusalem, where they gatte the city of
Caesarea in Palestina, and leauyng it in possession of the christians,
returned home with great tryumphe and pray.

Finally within the space of.13. years the Genowaies sent.vii. several armies
into Soria, by whose means the principal towns from the golfe of Laiacia
southewardes, to the golfe of Rissa, that is to wete Malinistra, Solino,
Antioche, Laodicia, Tortosa, Tripoli, Baruti, Accon, sometime called
Ptholemaida, Acres, Ghibelle^to, Caesaria, Assure, Iaffo, Acaron, and Ascalon,
were gotten out of the Turks hands* For which great service Bauldewyn than
king of Jerusalem next after Boemonde, gave to the Genowaies diverse notable
privileges through all his dominion, which they enioied long time.

After these many victoryes retournyng to Genoa, the war that ceased so
far of, sprange up nerer home. For the Pisani contended with the Genowaies
for consecracion of the bishop of Corsica, and for the i will of Sardegnia.
Whereupon followed sharp wars between them, for the most part to the
disauauntage of the Pisani: so that at last being plainly ouercomen, the
Genowaies entered into Pisa by force, 1127.
and rased all the houses thereof down to the first floor.

1146.
Thus finishyng those wars, and wantyng occasion where to be occupied, they
made out an army against the Sarasines, and first ouerranne the i will of
Minorica, and after assaulted the citees of Almeria and Tortosa, in the
confines of Granata, which they took by force, with the slaughter of an
infinite noumbre of Moors, besides 10000. slaves that they carried with them to
Genoa, and such a quantitee of treasure and booties, as few like had been seen
in those days: diuidyng the dominion that was gotten into three parts, the
Earl of Barcelona (chief of this enterprise) had two to him self, and the
Genowaies the third.

The glory and wealth of which victories were such to the Genowaies, that for
many years after they enterprised no great mattier far from home, but such
sedicion fell among them selfs, that their own braulinges many times gave
courage to foreign princes to work against them. For the emperor Federike
the first (after he had conquered Lumbardie) thought also to subdue them: and
made open preparacion for it. Which was cause of their union again. For when
they perceived an outward ennemie, than were they inwardly soon agreed: and
as soon as they were sure of peace abroad, incontinently they warred again
within them selfs. Nevertheless they used the emperor so well with gifts
and fair words, that he not only suffered them to continue in their
libertee, but also increased their common wealth with a noumbre of privileges:
and was occasion, that after long contencion with them of Pisa, the Genowaies
at length enioied quietely the one half of Sardegnia, which before the Pisani
had wholly to them selfs.

About this time the Souldan of Egypt got Jerusalem, 1190.
and diverse other citees in Soria out of the Christians hands. Richard king
of England.
Wherefore king Richard of England, and king Phillip of France made their
viage into those parties, and king Richard arrived at Genoa with.xv. galleys,
where he tarried but one day. After whom the Genowaies sent.80. sail, with
men and municion to the assiege of Acon or Ptholemaida. To the succors of
which city the Souldan sent a ship charged with vittailles and armure, and
amongst other a cage full of fleeyng serpents, purposely sent to be se^
forth in the Christian army, that with their venim they might plage it. But it
was met by the english navy and taken. And the emperor Federike coming
toward the same enterprise, being already entered into Soria, by mishappe was
drowned in a river.

After whose death his son Henry next emperor came to Genoa in his own
person, 1194.
requiring their help to the conquest of Sicilia, promisyng them the profit,
so that he might have the honor. Which so much enflambed the hertes of the
people, that they made out a great number of galleis and other vessels, and
did so much service, that the emperor (in manner by their power) gatte the
whole i will of Sicilia: which he unthankfully considered. For when they had
done their best for him, he rewarded them with all the spite he could,
threatnyng to oppress their libertee, and to make them his subjects:
insomuche that the Pisani, through coumforte thereof, molested the Genowaies of
new, and fortifiyng Poggio di Bonifacio, fell to spoilyng and ri^lyng of the
Genowaies goods by sea. But at length the loss turned to them selfs. For
the Genowaies armed them, and taking Bonifacio by force, not only sacked and
munited it for them selfs, but also took a number of Pisane ships, as they
could find them. Whereupon it followed, that the Pisani made out their power:
and so fought diverse times with the Genowaies with diverse fortune.

1201.
The inhabitauntes of Vintimiglia breakyng the articles of accord between the
Genowaies and them, were feign to come barefoote with crosses in their hands
to Genoa and ask pardon, for fear of the preparacion that the city made
against them. And the year following, the Genowaies purchased the dominion of
Gaui, of the enheritours thereof: and the inhabitauntes of the vale of Arocia
submitted their country to the Genowaies dominion.

1204.
And because the Pisani prepared to assail certain Genowaie ships, coming out
of Soria, laded with rich merchandise, the city armed certain galleis and
ships to conducte them safely: which metyng togethers in the mouth of the
Adriatike sea, determined to attempt to win the city of Saragosa in Sicile
lately gotten by the Pisani. In the enterprise whereof they take certain Pisane
ships: and without great feight won the city, leauyng it fortified and
governed for the commonwealth of Genoa. Than the Pisani made out a new army
and besieged it, and of lykelyhod should have put it to great afterdele, if
Henry earl of Malea in Greece, with certain galleys of his own, and other
ships of the Genowaies, that came from be east, had not comen to the
succors: who fought with the Pisane army, and with help of them that were
within the town, obtained the victory, to the great slaughter and loss of
them of Pisa.

And because the earl Henry of Malea had done the Genowaies great service
diverse ways, 120^.
therefore they aided him to their great charge, with galleis, ships, men, and
horses to defend Candia, which he had usurped upon the Uenetians: so that the
Uenetians being therewith agreued, immediately publyshed the Genowaies to be
their ennemies, whereupon followed sharp wars between them many years after.

Here is to be understand, 1216.
that from the year.1080. unto the year.1190. the city was governed freely by
the citesins under the name of Consulles without entermedling of strange
rulers, and so in manner to this time, though for the space of.26. years some
strangers had been now and than brought in as Potestates (the consules
nevertheless remainyng after the old manner) but from this time forewarde the
Consulles ceased, and strange Potestates bare the rule a great time after.

The general army of the Christians liyng at the 122^*
siege of Damiata in Aegypte was relieved with.10. galleis sent by the
Genowaies: through whose help the city was gotten, with wonderful richesse
and an infinite number of slaves, besides the multitude of infidelles that were
slain: howbeit the christians kept not the city long, for the year following
the Sarasines recovered it again.

1222.
They of Vintimiglia re^elled against the Genowaies, so that after many light
bickeringes, at last an army was sent out against them, which lay long at
siege before the town, and could not prevail: so that the Potestate to be
assured of that enterprise, edified an other town between them and the sea,
and with a garryson held them so straight, that at last they yielded: whereupon
the town being recovered, the Genowaies builded there two fortresses for the
more suretee of the same.

1227.
In like manner they of Sauona and of Albenga rebelled, and were to their despite
reduced to their former obedience. But the war that happened between
Alexandria in Lumbardy, and Genoa, for the dominion of Capriata and other
towns in the confynes between them, was not so sone appeased: though in effect
the Genowaies at length prevailed.

Gregory the.ix. bishop of Rome trauailyng to send an army into the holy
land, 1238.
agreed the Uenetians and Genowaies togethers for.ix. years, and bound them
to keep peace on pain of cursyng. But like as his enterprise came to naught:
so his curse could not keep those two astates from renewyng of their malice,
as by their often fightyng with variable fortune appeared after. And being than
in contencion with the emperor Federike, and calling a counsel in Rome
against the emperor, he sent to the Genowaies, praiyng them to conueyghe in
saufetee the legates and prelates that came out of the west parts toward
that counsel. Wherefore they armed.27. galleis, and receiuyng two Cardinals,
and other prelates to the number of.40. at Niza in Prouance, brought them
solemnly to Genoa, and going from thense with them toward Rome, met with
Ansaldo admiral of the emperors navy: who fought with them, and took.22. of
those galleis, withal those goodly prelates, and diverse of the chief of the
Genowaies: and after vexed the common wealth sore in diverse parts of their
dominion. And because the emperor had intelligence with diverse of the
citesyns, who withstode the maintenance of bishop Gregory: therefore were
they for the most part banished, and many of their houses raced to the
earth: and as banished men procured many displeasures to their country diverse
ways. And though the most part of the imperialles were thus banished, yet
diverse of that affection remained in the city closely: insomuche that the
commons divided them openly by name, calling the imperialles Mastarati, and the
Papists Rampini: which names continued till the coming up of Guelfi and
Ghibellini, that divided the whole Italian nation, as is mentioned in the
Florentine history.

Than died the bishop Gregory, 1243.
and Celestine his successor lived but.18. days, after whom succeeded
Innocence the.iiii. a Genowaie borne. He following the trade of his
predecessors contendyng with the emperor, and being in his danger at Sutri
in the realm of Naples, wroughte so with the Genowaies, that they privily made
out certain galleys, which came to Ciuita Vecchia besides Rome, to receive
the bishop, who as secretly as he could came thither, and took shippyng to
Genoa, where he was received with Gloria in exce^sis, as reason would: not a
little to the emperors displeasure, that before accounted him self in manner
sure of him. And Innocence restyng him self a certain space in Genoa, he
departed toward Lions in France, and there held a general counsel
against the emperor Federike, during whose life he durst not return into
Italy: but immediately after the emperors death he came back again by Genoa,
and was there no less triumphantly received, than he was the first time.

1251.
Upon the death of this emperor the Genowaies also recovered Saona and diverse
other towns, that by the emperors time rebelled against them, and had dooen
them notable displeasures, as well by sea as by land. And bishop Innocence
being departed from Genoa to Milaine wrought so, that the banished Mastarati
were restored to their country again: and.10000. pounds paid them of the
comminaltee in recompense of their goods taken away before.

1^57.
And not long after the people made a commocion against the office of the
Potestate, so that the rumor ceasyng, they elected Guglielmo Bocanigra, a
citesin, to be their captain and superior unto the Potestate, and all other
magistrates, who being placed in that office for.x. years, by little and little
usurped the dominion over the whole, and so provoked the chief citesins to
conspyre against him. And though he being advertised of the first conspiracy
prevented his fall, by banishyng of diverse of the conspyratours, and by
reconcilyng of the rest: Yet his tyranny so much increased: that at length,
not the chief citesins alone, but also the commons openly rebelled, and
deposed him: reducyng the city to the former order of thyr strange Potestate.

In his time the city happened to have great wars specially with the
Uenetians, 1258.
who having like privileges in the city of Acon, and in other parts of Soria,
as the Genowaies had, upon a light occasion brake the peace, that bishop
Gregory before had made between them: so that both the Uenetians and the
Genowaies made out notable armies into Soria, either of them to maintain his
party there, and after diverse skyrmisshes and light bickerynges, at last the
armies met and fought before Acon, where the Genowaies were discomfited, and
xxv. of their galleis taken. So that those Genowaies, that than were in Acon,
were constreigned to flee: And thereupon the Uenetians took, sacked and rased
their houses to the earth: and for a more despite, rooted up a very fair
toure of the Genowaies, and made a ponde of that place, and setting botes
thereupon, would say in scorn: See where the Genowaies toure swymmeth.

This overthrow caused the Genowaies to enter in leage with Michael Paleologo
emperor of Constantinople, than enemy to the Uenetians: 1261*
who gave to the Genowaies the city of Lesmirre, and the i will of Sio, as some
affirm.

Either of those common wealths yearly made out a noumbre of galleis, which
most commonly met togethers and fought: but the notablest conflict of all was
before Sicilia, 1266.
between Trapani and Mazara, where the Uenetians took.xxvii. Genowaie galleis,
withal the booty and prisoners that were in them.

And though the Genowaies many times got from the Uenetians diverse of their
armed galleis, and many of their merchaunt ships richely laden: yet all
things reckened, the Uenetians had the better, whether I should ascribe it to
fortune or force, I can not well judge.

1^70.
Lewys the French king waged a certain noumbre of galleis and ships,
with.10000. men of the Genowaies, which served him in his entreprise made to
Tunise in Afrike, where the king him self, one of his sons, and diverse
other princes and a number of soldiers died of the plague: so that Charles
king of Naples, than left chief of the army, fell to composicion with the
king of Tunise, and upon the receipte of certain money, with promise of other
things, dissolved the army, and returned homewardes without any notable
act: in which return he met with Edward our prince, that with a goodly
company was departed out of Gascoyne toward the aid of that enterprise, and
offered him part of the money gotten toward his charges: but the prince
refused it. Wherefore the rest of the army, (that were sore tourmented with a
great tempest, in which a noumbre of ships and men were lost) seeing the
english army clear, and safe without loss: affyrmed, that it was only
because they would take no part of the money received of the infidelles.

And though the Genowaies both for ships and noumbre of men deserved most
in this viage: yet had king Charles so little respect to them, that those
that remained, returned to Genoa not only without gain or reward, but
glad with their great loss to be at home again.

About this time, by reason of the Guelfe and Ghibelline parties, that
corrupted all Italy (as in the Florentine history appears, diverse of the
chief houses of Genoa likewise divided them selfs into those sects:
insomuche that they of the houses of Doria and Spinoli, with help of their
partetakers, by force expulsed the Flischi and Grimaldi out of the city, and
banished those two families, with a number of others, which banished men, with
help of a Cardinal of the Flischi, provoked Charles than king of Naples, to
make war against the Genowaies, which endured not long. For Oberto Spinola,
and Oberto Doria, that took upon them the absolute power, and ruled the city
certain years, keeping their adversaries out, were by fair means so entreated
of Innocence the.v. than bishop of Rome, 1376.
that the banished men were quietely reconciled and called home: the
governance of the city nevertheless remainyng in the hands of the Oberti as
it did before.

And than the common wealth bought of Nicolas De Flischo certain towns and
territories to the value of 25000. pound, which they well and truly paid
him. But the Flischi and Grimaldi continued scarcely.xii. months at home, but
they were accused of conspiracy against the astate, and so banished of new.

And though king Phillip of France had before this time made peace for a
season between the Uenetians and Genowaies, in hope of an enterprise that he
intended toward the holy land: yet the ancient hate was such between
them, that the one could scarce meet with the other on the sea, but that
they would fight togethers, and take that advantage that they would do in
war.

1282. Giudice.
Than began Giudice di Ginercha in Corsica to trouble the Genowaie vessels, and
at length to declare him self open ennemie to them. Wherefore they made out
a power against him, and expulsed him out of his astate. But by them of Pisa
he was by force restored again: for the which the war renewed between the
Genowaies and the Pisani, one of the blouddiest wars and greattest by sea
that has lightly ben heard of between two common wealths. For within the
space of three years their armies fought.iiii. battles, and their diligence
was such, that when the one army was discomfited (which for the most part
hapi to the Pisani) they would within a month or.vi. weeks repair their
number of galleis as strong as at the first, not of old galleis, but of new
timber. And it would seem incredible to him that knows those two citees,
that they should be able (having so little dominion) to make such powers one
against an other, as by their chronicles appears they did.

1284.
For the Genowaies upon a sodeine tidings of the Pisanes landyng in Porto
Venere, armed.70. galleys in less than.iii. days, and set them forth to
the sea, and in the same year was.58. galleis, and.viii. Pamphili (which be
boares of.140. or.160. ores) made ready in Genoa in a day: which with the
rest of the army, to the number of.88. galleis, besides other vessels,
sailed forth before the haven of Pisa, where after a cruel and blouddie
battaill the Genowaies had the victory, took.28. Pisane galleis, boulged
seven, put the rest to flight, and led with them.9272. prisoners, whose
ransom yielded unto the Genowaies no small sums of money: and though this
overthrow should seem almost sufficient to be the destruction of a great
prince, yet did that one city of Pisa so bear it, that after a little
dissembled peace they declared and continued enemies a long while after
against the Genowaies, and fought many battles by sea with diverse fortune.

The nobilitee of Genoa conspired against the governors and people, to take
from them the rule, 1289.
because the city was governed more after the commons will, than the
gentilmens. And this conspiracy was so close kept (notwithstanding that in
manner all the chief families, as Grimaldi, Flischi, Negri, Malloni, Sal^atici,
Embriaci, and others were confederates in it) that it was never known, till
they were in the streets armed on horseback and on foot, and had taken the
church of saint Laurence: But following to the Abbotes house (for so was the
chief ruler called) the people assembled and resisted the conspiratours in
such wise, that the nobilitee was feign to lay down their weapons, upon
promise to be pardoned of life and goods. By reason whereof the commocion
ceased, and certain of the principal causes were banished for a time.

Upon examinacion, 1290.
what power the Genowais were able to make by sea in time of need, it was
found they had.120. galleis, furnished with their own chosen men. Whereof.40.
were immediately sent forth against Pisa. which entered the haven, destroyed
the great toure that the Pisanes had made there for their defense, took the
town of Ligorno, and raced it to the earth: and finally brake the great chain
that crossed the water, a great part whereof they brought with them to Genoa,
and there openly hanged it up for a perpetual memory of their victories.

Where as the commons the year before had defended their rulers from the
conspiracy of the nobilitee, now they them selfs began to move and to make
rumors against them: so that the capitaines of their own accord gave up
their offices to the people, whereupon a new order was taken, that they
should have a stranger to be their captain, and the rest of all the
officers, as the counsaylours, the Antiani, and such other, should be made
half of the gentilmen, and half of the people.

12^^.
Not long after upon a light occasion, the truce was broken between the
Genowaies and the Uenetians, and either of them armed a certain number of
galleis to the sea, and in the Leuaunte seas before the haven of Giacia meite
and fought, where the less number, (...) Genowaies overcame the greater
number, and take.25. of their galleis. 1294.


Here it is to be noted, that within the space of.vii. years, from the
beginning of the last wars against Pisa, it appears, that the Genowaies at
sundry times had armed.627. sail, besides the merchaunt ships and galeis,
that yearly amounted to.70. or more. And the custom of comers and goers, with
the tax of salt, yielded yearly unto the comminaltee above an.140000. pounds
(every pound of theirs being two of ours, or theraboutes) which seems a
thing incredible.

Than were the Mascharati and Rampini of the city (which were also as Guelfi
and Ghibellini) made at one, 1295.
after they had contended as ennemies more than 50. years. Whereupon (hearing of
a great preparacion that the Uenetians made to revenge their loss the year
before) the Genowaies armed.165. galleis whereof 105. were new, in the which
they had.45000. feightyng men, all of their own subjects, under the leadyng
of Oberto d' Oria, admiral for that vyage: who went into Sicile, thinkyng
there to mete the Uenetians, but they met not, so that the army returned
without doing any fea^e: and their wealth was such, that.8000. men of that
army were clothed in clothe of gold and silks.

The old envy between the Guelfi and Ghibellini renewed, so that the city
was divided, that is to wete, 1296.
the families of Spinola, and Doria, with their folowers on the one part, and
Flischi and Grimaldi, with their sect on the other part: so that they fought
from the later end of December, unto the.vii. of February day by day, and
burned diverse goodly houses: but at last Spinola and Doria prevailed, and the
other were driven out of the town and banished. By reason whereof.ii.
capitaines of those.ii. houses were elected to the rule of the city after the
old manner, and the strange captain, with the Potestate discharged.

Lamba d' Oria, 12^^*
being one of the capitaines of the town, and admyrall of the army by sea,
entered the Uenetian golfe, fought with the Uenetian army, burned 77. galleis,
and brought.18. with.7400 prisoners to Genoa, and nevertheless shortly after
made peace with the Uenetians, and granted truce to them of Pisa for 27.
years. For the which the Pisani, yielded to the Genowaies the i will of Corsica,
and the city of Saffari in Sardegnia, with.135000. pounds in money.

1304.
The emperor Adronico Paleologo of Constantinople, for the great amitee
between him and the Genowaies, gave them the ground, whereon Pera stands, a
mile distant from Constantinople, where all the Christians now dwell, first
builded by the Genowaies.

1306.
Within two years after began the discord, that caused so much mischief
between the houses of Spinela and Doria, (which before time had been steadfast
friends together) and endured the space of.xv. years with much bloudshedyng,
till the coming of the emperor Henry the.vi. to Genoa, who agreed both
parties, and so behaved him, that the citesins bound them selfs by feaultee
unto his obedience for term of.xx. years: 1^12.
which was the first time that the city submitted her self to the dominion
of any stranger. Notwithstanding when the emperor was departed, those two
parties Spinola and Doria fought openly in the city, so that at length the
Spinoli (being the weaker) were driven out with well nere all their
partetakers, 1315.
and yet the war continued between them the space of.24. years, as well within
as without the city, to the great damage, and almost destruction of the common
wealth. For many times the banished men by mean of friends were reconciled
again: and when they were ones returned, than did they worse than ever they
did before.

This discension was not only between those two families of Spinola and Doria,
but also between the sects of Guelfes and Ghibellines: into which parties the
whole city was likewise divided: 1318*
so that the Ghibellines, which than were banisshed by help of the Visconti
of Myllaine, and of other Ghibellines, made a great army: and under the
leadyng of Mark, son to Mathewe Visconti, came before Genoa, took the
suburbs, and streigned the city so sore, that if it had not been succored by
king Robert of Naples (who in his own person, with.25. galleis entered the
haven) the Ghibellines had been like to have taken it. Wherefore they of the
city, to make them selfs strong, yielded the dominion into the hands of the
bishop of Rome, and of the foresaied king of Naples, for the space of.x.
years: in which time were so many civil battles stricken, so much
bloudshedde, so many towns and houses destroyed and burned, so many galleis
and ships broken drowned and lost, and so great sums of money spent, that
it seems a wonder how so little a country should bring forth so great
furniture, and all to mischief.

Finally king Robert (to whom the rule of the city was prolonged for.vi.
years) called the ambassadors, 133^.
as well of the Ghibellines as of the Guelfes, to Naples: and there made them
to conclude a peace, so that the Ghibellines were reconciled home, where they
lived not long in quiet, as hereafter shall appear.

In the time of this war one notable policy was used by sea. The year before
conclusion of this peace, Policy.
Federike Marabotto, captain of.ix. galleis of the Guelfes (whereof.ii. were
drowned in Sardegnia) was chased by Aitono Doria, captain of.xiiii. of the
Ghibelline galleis, and came so near with the night, that they were within a
flight shot together: so that Federike could by no mean escape: Wherefore in
the dark of the night, he set forth a little empty vessel, with a burning
lantern in it, and caused all the lyghtes of his galleys to be put out. This
dooen he let the little vessel lose: which the wawes of the sea by little
and little drove toward the land: so that Aitono thynkyng it to be the
galleis that he had in chase, followed, and by that mean was so far from
Federike er it was day, that Federike easily escaped the danger.

1332.
Than began the Catalaines to make war to the Genowaies upon a veraie light
occasion, which continued a great while, with many notable battles by sea,
more to the loss of the Catalaines than of the Genowaies: though the better of
both had no cause to triumph. 1335.
But those foreign wars were nothing so hurtful to the city, as their own
civil sedicion, which shortly after renewed between the Guelfes and
Ghibellines: so that within the city they fought a certain space with
variable fortune, till at length the Ghibellines prevailed, and chased away
the Guelfes: and so an other while took the rule upon them. Wherefore the
Guelfes fortified them selfs at Monaco, and made out diverse armies by sea:
which were diverse times met withal, by the contrary part, though in
effect there happened no notable battle between them.

1338.
Not long after the French king warryng with England, hired.40. galleis of
the Genowaies: whereof.xx. were of the Ghibellines in Genoa, and.xx. of the
Guelfes in Monaco: which when they had served him a year, returned not well
contented with their paiement, so that the mariners and other mean soldiers
took the rule of the galleis from their capitaines: and were grown to such a
courage, 1339.
that when they landed, they moved the commons to rebel against the rule of
the common wealth, and subuertyng the city of Sauona, with most part of the
country theraboutes, the commons of Genoa took courage thereupon to arm them
selfs, and to run to the palaice criyng, that they would have an Abbotte made
of the people, and would no more be ruled by the capitaines. Wherefore the
nobles (seeing their power inferior to the peoples fury) assembled together,
and fell to counsel for chosyng of this new Abbotte, in which counsel they
tarried so long within, that the people without were werie, and up start a
poor wyredrawer or a goldsmith (to give him the better name) and asked the
people, whether they would be ruled by him? Whereunto many answered: yea, well
(quod he) and than shall Simonine Bocanegra be our lord and ruler. Be it (quod
one) and be it quod an other: so that the people with an whole voice cried,
Abbotte Bocanegra. But he (who was a good man) did what he could to refuse it:
and they seeing that, amended the mattier with criyng not Abbotte but Duke: so
that in conclusion, whether he would or no, the absolute power was put in his
hand, and he called Duke: being the first that ever had that title in Genoa.
Than was a law made, that none should be called to any rule or office of the
common wealth, unless he were a Ghibelline.

1340.
The Turk at this time waxed great, and had certain galleis going upon the sea
called Mare Maggiore (otherwise Pontus Euxinus) which had robbed certain
merchaunt ships of the Genowaies, wherefore they armed them selfs in Caffa,
and meetyng, fought with the Turks army, and recovered not only their own
goods, but also took.x. Turkish galleis and a ship with great booty.

1344.
Likewise the emperor of the Tartares made war on the Genowaies, and besieged
them in Caffa (a town situate in the confines of Tartarie) out of the which
the Genowaies issuyng by night, burned the Tartares engines, and slew.5000.
men: so that their emperor sent to Genoa for peace, and under color thereof
(obteignyng it) did them much more hurt by treason than he had done in open
war. For he spoiled them at one time of.200000. pounds.

The Nobilitee of Genoa (that than were banished) seeing the astate ruled all
by the people, assembled their powers, and came before the city, so that
Bocanegra (seeing also the nobilitee and people within the city in manner at an
open contencion for the same) deposed him self of his dignitee, and departed
out of the city: In whose place John di Morta was by the people elected, 1345.
and the nobilitee kept out, till by the awarde of Lucchino Visconti, lord of
Millaine (to whose judgment the mattier was committed) they were restored to
the city, and to part of their goods, the rule remaignyng nevertheless at
the peoples will.

1346.
All this while, they of Monacho mainteigned war against Genoa, and had newly
armed.34. galleis wherefore they of Genoa armed also.29. so that because they
would not meet togethers, they of Monaco went to serve Phillip the French
king against our king Edward the.iii. in which wars they had so good
success, that one galley of them never returned home again: but the other
army of Genoa, under the leadyng of Simonde Vignioso prospered very much. For
after diverse enterprises achieved in the realm of Naples, he entered into the
Archipelago (otherwise called Mare Egeum) and there gatte the i will of Sio,
which in process of time has been occasion of wonderful gain and wealth to
the Genowaies: and besides that at the same time he gatte the two citees called
Foglie Vecchie.

Than renewed the war between the Uenetians and the Genowaies, wherein were
diverse battailles stricken, 1350.
one before Constantinople, where the Uenetians were discomfited, with the
loss of.30. galleis: an other in Sardegnia, where the Genowaies were
discomfited, with the loss of.41. galleis, and an other at the i will of
Sapientia, where the Uenetians lost.40. sail, besides diverse others of less
importance.

And though it seem, 135^.
that the Genowaies got most in these last wars with the Uenetians: yet
their gain was so blouddie and costly, that in manner of necessitee they
submitted them selfs to John than archbishop and lord of Millaine. 1356.
Under whom it continued scarcely.iii. years, but that the people (being
offended with the taxes that ^he bishop required of them) restored Simonde
Bocanegra to the astate of Duke: whereof he had deposed him self before: and he
in recompense thereof, deposed all the nobilitee, and gave the offices amongst
the people. For which were diverse conspiracies wroughte against him: and (as
some hold opinion) at length he was poisoned at a bankette made to the king of
Cyprus, as he passed that way into France.

1363.
Gabriell Adorno was made Duke next after him, who continued the space of.v.
years, till the people misliked his rule, and by force deposyng him, created
Domenyke Di Campo Fregoso in his room. In whose time happened the business in
Cyprus between the Uenetians and Genowaies for going on the upper hand,
1370.1372.
which afterward was occasion of cruel wars.

It happened upon the death of king Peter of Cyprus (who in the night was
slain by his brethern) that as his son Peter should go to the cerimony of
his coronacion, the Uenetians and Genowaies than present, contended very
ernestly for the upper hand, which at length by order of the kings counsel
was given to the Uenetians, so that the Genowaies, preparyng them selfs to be
revenged, were discovered, taken, and slain, that of as many as were in Cyprus,
there escaped but one to bring home news of this mattier: which at length
caused the destruction of that land.

For the Genowaies made out an army, and the same day.xii. months, 1373.
that they were beaten, they entered by force into Famagosta (the chief city
of Cyprus) and took all the nobilitee of the realm.iii. of the chief they put
to death, because they had been their enemies, and having all the realm at
their disposicion, they restored it to the young king Peter, reserving
Famagosta to them selfs, with a trybute of.40000. Florines: which they
enjoyed unto the year of our lord.1464. and besides that they brought diverse
noble men and gentilmen of the Cipriottes prisoners unto Genoa, amongst whom
was the kings uncle James Lusigniano, who being kept in the tower Capo di
Faro, begatte a son called Iano, and was afterward king him self.

And albeit that Domenyke di Campo Fregoso (who for the space of.viii. years
had been Duke) ruled the astate so well, that no man could justly reprove him,
1378.
yet the inconstant multitude, with a little steryng of some that were great,
made a commocion against him, and not only deposed him, and put him and his
brother Peter (general of the enterprise of Cyprus) in prison, but also
banished all them of the house of Fregoso: who for a great space had been
notable ministers of the common wealth.

But this ingratitude of the people can be no wonder to them that have read
histories. Ingratitude of people.
For it is almost ordinary with the people to render ill for good.

Than was Nicolas di Guarco elected Duke: By whose time happened that notable
war between the Genowaies and Uenetians, wherein after diverse fortunes and
victories on both parts, the Uenetians looked to be beaten out of their
houses. For the Genowaies with help of their colleges so sore oppressed their
power by sea, that they were driven into their own haven, and Peter Doria came
with the army before the two castelles at Lio, within two mile of Uenice, so
that if the Site of the place made not the city imprenable: of likelihode the
Uenetians had been subdued. For they sent their ambassadors to Peter Doria to
require peace with large conditions, who (not being contented to have the
honor with a reasonable advantage) would needs they should yield them selfs
and their city to be at his discreacion. The extremitee of which answer
made the Uenetians so desperate, that strainyng their vttermoste powers
togethers, at length they discoumfited the Genowaies army, slew Peter Doria,
took.xix. galleis, and more than.4000. prisoners: and so recovered Chiozza,
withal their other places about their marisshes, that were before taken from
them. And than increased their courage so much, that Carlo Zeno, with
certain Uenetian galleis, entered the river of Genoa, and held the Genowaies
short, till by mean of the Duke of Sauoie the peace was made between them.
1381.


1383.
Than died king Peter of Cyprus, whom to succeed the barons elected his uncle
James, then prisoner in Genoa: who upon advertisement thereof was not only put
at libertee, but also (after great feasts and honor) sent home with.x. galleis
of the common wealths: first binding him self to certain articles as well
for the payment of a yearly tribute, as also for the city of Famagosta, which
remained in the Genowaies possession.

About this time were so many commocions in the city, for chosing of their
Dukes, that I think there was never so much alteracion of rulers in one
common wealth for the time. And because the rehersall thereof would occupy a
greatter room than my purpose does here allow: it shall suffice to say,
that as long as the rule of the common wealth consisted in the will of the
multitude, never was so inconstant an astate as that of Genoa: For amongst
other in the change between Domenyke di Campo Fregoso and Nicolas Guarco
were.iii. Dukes in a day: Fregoso deposed in the morning, and Adorno
incontinently made, and at after noone Adorno deposed, and Guarco made.
Wherefore as superfluouse to treat of all the Dukes elections, I woulle
hensfoorth speak no more of their chaunges, without great cause.

The Moors of Barbary in this time scoured all the middle seas, 1389.
robbyng and spoilyng all that ever they could take. Wherefore the Genowaies
with diverse others made suite unto the French king for an enterprise to be
made against the king of Tunise. Which the French king granted, and sent
the Duke of Bourbon^ as general, not only with a greatte power of France, but
also with aid that was sent him out of England, in whose company the
Genowaies sent.40. galleis, and.xx. ships of theirs, under the leadyng of
John Centurione. And their Chronicle makes mention, how our English archers
behaved them selfs at their landyng in Barbary so well, that the Moors gave
them pla^e: whereas without them the army should have had much adooe to
land. The end of which journey was, that the king of Tunise released all
Christian slaves, whereof there were a noumbre in his realm, and paid the
Christians.10000. duckates, with promise to trouble the seas no more.

From the year.1390. till.1396. was so much adooe for making and deposyng of
Dukes, 1396.
that Antoniotto Adorno had been.iiii. times Duke, besides.viii. or ix. others,
that had been put in and out the mean time, with so much bloodshed, burning,
and spoilyng, that at length for veraie desperacion the city sent ambassadors
to Charles the.vi. French king, besechyng him to take the dominion thereof into
his hands. Who at their request sent the Count of saint Paul, and the
bishop of Meaux to be rulers there, and to receive the fortresses into his
possession: 1397.
which immediately were delivered to them, and feaultie sworn by all the
subjects.

The French Governor had not been there fully a year, but the sects of
Guelfes and Ghibellines renewed so sore, 1398.
that after much burning, spoilyng and kyllyng in the country theraboutes,
the Ghibellines entered into the city, and from the.xvi. of Iulie, to the.v. of
September fought day by day with the Guelfes, and fortifiyng the one half of
the city, against the other, they never ceased, till both parties were tired
with the fury of their own bloudde and flambe. For amongst their feightyng it
was a common matter to set one an others house on fire: so that the loss that
the common wealth susteigned in this rage, was esteemed much more than a
myllion of gold.

The bishop of Meaulx, than governor of the city, for fear of his own
life, fled in the midst of this fury. 1399.
So that when it was past, the French king sent thither in his steed one
Collarde, a counsailour of his, who by the Genowaies was honorably received.
He governed not much more than a year, but by mean of a new sect, called La
Scorzola, he was feign to habandone the city, 1400.
leauyng them together by the ears after their old manner, feightyng and
burning amongst them selfs day by day: 1401.
which ceased not, till the coming of Bouciquart marshall of France, who
being the kings lieuetenant, entered into Genoa with a thousand soldiers, and
incontinently proceeded against the steerrers of the common wealth, causyng two
of the chief of the city Battista Boccanegra, and Battista de Frauchi, to be
taken and brought to the palaice, and beheaded Boccanegra: upon whose death the
people began such a cry, that they which had the other in keeping: let
him go: so that when the rumor was past, Bouciquart in a great rage, caused
the chief officer of the wards head to be stricken of, because through his
men's negligence, happened the escape.

Than did Bouciquart also fortify the little castle, 1402.
now called Castelletto, and put a garrison into it: and when he had taken
as well from the men of the countrei as of the town, all kind of armure (their
swords excepted) than spared he none of them: But for every occasion of any
importance, would behead the offendour without any respect to his qualitee or
kin: And his procedynges were such, that the French king confyrmed him in
that office for term of life: to the great contentacion of the citesins, who
in his rigorous justice found greater ease, than in the soft procedynges of
the other governors: whose gentilnesse gave libertee to the presumptuouse
multitude to do what they would, which was their own destruction.

Than Iano king of Cyprus (who had been borne, bredde up, 1403.
and well entreated in Genoa) laid siege to the city of Famagosta, intendyng
to get it from the Genowaies: but an army of.18. sa^^e was incontinently
made thither, under the leading of Bouciquart, who not only raised the siege,
but also constreigned the king to pay their charges, and achieved diverse
other enterprises on the costs of Soria: nevertheless in his return the
Uenetians met with him, and puttyng him to flight, took.iii. of his galeis:
and yet was the mattier so handled, that the war between the Uenetians and
Genowaies ceased for this time. In deed Bouciquart in his own quarrel defied
the Duke of Uenice, and Carlo Zeno, captain of the Uenetian galleis, to
feight either hand to hand, or number for number: but he was not answered.

Bouciquart.
This Bouciquart, for the space of.viii. years ruled the common wealth of Genoa:
by which time the city of Serezana, with the countee about came to the
obedience of the Genowaies. Because they were of them selfs no more able to
resist the Florentines: and Bouciquart sold to the common wealth, the Port
of Ligorno besides Pisa for.26000. duckates.

By his time also Benedict the.xii. Scismatike bishop of Rome, came to Genoa,
and was there triumphantly received. And the office of. S. George was than
devised, which endures to this day.

The Siotes also rebelled, in so much that Bouciquart, with.vi. galleis went
thither, and reduced them to their former obedience.

Finally couetyng to have the rule of the astate of Millaine, he made an army
of.6000. footmen, and.5000. horsemen, and (not mistrustyng any alteracion in
Genoa) passed the ^^reicte into Lumbardie. 1409.
But the mean while the people murmored aginst him, and at last rebelled and
slew all the Frenchemen they could find within the dominion, and thau
received the Marquis of Monferrato, with a certain power of men into the
city, who was made captain and president there, with a stipende of.15000.
pound by the year. So that when Bouciquart would return, it was to late. For
than the Genowaies would be no longer subjects to the French king.

The Marquis continued not fully.iiii. years, 1413.
but they rebelled, and expulsed him out of their dominion, partly by force and
partly by agreement. For they gave him.24500. duckates for the restitucion of
those towns and fortresses that he had of theyrs in his hands. And than fell
they to a new order with the election of a Duke much after their old manner:
so that George Adorno was made Duke for that time.

And albeit there could no fault be found in him, for he was a good iusticer,
and a man endued with much humanite, yet was he scarcely.ii. years in that
office, but Battista Montaldo conspired against him. 1415.
Whereof followed so much civil war between parties in the city, that there
were above.100. men slain, and that many of the best sort, and.146. houses
burned, spoiled and destroyed: and so much hurt done besides, that it were to
lamentable to tell.

Finally both parties weeried, they fell to agreement: so that George Adorno
willingly renounced the astate of Duke: and Barnabas di Goano was elected in
his steed. Who within the space of a year was also deposed, and Thomas Di
Campo Fregoso made Duke in his place.

This man immediately after his election, 1416.
to get the love of the people, disbursed.60000. duckates of his own, to the
relief of the common wealth: which at that time was far in debte. And yet
for all that the common wealth was brought to such pouertee, by their own
civil sedicion, and resisting Duke Phillip of Millaine, who than made sharp
war upon them, that for very necessitee they sold the port of Ligorno to
the Florentines for.120000. duckates.

And to increase their calamitee king Alfonse of Aragone (going out of Spain
to ge^te the realm of Naples) landed in Corsica upon the Genowaies dominion,
and there besiegeyng Bonifacio put them to no small charge in the rescue
thereof: wherein surely the Genowaies bare them selfs wonderful valiauntely,
notwithstanding that by their continual wars specially against the Duke of
Millaine, they were brought to such pouertee, that they were feign at last to
submit them selfs to the Duke of Millaine, 1421.
and in recompense of the deposyng of their own Duke, gave him.30000.
Florines, with the lordeship of Serezana. Than was captain Carmigniola made
ruler of the city for the Duke, 1422.
in whose time an army was made out into the realm of Naples against king
Alfonse, under the leadyng of Guido Torello, who by composicion took the cities
of Gaetta and Naples, and did so much, that the Spaniardes forsook the realm,
and so had the Duke of Millaine his purpose there, though he used it but
easily: for by fair entreatie he restored to Queen Johan, all that the
Genowaies had gotten from her. Besides that the Duke suffered the common wealth
to decay, by reason that diverse (partly by his appoynctmente, and partly by
his consent) occupied certain towns and possessions to their own uses, which
before belonged to the comminaltee. Wherewith the Genowaies were much offended,
though for that time they du^s^e not s^urre.

And Albeit that the Genowaies served him notably in his wars against the
Uenetians, 1437.
specially in the conflicte between them on the river of Po, nere to Cremona,
where the Uenetians received a great discomfiture: yet when the Uenetians made
war again upon the Genowaies, only to be revenged of their loss on the Po,
Duke Phillip nothing aided the Genowaies: so that the Uenetians discomfited
their army before the church of saint Fruttuoso: where the Uenetians took
viii. galleis: and pursuyng their victory, seeing the Genowaies scarce able to
arm them, and the i will of Sio undefended, made thither: and gave diverse
assaults to the city, thinkyng to get it. But the S^otes, with help of a
few Genowaies that they had there, defended them selfs so valiantly, that
the Uenetians were feign to retire with great loss of their men.

Than returned king Alfonse of Aragone into the realm of Naples, and
besieged Gaetta, 1434.
to the rescue whereof Blasio d' Asseretto was sent, with.xv. sail, and not
fully.3000. men: who met and fought with the king, the sorest battle that
happened in those days, for so small a noumbre. For the king set on the
Genowaies army with double the noumbre of men, and with great advantage of
ships and galleis: yet did the Genowaies so obstinately feight it out, that
of the kings part they slew above.5000. and took the king with his.ii.
brethren, a noumbre of Dukes and Earls, and above.200. knights prisoners:
with so much spoil of gold, silver, iewelles, and other treasure, that the
like booty has not lightly been heard of: All which they brought in saufetee
to Genoa: saving the kings person, which by the Duke of Myllaines
commandment was had to Sauona, and from thense to Millaine: where he was not
entreated as a prisoner, but at length not only without ransom, but also
with great presents set at libertee, and that without the Genowaies consent:
which with diverse other vnkyndnesses and injuries dooen to them by the Duke,
caused the Genowaies to return to their own wonted wills: so that thorough
procurement of Frances Spinola, the whole city was in arms: 1436.
and expulsing and sleayng all the Dukes ministers, took on them their old
liberty, and made Thomas Di Campo Fregoso Duke again: who continued in the
same about.vi. years. In which time Raynolde Duke of Angio (that claimed the
realm of Naples) came to Genoa, and was not only well received there, but
also aided with certain armed galleis toward his enterprise, and Nicolas
Fregoso sent for captain with him: by whose help he gatte the Castle Nouo
in Naples, and so much prospered otherways, that it was a great while
doubted, who should enjoy the realm, either Raynolde, or king Alfonse. But
at last Raynolde for lack of men and money was feign to leave the entreprise,
so that the Genowaies returned without any recompense of their great charges
susteigned in that quarrel. 1442.
And than was king Alfonse in their tail by sea: so that they were no sooner
unarmed, but that he ouerranne all the Genowaie costs. The like whereof did the
Duke of Myllaine by land: and so was the common wealth in manner besieged on
both sides.

In the midst whereof began a conspiracy against the Duke, 1443, 1444*
who was deposed and Rafaell Adorno settled in his place. Than peace was
obtained of king Alfonse upon certain conditions, as the necessitee of the
time would allow: amongst which one was, that the Genowaies should yearly
send him a basen of gold as a present, or rather as a tribute, as he took it.

Rafaell Adorno being persuaded, 1447.
that the common wealth should amend, if he renounced the Duchy, left it
willyngly. Whereupon Barnabas Adorno took upon him: but Ianus Di Campo Fregoso
entered by night into the city, and deposyng Barnabas by force: took the astate
upon him, and died within two years.

After whom succeeded Lewys Fregoso, and after him Peter Fregoso. In whose time
the dominion of Corsica, with the profittes coming out of Caffa, and out of the
other places, subject to the Genowaies in the east, were all converted to the
magistrate of saint George: and the city of Pera against Constantinople
(which apperteined before to the Genowaies) was yielded to the Turk, when
Constantinople was gotten. 1454.


John Duke of Angio, 1458.
son to the forenamed Raynolde, came this year unto Genoa, where by accord
of the citesins, he received the city into the dominion of the French king,
and thereupon took their feaultee. But than came king Alfonse before the haven
with a notable army, and so sore streigned the city by siege, that if death
had not taken him the rather out of the way, he must needs have gotten it.
Whereas his death unlooked for, caused the whole army to skatter here and there:
by reason whereof the Genowaies were delivered, even when they despaired of all
mercy, knowing how much the king was bent to their destruction.

Than incontinently they made out an army in favor of Duke John^ toward the
recovery of the realm of Naples, which did him notable service, though in
effect his purpose proved not.

1459.
This mean while Peter Fregoso, that had been Duke, seeing the power of the
city well abated by sendyng out of this army, made a power, and imagenyng
how he might recover his astate, entered the city by night. But this Duke
John with the citesins resisted, fought with him all night and a part of the
day, and at last repulsyng his men, by chance locked him with a few more
within the gates: where at last he was slain: and some of his alies and
confederates taken and beheaded.

1490.
But Duke John^ after this victory rested not long, till the commons began
to contend for paiement of taxes, and findyng fault with the burdein that was
laid upon them, took their weapons in hand, and constreigned the Duke with
all his frenchemen to flee into the Castle. Where they besieged him: and than
made Prospero Adorno their Duke: so that Raynolde, father unto the besieged
Duke (with help of the french king) made a great army by sea and land, and
came to Genoa, where he was well fought withal, discoumfited, and lost.2500.
men: so that the Genowaies remained in their libertee: and yet were the
ennemies no sooner retired, but civil sedicion sprange up amongst them
within the city. For the Duke Adorno could not be contented to suffer the
Fregosi to tarry within the city, whereupon either of them made what power
they could: And the Fregosi having the better hand, expulsed Adorno, and made
one of their own name Duke.

This overthrow was so displeasaunt to the French king, 1462.
that keeping Sauona a certain space in his hands, and seeing the maintenance
thereof ouerchargeable for him, gave it unto Fraunces Sforza than Duke of
Myllaine, withal his right unto the astate of Genoa. Whereupon Sforza sent an
army thither under the leadyng of Gasparo di Vicomercato, 1464.
and easily obtained the dominion of the city, by reason that Paul Fregoso,
than both Duke and archbishop of Genoa, fled without making any resistance,
knowing that the people hated him for his great tyranny.

Thus Gasparo being in the Dukes name placed in the rule of the city, the
Genowaies sent.xxiiii. of their chiefest citesins in ambassade to Myllaine, to
gratify the Duke: that amiably received them. And glad were the Genowaies,
that they had gotten him to be their lord because the good governance of his
own subjects made them to hope for like wealth and rest: as it proved in
deed. But he lived not fully.ii. years after. 1466.


Than succeeded his son Galeazzo: In whose time the Turk gatte the city of
Caffa, with diverse other towns in the east parties, 1475.
apperteinyng to the Genowaies: Which was not only a great hyndraunce to
their wealth, but also to their reputacion.

And because this Galeazzo showed him self some what unthankful to the
Genowaies (being in deed a wilful young man) therefore the people murmoured
against him, and ones rebelled by procurement of Jerome Gentile: 1476.
which nevertheless without much a do was pacifi^d: so that Galeazzo
continued lord thereof till he was slain in Millaine through a conspiracy
made against him. As in the Milanese history appears.

1477.
But incontinently upon his death the commons arose again, and expulsyng the
governor there for the Duke, took a new order for the rule of their common
wealth. Wherefore incontinently a great army was sent from Millaine, which by
the help of the Adorni, with their parttakers discomfited Obietto di Flisco,
with the comminaltee, and so being entered into the city, Prospero Adorno was
established, as the Duke of Millains liuetenaunte there. But he continued
scarcely one year, till by mean of new practices, that he held with
Ferdinando king of Naples, 1478.
he was had in suspicion to the Milanese: who willing to depose him, raised a
new commocion of the people: so that where he was before the Dukes
liuetenaunte, now he was made governor absolutely of the common wealth.
Whereupon a new army was sent from Millaine to Genoa, and there fought
withal, and so discomfited, that of.15000. men, which departed from Millaine,
returned not fully 3000. the rest, some were slain, but the most part taken.
This battaill being thus achieved, the Genowaies had no rather recovered their
libertee, but that their old civil sedicion renewed. For the Fregosi could
not suffer the Adorni to rule, wherefore within the city they fell together by
the ears. And albeit that for a season the Adorni prevailed, yet at length
they were oppressed and constreigned to flee, and Battista Fregoso made Duke
after their old manner: who the.iiii. year after his election was deposed by
the procurement of Cardinal Fregoso, and the Cardinal made Duke in his
steed: 14^^.
by whose time the Florentines made war against the Genowaies, and gatte
from them the towns of Serezana and Pietra Santa, which with the countries
about them, were of notable importance to the common wealth. But it is no
marvel, though the Florentines prevailed: 1487.
For the Genowaies were at that time habandoned of all the astates about them.
Whereas the Florentines were in leage with the bishop of Rome, with the
Uenetians, and diverse others.

Than were the commons so weary of the Cardinals rule, that Obietto Flisco,
upon compforte thereof, entered by night into the city, and after much fight
and long contencion, made the Cardinal to renounce: 1488.
so that the citesins (remembryng how they were best in quiet, when they were
subjects to the Duke of Millaine) returned of new to be under the Milanese
dominion: and than was Antony Adorno made governor of the city for the Duke.
By whose time truce was taken with the Florentines, to the Genowaies
disaduauntage: and Charles the.viii. French king was aided by the Genowaies
toward the winnyng of the realm of Naples: 149^.
but in his return thense, they not only discomfited a good part of his
army by land, but also took.x. galleis, and a great gallion, that were
retournyng into France from the kings said enterprise of Naples. Whereupon
diverse towns that before rebelled against the common wealth, returned than
unto them, as Vintimiglia with others. 149^.
And Serezana was bought of the Castellane there for.25000. duckates.

The emperor Maximilian came also to Genoa and was there honorably received.

149^.
This time was Lewys, surnamed Moro, Duke of Millaine, and sins the last
submission of the astate of Genoa unto the Duke, the house of Adorni had borne
all the rule. And because they had persuaded the common wealth to aid the Duke
against the french king with 1000. men paid for.iii. months, therefore when
the French king had chaced the Duke from Millaine, the citesins took occasion
to expulse the Adorni, and sent ambassadors to king Lewys the.xi. than being
at Millaine to offer them selfs to him: who amiably received them: and made
his cosen Philip of Cleues their governor: who with.xviii. sail French and
Genowaies together, 1501.
took his viage toward the enterprise of Meteline, to the which the
Uenetians also sent.34. galleis, But they returned all without atchieuing their
purpose.

1502.
Than came king Lewys to sport him at Genoa, and making great preparacion to
receive him, the nobles contended with the auncientes of the commons, who
should go before, which for that time was judged by Rocabertino, 1506.
lieuetenaunt for the governor, that they should go by age, and another by
bloudde nor dignitee.

And albeit that this contencion was appeased for that time, yet for this and
other light causes there grew such hate between the nobilite and commons, that
at length the multitude arose, and constreignyng the gentilmen to flee out of
the city, spoiled and robbed diverse of their houses.

Upon knowlage of which rumor, the French king sent the governor thither.
Who with.150. horse and 750. footmen entered the city, thinkyng with his
presence and power to oppress the peoples fury.

Than Aloise di Flisco, with most part of the nobilite^, had assembled a
power, and were come to Quarto, in hope by the governors means to be
reconsiled. But than began the Artisanes, with the rascal of the city
(which for their pouertee were called Capette) to assemble together in
companies, some of our lady, and some of saint John Baptist, with other
like, and so to ^enne about doing infinite harms: that the governor durst no
more offer to bear any auctoritee. For they made them.viii. rulers by the name
of tribunes: against whom no man might speak: so that the governor, seeing
his auctoritee clean taken from him, departed.

A little before whose departure king Ferdinando of Spain, with.x. galleis
and.vii. foystes entered the haven, and tariyng there a day, departed on his
way to Naples.

Than did they of the city send.iiii. ambassadors to the French king, who
scarcely would look upon them: being determined by force to chastise them,
and therefore sent commission to the Castellane that kept the Castelletto, to
damage the city all that he could: who thereupon secretly made an issue (when
he knew he should find the chiefest in the church of. S. Fraunces) and took
a number, and led them prisoners in to the castle, where for their
raunsomes the captain gatte above.10000. duckates. But that let him not
from the execucion of his masters commandment: for he never ceased, but
shot of all manner of artillery into the city and into the haven, to the
great terror and annoyaunce of the people.

Yet for all that these rascal Capette were so obstinate in their rebellion,
that with help of their new tribunes they made them a Duke, one Paul Da Noue
a dier of silk.

And though that the Cardinal Finaro, with diverse of the best citesins, 1507.
did what they could by counsel to cause the people to submit them selfs
to the french king (who than newly was entered with an army into Lumbardie)
yet would they never stowpe, till the french king with his own army, and
with such power as the nobilitee of Genoa could make, came before the city:
where the commons made a little resistance, but at length he entered in arms,
made his army to pass thoroughe the city, put diverse of the principal
offenders to death, received homage of the citesins sittyng in his magistee,
placed the nobility in their accustomed dignitees, burned the books of
couenauntes, in steed whereof he granted them some privileges, made them
pay.200000. crowns for his costs, and.40000. to the buildyng of a fortress
at Capo di Faro, increased the garrison with.200. soldiers, and finally bound
them to keep.iii. galleis continually armed at their cost and charge. And thus
(to his seemyng) establisshyng all things, returned toward France. And at
Sauona was overtaken by the king of Spain, who in his return from Naples
landed there to visit and salute the french king: that likewise received him
with solemn cheer.

15^^.
After this the Genowaies rested scarcely.ii. years in quiet under the French
kings dominion ( Radolfo de La Noi being governor) but there spronge up a
company in the city called the fellowship of the tou^ne: which betokened, that
as the barell staves of the tou^n^ were perfectly joined, so were they knitte
togethers in one will. And these waxed so s^oute, that they sent ambassadors
to the French king, requiryng (amongst other things) a change of their
governor, whom they reputed to be an extorcioner and a tyranne. But they
spedde not of their purpose.

The mean while the bishop of Rome tempted and alteracion of the astate, 1512.
in so much that the bishop of Vintimiglia came to the city, to the intent
to slay the governor, and to make a commocion. And though he mist of his
purpose, yet did the great bishops purpose prove at length. For Iano Fregoso,
with a certain noumbre of men sent from the bishops camp, entered the city,
without any resistance thoroughe the governors cowardely flight. And being
made Duke, forced the castle so sore, that the Castellaine for.12000. duckates
yielded it. Nevertheless the Castle of the Lantern held still french, and
was besieged of the Fregosi. But the Adorni rescued it: and by coumforte of the
french kings army by sea, entered the city: 1513.
Whereupon the Fregosi fled, so that the astate returned French, and
Antoniotto Adorno, by the kings special commission was made governor.

In which office he continued but.22. days. For as soon as the French navy
was departed (which by reason of the great discoumfiture that the french king
had at Nouara, could tarry no longer) the Fregosi, with aid of the king of
Spain, came so strongely to Genoa, that the Adorni with their parteners were
feign to give place: and than was Octauian Fregoso made Duke: so that within
the space of one year, the astate of Genoa altered.iiii. times.

1514.
This new Duke paid the Spaniardes, that had aided him.80000. crowns out of
the common treasure: and made Andrea Doria captain of.iiii. galleis: and than
besieged the Castle of the Lantern, which for the quantitee was excellent
fair and strong. Nevertheless as soon as he had gotten it (by composicion
paiyng 22000. duckates to the captain) incontinently he rased it to the earth.

1515.
The Adorni, with the Flischi than conspyred against the Duke, and with a
certain noumbre of men sodeinely entered into the city: Where they were not
only foughten with, and their men repulsed, but also they them selfs taken
prisoners. Whereupon the Duke, seeing the instabilitee of his astate, to eschew
further inconvenience, sent ambassadors to the french king, and yielded the
city to him: and sent him.2000. footmen, which did him no small service in
the battle besides Marigniano.

After the notable victory whereof, this Octauian (being from Duke changed to
governor) with.viii other of the chiefest citesins, went to visit the french
king at Myllaine, and there lent him.80000. crowns toward his charges.

1516.
About this time Cortogoli a Turk, scoured the seas, and did much hurt to the
Christians, wherefore an army was made out against him, under the leadyng of
the archbishop Fregoso, with Andrea Doria, and others: who sailed into the
costs of Barbary, and found xv. foystes, and certain galleis of Cortogolies
unarmed before Biserti, which they might have burned or brought away, if they
had not tended to much to the spoil. For that by reason of a sodeine tempest
they were driven to forsake the costs, and return home with out ought dooyng.

The Cardinal Sauli (a Genowaie borne) was upon suspicion emprisoned by Leo
than bishop of Rome, 1517.
and by his parents raunsomed at.25000. duckates: and yet for all that (it was
thought) that determinate poison was given him in prison. Poison that works
not till a time.
For within a certain space after his deliverance he sickened, and in less
than a year died.

The Moors of new troubled the seas. 1519.
Against whom Andrea Doria went out with.vi. galleis, gave the onset on.ix.
sail of theyrs, which he discoumfited with sore feight, and took.vi. of them.

All this while the faction of Fregosi ruled the city under the french king.
1521.
Wherefore the Adorni (who were than as banished men) armed.ix. galleis,
thinkyng secretly to enter the city, and to subuerte the astate. But they
missed of their purpose. Nevertheless they ceased not to provoke the emperor
against Genoa, promisyng him large succors of their part: So that thorough
their procurement, immediately after the battle of Bicocke (where the french
camp was discomfited) the Duke of Myllaine, the Marquis of Pescara, 1522.
the Signior Prospero Colonna, and the other imperial capitaines, with.20000.
men came before Genoa, and by force wanne and sacked it, and taking the
governor Octauian, with diverse others (whom they kept as prisoners) after the
departure of the army, Antoniotto Adorno was made Duke. And so the city
remained imperial. Adrian the.vi. elected bishop passed that way toward
Rome: 1524.
and the Duke of Burbone with his band came through to Genoa as he went to
rescue Millaine than besieged of the french men.

But the French king shortly after passed the mountains in his own person:
and not only recovered all that he had lost in Lumbardy, Pauia excepted, but
also gatte Sauona and Varagine in the river of Genoa. Wherefore Don Hugo Da
Moncada (afterward Vice Re of Naples) issued out of Genoa with.xv. sail,
1525.
and set.4000. men of the Genowaies on land, thinkyng to get Varagine,
where he was met with by Iocante Corso captain of the Frenchemen, and the
Genowaies being discomfited, him self the Vice Re was taken prisoner. Shortly
whereupon followed the taking of the French king at the battle of Pauia, who
in May after his taking was brought to Genoa, and from thense conueighed into
Spain.

1526.
Than the bishop of Rome with the Uenetians entered in leage with the French
king against the emperor. And because the city rested imperial, therefore
was an army of.37. galleis made, that besieged Genoa by sea, to the rescue
whereof the emperor sent the Vice Re of Naples out of Spain with.xxii. sail:
who encountered with.vi. galleis of Andrea Doria (that than served the leage
against the emperor) and fought together, in which feight Andrew and his
men behaved them selfs so valiauntly, that they sparpled the imperial army
abroad, and took.ii. of their ships. For which valiaunte act the emperor
made him admiral of his army, and knight of his order: and shortly after in
Porto fino he took.vii. galleis.iiii. of the city, and.iii. of Spain, so that
the siege continewyng still, 1527.
the city suffered extreme famine. Wherefore partly by force Caesar Fregoso,
with a band of French men by land was received into the town, and the city
delivered unto him in the kings name, without bloudde or spoil (the Duke
Antoniotto Adorno being fled into the castle) and than was Theodore Triulci
Milanese made governor thereof. 1528.
By whose time the Union began amongst the citesins, for there had been
division of parties, first the Guelfes and Ghibellines, than the nobles and
commons, and the commons divided in two, merchauntes and artificers, and last
of all were the factions Adorni and Fregosi. So that as long as these parties
reigned, it was impossible the city should prospere, seeing them daiely fall
together by the ears as they did.

Finally they all agreed to extynguish these divisions, and elected.28.
families to be all nobles, amongst whom the offices should run in common and
change without naming and party, and so were they brought to accord, that so
many years before had continually contended.

Than the French king sent a notable army under the leadyng of Mounser
Lautrech, to the siege of Naples, and because it should be besieged by sea and
land: therefore Andrea Doria armed.vii. galleis, whereof he made his cosen
Philippino Doria captain, and sent him to Naples, where the Uice Re,
with.vi. galleis issued out and fought with him, but Doria prevailed, and the
Uice Re was slain, and the Marquis of Vasco, with diverse others taken
prisoners.

Whereupon it seemed that the French king waxed unkind as well to the common
wealth as unto Andrea Doria. For first he suffered the city of Sauona to be
exempt from the subjection of Genoa, and furthermore to have all manner of
privileges that Genoa had with the custom of ^alte and other things, which
at length would be the destruction of Genoa.

And though the Genoways made diverse complaints hereupon, yet (as though they
were not regarded) no reformacion was had.

Than the French king had taken from Andrea Doria diverse of his prisoners, and
amongst all others the prince of Orange, and besides that had paid him his
wages but very homely: so that when Andrew began to murmour against this, the
king wrought means to have had him slain: which coming to his knowlage,
caused him to dispose him self otherways: so that when the time of his wages
was expired, he bare a white baner, declaryng that he was at libertee to serve
whom he would: and than after certain practices with his prisoners, the
Marquis of Vasco and Ascanio Colonna, he became the emperors man, and was made
prince of Melfi, by reason whereof the city began also to be moved against
the king, remembryng his ingratitude. So that finally by means of Andrea
Doria the French kings officers were licenced, his galleis by sea put to
flight, and some taken, and the city restored to her ancient libertee.
Notwithstanding that many thought Andrea Doria would have taken the rule of it
unto him self.

Hereupon a counsel was called, a new reformacion established, a Duke.viii.
governors and.viii. proctours chosen according to the order that yet
remains: and the city ever sens continued in peace, with increase of so much
wealth and quietness, that at this hour she may be reckened one of the
happiest and richest cities of Europe.

And albeit that some sterrynges have been sens that time for alteracion of the
astate, as the assault that the Conte Guido Rangone made with.10000. men of
the French kings brought out of Lumbardy, 1536.
and the conspiracy that the Conte Di Flischo made now of late (in the which he
him self was drowned, 1546,
and Iannetine Doria slain) yet has the city perseuered now these.20. years
in one astate, much through the great wisdom of Andrea Doria, who (refusyng
the dominion of it, Andrea Doria.
when he might without difficultee have taken it upon him) has not only
restored it to the perfect libertee of a common wealth, but also with his
notable service in themperours affairs (as in his viages to Tunise and Algier,
in the rescue of Coron besieged of the Turks, in defense of Barbarossa his
armies the years.37. and.38. and in oppressyng of the great Corsales or
pirattes by sea) has so mainteigned the imperyall favor toward the
Genowaies, that no man is able to hurt them at this day. For though in deed
they be not the emperors subjects: yet when any astate should happen to move
war against them, it should well appear, that he tendreth them no less than
as the dearest subjects he has. For the which they likewise at all times
have and yet do serve him for his money to the uttermost of their powers.

The description of Myllaine.
Amongst other particular astates of Italy, the Duchy of Myllaine has been
one the most notable.

For while the house of Visconti reigned, the same valiauntly maintened wars
of great importance against most puissaunt princes and powers. And for the
interest thereof, the notablest wars of our days have happened between the
emperor and the French king: insomuche that Fraunces the first of that name,
feightyng before Pauia against the imperial army (led by the Marquis of
Pescara, and the Duke of Bourbone) was taken prisoner, and conueighed into
Spain: where for his ransom, after a years imprisonment, he was feign to
pledge his two sons, and consequently to marie the emperors sister, with
other couenauntes to long to rehearse.

And no marvel, though these two most mighty princes of Christendom so much
contented for his only astate. For though in name (being but a Duchy) it
should not seem great: yet in very deed both for the wealth of the
country, and for the quantitee, the thing has been of as great reputacion as
some realms of Europe. Out of doubt there have been some Dukes of Myllaine
much greatter in territory, wealthier in revenues and treasure, more
puissaunt in wars, and finally more honorable in peace, than diverse of them
that had kyngly titles.

As for the richesse and beauty of the country, I am afearde to speak of,
least to him that never saw it, I should seem ouerlarge in the due praisyng
of it: and least unto him again that has practiced there, I should seem
unwise to treat of that, that my knowlage is not hable woorthily to set
forth, Nevertheless between fear and shame this much woull I say, that
such an other piece of ground for beautiful citees and towns, for goodly
rivers, fields and pastures, and for plenty of flesh, foul,
freshewaterfishe, grain, wine and fruits, is not to be found again in all
our familiar regions.

I think the emperor, that now is lord thereof, woull confess, that he
draws more money yearly to his purse ^ut of that only astate, than out of
some of his realms. And yet his Mylanese dominion is not half so much at
this present, as that that diverse Dukes of Mylaine have had. For whereas the
emperor, besides the city of Myllaine has now.vii. or.viii. citees, as
Pauia, Lodi, Cremona, Alexandria, Vercelli, Nouara, and Como: Dukes of Myllaine
have had, some.xx. and some.xxx. citees, and vpwardes. Yea and some so great,
that they have aspyred to the dominion over all Italy: as in the brief
history following more plainly appears. Nevertheless he that now shall
happen to see the company of noble men and gentilmen, that are in manner
continually attendaunt on themperours lieuetenaunt or deputy in Myllaine,
shall say, that the same represents rather the court of some puissaunt
king, than the train of a deputy.

And I think verily, that Don Ferrando Gonzaga, now lieuetenaunt there, rides
many times more honorably accompanied, and with a greatter presence of
magistee, than the emperor him self does in Germany.

Wives of Millaine.
The like whereof with rather the more is to be said of the Mylanese
gentilwomen, who in sumptuouse apparaile may compare with the best: specially
in the ornaments of their Chariottes, with coueringes of cloth of gold, of
veluettes, of silks, and a thousand sorts of embroderies. There is almost no
craftesmans wife in Myllaine, that has not her gown of silk, and her chain
of gold. A thing that should seem rather meruailouse than credible. But the
craftesmen there are so excellent in their doings, and the women so expert
in silk works, that it is no wonder though their gain grow to the biyng of
gaie gear.

Finally the city of Myllaine standing in the heart of the pleasauntest and
fairest plain of all Christendom, Millaine S^^^ate.
is served of all delectable and necessary things that are to be desired for
man's sustentacion. Honorable for the court, gallaunt for gentilmen,
herborough for soldiers, delicate for dames, rich for merchauntes, and
wealthy for artificers. But for notable or sumptuouse buildings, it may not
be compared with Uenice, Rome, or Florence. For all be it, the houses be great
and fair within, yet outwardely it is nothing of that beauty and pomp, that
those other citees be: by reason that for the most part the Mylanese buildyng
is all of brick, because hard stone and marble is not to be had by a great
way of.

Nevertheless the Domo of Myllaine (being their Cathedral church) is one of
the rarest works of our time: built all of fine marble, so well graven and
cut, that the woorkemanship is a wonder. But it is of so unmeasurable
greatness, that most men doubt, whether ever it woull be finished or not:
though it have many thousand duckates of yearly reuenew in good land toward
the continuance, and a noumbre of woorkemen daiely labouryng thereon.

But what speak I of the church, Castle of Millaine.
the castle of Mylaine being so near? which in mine opinion is the worthiest
and strongest of all Europe. For it has ward within ward: fortress divided
from fortress, that one may hold against an other, walls of endless
strength and large dyches well watered, as fair built over all as needs to
be, and so well fortified, that without famine it is impregnable. And this
concerning the country, city and people of Myllaine in general, shall
suffice.

The beginning and success of the State of Myllaine.
AS Liuie and diverse other authors write, the year before the coming of
Christ.259. from the edificacion of Rome.460. and from the beginning of the
world.4860. in the time of Assue^e, otherwise called Cirus and Longimanus,
son of Xerses, and nephew to Dario kings of Persie: The city of Mylaine was
rather augmented than newly built by certain frenchemen called Senoni or
Iusubrij, people of low Britain, now called Semans, where likewise is a town
called Myllaine. These were the frenchemen that first passed the mountains,
and settled them selfs in Lumbardie, and that afterward went under the
leadyng of Brenne to Rome, burned the city, and besieged the Campidoglio,
though at last they were discomfited.

Finally in process of time being becomen Mylanese, and made subjects to the
Romans, Amilcare the Affricane at his coming into Italy, persuaded them to
rebel: wherefore they were foughten with and twice overthrown: first by Furio
the Praetor, and after by Claudio Marcello, who in the later conflict slew Mago
brother of Hanniball, with.37000. Affricanes and Mylanese together: and
therefore at his return unto Rome was received with triumph.

Millaines ^ame.
Now wherefore it was called Millaine be two opinions, the one is, that it took
that name of the other Millaine in Britain: the other, by reason the form of
a farowyng sow half covered with woulle (signifiyng fattenesse) was found at
the diggyng of the foundation, they called it Milana, as who should say half
woulle. But how so ever the occasion thereof proceeded, I find that it had
diverse names, as Subria, Mesopia, Paucentia, Alba, and Ercolea of Ercole,
Massimino, that furnished it with houses, and closed it with walls: and also
builded a temple in it to the honor of Hercules, which is now converted to
be the church of. S. Laurence.

Thus after the tryumphe of Claudio Marcello, Millaine increased more and more,
and rested in peace about 500. years, being in manner the chief markette of all
Italy. Insomuche that many Romans came thither to dwell, and many times the
self emperors came thither to solace. But at length, in the time of saint
Ambrose bishop there, when the sect of Arrians began, it was somewhat
troubled: and shortly after destroyed by king Attila, called of the Italians
Flagellum Dei. Attila.


And albeit that it was after reedified, yet by Totila and the emperor
Justinians capitaines, it was for the more part again and again destroyed. And
by the Lumbardes also it was many times sore vexed. But last of all Galuano,
1161.
(who being taken prisoner by the emperor Barbarossa, by escape was returned)
seeing afterward the same Federico occupied with the French wars,
reedified it of new, and diyng without issue, left it to his citesins: who
(with favor of their neighbors) governed the same as a common wealth, the
space of.52. years, till Giouanni Torrigiani, Giouanni Torrigiani.
a principal citesin usurped the dominion by force.

This Torrigiani (as he that was cruel and desyrouse to make his astate
durable) feigned daiely new crimes and offenses against his citesins, Tyranny.
and specially against the Visconti, to rydde them out of the way. And though
he cloked his crueltee with the best color of justice that he could imagine
outwardesly, so that no man for fear durst withstand him: yet God taking
vengeance suffered him to be discomfited, and slain before Parma, where he
had been two years general of the emperors army against the bishop of Rome.

Now upon the death of Torrigiani, the M^lanese began to contend amongst
them selfs, so long, that at last Martino Turrigiani took the dominion upon
him, Martino Torrigiani.
and kept it two years, in which time being advertised, that Ezelino, lord
of Uerona, with many banished Mylanese ca^e in arms against him, he issued out
into the field with his power, fought with Ezelino, hurt, and took him
prisoner, and so being victoriouse, and of the age of.80. years, died at
Souzino.

Philippo Torrig.
After him succeeded his son Philippo, who being but weak herted and gross
witted, made nevertheless war against the Cremonese, sacked Como, took
Bergamo and Nouara, and finally expulsed the family of Tornielli. After which
enterprises he died, leauyng the astate to his son Napoleone, Napoleone.
that after happened to be slain. Unto whom succeeded his son named Philippo,
that by mean of the archbishop Ottone Visconti was afterward expulsed.

Uisconti*
It is to be understand, that before the time of Giouanni Torrigiani, the house
of Visconti was equal with the best of Millaine: being descended of the Earls
of Angiera, that before time had been lords of Millaine: for the name of
Visconti, was taken of Ottone son of Elipandro, who by reason he was lord
both of Angiera and of Millaine called him self Bisconte, as who should say,
twice Earl.

Ottone.
This Ottone being gone in a croisy with other princes to conquer the holy
land, fought there with a Sarasine hand to hand, and overcame him: and
because the Sarasine for his enseigne carried on his crest an adder, with a
littell child in his mouth, Ottone as a perpetual memory of his victory,
used the same ever after in his arms.

But now to come to the purpose, about the year of grace.1262. there
remained.iiii. brethren of the house of visconti on live, that is to wete,
Ottone before named, Vberto, Iacopo, and Gasparo, sons of Vberto de Visconti.

Ottone Uisconti.
This Ottone (the archbishop being than a banished man) through help of his
kinsman Gregory bishop of Rome, by force expulsed out of Millaine the
foresaied Philippo Torrigiani, son of Napoleone, and finally became lord
thereof: being afterward confyrmed in the same as vicare of the empire.

Within two years after Ramondo Torrigiani bishop of Como, and Patriarch of
Aquileia, returned with a great army to drive Ottone out, and did much hurt
in the Milanese territory. But at last he received a sore discomfiture by
Ottone, through help of the families of Duarosi and Palauisini, which houses,
together with those of Lampugnani (descended of the Goti) and those of
Pietrasanta (comen out of Tuscane) those of Porri, of Caimi, of Bossi, of
Marliani, and of Triulsi, were all at that time most noble and puissaunte in
Millaine.

After the death of Ottone, Matteo Magno.
his brother Iacopo having a son named Tibaldo, and Tibaldo, a son named
Matteo (who for his lusty courage and deeds was surnamed Magno) the reputacion
and state of the Visconti began to grow more and more. For this Matteo gatte
Alexandria, Pauia, Tortona, and many other towns.

Finally this Matteo puttyng Pietro Visconti in prison (whom after he
delivered) being advertised, how the same Pietro conspyred with the chief of
the Torrigiani, to drive him out of his astate, and mistrustyng his own power
to defend the same, committed the whole to Alberto Scoto, lord of Piacenza:
and fled him self into the marshes of the lake of Garda, where he lived
long time of his only labor of fishyng. He had.iiii. soonnes by his wife
Bona Cosa, the first named Galeazo (so called because in the night of his
birthe the cocks crowed more than they were wont) the secounde Giouanni,
the.iii. Stefano, and the.iiii. Lucchino.

Galeazo.
This Galeazo succeeded his father, and going afterward with Henry the
emperor to Rome, was there made captain of the light horsemen: and about
that time begatte two sons, the one called Azone, and the other Marco. His
courage was so great, that when the emperor Lodouico di Bauiera required a
certain sum of money of the Mylanese, Galeazo withstode it. Upon displeasure
whereof Lodouico took him prisoner, and banished his sons Azone and Marco. But
at length, at the instaunce of Castruccio Lucchese, Galeazo was delivered. And
finally being in company of the same Castruccio at the siege of Pistoia,
sickened and died in the town of Pestia.

^^ene.
After whose death Azone and Marco (for a certain sum of money paid before
hand) obtained of the emperor Lodouico the restitucion of the state of
Myllaine. And so Azone as elder brother having the dominion, Marco in his name
gatte the city of Lucca, and his uncle Lucchino the citees of Bergamo, Bressa,
and Pauia: whereby Azone became great, and so high of stomach, that remembryng
the injuries done to him by the emperor Lodouico: when he would have passed
through Myllaine (as lord of all Italy) he closed the gates against him:
refusyng to accept him for his better. Therefore not without good cause was he
both feared and esteemed, specially for his approved valiautnesse: for being
sent of his father to help Castruccio, he fought with the Florentines near to
Fucecchio, discomfited, and pursued them euin to the gates of Florence: and
laiyng siege to the city, remaigned there idell certain days, for no man
durst issue out to meddle with him. Which was the first enterprise of the
Visconti against the Florentines.

After which Azone, through help of Castruccio, became lord of the Alco
Pascio, and of Bologna: and as some say, being in camp on a day, after he
had broken his fast: puttyng his sallette on his head (which before had lien
on the earth) there issued out an adder, that glyded down alongest his face,
without dooyng him any hurt: whereof it followed, that the Visconti used the
adder in their arms: And though it so may well be true, yet this second
opinion of the adder does not so much satisfy me as the first.

Finally Azone diyng without issue, Lucchino.
his uncles Lucchino and Giouanni rested in his place, and were confirmed in
the astate by Benedetto the.xi. bishop of Rome, as vicares of the church: with
condition, that after the death of the emperor Lodouico di Bauiera, the state
of Myllaine should be holden of the dominion of the church.

Lucchino as elder brother, took upon him to govern, and proved a very
rightuous and merciful man. He granted reconcilement unto many of the citesins
before time confyned by Azone: and builded many devout places in Myllaine. He
gatte many towns part by force and part with love: and in manner renewed the
walls of Bergamo at his own cost. He reformed many things in Bressa, and so
finally died.

After him his brother Giouanni succeeded, Giouanni.
who incontinently called home Matteo, Bernabo, and Galeazo, sons of his
brother Stefano, before time banisshed by Lucchino.

And all be it, that this Giouanni was an archbishop: yet being more given to
arms than to the church, thorough the valiantness of Galeazo he gatte Parma,
Lodi, Cremona, Bergamo, Genoua, Sauona, and many other towns: and finally
died, leauyng his astate divided between Bernabo and Galeazo.

Bernabo.
This Bernabo held war long time with the bishop of Rome for the city of
Bologna, that together with Genoua had rebelled against him: and finally took
for Bologna a great sum of money, and forbear Genoa, because it had been
before redeemed at his hands for the sum of.600000. duckates. But some say,
he was enforced to let it alone, by reason that in one self time he was
troubled of the Romish legate, of Philippino di Gonzaga, and of Cane della
Scala for the things of Bressa, where he had been ones discoumfited.

He had to wife one of the daughters of Mastino della Scala, a woman that for
her unreasonable pride was surnamed, La Reina, the Queen, And had by her.14.
children, whereof.iiii. were sons. To Lodouico the eldest he gave the city of
Cremona: To Carlo, Parma: To Ridolfo, Bergamo, and to Mastino, Lodi.

The rest being daughters he married on this wise.

La Verde, unto Le^poldo Duke of Austria, graundfather to the emperor Federico
the third.
La Taddea, to the Duke of Bauiera.
La Valentina, to Peter king of Cyprus.
La Catherina, to Giangaleazo Visconti his nephew.
L' Antonia, to Federico king of Sicilia.
La Maddalena, to the Duke of Bauiera again.
L' Agnesa, to Francesco Gonzaga.
La Lisabetta, to Ernesco Duke of Monaco in Bauiera.
L' Angiolella, to Federico the younger: And La Lucia to Lodouico Duke of
Angiers, eldest son to the French king, And after to Baldasar Marquis of
Misna, and finally to Edmonde, Earl of Kent, son to the king of England.
And with the marriage of every of these daughters he paid all.100000. duckates.

Besides these he had.iiii. bastard daughters, Bernarda, Ricciarda, Lisaberta,
and Margherita. And five bastard sons, Ambrosio, Nestore, Lancilotto,
Galeotto, and Sagramoro.

On the other side Galeazo begatte on his wife Bianca, daughter of Amone Duke
of Sauoie, Galeazo.
a son named Giangaleazo, and a daughter named La Violante, which
afterward was married to Lionell Duke of Clarence, and son to the king of
England. At the sumptuouse feast of whose marriage Petrarcha happened to be
present. How be it, some have written, that she was married to the French
kings son, with the dower of an.100000. crowns. But how so ever it were,
her husband lived not passing five months after the marriage: and shortly
thereupon the father Galeazo also died.

After whose death his son Giangaleazo grown to Giangaleazo.
sufficient years divided the state with his uncle Bernabo on this manner. He
kept to him self Pauia, Tortona, Alexandria, Nouara, and the other towns
near unto the Alps, with the one half of Myllaine: and gave unto Bernabo
Parma, P^accuza, Cremona, Lodi, Crema, Bergam^, Como, and the other half of
Myllaine, with this advantage: that for as much as Bernabo was the more
aunciente, he should dwell in Myllaine, and Giangaleazo in Pauia. Thus being
agreed after a certain time Giangaleazo was advertised by his wife, how
Bernabo her father and his uncle, had diverse times sought his death, to rid
him out of the state: so that Giangaleazo incontinentely determined to preuente
him: and going unto Millaine under pretense of pastyme or of some other
business, Bernabo (to honor him the more) issued out against him: and so was
taken, died in prison, and part of his sons slain, part banished. Which
act only excepted (though it was not yet all against reason) this Giangaleazo
in all his doings was accounted so worthy, noble, and valiant a prince, that
of the people he was called II Conte di Virtu, that is to say, The E^le of
virtue. For he was not only beautiful of personage, but also learned,
eloquent, wise, hardy, and lyberall. And was the first that ever was invested
Duke of Millaine, paiyng therefore to the emperor Vinceslao an.10000. duckates.
After the obteinyng of this honor he increased his astate by the gettyng of
Verona, Vicenza, Padoa, and Bologna.

He discomfited the armies of the leage made between the Florentines and
Bologniese with other their confederates at Casalecchio, and brought the
Florentines at length to that taking, that had he not died the rather, they
must needs have yielded to benne his subjects.

He overcame Antonio della Scala, and builded the fair palayce in Pauia, with
that goodly library, that yet is seen there, walled the park about, being of
a great circuit, and edified the Charterhouse, that to this hour amongst the
beautiful buildings of the world, may be rekened one of the rarest.

He brought Italy into such fear, that the Pisani, the Senesi, the Perugini,
the Ascesiani, and the Lucchesi willyngly became his men: so that he found him
self lord over.29. citees, and thought to have been king of Italy, if death
had not so soon taken him.

He had two wifes, the one called Lisabetta, daughter to the king of Boeme, by
whom he had a daughter named La Valentina, married afterward to the Duke of
Orliens, with the dower of the Erledome of Aste, that has been cause of no
small trouble in Italy: and the other wife named Caterina de Visconti, by whom
he had two sons Giouanni, and Philippo Maria.

He had one bastard called Gabriello, who afterward sold Pisa to the
Florentines.

Finally this notable prince at Marignano died: 1402.
and according to his own order was from thense carried to the said
Charterhouse besides Pauia, and there buried.

Than succeeded in the astate Gia^ma^^a the eldest son, Giouann^ Maria.
whose dealings were so greuouse to the Milanese, without any their deseruyng,
that hearing mass on a day in the church, through the fury of the people and
of his own men together he was slain: first causyng his mother to die in
prison, for often warnyng him of that that happened in deed.

He was wont to say many times (in excusing of his errors) that in a great
house it was necessary there should grow men of diverse sorts, and that he
therefore used the contrary of his fathers doings, so that through his crueltee
and his death together, many citees rebelled, in such wi^e that the Milanese
were constreigned to call the sons of Bernabo to the Douchy, who enioied the
same until that Philippo maria recovered the dominion, 1433.
and driving them out met with one of them called Nestore in a skirmish, and
slew him.

Philippo Maria.
This Philippo was first lord of Pauia, and had married Beatrice the daughter,
or (as other say) sometime wife of Fazino Cane della Scala: for none intent
but because she was enheritour of many fair lordeshippes beyond the Po, and
had also very much money. By mean whereof sleayng Crabrino lord of Verona he
gatte that city to him self.

He was constreigned to yield Bologna, Furli, and Imola to the bishop of Rome.
Nevertheless he gatte Genoa, though afterward he lost it again.

He likewise took Bressa, which being recovered against him by the Uenetians,
caused between them very long and cruel war. Wherein on the Uenetian side
were capitaines Francesco Carmignuola, Giouanni Malauolta, Gianfrancesco
Gonzaga, and Nanni Strozzi, a Florentine knight. And on the side of Philippo
against the Uenetians were Francesco Sforza, Agnola da Pergoletto, the one and
other Nicolo Guerriero and Piccinino, and one Fierauante da Perugia: with the
help also of Alfonso king of Naples, who being before time brought prisoner
to Philippo by the Genowaies, and by him restored to libertee: like a faithful
friend (for a great while after) succored him in all his business.

Thus when Philippo had finyshed the enterprise against the Uenetians, and by
mean of those his capitaines gotten Piacenza, Como and Lodi, he made the
Marquis of Monferrato so afearde of him, that wyllyngly he yielded unto
Philippo's hands Vercelli, Alexandria, and Aste. And Nicolo da Este of
Ferrara, came to visit him, renderyng Parma, that before had been taken from
Ottone, and knowlageyng him self to hold the city of Reggio in fee of
Philippo.

The citeee of Florence fearyng the power of this man, entered in leage with the
Uenetians, whose two armies united togethers were foughten withal by certain
of Philippo's capitaines, in the County of Faenza, and there ouercomen.

Notwithstanding that the same victory was of much less importance, than that
which the noble Florentine Cosmo di Medici obteigned in the plain of Anghiari
against the army of Philippo, led by Nicolo Piccinino, toward the
Florentine damage: for the which victory Cosmo at his return to Florence was
called father of his country.

But for all that those wars had never end as long as Philippo lived: who
finally fell out with the forenamed Alfonse king of Naples, and by force
restored the Queen Giouanna to her possession.

He received into Myllaine Martine the.v. bishop of Rome, as he returned
from the counsel of Constance: and married his daughter Bianca unto Francesco
Sforza.

Finally findyng him self fallen in great aduersitee, what thoroughe
blindness that took him in his age, what through the loss of Genoa, and what
through the discoumfiture of his army at Casale Maggiore: In following the
victory whereof the Uenetians had already passed the river of Adda, and
scoured the country even to the gates of Myllaine: he at last a little before
his death, bequethed his astate by testamente unto the king Alfonso, as to
one the dearest friend he had.

Philippo Maria descriued.
This Philippo had been a prince of a subtle nature, witty, a lover of
travail, couetouse to learn and to have, and yet liberal in geuyng, easy of
pardonyng, but suspiciouse out of measure, and so light of credence, that many
times he wrongefully rid out of the way the dearest friends he had. Whereof
it followed, that in his most business he found him self utterly habandoned:
leauyng the state of Myllaine in manner naked. For the Duke of Orliens in the
right of his wife Valentina, daughter of Giangaleazo, enforced him self to
atteine the possession, which the emperor Federico for his part in titell of
the empire denied. But Francesco Sforza, as soonne in law of the dead
Philippo, withstode them both: insomuche that thorough this rumor the
Mylanese rent the testament in pieces, Testament ^^oken.
and took on them their libertee, electyng.xii. men to divise order for the
governance of their citees: whereunto they had the help of Carlo Gonzaga, who
being lately departed from the camp of Sforza, was present in Mylaine the same
time. And so the new officers being ordained, there were many of those nobles
slain, that were known favorable to the part of Francesco, whose power and
courage the Mylanese feared much more than the puissance of France, or of
the emperor.

The father of this Francesco, named Mutio, Francesco Sforza. Mutio father to
Fraunces Sforza.
was borne besides the castle of Cotignuola: and following the wars first
served the soldiers with cariyng of woodde and water. Than gettyng a little
with sackyng here and there, became so strong and hardy, that many times he
would by force take the booty from his own companions, and therefore was
called Sforza.

From which base condition he began to wax an aduenturer, and to feight on
horsbacke, so that finally he became a captain: and in short space was judged
equal unto Braccio Montone, the valiauntest and honourablest general of those
days.

But at last (after he had long time served the Queen Giouanna against king
Alfonse in the realm of Naples, and in other places dooen many notable
enterprises) couetyng to save a lakey in the river of Pescara, he was drowned
him self, and could never after be found nor heard of.

Than was this Francesco his son first waged of the forenamed Queen, and
after of the Uenetians, than of Philippo, and after Philippo of the Mylanese
against the Uenetians, and lastely of the Uenetians against the Mylanese. In
all which doings as well in the realm, as in Lumbardie, he evermore showed
great prouffes of his worthiness: and at last with help of the Uenetians came
against Myllaine and besieged it. Insomuche that after long resistance,
constreigned with hunger, and deceived of their promised help from the
Uenetians, the Mylanese (first sleayng the Uenetian ambassador) accepted
Francesco for their prince. Who not long after (stablishyng the things of
Mylaine at his pleasure) made war to king Alfonso, and to the Uenetians
both: in which wars he was served of these valiant capitaines, Tiberio
Brandolino, Nicolo Guerriero, Dolce dell' Anguillara, Carlo di Ca^po Basso, and
Iacopo Piccinino: which Iacopo was promised to have to wife his daughter
Drusiana, before time married unto Iano Fregoso Duke of Genoa. How be it, the
Duke Francesco afterward for suspicion caused this Iacopo to be slain.

Aboutes the same time, whylest Eugenio bishop of Rome was occupied at the
counsel of Basile, Francesco (as his enemy) attempted to take the state of
Marca from him. And there kept war long time with king Alfonso, whom the
said bishop had sent thither against him: where they say Francesco was defied
by Nicolo Piccinino, and being challenged to feight hand to hand, would in no
wise accept it. That notwithstanding he was undoubtedly a worthy man of arms,
the most happy and valiant of all other in his time. For in those.xvi. years,
that he reigned Duke, he in manner extinguisshed the sedicion of the parties of
Guel^i and Ghibellini: insomuche that the Genowaies fallen in discord amongst
them selfs, seeing the good governance of this Duke Francesco, with the
loving enterteinement of his subjects, willingly embraced him for their lord.
He loved much Cosmo di Medici of Florence, by whose help and counsel it is
thought he prospered not a little in the beginning of his astate: seeing that
Cosmo (as soon as he was made Duke) sent ambassadors unto him, reioysyng at
his prosperitee. For the friendship whereof Francesco afterward succored
Piero di Medici in the coniuracion made against him by Luca Pitti, whom Borso
Duke of Ferrara favored.

This Duke Francesco reedified the little Forte in the Castle of Myllaine,
called Gioue, and builded many devout places. Nevertheless in his age he was
somewhat blamed for his disordinate love to women, more than his astate, his
age, and his passed virtues did allow.

Finally finisshyng the course of this life, he left (by his wife Bianca).v.
sons Galeazo, Lodouico, surnamed Moro, Ascanio, Philippo, O^tauiano, and a
daughter named Hippolita Maria that afterward, was married to Alfonso Duke of
Calabria.

When Galeazo being in the wars in France with king Lewys, heard of his
fathers death, Galeazo*
he returned to Myllaine: where he was received as Duke. And all be it, he was
expert in arms, yet did he never show any honorable prouffe thereof: as he
that entered into an astate ouermuche wealthy and quiet. And because he had so
much felicitee, that he thought it impossible ever to decaie, he set so little
by men and by virtue, that many of his own citesins and servants hated him.
And they whom he favored most conspyred his death and slew him. The principal
whereof was o^e Gianandrea Lampugnano, that with his own hands first struck
him, in the church of saint Stephen, when Galeazo had his guard of
Halberders round about him. Which Halberders incontinently slew the same
Giauandrea (that fleeyng through the women happened to be tangled by the
spur) much after the manner as he was served, that slew Asdruball in Spain.

And albeit that this Galeazo through his delicate or wanton life, became
odiouse and unworthy to them that delited in chieualry: and also hated of them
that had the fairest wifes and daughters, with whom he would be familiar (as
the fame went) yet the commons lamented him a great deal more than many of his
predecessors: because that during his life they remaigned in peace. For in
peace when the soldier does beg, the plow prospers: and in war when
the plow man is fled, the soldier plaieth the swyne.

These things being thus happened, Giouanni, the son of Galeazo, Giouanni.
than but a child, succeeded in the astate, under the governance of his mother
Bona, and of one Cecco, that long time had been brought up in that house.

This Cecco was borne in Calabria of very low degree. But through his
wisdom he became noble and of so good credit with Francesco Sforza, that he
governed most things in Millaine.

Finally, when Galeazo was dead, to the entente that Giouanni might the more
quietly enjoy the dominion he sent away his other brethern into exile. But at
length Lodouico Moro, uncle to Giouanni was revoked by the people: and
ineontinently upon his return Cecco beheaded, and Bianca the mother exiled.

After which time Giouanni remained in the astate aboutes.xii. years. But his
proof was so simple, that in manner by force he committed the rule of all
things to Lodouico. By whose means (as he that was not yet contented) some
say Giouanni at length was poisoned, and died in Pauia, leauyng issue, a son
called Francesco Sforza begotten on his wife Isabella daughter of Alfonso king
of Naples.

Now incontinently as Giouanni was dead, Lodouico Moro.
this Lodouico Moro both of the people, and also by consent of the emperor
Maximilian was proclaimed Duke, and shortly after married his niece Bianca,
daughter of his brother Galeazo unto the same Maximilian, taking also upon him
the protection of his nephew the young Francesco Sforza, and of his mother
Isabella.

Than married he Beatrice the daughter of Ercole Duke of Ferrara, and begatte on
her Francesco Sforza, with a secounde son, in whose birth the mother died.

This Moro was a witty man, of very gooo disposicion, and one that delited
much in the administracion of justice, in peintyng, and in cunnyng men.

In the beginning of his astate he entered in amytee with the Florentines, the
Senese, the Bologniese, with Ercole da Este, with the Marquis of Mantua, with
Lewis king of France, and with Alfonso king of Naples. But like as he was easy
to enter into frendeship, so for a trifle would he sodeinly break with the
best of them.

He helped Charles Duke of Sauoy against Lodouico Marquis of Saluzzo, and
confined his brother the Cardinal Ascanio, because in Ferrara he had practiced
diverse new things against him.

He took Boccalino by siege, that had rebelled against the Romayne church, and
thereby gratyfied the bishop of Rome.

With his great policy he recovered Genoa, that before had rebelled against
him. He found the means to bring Charles the.viii. French king into Italy,
to expulse king Alfonso out of Naples: because he had before taken him for his
ennemie, for sekyng to mainteigne the astate of Giouanni the son of Galeazo,
against him.

This coming of the French king not only annoied Alfonso, but also troubled
all Italy.

Finally he made war against the Uenetians, which dured till that after the
death of king Charles, Lewys succeeded in the realm of France: who hated so
much this Duke Moro, that being entered in leage with the Uenetians: Moro was
constreigned to flee into Almaine, where he remained whilst the Frenchemen
took Millaine, and the Uenetians Cremona and Gieradadda. How be it not long
after the Frenchemen through their ill governance were driven from Millaine,
and Lodouico revoked home out of Douchelande, who after his arrival, taking
Neuara, and trauaylyng to chase the French men out of Italy, was betrayed of
the Douchemen, and both he and Ascanio taken and led into France, where
finally he died.

This Lodouico reignyng in his dominion, used to answer them that counseled
him to increase his treasure with taxes and tallages, that the office of a good
shepeherde was to shere his sheep, and not to flaie them.

Thus Lodouico Moro taken and dead, as is beforesaied, Francesco
his son Francesco shortly after the battaill of Rauenna, being than but
tender of years, was astablished Duke of Millaine by the emperors means, and
continued in the astate till the coming of Fraunces the French king into
Italy: who with the help of the Uenetians chaced him away, and gatte the state
of Millaine by force: leauyng Mounser de Lautrech governor of the same: so
that Francesco Sforza withdrew him to Trent, and there remained till the
French men through their tyranny and ill governance, became so hated of the
Milanese, that at length they were chased away, and Francesco revoked home:
though in effect he enjoyed it not long. For the French king shortly after
with a great power came in his own person into Italy, and so chaced Francesco
again out of the state of Millaine, and prospered much in his wars there,
until the journey of Pauia, where he with many of his nobles were taken
prisoners. After which discomfiture Francesco Sforza, by the emperors favor
was ones again restored to the Douchie of Millaine, and continued in the same
till through envy and malice of some pi^^ethankes, the emperor was unjustly
persuaded, that the said Francesco was not so faithful toward his maiestee,
as his goodness had merited: so that the emperor conceiuyng an unkindness
and a mistrust in him, constreigned him by force not only to habandone
Millaine: but also for his saufegarde to flee into the castle, which after a
very long siege he yielded unto the imperialles, to depart freely with bag
and baggage.

And so (being let of the imperialles from going to Como, where he intended
to sodgiourne, till he might clear his innocence toward the emperor) in
mane^ half desperate, he agreed with the French men: and drew to the camp of
the leage, that than was made against the emperor.

Finally he went unto Cremona, till after the taking of saint Polo, the
Frenchemens doings in Italy went all to wrack. Wherefore seeing the emperor
Charles the.v. that now is come to Bologna to be crowned, he went simply
thither unto him: and there submittyng him self with just excuses, recovered
his magistees favor, with restitucion of the astate of Myllaine, upon these
conditions following: That the Duke should marie the emperors niece, daughter
of the king of Denmark and of the emperors sister: that he should pay the
emperor nine hundredth thousand duckates in ten years by equal porcions:
And finally, that diyng without issue, he should leave his astate of
inheritance to the emperor.

Incontinently upon which agreement Alexandro Bentiuogli, as vice Duke, with
diverse other officers, were sent to Myllaine, to leauey the first paiemente of
this money: which was easily gathered up. For the Mylanese couetyng the
return of their Duke (whom for his gentill and temperate governance in times
past they hertilie loved) sticked not to streigne them selfs for his relief,
in such wise, that though their customs and taxes were doubled by reason of
these paiementes: yet their hope of better life to come under their Duke, made
them not to esteem their present charges.

Than came themperours niece, the daughter of Denmark, to Myllaine, and there
was most solemnly received with infinite triumphs: and finally married to the
Duke in presence of the Cardinal of Mantua, with such feasts and plays
afterward, as so great a marriage required.

But ere a year went about, the Duke (through great infyrmitee, blinded of one
eye) died without issue: leauyng the astate of Myllaine wholly to the emperor,
who ever sens has governed the same by his lieuetenauntes. The first whereof
was named Antonio di Leua, so lame a man of his limbs, that he used to be
carried on men's shoulders: but on the other side so prudent and ware a captain
in his doings, as in his days was not lightly to be found again.

Next unto whom followed the Marquis of Vasco, a very honorable and courtly
man, but not altogether man, but not altogether so happy in his procedinges as
such noble men couette to be.

Finally after his death the emperor has placed there the famous Don
Ferrando Gonzaga, uncle to the Duke of Mantua: whose prosperitee has not only
been great in feats of war, but also wonderful in purchasyng of fame,
through the sincere and rare administracion of justice, that he uses.

I call it not rare for other cause, than for the rare correction he has used
against the offenders: whereby he has won the hertes of them that love
justice.

As for the progress of the things happened in the state of Myllaine, sens
the death of Francesco Sforza (in whom it seems the house of Visconti to have
taken his end) I shall not need here to make any rehersall, because on the
one side the doings of the same have not been very great: and on the other
side they are present and fimiliare.

Of the astate of Mantua.
THe city of it self is very fair and strong, and stands richely, by
reason the countries about are plain, and no less plentiful than the other
parts of Lumbardie be. It is strong, because the river of Meltio (or Mentio
as some call it) falling out of the lake of Garda thoroughe the town of
Peschiera, passes to the Po by Mantua, and makes about it such a poole, that
three parts of the city are defended with the breadth of a quarter of a mile of
water every way: which in some places is deep, and in some shalow, that it
can not be passed with botes. And than in the necessary places such bulwarks
are made to defend, that it seems impossible to be won by assault on that
side.

And for the.iiii. part, which is toward the weast, it is very well
fortified with strong walls and bulwarks, and a large byche well watered:
besides that the ground on that side is in manner all marisshe, or at the least
so rank, that in the driest of the summer there can none artillery pass: so
that the city is undoubtedly one of the strongest that I have seen.

The dominion that the Duke has is not great, neither of circuit nor of
reuenew. For at the best (as I have been informed) the rentes never passed
an.100000. duckates a year, and many times it has been much less, by reason it
is not standing, but rises of customs and casualtees.

It is true, that the state is much increased by reason of Monferrato, that
the last Duke had by the marriage of his wife, so that now the Duke of Mantoa's
rentes by estimacion are reckened at.130000. duckates or theraboutes.

And as for notable buildinges in Mantua, other than such as be universal in
the goodly citees of Italy, I find none, saving certain propre lodgeynges
that the Duke Federico deceased, has made on the southe part of his palaice:
which undoubtedly are galaunt and rich. Wherefore procedyng now to the
original of the citesins and city, with the success thereof hitherwardes.

The Original of Mantua.
BY agreement of most aucthours I find, that the people of Mantua are
descended of those ancient Tuscanes, that before the siege of Troie departed
out of Lydia in Asia, and under the leadyng of their prince Tirreno, came and
enhabited the region of Italy. Part of which Tuscanes, chosyng afterward
the place of Mantua for their habitacion, builded the city, before the coming
of Eneas into Italy, and before the edificacion of Rome, more than.300. years.
The captain of which people at that time was named Ogno, a very expert man
in Astronomy, or in the science of diuinacion. For his virtue in which
science, following the Greek word Mantia, he named the city Mantua. How be
it, Dante (speaking thereof) refers the beginning of Mantua to Manto,
daughter of Tiresia, king of Thebes: whom the poets feign, lost his sight
for iudgeyng between Jupiter and Juno, that the woman in the use of nature had
more pleasure than the man: taken for judge in this mattier, because (through
the killyng of certain serpents) he before time had been changed from a man
to a woman, and had used in both kinds. So that Jupiter in recompense of his
sight (that Juno had taken from him) gave him the science of diuinacion, and he
having a daughter afterward, according to that science named her Manto: who
coming into Italy was aucthour both of the beginning and also of the name of
Mantua. But how so ever it were, I find, that ones it was destroyed by Attila
king of the Goti, and after by Agilulfo king of the Lumbardes, thyrdely by
Cacciano king of Bauiera, and lastly by the Hungariens. 1063.
And than being reedified Nicolas the secounde bishop of Rome held a general
counsel there, in the which these holy Pilates (I would say Prelates) decreed,
that from thense forth the bishops of Rome should be elected by the college of
Cardinals, to the intent the emperors should have no more to do withal.
At the time o^ which counsel Matilda daughter of the Conte Bonifacio, was
lady of Mantua.

This Conte Bonifacio was lord of the citees of Luca, Parma, Reggio, Mantua,
and Ferrara: called altogethers at that time Il Patrimonio: and was so great a
man, that he obteigned unto wife Beatrice, sister of Henry the secounde
emperor of Almaine. Which Beatrice after her husbands death governed the
whole dominion 15. years, and was finally buried in Pisa: leuyng her daughter
Matilda before named with an husband named Godfrey in the astate.

Matilda.
Matilda after the death of her husband Godfrey married again, and at length
found mean to be divorced: insomuche that diyng without issue she left her
whole astate unto the church of Rome, and was buried in the abbey of. S.
Benette di Bondeno besides Mantua.

After whose death the city of Mantua was governed by Roman vicares and
legates, until aboutes the year of grace.1220. one Sordello found the means
to be principal governor thereof: Sordello.
the mightiest man of body and strength that was in those days: insomuche that
being provoked many times to feighte, he always remained vanquisher. Through
the notable fame whereof the French king sent for him, and being arrived in
his presence, merrily said unto him: he believed not that he should be
Sordello: wherewith Sordello being offended, incontinently turned his back
without speaking any word: and being called again, was demanded by the
French king, what he meaned so sodeinly to turn his back, he answered: I
would have returned to Mantua to bring witness, that I am Sordello.

He married one of the daughters of Ezelino da Romano, who first being enamoured
on him, used secretly to depart from her fathers house, and go to Mantua unto
him. Whereof Ezelino at length having knowlage, tempted by mean of his
daughter, that Sordello should have betrayed the Mantuanes into his hands:
but Sordello would never consent thereunto: insomuche that at last Ezelino came
him self and besieged Mantua, hopyng to get it by force. But all in vain,
for after he had lien before it certain days, he finally was constreigned to
raise his siege, and not long after died. So that the Mantuanes provoked
through that example, immediately endeavored them selfs to fortify their city
with diches and water, to the end that in time to come their vittailes might
not easily be cut from them. And in short space after fell in contencion
with the Cremonese for the possession of the river of Oglio. In which time the
notablest families of Mantua were the Poledroni (that had chaced away the
Crabrosi) and next them were the Arlo^^i, the Caccialodi, the Grassolani, and
the Agnelli, but at length the Buona Colsi became most puissaunte of all the
rest: the head of which house was named Pinamonte, who being conspired
against by all the other forenamed families, found the mean to overcome all
their forces. And being elected with an other named Ottonello, unto the
chiefest office of judgment upon life and death for term of.vi. months, he
found the mean also to slay his colleage, and to usurp the dominion over the
city by force.

Pinamonte.
Nevertheless afterward he behaved him self so well, that through his
gentile and just dealings, he gatte the citesins favor, and continued in the
astate.18. years. After whom succeeded Bardelaio, ill beloved of all men: and
next him Botticello indifferently well beloved on the other side. But last of
all Passerino enioied the dominion, Passerino.
whose son named Francesco, caused the destruction of his father, of him
self, and of their other kynne and friends by this mean.

Amongst his many friends Philippino, son of Luigi Gonzaga was one. Of whom
this Francesco began to conceive a ialousy touching his wife: and so much
increased this suspicion, that being on a day (as ^he manner is) greeted by
Philippino, he churlishly answered, that he would be even with him, by forsyng
his wife again openly in the markette place. The arrogance of which answer
so much enflambed the innocent heart of Philippino, that incontinently he began
to imagine how to be avenged: not on Francesco alone, but also on the father
Passerino considering that the one could not be well done without the other.
And so, declaryng the terrible words of Francesco, lamented the case unto his
brother Guido Gonzaga, and to diverse other of his friends and kynne: who all
togethers with the help of Cane lord of Scala, determined to dispatche
Passerino. And at the day appoyncted assemdled in arms in the markette place,
and there slew Passerino, as he fled toward his own house to have saved
him self. So that when Passerino was slain, the house of Gonzaga took on it
the dominion, banished diverse of the contrary part, beheaded Francesco, and
therewith ceased from further crueltee against their enemies: by commandment
of the forenamed Luigi Gonzaga, that first of that name was lord of Mantua.

This family of Gonzaga had his beginning of one Luigi Tedesco an Almaine of
royal bloudde, Gonzaga.
who (in the time that all Italy was in arms, and so many armies about
Robicone) had taken place for him and all his family at Mantua. Luigi. Gonzaga.
Of whom afterward descended this Luigi Gonzaga before named, that aboutes
the year of grace.1328. began his dominion over Mantua, and governed the same
afterward the space of 53. years. He had three wifes, and by every wife three
sons. By the first he had Guido, Philippino, and Feltrino. By the second
Currado, Alberto, and Federico. And by the third, Azo, Iacopo, and Giouanni.
Insomuche that there happened in Mantua three notable marriages of that house in
one time, Luigi him self to his last wife of the house of Malespini: Currado
his son to the sister of Mastino della Scala, and Vgolino his sons son borne of
Guido, unto a little girl of Becacci da Pauia. At which marriages there
assembled a wonderful nu^bre of people: insomuche that Luigi him self gave
away amongst nobles and gentilmen.120. goodly horses.

After the success of these things whylest Philippino was following the
wars, in service of the king of Hungary against the king of Naples, there
happened a mischaunce unto the house of Gonzaga.

Isabell wife of Lucchino Visconti, lord of Myllaine, a very fair woman,
feigned to her husband, that she had made a vow to go in pylgrimage unto
Uenice: and under that color, obteignyng license, she took Mantua in her way,
where she lodged in the house of Gonzaghi, ancient friends unto her husband.
And after she had supped, secretly sent for Vgolino, unto whom she declared,
that for the fervent love she bare to him, she had taken on her that journey:
praiyng him therefore to keep her company unto Uenice.

This thing came to the ears of Lucchino, who provoked thereby, laid siege to
Mantua. Nevertheless findyng the friends of Vgolino innocent of the fault,
and that Guido the father did his best to correct him, Lucchino, through
intercession leueied the siege: And shortly after Luigi Gonzaga, of the age
of.93. died, having led an happy life, to see so many forewarde persons to
the.iii. and fourth degree of his own generation.

After whom Guido his eldest son entered into the astate, and whilst the
empire was vacant, Guido.
by the help of his brother Philippino, gatte Lamporeggio, and contended long
time in arms with Obizone Marquis of Ferrara: who at length was ouercomen by
Philippino: and with great loss constreigned to withdraw him home unto Ferrara.

This Guido had.iii. soonnes, Vgolino, Francesco, and Luigi. And because the
two younger perceived, that the father fououred more the eldest, they taking
counsel together, determined to rid him out of the way: and so biddyng him
to supper on an euenyng, slew him.

This unnatural part of the sons was supported of the dolorouse father as
well as nature would suffer it. But because the correction thereof should have
drawn more bloudde of his own, he therefore sought to abate his passion with
the new marriage of his son Francesco unto the daughter of Guido Polenta,
lord of Rauenna. Nevertheless Bernabo Visconti, uncle to the wife of Vgolino,
to avenge Vgolino's death (after he had first fette away his niece) laid
siege to Mantua: by reason whereof Guido was constreigned to sue for help to
the emperor Charles, that than warred in Italy: who before time going
toward his coronacion, and passing through Mantua, had been there most
honorably received, by Luigi father of Guido: so that by the emperors means
the mattier was remedied: and within short space after died Guido and his
son Francesco both.

And than came the astate clearly to Luigi, Luigi.
who builded the palaice, wherein all his successors to this day have dwelled.
He begatte on his wife Alda, a son named Francesco, whom he married very
young unto Agnesa, daughter of Bernabo Visconti, and at last being known
openly to have committed auoutrie, the people arose and cruelly slew him.

After whose death the astate descended to his son Francesco, Francesco
than being of the age of.xiiii. years. But grown afterward to more time, he
so much loved peace, that he refused to enter in confederacion with
Giangaleazo Duke of Myllaine. And upon displeasure therefore following between
them, Francesco caused the adder (that for the great amitee and aliaunce
between those two houses had in time past been ioygned to the arms of Mantua)
to be clean taken out thereof. For which despite Giangaleazo besieged Mantua,
and lay before the same an whole year: in which mean time there perisshed
many notable men on both sides: and specially of the house of Gonzaga.4. that
is to wete, Guido, Torello, Bartolino, and Galeazo. Which Galeazo Gonzaga
amongst all other was reputed the strongest and hardiest man of his days,
having fought oftentimes body to body, and remained evermore vainquisher:
namely against Buccialdo a notable strong man than governor for the French
king in Genoa. These businesses at length being pacified, and Francesco
somewhat awakened in arms, he enterprised war in the name of Giangaleazo
against the Bologniese, and against Giouanni Bentiuogli: in the thick whereof
he took Iacopo Carraro of Padoa prisoner, and led him to Mantua, geuyng him
such curteyse libertee there, that yeldyng unkindness for kyndnesse Iacopo
escaped away: whereof followed much a do afterward. For as soon as the Duke
of Myllaine was dead, the Uenetians (considering the provoked displeasure
before rehearsed) elected the said Francesco to be their general in
thenterprise against the Carrari, and were so well served of him, that after he
had chased the Carrari out of Padoa and Verona, he reduced both those citees
to the Uenetian obedience: And so after a gloriouse life died. 1407.


Leauyng after him his son Gianfrancesco in the dominion, of the age of.14.
years, Gianfrancesco.
who by his wife Paola, daughter of Malatesta, lord of Rimini, had.4. sons,
Luigi, Carlo, Lucido, and Alexandro. To the first whereof he obtained for wife
Barbera daughter of the Marquis of Brandenburgh, and kynneswoman unto the
emperor Edmonde, who at his coming into Italy, and passing through Mantua,
was there honorably received by Gianfrancesco, insomuche that before his
departure he made him Marquis, and gave him in his arms the ensign of the
empire.

After the atteignyng of which honors he was three several times made
general of the Uenetians, and in every enterprise gatte the upper hand. And at
last forsakyng them, he was waged against them by Philippo Duke of Myllaine:
and in that service in company of Niccolo Piccinino was part of the occasion,
that the Uenetians than lost the city of Verona: with many other towns of the
Bressane and Uicentine: and so he died: 144^.
leauyng his dominion divided in.iiii. parts unto his four sons. To Luigi
(as eldest) the city of Mantua, with those other towns that he had about
Verona: to Carlo (who was an excedyng strong man) Luce^a, with the rest of
those lands that he held on the Cremonese territory. To Lucido (ill shapen
and weak of person) Capriana, La Volta, and Ciregiaia: and finally to
Alexandro (who was crokebacked, and becomen religiouse) Canneto, with that
land that he had on the Bressane.

Luigi.
Thus Luigi the eldest took the astate upon him, and continued not long in the
same vnuexed of his brother Carlo, whose mightiness and force of body was
coupled with such an haultenesse of mind, that for desire of atteignyng his
elder brothers astate, he could not be contented to live in peace.

And albeit that in the wars between Francesco Sforza, and the Milanese he
fled from one part to an other and back again: yet by his brothers means he
recovered the favor of Sforza, at whose hands he received diverse benefits.
But Luigi, seeing now the ill disposicion of his unquiet mind, finally took
from him all the lands that his father left him: so that Carlo fled to the
Uenetians, and became their captain, so long till at length through their
help he assembled a power of men, went against his brother, and fought with
him to the ieopardy of the loss of the Mantuan astate. But in conclusion the
right of Luigi prevailed against the force of Carlo, who being discomfited and
fled, died afterward very poorly in exile.

This enterprise being thus ouercomen, and the things of the astate quieted,
Luigi triumphantly received the emperor Federico the third, as he passed
through Mantua to Rome, and being than a wydower by the death of his first
wife, married Margarite daughter of the Duke of Bauiera, and cosen to the
forenamed emperor.

He was so great of body that he was commonly called the Turk, so well
exercysed in arms, and so beloved specially of the Dukes of Millaine, that
Duke Philippo called him son, Francesco called him brother, and Galeazo
called him father.

He was noble of courage, fine of wit, and somewhat learned, which things
together with his liberal and courteise life, made him beloved of all men.

Finally through some disorder in living, as he that loved to live in pleasure,
he died somewhat before the full course of his natural term. Leauyng by his
first wife Barbara.v. sons, Federico, Francesco made Cardinal, Luigi,
Gianfrancesco, and Rodolfo, all notable and virtuous persons.

Federico as eldest, succeeded in the astate, Federico.
and was afterward general to the Duke of Millaine, and married La Margerita
Tedesca, on whom he begatte a son named Francesco: and in the Uenetian wars
against the Duke of Ferrara, having gotten Asola, which afterward he was
constreigned by force to restore, sickened for sorrow and died.

By reason whereof his son Francesco, of the age of 18. years, entered into the
astate, Francesco.
and at the age of.38. was made general of the Uenetians, in whose service he
did wonders: specially against Charles the eighte French king, nere unto the
river of Taro besides Parma, as the same king retournyng from the conquest of
the realm of Naples, laden with great richesse, was going into France. In
which enterprise Francesco so behaved him self, that he led many noble men
prisoners with him at his return, insomuche that the French king made very
great offers to have had his service, but all in vain. For continuyng his
ennemie he afterward fought with the French men in Puglia, and so
discomfited them, that he restored the king Ferrandino unto his astate. And
leauyng three sons by his wife Beatrice, daughter of Ercole, Duke of Ferrara,
that is to wete, Federico that next succeeded him, Ercole made Cardinal, and
Don Ferrando that now is the emperors general at Millaine, finally he died.

Federico. ^520.
After whose death, Federico took the astate upon him, and was made general of
the Roman church by bishop Lion the.x. confirmed by Adrian the.vi. and
continued also under Clement the.vii. And as the emperor (that now is)
returned from his coronacion at Bologna, passing through Mantua (where he was
most honorably received) his maiestee, for the virtue, worthiness, and
nobilitee known in this Federico, called him from the degree of Marquis, and
created him Duke.

He married Margerite daughter and heir of the lord Guglielmo Paleologo,
Marquis of Monferrato, in whose right by favor of the emperors maiestee, he
obteigned her fathers astate, that is to say, the dominion of Monferrato. And
so notably fortifiyng the city of Mantua, 1539*
he died, leauyng.iiii. sons, Francesco Guglielmo, Lodouico, and Federico.

Francesco
Francesco after his fathers death entered into the dominion, but because he was
than of very tender years, and passes not yet the age of.14. his father by
testament committed the governance of him unto his wife, with the help and
counsel of his brother Ercole the Cardinal, until the young Duke shall be
grown to sufficient years: who by the parents consent, and by the emperors
procurement, has been contracted unto one of king Ferdinando's daughters, and
shall marie her very shortly, as the saying is.

Of the astate of Ferrara.
FErrara is one of the notablest citees of Lumbardie, as well for the beauty
and greatness, as also for the strong site and fortificacion.

First for beauty, if that part, that is called La terra nuoua, had been
thoroughly finished: as it was devised, it should have been worthy for fair
streets, to have been preferred before any other city that I have seen. And
now as it is, I think it no less worthy. For you shall find above a dousen
streets so just and euenly set^e forth, that I warrant you there is not so
much as the corner of a house to let a man of his full sight from the tone
end to the the other. Some of which streets lack little of a mile long, with
the goodly houses and buildings on both sides so fair and uniform, that it
seems all dooen at one time and by one agreement, as no doubt the most part
has been in deed. And than in the midst it has a very fair green,
appoincted out for the markette place. But the Duke that now is, has had no
mind to follow it, although his father Alfonso bestowed the most travail of
all his days about it, to his wonderful charge: as he that shall see it may
well consider. So that the most habitacion of people rests still in the old
part of the city, which is also indifferent fair: but nothing comparable to
the new. Than as touching the greatness, I think the circuit by the walls
be little less than.v. miles. And finally for strength it has the goodliest
and strongest wall, and the largest diche, well watered, that I have seen:
specially for three parts to the land ward. And as for the fourth part,
though the wall be not so strong, yet is it reputed of no less force on that
side, than on the other: by reason that within.20. yardes of the wall, the
great river of Po, has his course down toward the sea: which renneth so
swifte, and is so broad and deep, that it is not to be passed of any enemy
to give assault to the town.

The Duke has under his dominion two other citees, that is to wete, Modona,
and Reggio, with a good part of the low countries of Romagna, and may
dispende yearly by estimacion between.200. and.250000. duckates: and is
esteemed very rich, because he has had no war, nor other charge of
importance, for the space of.xiii. years or more, that he has governed the
astate.

The Original and success of the city.
Like as of other places be diverse opinions: even so is there of the beginning,
and name of Ferrara. Some woull, that the name thereof has grown of a certain
quantitee of iron, that the same city yielded for a tribute unto the lord of
Rauenna: as Argenta, and Aureolo have also dooen of the paiement of silver and
gold. Some other woull, that it be so called of the mines of iron that have
been found there: which opinion is most sensible, considering that Ferrara
(after the use of the latin tongue) signifies none other but the place where
iron is dug forth, as Caesare in his commentaries, the.viii. book of the
French wars, and as Liuie in the fourth of the Macedonicall wars do
affirm.

But to pass over these antiquitees, and come nerer to our purpose, I find,
700.
that the said city of Ferrara was first closed with walls by one Smeraldo,
captain for the Greekish emperor in Rauenna: and long time after (being a
certain space under the obedience of Henry the secounde emperor of Almaine)
it was recovered by the counteise Matilda, daughter of the Conte Bonefacio,
1020*
as her right enheritaunce, through help of the Uenetians, and of the lords
of Rauenna, out of the hands of Henry the third than emperor: which
Countess at her death, with other her possessions, left it unto the use of
the Roman church: insomuche that long time it was governed of vicares and
of legates, until the house of Este gatte the rule thereof. Who first
obteigned is under condition, that they should for ever hold it in fee of the
church of Rome.

And to resite the beginning of that house, some think the same is descended
of those aunciente Troianes, that came with Anthenor into Italy: and some other
woull, that their s^ocke should be of a certain town called Este, now under
the Uenetian dominion, liyng.xv. miles from Padoa, on the southeside of the
Padoan hills. From which town (they say) this family of Este came to dwell
in Ferrara. But how so ever it be, the first notable man of that house, that
ruled Ferrara, was named Azo, Azo 1. Aldobrandino.
who at his death left issue two sons, Aldobrandino, and Azo: the first
entered in possession, and living but a short space, left the astate unto Azo
the second his younger brother. Azo.2.


This Azo was driven out of it by Federike the emperor, and one Salinguerra
put there in his place: insomuche that Azo for succor resorted unto a certain
Ferrarese named Gregorio Montelungo, being at that time Romysh legate in the
city of Bologna: by whose means, with help of the Uenetians, of the
Mantuanes, and of Ezelino, than lord of Verona, brother in law unto this Azo:
Salinguerra was by force expulsed, and Azo restored unto his astate: upon
condition that he should hold it for ever as vicare of the church, and none
otherwise.

Now this Azo the second having by his first wife a soonne, named Fresco,
married again the secounde daughter of the king of Naples, Crueltee.
named Beatrice: which marriage so much offended his son Fresco (as he that
was desirouse to reign) that prisonyng his father put him unto death, and
after with help of the Uenetians took on him the astate.

But his own citesins, abhorryng so great a crueltee, Fresco.
procured so much the Romysh legate Palagurra to the vengeance of Fresco,
that both Fresco and the Uenetians were excommunicated, and war moved
against them: the general whereof was named Diego Catelano a Spaniarde.

Now Fresco waxyng more cruel through these businesses than before, Crueltee.
put to death all those of his subjects, that were contrary to him, and after
burned the one half of the city, purposyng to destroy the whole. But the
fury of the people was so moved thereby, that taking weapon in hard, they
sought him, and as he would have fled out at the Lion gate, slew him. And
Rinaldo his brother (to whom of right the astate ought to have descended) was
also dead in prison.

So than Obizone, son of Rinaldo, took on him the astate: Obizone.
and was the first that began to enlarge his dominion through the gettyng of
Modena and Reggio.

And after Obizone succeeded Azo his son, Azo.3.
the.iii. of that name, who delited much in arms: many times attemptyng to
conquer Parma and Bologna: and at length (...) without issue.

Leauyng his astate unto his nephews Rinaldo and Niccolo, sons of his
brother Aldobrandino. Rinaldo.


This Rinaldo desirouse to increase his dominion, with the help of Passerino
Buona Colsi, than lord of Mantua, obtained Argenta, and after ioignyng his
power with an army of the lords of Scala, laid siege to the town of San
felice on the Modenese. Which town the king Manfredi, together with.30. other
towns, had left in custody of Charles son to the king of Boeme: so that
the same Charles, with Manfredi, and with Beltrame the bishop of Romes general
(vnityng their camps together) assaulted Rinaldo, and discomfited him, taking
part of his men, amongst whom Nicolo brother unto Rinaldo rested prisoner:
insomuche that the Romish legate, waxyng immoderately proud of this victory
addressed his power toward Ferrara, and besieged it. But at last Rinaldo
issued out and discomfited him, taking prisoners Galeotto da Rimini, Francesco
de gl' Ordelaffi, Ricciardo Manfredi di Faenza, and Astagio da Polenta, whom he
delivered in exchange for his brother Nicolo, and after let the rest go
freely upon their oaths, that they should no more be against him.

Finally this Rinaldo was so much persuaded by his own citesins, that he
restored Argenta to the bishop of Rome, whereby he recovered the bishops
blessyng, and so at length died without issue.

Obizone.2
Leauyng his astate unto his nephewe Obizone the secounde of that name, son
unto his brother Nicolo.

This Obizone (through favor of the legate) was the first that was made
general of the church, and had therefore.10000. duckates of yearly provision
assygned unto him. And shortly after was Parma also given into his hands by
Azo da Correggio, not withstandyng that it appertaigned unto Mastino della
Scala, and that the same Azo also had before offered to sell it unto the
Florentines for.50000. duckates.

Not long after there grew a controversy between Obizone and Philippino di
Gonzaga for the city of Reggio: whereof there followed so sharp war between
them, that Obizone, mistrustyng his own power, yielded the city of Parma into
the hands of Lucchino Visconti, and finally leauyng issue two sons, Nicolo
and Alberto, died.

After whom Nicolo the eldest succeeded, Nicolo.
being always fast friend to the Roman bishops, in whose favor many
times he fought with Bernabo Visconti, and had the better, specially in that
notable journey that happened between them on the Bressane territory nere to
the hill Morlano.

He purchased also of Giouanni Aguto, an English captain, the city of Faenza
for.20000. duckates, and bought also the town of Baguacauallo, though he kept
it not long: for Astorgio Manfredi gatte it from him by treason.

Finally he did much for his citesins, and greatly augmented Ferrara.

He was eloquente, merciful and learned, constante both of nature and of
countenance, and so liberal, that he never repulsed person that sought
benefit at his hands. At last diyng without issue, he left his astate unto
his brother Alberto, who also at his death, Alberto*
having no laufull child, left it unto Nicolo his bastard son, than being
but a child.

Now was there one Azo of the house of Este, Nicolo.
that seeing Nicolo yet tender of years, under the govern of tutours, and
unapt to rule, did as much as he could to prevail him self. But with the
help of the Uenetians, of the Florentines, and of the Bologniese, Nicolo was
not only maintained in the astate, but Azo for his presumpcion confined also
into Candia. And afterward being grown unto age, this Nicolo became so
mortal ennemie unto Ottone, lord of Parma, that feignyng at length to mete
with him for a treaty of peace, caused him secretly to beslayne by the way,
by mean of Sforza Cotignola, and so recovered the citees of Reggio and Parma,
that Ottone before had occupied.

After the which, being all given unto the commoditee of Ferrara, he builded
the great palaice or castle in the heart of the city, wherein the Dukes ever
sens have dwelled: and besides that the palaices of Ficcarolo, and of
Bellosguardo, and took unto wife the daughter of Francesco Vecchio da Carrara.
By reason whereof he became enemy to the Uenetians, and provoked against him
self a daungerouse war.

But finally in feats of arms he became excellent, and in the gouernyng of
his astate very prudent, and of such reputacion, that he caused the general
counsel of that time to be kept in Ferrara. At the which the emperor of
Greece happened to be present: and not long after he died, leauyng two bastard
sons, Lionello and Borso, and two laufull sons by his secounde wife, of the
bloudde of the Marqueses of Saluzo, named Ercole, and Gismondo.

Lionello.
Of whom, Lionello being the eldest succeeded in the astate, by what reason I can
not tell, but that the father would so.

This Lionello was a very wise man, and in his time made of new the wall of
Ferrara on the side of the Po, and amended the houses and streets on that part
of the city. And because his son Nicolo, whom he had begotten gotten on the
daughter of Gianfrancesco Gonzaga, was a very child at the time of his death,
on his death ^edde he committed his astate to his brother Borso, besechyng him,
that when his son Nicolo should be grown unto sufficient age, he would
vouchesafe to restore it unto him.

Thus entered Borso into the dominion, and incontinently revoked his brethern
Ercole and Gismondo, Borso.
whom Lionello had before confined into the realm of Naples, and to the intent
there should grow none envy between them, he always nourished them together a
like.

He fortified Ferrara with strong walls, and builded the Chatterhouse of the
same: and was of so good a nature, that he would offer no man wrong, but
rather forgettyng those that were done unto him, he was wont to say: That
sooner and with more ease should a man overcome his enemy by benefits and
courtesy than by sword^ or vengeance.

He delited much in cunnyng men, and kept diverse about him, as well of learned
as of others. And finally was so worthy a man, that the emperor Federico
passing through his dominion, of his own mocion created him Duke.

After the death of Borso, Nicolo the son of Lionello, Nicolo.
according to the covenant made between Borso and his father, succeeded in the
astate.

He ruled not long, but the right heir Ercole, Ercole.
before named, with help of the Uenetians, by force expulsed him, in suchewyse
that for succor he ^ledde to his uncle to Mantua, where after the term of
three years, assemblyng about an.800. banished men, he attempted to recover
Ferrara: and watchyng his time whilst Ercole was forth of the city, by night
skaled the walls* and came to the market place, criyng Vela, Vela (which was
his enseigne) but there was none of his friends so hardy, as to arise to
succor him: so that Gismondo, brother to Ercole (seeing the weakness of
Niccolo's succors) gathered together such power as that hasty rumor
allowed, and not only discoumfited Niccolo's company: but also took him,
with.xx. of his men prisoners, and brought him unto Lionora the wife of Ercole
daughter to Ferrando king of Naples: who sent for the Duke unto Bellosguardo.
And so within.iii. days after (the Duke being returned unto Ferrara) Nicolo
lost his head, and was nevertheless honorably buried amongst his
ancestors.

Not long after the Florentines (at that time troubled by the bishop of Rome,
and the king of Naples) elected this Duke Ercole for their general, who
accordyngly served them very honorably.

Finally falling out with the Uenetians for the breach of certain articles
between them, what with war, and with hunger he was so oppressed, that had he
not obtained the bishop of Romes favor, he might easily have lost his astate.
After which enterprises, being general of the Uenetians, and of the Mylanese
both, and utterly suppressing his adversaries the Earls of saint Bonifacio,
at last he disposed him self altogethers to religiouse works: and amongst
all other with his own hands he daiely distributed to.13. poor men for
gods sake, two pounds of flesh, a measure of wine, three loves of bread,
and a little piece of money, unto every one of them, and than died.

Leauyng his astate unto his son Alfonso, Alfonso,
who proved so worthy a man, that notwithstanding he had married Lucretia,
daughter of Alexandro bishop of Rome, yet when the same bishop by force
offe^ed to take from him the country of Romagna: he resisted so valiantly,
that the bishop was feign to forgo his enterprise.

The like whereof he did unto bishop Leon the.x. that purposed to have taken
Ferrara from him.

And thus having by Lucretia his first wife three sons, Ercole, Hippolito
now Cardinal, and Don Francesco: and by Laura his secounde wife two sons,
Alfonso and Alfonsino, he died.

After whose death Ercole as eldest son, Ercole*
entered into the astate, and at this day enjoys the same.

And albeit, that hitherto there has happened no notable occasion to try his
worthiness, yet can he not chose, but prove well. For he is a goodly man of
personage, high of stature, strong and well proporcionate in all his members,
balde on the crown of the head, and amiable enough of countenance. He has a
good wit, and is somewhat learned, and indifferent in the administracion of
justice. And one thing special I remember of him, worthy to be recited.
The Emperor at his being in Italy borrowed money of all hands. And demaundyng
amongst the rest.100000. crowns in love, of this Duke, he brought him a bag
of.50000. crowns: excusing him self, that to lend.100000. crowns he was not
hable, but to give his maiestee those.50000. he could be contended with all his
heart: and by this shifte kept the other.50000. crowns in his purse.

Finally of religion he is no more earnest than most princes are, and in his
life he follows the court of love, to lose no time of pleasure.

He is friendly to fair women, and cherishes change. By his fathers days he
married madame Renea daughter unto Lewys the.xii. french king, a very
graciouse lady. By whom he has two sons, Alfonso and Luigi. Hitherto he
has maintained his dominion in peace, and is therefore thought (as I have
said) to be very rich, He is well furnisshed of artillery and municion: and
of devotion is altogether French. So that if there should happen any business
in Italy between the emperor and french king, his part is like to be therein.

The astate of Placentia and Parma.
PLacentia and Parma ar two notable citees of Lumbardie, liyng between the
Appepine hills and the river of Po: whose territory and pastures are so fat
and sweet, that it is thought no place of all Europe hable to compare with it
for the excellent cheeses it makes, which by the name of Parmesanes are right
well known over all.

These two citees of late apperteined unto the church of Rome. But Paul the
third, now bishop of the same* a Roman of nation, of the house of Farnesi,
to increase his own family, found the mean to separate these two citees
with their territories from the churches dominion: and to give it unto his own
son named Peter Aluigi, creatyng him Duke thereof. And in recompense annexed
unto the church the Duchy of Camerino, that he before had taken by force from
the Duke of Urbine.

This Pietro Aluigi, being the year of our lord 1546. entered into the
astate, began to bear him self ouerstoutely against the nobility of the
same, and specially toward the Signor Ieronimo Pallauicini di Corte Maggiore,
who rather disdeigning then enuiyng this man's dominion, was feign at last to
flee, and to habandone wife and children, gooddes and lands. Insomuche that
this new Duke took all unto him self, and furnished the castle of Corte
maggiore (being a veraie strong hold) with his own men, took all the rentes
(being.12000. duckates a year) to his own purse: except a small portion
assigned to the lady wife of Ieronimo, for her living: with condition
nevertheless, that if she reliued her husband with any part thereof, she
should lose the whole. Besides this, he oppressed his subjects, causyng them
to bie harneis, and to furnishe them selfs for the war on their own cost.
But most of all he occupied a great noumbre of laborers in his works,
beginning the foundation of a strong castle, in the place where the Abbey of
S. Bennettes in Placentia stood. The monks whereof he appoincted unto a spittle
house, called saint Lazares in Champaine. And these laborers were taken up by
force from all parts of the Parmesane and Placentine: of which there perished
at one time, with the fall of an holow bank above 50. persons: so that what
with one thing, and what with an other (being also a man known full of
abhominacion in all kind of vices, and specially in the unnatural) in
conclusion he became hated of all men: insomuche that the Conte Giouanni
Aguzzolo, and the Conte Augustino di Pallauicini, with certain of their kynne
and friends, conspired against him, and at their time appoincted, findyng him
with a small guard in his own house in Plancense, slew him, hangyng afterward
the dead body out at a window for a spectacle unto the people.

Finally these gentilmen (foreseeyng the danger that for this doing might
follow unto them, in case the state should continue of the church) practiced
before with Don Ferrando Gonzaga, to see whether he would back them, by
receiuyng the strong city of Placense unto the emperors behoufe: so that
being at a poinct with him, the mattier was so handled, that the next night
after the Dukes death, there were secretly received into the town.800. of the
emperors men, and so the city won without stroke strickyng.

All the money, plate, iewelles and stuff that could be found of the Dukes,
to the value of.30000. crowns and vpwardes, were divided amongst the
confederates, and the Conte Giouanni Aguzzolo, who killed the Duke his own
hands, allowed by the emperor.20. men for his guard.

Finally the bishop of Rome (being hereof advertised) incontinently caused
Parma to be fortified, and furnished with men of war, and tempted by
corrupcion of money to have had one of the gates of Placense delivered him by
night: but his practice was discovered, and certain Spaniardes therefore taken
and hanged. And ever sens for more than this half year, the emperors power
upon the Placentine, and the bishops on the Parmesane have kept diligent
watch and ward, loking every hour for open war. What it woull prove to, he
best knows that governs all.

Of the astate of Urbine.
THe city of Urbine stands almost on the top of the Appe^yne hills, in
manner between the mark of Ancona and Tuscane, the people whereof (as Pliny
writes) have been surnamed Metaurensi, and it seems to have taken name of
Vrbes Binae, two towns. For who that well considers the proporcion of it,
shall judge by the miter facion thereof, that it has been two towns ioigned
together, and the middell, which is a holow descent between two hills, is the
sklenderest part of the city.

The Dukes palaice is a very fair house, but not so excellent as the Conte
Baldasar in his Courtisane does commend it.

The Dukes dominion is two citees, Vrbine and Pesaro: his reuenew passes
not.60000. crowns by the year. But his ancestors for the most part served
other astates, as the Duke that now is also does: whereby they kept much
greatter ports than their own habilitee would bear.

Amongst other this Dukes father builded an house within a mile of Pesaro,
called Imperiale, which in mine opinion is one of the best devised little
things that may lightly be found. It stands on the side of an hill, and
has prospect both to the city and to all the valey, it has many fine little
chambers, goodly open vaultes, and excellent fair fountains. But that which
most of all pleased mine eye, was that being of a great height, you may out of
the highest gardeine ^yde about on the top of the house, which is very fair
paued with brick, and railed on both sides with fine pillars and railes of
white marble.

As for the edificacion of Urbine, or other notable memory before the
year.1345, I find nothing mete to be written. At which time (by reason of the
variaunce between bishop Clement of Rome, and the emperor Lewis of Bauarie,
who to make their parties strong, made diverse new lords in Italy) Galasso di
Montefeltro was made vicare for the emperor in the citees of Urbine and
Eugenio, Galasso di Montefeltro.1345.
against the bishop of Rome and his adherentes: in which his succession
continued enheritours unto the year.1444. that Federike, after made Duke, Conte
Guido.1428.
obteigned the astate. The occasion whereof was, that Guido Conte di Vrbino,
having no heir male by his first wife, feigned, that he had gotten a
Concubine with child, and so secretly took the son of his nere kinnesman
Bernardino della Corda, which even than was newly borne, and namyng it
Federike, caused it to be nourished as his own.

Not long after his wife died, and mariyng again, engendered a son named
Oddo, Oddo.1440.
who in deed succeeded the father in his astate. But he was so viciouse of
living, and so busy with gentilmens wifes, that in a sodein rumor of the
people, he was slain, and a Protonotary, called Carpesiano with him.

Whereupon this Federike the putatiue son, Federico* 1444.
by the whole voice of the people was elected their prince: who in his youth
had been very well brought up, specially in feats of arms, in the exercise
whereof he lost one of his eyes.

This Federike was not only valiaunte, but also very well learned, and so
happy a man, that in his time he was general of.viii. several armies, and
died captain of the Uenetians army in the field before Ferrara.

The bishop of Rome for his worthiness made him Duke, the king of England not
only gave him money, but also made him of the Garter. For which curtesy all
English men have a certain privilege of freedom in his dominion, and the
French king made him also of his order. Besides that, there was none astate in
Italy, but that at one time or other presented him with some worthy gift.

And above all the rest his fidelitee seems to me most worthy of
commendacion. For when Francesco Sforza, was forsaken of all his other
friends, and pursued with 20000. men, he only received him, and thereby put
him self and his whole astate in ieopardy, which he determined rather to lose,
than to seem an unfaithful friend, and in effect mainteigned Sforza till
time served him to recover.

Guido. Ubaldo.14^2.
After the death of Federike, his son Guido Vbaldo, of the age of.xii. years
succeeded, who reigned quietly about.xxi. years, till the coming of Valentino
Borgia, son of Alexandre the.vi. bishop of Rome: that first by such craft
gatte the astate into his hands, that Guido Vbaldo was feign to flee disguised
in plowmans clothyng. Nevertheless through the good will of his subjects he
recovered his astate in short time again. But Ualentines force was such,
that at length this Duke took such treasure as he had, and fled to the
Marquis of Mantua, whose sister he had married: and there diyng without issue,
ended the house of Montefeltro, that had reigned in Urbine the space of.157.
years.

Ualentino Borgia.1503.
Valentino Borgia held it but a very small space, for shortly after his
fathers death, Iulie the second bishop of Rome persecuted him, and brought the
house of Borgia to naughtes: and thereupon gave the astate of Urbine to his
nephiew Francesco Maria Prefettino della Rouere: Francesco Maria.1504.
whom he created Duke there.

This Francesco Maria was a very wise and valiant prince, nothing inferior to
Federike beforenamed: who reigned not fully.x. years, but Leo the x. that
succeeded Iulie the.ii. made a puissaunt army, and expulsed him out of his
astate, 1514.
and rased the walls of the city even to the earth. Whereupon he established
his nephiew Iuliano di Medici Duke in his place, Iulianio di Medici Laurence di
Medici.
and after his death (for he lived but a while) his brother Laurence di Medici:
who continued in the same, till Adrian the.vi. that succeeded Leo, 1522.
expulsed him, and restored the astate unto Francesco Maria, that enjoyed it
till he died, the space of.xvi. years in so great reputacion, that all princes
and astates of Italy loved and honored him: and the greatest of them were glad
to enterteine him for their general in the wars. Wherein he gatte infinite
sums of money. But he was so great a builder and so liberal unto his
soldiers, that when he died, he left no kind of money in his coffers.

By his life time he builded the palaice besides Pesaro, called Imperiale, and
fortified the city of Pesaro, and the castle there, with diverse other goodly
buildings: and gatte Katherine daughter and heir to the Duke of Camerine to
be married unto his son Guido Vbaldo, that now lives. In whose right he
enjoyed that astate during the fathers life.

As Soon as Francesco Maria was dead, Guido Ubaldo.2. 1538.
Paul the iii. now bishop of Rome, seeing this Duke that now lives a young
man, without money or great friends, made so great a power against him, that
for fear to lose the whole, he was content for a little money and some other
small recompenses, to yield to the bishop the astate of Camerine: which the
bishop hitherto enjoys. And yet for all this, the same bishop has found
the means to marie his niece to the same Duke: 1547*
whereat many men marvel not a little.

Finally this Duke Guido Vbaldo is general over all the Uenetians lands,
towns, and fortresses, and has of them.10000. crowns annuitee. But hitherto
he has had none occasion of trial in the wars. He is mean of strature,
hard of favor, and very grave in countinaunce. And though he be well learned,
his wisdom has had no great trial as yet, but men trust he woll prove as
virtuous as his predecessors.

The conclusion.
THere be diverse other astates in Italy, specially the common wealths of Siena
and Lucca, the byshoprike of Trent called Tridentum in latin, Piombino,
Mirandula, Castle Geffroie, and such like, but because they are not of such
reputacion either for dominion, power, or continuance of years, that they
should be numbered amongst the principal, I have forborne to speak
particulerly of them: though some in deed deserve notable praise: besechyng
all gentill readers to accept my travail and deligence, used in this behalf,
as a thing done for their commoditees. And though I want learning and
eloquence to accomplish so high an enterprise, as to descriue pithily the
astates of countries and commom wealths, yet sens I spared no pain, nor
labor to do profit, I would at the least wise for my reward crave good
report.

JMPRINTED AT LONDON IN FLETESTRETE IN THE HOUSE OF THOmas Berthelet. Cum
priuilegio as imprimendum solum. ANNO. M. D. XLIX.

The table of this present book by letter.
AEbrigement of the astate of Italy, from the beginning until the Romain
empire was utterly divided. fol^o. 8. Abbrigement of the lives of the Roman
bishops fo. 41. Abbrigement of the Uenecian histories from the edificacion of
the city to this day. 85. Academie in Florence. 139. Adoaldus. 18. Adrianus.
12. Agilulphus. 18. Agostino Barbarico. 110. Agrippa. 9. Alaricus king of
Goths. 15. Alba Siluius. 8. Alboinus 18. Alberto. 210. Aldeprandus. 20.
Aldobrandino. 208. Alfonse king of Naples. 66. Alfons adopted heir to queen
Johan. 131. Alfonse the second. 134. Alfonso. 212. Alexander Seuerus. 12.
Amalasuntha. 17. Amulius. 9. Ancus Martius. 10. Andrea Dandolo. 102. Andrea
Contarini. 104. Andrea Uendramino. 109. Andrea ^ritti. 111. Andrea ^oria.
185.186.187. Angelo Particiaco. 90. Annates. 63. Antonio Ueniero. 105. Antonio
Grimani. 111. Antonio di Leua. 200. Antonius Pius. 12* Antonius Caracalla. 12.
Antharis Flauius. 18. Arches of Triumph. 29. Archadius. 14. Arrigo Dandolo.
96. Arno the river. 137. Artificers of Italy. 5. Arioldus. 18. Aristolphus.
20. Arithpertus. 19.20. Ascanius. 8. Asprandus. 20. Astate of Mantua. 200.
Astate of Ferrara. 207. Astate of Placentia and Parma. 212. Athalphus. 16.
Athis or Egyptus Siluius. 9 Attila. 10. and 190. Auentinus. 9. Augustus. 50.
Auogadori. 91. Aurelianus. 13. Azone. 191. Azo the first and secounde. 208.
Azo the.iii. 209.
B.
BAgelardo. 117. Bartholomeo Gradenico. 101. Beginning and success of the
astate of Myllaine. 189. Belles. 91. Berengarius. 48. Bernabo. 191. Bishops
palaice, with Beluedere. 4^. Bishop of Rome besieged. 118. Biorgus. 16.
Boccatius. 127. Borso. 211. Bou^iquart. 177. Bridges in Rome. 23. Br^dges in
Florence. 137. Buildings in Rome. 41. Buildings of Uenice. 74. Buildyng of
Genoa. 163.
C.
Caesar. fol. 50. Cains Caligula. 11. Caesar Fregoso. 188. Capi Siluins. 9.
Cardinal hattes. 56. Cardinals sacked and baked. 62. Cardinal Sauli. 185.
Carlo duca de Angio. 125. Carlo. ii. 126. Carlo. iii. 129. Carpentus. 9. Carus.
13. Castle Cant^ Angelo. 41. Castle ^ouo. 113. Caroccio. 122. Castle of
Millaine. 189. Cercles. 31. Charles Martell. 45. Charles son taken prisoner
126. Charles the.v. emperor. 136. Chilperike deposed. 45. Christoforo Moro.
108. Circuit of Italy. 1. City of Florence. 137. City of Naples gotten by
the Normaines. 120. City of Urbine. 214. Citta della. 159. Claudius. 11.13.
Colosses and images. 34. Comodus. 12. Commoditees of Italy. 1. Common
provision and charitable deeds in Uenice. 82. Common people. 149. Conrade.
124. Constantius. 14. Constantinus. eodem. Consules. 10. Conduites of water in
Rome 27. Counsel of Uenice. 78. Corradino.124. beheaded. 125 Cortogo^^. 184.
Cosino di Medici. 152. Covetousness. 134. Crueltee. 96.98.124.125.12^.208.209.
Customs in their living in Uenice. 8^. Cyprus won. 109.
D.
DApho. fol. 18. Decius. 13. De^dato. 89. Descripcio^ of Italy. 1. Descripcion
of Rome. 22. Descripcion of Naples. 11^. Descripcion of Florence. 137
Descripcion of Millaine. 187 Desyderius. 18.20. Didius Julius. 12. Dignitees
and offices in Uenice. 77. Dioclesianus. 11. Diuidyng of the empire. 15.
Division. 141. Discord. 131. Dominion of Uenice 7^. Domenico ^^one. 89.
Domenico Menicaccio. eo. Domenico Orseolo. 9^. Domenico Flabenico. eodem.
Domenico Contarini. eod. Domenico Silu^o. eod. Domenico Michele. 94. Domenico
Morosini. 45. Dominion and governance of Genoa. 161. Domitianus. 11. Don
Ferrando Gonzaga. 188.200.213. Donacion of Constantine. 14.43. Douchemens haull
in Uenice 111. Drogone. 116. Duke of Florence dominion and reuenew. 139. Duke
Cosmo. 159.
E.
EDificacion of Rome. 9. Edificacion and success of the city of Florence 140.
Edifices in Florence. 137. Election of the emperor, when and by whom it was
ordained. 21. Electours of the empire. 50. Empire divided. 15.46. Empire
changed. 48. End of the Roman kings 10. End of the Lumbardes reign. 20.
End of the house of Normans in Sicilie. 121. End of the house of ^ue^ia in
the dominion of Naples. 125. End of the house of Durazza 132. End of the house
of Arragon in Naples. 135. Emanuel emperor. 96. Ea^as 8. Eneas Siluius. eod.
Ercole. 211.212. Ezelino di Romano. 98.
F.
Facion of Italy. fol. 1. Faunus. 8. Federico. 206.215. Federike.122. king of
Sicilie. 127.135. Feedyng in Italy. 2. Ferdinando. 133. Ferdinando king of
Spain 136. Ferrandino. 135. Fertilitee of Naples. 11^. Fire breaking out of
the earth 113. Florence destroyed and reedified. 140. Florentines customs.
1^8. Florentines common wealth constituted. 141. Francesco Maria. 215.
Francesco. 204.206. Francesco Donato. 112. Francis Petrarcha. 60.127. Francis
Dandolo. 101. Francis Foscaro. 106. Francis Sforza. 181.196.198. Fresco. 209.
GAlba Sergius. 11. Galeasso di Montefeltro. 214. Galeazzo. 181.191.193.197.
Galerius. 14. Galienus. 13. Garmaldus. 19. Gasparo di Uicomercato. 181. Gates
of Rome. 24. Gensericus. 16. Gensualdus. 19. Gentilmen of Italy. 3.
Gianfrancesco. 205. Giangaleazo. 193. Giouanni. 89.91. Giouanni Dandolo. 99.
Giouanna prima. 127. Giouanna. ii. 130. Giouanni Torrigiani. 90. Giouanni.
192.197. Giouanni Maria. 194. Giustiniano. 90. Giudice di Ginarcha. 169.
Godfrey. 117. Gonzaga. 203. Gordianus. 13. Goths. 15. Graners and Arsenales.
36. Gratianus. 14. Grimoaldus. 19. Guelfes and Ghibelines faction. 141.
Guglielmo Ferrabach. 116. Guglielmo. 119.120.121.123. Guido. 204. Guido Conte
di Urbino. 214. Guido Ubaldo. 215.216. Gundebalde. 16. Gundibertus. 19.
HEad of Tyber. 23. Helius Pertinax. 12. Henrico imperatore. 121. Hills in
Rome. 25. Hill Testacchio. 35. Hippodromus. 36. History of Naples. 114.
Honorius. 14. Hospitalles in Uenice. 82. Hospitalles in Florence. 138. Hot
baines. 113. Hugo Conte d' Arli. 48. Hunes. fol. 15. Hunfredo. 117. Husbandmen
of Italy. fol. 5.
I.
IAcopo Contarini. 99. James Tiopolo. 97. Iano king of Cyprus 177. Iano
Fregoso. 184. Ianus. 8. Images put out of churches. 44.46. Ingratitude of
people. 175. John Acton. 62. John Soranzo. 100. John Gradenico. 103. John
Delfino. eodem. John Mocenigo. 109. John Sharp. 149.210. Iouinianus. 14.
Italian customs and nature folio. 3. Jubilee. 58.60. Julius Caesar first
emperor. 10. Iuliano di Medici. 215. Julius Phillippus. 13. Iulianus Apostata.
14. Iunipertus. 20.
K.
Kinds of marble. fo. 37 Kings of Naples entitled kings of Jerusalem. 122.
King Alfonse taken prisoner. 132.
L.
Laws of Uenice. 81.88. Ladislaus. 130. Laurence di Medici. 155 215. Latinus.
8. Latinus Siluius. 8. Laimpertus. 20. Lewis the.12. king of France 135.
Leather coined for money. 110. Leonardo Loredano. 110. Libertee of strangers
in Uenice. 85. Liberalitee. 107. Lionello. 210. Lodouico Moro. 198. Lorenzo
Tiepolo. 99. Lorenzo Ce^so. 103. Lucchino. 192. Lucius Tarquinius. 10. Luigi
Gonzaga. 103. Luigi. 204.205. Luitprandus. 20. Lumbardes. fol. 15.
M.
MAnfredo. 56.124* Macrinus. 12* Marcello. 88* Marino Morosini. 97. Marino
Giorgio. 100. Marino Falerio. 102. Marco Cornario. 103. Marco Barbarico. 110.
Marie. 129. Marcus Aurelius Antonius. 12. Martino Torrigiani. 190. Matilda.
52.201. Mattea Magno. 191. Mauritio. 89. Maximus. 12. Maximianus. 16.
Merchandise of Italy. fol. 2. Merchantes of Italy. 4* Michele Morosini. 105.
Michele Steno. 106. Millayne situate. 188. Millaynes name. 189. Morea. 108.
Morbus Gallicus. 135. Murder. 129. Mutio, father to Frauncis Sforza. 196.
N.
NApoleone. 190. Narses. 17. Naumachiae. fol. 29. Nero. 11. Nerua. 11. Nicene
counsel. 43. Nicolo Trono. 108. Nicolo Marcello. 109. Nicolo. 210.211.
Nobilitee suppressed. 149. Numitor. 9. Numa Pompilius. 10.
OBeliskes. folio. 33. Obelerio. 90. Obierto Flisco. 182. Obizone. 209.
Octauianus Augustus. 10. Oddo. 215. Odoacrus. 16. Ordelaffo Falero. 94. Orso.
88.91. Orso Baduaro. 92. Orso Orseolo. 93. Orio Malipiero. 96. Original of
Mantua. 201. Original and success of the city of Ferrara. 208. Otho the
first. 115. Otho the.ii. eodem. Otho Lucius. 11. Ottone Orseolo. 93. Ottone.
190. Ottone Uisconti. eodem.
P.
PAolo Lucio. 87. Passerino. 202. Pasquale Malipiero. 108. Patriarch
Uitellesco. 132. Partharus. 20. Peter king of Aragon. 126. Peter Fregoso. 180.
Philippo Torrig. 190. Philippo Maria.194. descriued. 195. Pietro Gradenico.
91.99. Pietro Candiano. 92. Pietro Tribuno. eodem. Pietro Baduaro. 92. Pietro
Orseolo. eodem. 93. Pietro Barbolano. 93. Pietro ^olano. 95. Pietro Ziani. 97.
Pietro Mocenigo. 109. Pietro Lando. 112. Pietro Aluigi. 213. Picus. 8.
Pinamonte. 202. Plague of pestilence. 60. Pleasures of Italy. folio. 2.
Plinies death. 113. Policy. 65.164. Porches in Rome. 31. Poor people. 82.
Poison that works not till a time. 185. Practice of a prelate. 153. Present
astate of Rome. 37. Priests marriage. 52. Prince Edward of England 126.
Prisoners in Uenice. 83. Probus. 13. Proca. 9. Proctours and treasure of
Uenice. 80. Pyllers in Rome. 32. Pyramides. 34.
Q.
Queen Iohans housband strangled. 127. Queen Johan hanged. 129.
R.
RAchis or Lachis. 20. Rafael Adorno. 180. Raimpertus. 20. Rainoldes coming to
Naples. 132. Raufe Duke of Burgoyne. 48. Rebellion in Sicile. 125. Realm of
Naples. 6. Renulus. 9. Resort of strangers into Italy. 2. Reuenew of Uenice.
76. Richard king of England. 165. Rinaldo. 209. Rineri Zeno. 98. River of
Tyber. 22. Robert. 127. Roberto Guiscardo created Duke. 117. Rodoaldus. 19.
Roger.119. entitled king of Sicile. 120. Rome destroyed.iiii. times. 17. Rome
gotten. 130. Romoaldus. 19. Romulus. 9. Romulus, first king of Romans. 9.
Rotharius. 18.
S.
Saint Peter's church. 40. Saying of Fuluius. eod. Sarasines coming into
Italy first. 11^. Saturnus. 8. Sebastian Ziani. 95. Sepulchrum Bac^hi. 36.
Seruius Tullius. 10. Seuerus. 12. Sicile conquered by the Normaines. 118.
Siluius Posthumous. 8. Site of Italy. fol 1. Site of Uenice. 73. Sordello. 2^2.
Sophia. 17. Supremitee of the church. 44. Shiftyng and poysonyng of Roman
bishops. 50. Slaughter of Frenchmen. 125 States of Italy. 6. State of Genoa.
160.
T.
TAcitus. 13. Tancredi the Normain 116. Tancredi. 123. Tarquinus Priscus. 10.
Teia. 17. Temperature of Italy. fol. 1. Temperature of Naples. 113. Temple in
Rome. 31. Testament broken. 195. Theaters. 30. Thermes in Rome. 28.
Theodolinda. 18. Theodoricus. 16. Theodorius. 14.16. Thomas Beckette. 55.
Thomas Mocenico. 106. Title of the kingdom of Jerusalem. 126. Title of the
second line of the house of Angio. 128. Titus. 11. Tullus ^ostelius. 10. Turk
conquered in Italy. 1^4. Trade and customs of Genoa. 161. Tra^anus. 11.
Treasure found under the ground. 118. Tribuno Memmo. 9^. Tyberinus. 9.
Tyberius. 11. Tyranny. 190.
U.
VIlla. 43. Ualentino Borgia. 215 Ualentinianus. 14. Ualens. 14. Ualerianus.
13. Uandales. fol. 15. Uarius Heliogabalus. 12. Uenetian astate. 73.
Uespasianus. 11. Uiage into the holy land. 53. Uitale Candiano. 93. Uitale
Falero. 94. Uitale Michaele. eodem. 95. Uirius Gallus. 13. Uisconti. 190.
Uitellius. 11. Walls of Rome. 23. Wars of Uenice. 81. Wild beasts in
Florence. 138 Wives of Florence. 139. Wives of Myllaine. 188. Women of Italy.
fol. 6. Wounder. 163.
Thus ends the table of this present book set out by letter.

