A True and strange discourse of the travails of two English Pilgrims: what
admirable accidents befell them in their journey to Jerusalem, Gaza, Grand
Cayro, Alexandria, and other places:

Also what rare Antiquities, Monuments and notable memories (concording with
the ancient remembrances in the holy Scriptures) they saw in Terra Sancta,
with a perfect description of the old and new Jerusalem, and situation of the
Countries about them.

A discourse of no less admiration, then well worth the regarding: written by
one of them, on the behalf of himself, and his fellow Pilgrim.

Imprinted at London, for Thomas Archer, and are to be sold at his Shop by
the Royal Exchange. 1603.

A true and strange discourse of the late travails of two English Pilgrims:
what admirable accidents befell them in their journey to Jerusalem, Grand
Cayro, Alexandria. etc.
ALthough it pass as a general proverb, that trauailers may tell leasings by
authority: yet I being no way daunted by that bugbeare-thunderbolt, but
confide^tly standing on the justice of my cause, my kind commendations to all
you my dear friends first remembered, thus from Jerusalem I begin to salute
you. You shall understand, that since my departure from the Grand Cayro toward
the Holy land, I wrote you a letter from Ramoth Gilead, wherein I certified you
of all my proceedings from Grand Cayro, even to that very place. I sent it with
seven other Letters beside to Damasco in a Carauan, and thence to be conveyed
to Constantinople: but doubting least the said packet be not as yet come to
your hands, I thought it good to write again unto you, concerning all the
aforesaid proceedings, as also the rest of my voyage to Jerusalem, with my
imprisonment and troubles in the city, as also what memorable antiquities I
saw there and elsewhere, until my return back to Alexandria, which was the
11. of April 1601. First then let me tell you, that I departed not from the
Grand Cayro till the 9. of March: upon which day I came to the place, where (it
is said) the Uirgine Mary did stay with our Savior Christ. So far was I
accompanied with Antonie Thorpe, and some others that came up to the Grand
Cayro with me: but here they left me, departing back to the city, and I with
my fellow trauailer Master John Burrell, both of us being in our Pilgrims
habit, came y^ night to a town called Canko, where we were glad to take up our
lodging in a yard, having no other bedding then the bare ground. The next day
we departed thence, and came to a town in the Land of Gozan, where we met with
a company of Turks, Jews, and Christians, and some seven hundred and fifty
Camelles, all which were bound for Damasco over the deserts: yet was there
amongst them two and twenty Greeks and Armenians, whose purposed travail lay
to Jerusalem, which made us the gladder of their company. At this town, being
named Philbits, we stayed two days and one night: in which time I went into a
house, where I saw (in my judgment) a very strange secret of hatching
Chickins, by artificial heat or warmthe: the like I had seen before at the
Grand Cayro, but not in such extraordinary numbers or multitudes as here, the
manner whereof (for your better satisfaction) was as follows.

The country people inhabiting about this town, by four or five miles
distance every way, do bring their Eggs in apt cartage for the purpose, upon
Asses or Camelles to this place, where there is an Oven or Furnace purposely
kept temperatly warm, and the Furner or Master thereof (or howsoever it shall
please you to term him) stands ready at a little door, receiving the Eggs
of every one, by tale: except when the number arises so high, as to ten
Camelles lading or more, then he fills a measure by tale, and after that
order measures all y^ rest. And let me tell you this for a truth, that I saw
there received by the Furner, Cook, or Baker, in one day, what by tale and
what by measure, to the number of thirty five or forty thousand Eggs: and
they told me, that, for three days space together, he does nothing but
receive in still, and at twelve days they come again to fetch Chickins,
sometimes at ten days, and sometimes (but not very often) at seven days,
according as the weather falls out. Perhaps some two hundred persons are
owners of one Raungefull, some having two thousand, some one, or more or less,
as the quantities amount too: but the Furner noateth the names and portions of
every bringer, and if he hap to have an hundred and fifty thousand, or two
hundred thousand at one heat (as many times it chances that he has) yet
does he mingle them altogether, as not respecting to whom they severally
belong. Then does he lay them one by one upon his Raunge, so near as they can
lie and touch each other, having first made a bed for them of Camelles dunge
burnt: and the place, whereon the ashes does rest, is of a very thin matter
made of earth, but mixed with the Camels dung in the making, and some Pigeons
dung is also amongst it: yet herein consists not the secreat only, for there
is made a concaue or hollow place about three foot breadth under it, whereon
is likewise spread an other layer of Camels dung, and under that is the place
where the fire is made. Yet can I not rightly call it fire, because it
appears too be nothing but embers: for I could discern it but as qualified
ashes, yielding a temperate heat to the next concaue, and the heat being
resisted by the layer of dung next it, (which dung being green, and laid upon
pieces of withered trees, or rather boughs of old dead trees) delivers
forth an extraordinary vapor, and that vapor enters the hollow concaue
next under the Eggs, where in time it pearceth the before named mixed earth,
which touches the ashes whereon the Eggs are laid, and so serves as a
necessary receptacle for all the heat coming from underneath. This
artificial heat gliding through the embers whereon the Eggs lie, does by
degrees warm through the shelles, and so infuseth life by the same proportions
of heat: thus in seven, eight, nine, ten, or sometimes twelve days, life
continues by this artificial means. Now when the Furner perceives life to
appear, and that the shelles begin to break, then he begins to gather
them: but of an hundred thousand, he hardly gathers threescore thousand,
sometime but fifty thousand, and sometime (when the day is ouercast) not
twenty thousand: and if there chance any lightning, thunder or rain, then of
a thousand he gathers not one, for they do then all miscarie and die. And this
is to be remembered withal, that be the weather never so fair, the air
perfect clear, and every thing as themselves can desire, let the Chickens be
hatched in the best manner that may be: yet have they either a clawe too much
or too little: for sometimes they have five claws, sometimes six, some but
two before, and one behind, and seldom very few or any in their right shape.
Afterward, when the people come to receive, that before had brought in, the
Furner gives to every one ratably, according as the Furnace yielded, reserving
to himself the tenth for his labor. Thus have you the secret of hatching
Chickens by heat artificial, at the town of Philbits in the land of Gozan,
which I think were in vain to be practiced in England, because the air there
is hardly ten days together clarified: neither is there any Camels dunge,
though they have dunge of other beasts every way as hot: therefore when the
Sun is in Cancer, Leo, or Virgo, you may (if you please) try what can be
done. Pexhaps some will think this to be a lie or fable, but to such I
answer, I can urge their credenceno further then my faith and truth may
persuade them: and if thereon they will not believe me, let them take pains to
make their own eyes a witness, and when they have paid as dearly as I have
done, (for the sight of this and other things cost me an hundred Marks in
fifty days) their judgment will be better confirmed.

But now to my journey toward the desert of Arabia, which I must pass before I
can come to the Holy land. The 13. of March we departed from the town of
Philbits, travailing all night in company with the Carauan of Damasco, and the
14. at nine of the clock, we pitched our tents at Boharo in the land of Gozan.
From thence we departed that night, and the 15. at night we pitched at Salhia,
which is to the Eastward of the land of Gozan, and stands on the borders of the
Arabian deserts. Here we stayed two days for fear of the wild Arabes, and
departed thence the 17. we passed that night over a great bridge, under which
the salt water stands. This water comes out of the Sea from the parts of
Damieta, and by men's hands was cut out of that place, some hundred and fifty
miles into the maine land, by Ptolomeus king of Egypt, who purposed to bring
the Red Sea, and the Mediterranean all into one: but when he foresaw, that if
he had gone through with this work, all his country had bin quite drowned, he
gave it over, and builded a bridge over for passage. This place parts Arabia
and Egypt, and no sooner had we past this bridge, but we were set upon by the
wild Arabes: and notwithstanding our great company (for we were more then a
thousand persons) a Camel laden with Calicoes was taken from us, four of our
men hurt, and one of them mortally wounded: so away ran the Arabes with the
preye, we being unable to help it, because it was night.

The 18. in the morning, we pitched by a well of brackish water: but I forgot
to tell you, that my fellow Pilgrim M. John Burrell escaped very narrowly in
the last nights bickering. Here we rested our selves till three of the clock
in the afternoon, called Lasara; for the Arabians and Egyptians divide the day
but into four parts: then we departed, and pitched the next morning at a
Castle in the deserts called Catga. This is one of the three castles which the
Turks kept in the deserts, to defend altrauailers from the wild Arabes:
wherefore here we pay a certain tare, vz. 60. pieces of silver of two pence a
piece value, for each man or boy, and 76. pieces for a Camel laden, and 14.
for a Mule. Having paid this imposition, we departed, and pitched again the
19. at another brackish well, from whence setting onward, we pitched the 20. of
March at the second Castle called Arris, kept also by the Turks in the said
deserts, where our tax was but 20. pieces of silver for each passenger, and
30. for a Camel. From thence we were guided by many Soldiors to the third
Castle called Raphaell, making one long journey of 24. hours together. Here
it is said that the Kings of Egypt and Judea fought many great battles: which
to me seemed very unlikely, because there is nothing to relieve an army
withal, except sand and salt water. There we paid but ten pieces each
passenger, and 20. for a beast: so departing thence, the 22. in ye morning, we
pitched at Gaza in Palestine, a goodly fruitful country, and here we were
quitted of all the deserts. In this town I saw the place, where (as they told
us) Sampson pulled down the two Pillars, and slew the Philistines: and surely
it appears to be the same town, by reason of the situation of the country:
here we paid 22. pieces for each beast, and 10. each passenger.

Hence we departed the 22. of March, and pitched at a place called in Arabian,
Canuie, but by the Christians termed Bersheba, being upon the borders of Judea:
where we paid but 2. pieces of silver each one, and 4. for a beast. Departing
hence, the 23. in the morning, we pitched our Tents upon a Green, close under
the walls of Ramoth in Gilead: there I stayed all that day, and wrote eight
Letters for England by the forenamed Carauan, which went for Damasco, to be
conveyed to Constantinople, and so for England.

The next day being the 24. in the morning, I with the other Christians set
toward Jerusalem, and the great Carauan went their way for Damasco: but we
pitched short that night at a place called in Arabian Cudeche laneb, being 16.
miles from Hebron, where the Sepulcher of our forefather Abraham is, and five
little miles from Jerusalem. From thence we departed in the morning, being our
Lady day in Lent, and at 9. of the clock before noone, I saw the city of
Jerusalem: when kneeling down, and saying the Lords prayer, I gave God most
hearty thanks for conducting me thither, to behold so holy a place with mine
eyes, whereof I had read so often before. Coming within a furlong of the gates,
I with my companion M. John Burrell, went singing and praising God, till we
came to the west gate of the City, and there we stayed, because it is not
lawful for a Christian to enter vnadmitted. My companion advised me to say I
was a Greek, only to avoid going to Mass: but I not having the Greek
tongue, refused so to do, telling him even at the gates entrance, that I
would neither deny my Country nor Religion: whereupon being demanded who we
were, M. Burrell (answering in the Greek tongue) told them that he was a
Greek, and I an Englishman. This gave him admittance to the Greek Patriarch,
but I was seized on and cast in prison, before I had stayed a full hour at the
gate: for the Turks flatly denied, that they had ever heard either of my
Queen or Country, or that she paid them any tribute. The Peter Guardian, who
is there defender of all Christian Pilgrims (and the principal procurer of
mine imprisonment, because I did not offer my self under his protection, but
confidently stood to be rather protected under the Turk the^ the Pope) made
the Turk so much mine enemy, that I was reputed to be a spy, and so (by no
means) could I get release from the dungeon.

Now give me favor to tell you, how it pleased hope (that very day) to deliver
me, and grant my pass as a Protestant, without yielding to any other
ceremony, then carriage of a wax candle only, far beyond mine own best hope
or expectation. Here let me remember you, how I was stayed at Ramoth in Gilead,
where I wrote the eight Letters for England by the Carauan of Damasco: having
so good leisure, I went to a Fountain to wash my foul linen, and being
earnest about my business, there suddenly came a Moore unto me, who taking my
clothes out of my hands, and calling me by my name, said he would help me. You
doubt not but this was some amazement to me, to hear such a man call me by my
name, and in place so far distant from my friends, country and acquaintance,
which he perceiving, boldly thus spoke in the Frank tongue. Why Captain, I
hope you have not forgotten me, for it is not yet forty days, since you set
me a land at Alexandria, with the rest of those passengers you brought from
Argier, in your ship called the Troyan: and here is another in this Carauan,
whom you likewise brought in company with you, and would not be a little glad
to see you. I demanded of him if he dwelt there: he answered me no, but both
he and his fellow were going in the Carauan to Damasco, which place they call
Sham, and thence to Beggdatt, which we call Babylon, thence to Mecha to make a
Hadgee, for so they are called when they have bin at Mecha: moreover, he told
me that he dwelt in the City of Fesse in Barbary. This man (in my mind) God
sent to be the means of mine immediate delivery. For after I had taken good
notice of him, I well remembered that I saw him in my ship; though one man among
300. is not very readily known: for so many brought I from Argier into those
parts of different Nations, as Turks, Moors, Jews and Christians. I desired
this man to bring me to the sight of his other companion, which (having washed
my linen) he did, and him I knew very readily. These two concluded, that the
one of them would depart thence with the Carauan, and the other go along with
me to Jerusalem, which was the Moore before remembered: and such kind care had
the Infidel of me, as he would not leave me unaccompanied in this strange Land,
which I cannot but impute to Gods especial providence, for my deliverance out
of prison, else had I bin left in most miserable case. When this Moore saw me
thus imprisoned in Jerusalem, my dungeon being right against the Sepulcher of
Christ, albeit he wept, yet he had me be of good comfort. Away went he to the
Bashawe of the city, and to the Saniack, before whom he took his oath, that
I was a Mariner of a Ship, which had brought 250. or 300. Turks and Moors
into Egypt from Argier and Tunis, their journey being unto Mecha. This Moore
(in regard he was a Muzzle-man) prevailed so well with them, that returning with
six Turks back to the prison, he called me to the door, and there said unto
me: that if I would go to the house of the Pater Guardian, and yield my self
under his protection, I should be enforced to no religion but mine own, except
it were to carry a candle, to the which I willingly condescended. So paying the
charges of the prison, I was presently delivered, and brought to the Guardians
Monastery: where the Pater coming to me, took me by the hand and bad me
welcome, maruailing I would so much err from Christianity, as to put my self
rather under the Turks then his protection. I told him, what I did, was
because I would not go to Mass, but keep my conscience to my self. He
replied, that many Englishmen had been there, but (being Catholics) went to
Mass, telling the Turks at the Gates entrance, that they were Frenchmen, for
the Turks know not what you mean by the word Englishman: aduising me
further, that when any of my Countrymen undertook the like travail, at the
gates of Jerusalem they should term themselves either Frenchmen or Fritons,
because they are well known to the Turks. This or such like conference past
between us: also how old our Queens Majesty was, and what was the reason she
gave nothing to the maintenance of the Holy Sepulcher, as well as other
Christian Kings and Princes did? with diverse other triuial questions, whereto I
answered accordingly. The day being spent even to twilight, master John
Burrel, who passed for a Greek without any trouble, came in unto us, being
nevertheless constrained to this Monastery, or else he might not stay in the
city: for such sway do the Papists carry there, that no Christian stranger
can have admittance there, but he must be protected under them, or not enter
the city. Master Burrell and I being together in the Court of the Monastery,
twelve fat-fed Friars came forth unto us, each of them carrying a wax candle
burning, and two spare-candles beside, the one for master Burrel, the other for
me. Another Friar brought a great Basin of warm water, mingled with Roses and
other sweet flowers, and a Carpet being spread on the ground, and Cushions in
Chaires set orderly for us: the Pater Guardian came and set us down, giving
each of us a Candle in our hands, then came a Frayer and pulled off our hose, and
(setting the Basin on the Carpet) washed our feet. So soon as the Friar began
to wash, the twelve Friars began to sing, continuing so till our feet were
washed: which being done, they went along singing, and we with the Guardian
came to a Chapel in the Monastery, where one of them began an Oration in
form of a Sermon, tending to this effect: how meritorious it was for us to
visit the Holy land, and see those sanctified places where our Saviors feet
had trod. The Sermon being ended they brought us to a chamber where our supper
was prepared: there we fed somewhat fearfully, in regard y^ strange cates have
as strange qualities: but committing our selves to God, and their
outward-appearing Christian kindness, we fell to heartily, supt very
bountifully, and afterward (praising God) were lodged decently. Thus much for
my first days entertainment in Jerusalem, which was the 25. day of March
1601. being our Lady day in Lent. Now follows what the Friars afterward showed
me, being thereto appointed by the Pater Guardian.

Early the next morning we arose, and having saluted the Pater Guardian, he
appointed us seven Friars and a Trouchman: so forth we went to see all the
holy places in the city which were to be seen, except those in Sepulchra
sancta, for that required a whole days work afterward, and at every place
where we came, we kneeled down, and said the Lords prayer.

The first place of note that the Friars showed us, was the place judicial:
next, the house of Veronica sancta: and demanding of them what Saint that was,
they told me it was she that did wipe our Saviors face, as he passed by in
his agony. Descending a little lower in the same street, they showed me the
way which our Savior went to crucifying, called by them Via dolorosa. Then on
the right hand in the same street, I was shown the house of the rich glutton,
at whose gate poor despised Lazarus lay. Holding on our way down this
street, we came to a turning passage on the left hand: whence they told me
Simon Sirenus was coming toward the Dolorous way, when the Soldiers seeing
him, called him, and compeld him against his will to help our Savior to carry
his cross. Then they told me, that in the same place the people wept, when
Christ answering said unto them: Oh daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me.
etc. Next, they showed me the Church, where the virgin Marie fell into an
agony, when Christ passed by, carrying his Cross. Afterward they brought me
to Pilates Palace, which though it be all ruinated, yet is there an old Arche
of stone, which is still maintained by the Christians, and it standing full in
the high way, we passed under it: much like the way of passage under master
Hammons house in the Bulwark, but that the Arch is higher: for upon that Arche
is a Gallerie, which admits passage (over our heads) from one side of the
street to the other: for Pilates Palace extended over the high way on both
sides, and Pilate had two great windows in the said Gallerie, to gaze out
both ways into the street, as master Hammon has the like advantage at both
his windows. Into this Gallery was our Savior brought, when he was showen
unto the Jews, and they standing below in the street, heard the words of Ecce
homo. A little from this place, is the foot of the stairs, where our Savior
did first take up his Cross. Then they brought me to the place, where the
virgin Marie was conceived and borne, which is the Church of Saint Anna, and
no Turkish Church. Next, they showed me the Poole, where Christ cleansed the
Leapers, and then guiding me to Saint Stephens gate, a little without it upon
the left hand, they showed me the stone whereon S. Stephen was stoned. From
hence I saw the stairs going up to port Aurea, at which port are diverse
relics to be seen: it was the East gate of the Temple, which Solomon built
upon mount Moria, in which Temple was the place of Sanctum Sancterum: but now
in that place is builded a goodly great Church, belonging to the Turks. Thus
spent I the second day, being the 26. of March, all within the gates of
Jerusalem, except my going to see the stone wherewith S. Stephen was stoned.

The next day, being the 27. of March, having done our duty to God and the
Pater Guardian, we hired Asses for the Friars and the Trouchman to ride on, and
going forth the city gates, we mounted and rode directly toward Bythinea. By
the way as we rode, they showed me the place of the fruitless Figtree, which
Christ cursed: next, the Castle of Lazarus, that Lazarus whom Christ loved so
well: for his house or Castle is in Bythinea, but it is utterly ruinated, and
nothing to be seen but the two sides of a wall. In the same town, they showed
me the house of Marie Magdalen, but al so ruinated, that nothing is left of it
but a piece of a wall: there I saw likewise Marthaes house, consisting of
three pieces of a wall: and thence they brought me to the stone, where the two
sisters told Christ that Lazarus was dead: from whence passing on, they
showed me the place where our Savior raised Lazarus from death, after he had
lien three days in the ground, and where he was buried afterward when he died.
This place has bin not ably kept from the beginning, and is repaired still by
the Christians, but yet in poor and very bare sort, and this is all that I saw
in Bythinia. From hence we rode unto Mount Oliuet, and passing by Bethphage,
they brought me to the place, where our Savior took the Ass and Colte, when
he rode to Jerusalem upon Palm Sunday. Riding from Bethphage directly to the
North, we came to the foot of Mount Oliuet, where they showed me the place
Benedicta of the virgin Mary's Annunciation, and ascending to the top of the
Mount we saw the place of our Saviors Ascension: at the sight whereof we said
our Prayers, and were commanded withal to say 5. Pater nosters, and 5. Aue
Mary's: but we said the Lords prayer, took notice of the place and departed.
This is the very highest part of Mount Oliuet, and hence may be discerned many
notable places: as first West from it is the prospect of the new City of
Jerusalem: Southwest from it may be seen the prospect of Mount Sion, which is
adjoining to new Jerusalem: also in the valley between Sion and the mount
whereon I stood, I saw the brook Cedron, the Poole Silo, the Garden wherein
our Savior prayed, the place where afterward he was betrayed, and diverse other
notable things in this valley of Gethsemanie: as the Tomb of Absolon, king
David's son, the Tomb of Iehoshaphat, and others which I will speak of as I
come to them. Full South from mount Oliuet, I could see the places we came last
from, as all Bythinia and Bethphage: also East North-east from this mount, may
be scene both the river of Jordan which is some 15. miles off, and Jericho,
which is not so far, because it is to the Westward of Jordan. From mount
Oliuet East and East-South-east, may be seen the lake of Sodom and Gomorrha,
which is some 100. miles long, and 8. miles over: all these places I set with
the Compass when I was on mount Oliuet, for I stayed on the top of it some two
hours and a half, having a little Compass about me. Descending hence toward
the foot Westward, we came to a place where the Friars told me, that a woman
called S. Pelagia did penance in the habit of a Friar: whereat I smiling, they
demanded why I did so? I answered, that to believe Pelagia was a Saint, stood
out of the compass of my Creed: they told me, when I should come home at
night, they would show me sufficient Authors for it: but when I came home I
had so much to do, in writing my notes out of my table books, that I had no
leisure to urge their Authors for S. Pelagia.

By this time they brought us to the place, where our Savior did foresee the
judgment, then where he made the Pater noster, and then where the Apostles
made the Creed. From hence we came to the place where Christ wept for
Jerusalem: thence, to the place where the virgin Marie gave the gyrdle to S.
Thomas: and then to the place where she prated for S. Stephen: all these last
were coming down mount Oliuet, toward the valley of Gethseminie, where by
the way we came to our Ladies Church, wherein is her Sepulcher, and the
Sepulcher of her husband Joseph, with the Sepulcher of Anna, and many others in
that Church. This Church stands at the foot of Mount Oliuet, and was built
(as they say) by Helena the mother of Constantine the great: here the Friars
went into the virgin Mary's sepulcher, and there either said Mass, or Prayers,
while we in mean time went to dinner. In this Church is a fountain of
exceeding fine water, and in regard we went down into a vault as it were, it
gives a marvelous loud Echo or sound. Hence went we to the Cave, whether
Judas came to betray Christ when he was at prayer, and thence to the Garden
where our Savior left his Disciples, commanding them to watch and pray; but
found them sleeping at his return: then they brought me to the Garden where
Christ was taken, and all these last three were in the valley of Gethsemanie.
Riding unto the town whereof the valley bears name) on the left hand I saw
the before remembered Sepulchers of Absolon and Iehoshaphat, and on the right
hand, the brook Cedron, which at my being there had not one drop of water in
it: for (indeed) it is but a ditche to convey the water from the two hills (I
mean Mount Oliuet, and mount Sion) when any store of rain falls, and this
ditche or brook Cedron is in the valley between both those hills. Hard by
the brook Cedron, they showed me a stone marked with the feet and elbowes of
Christ, in their throwing of him down when as they took him, and ever since
(say they) have those prints remained there. From hence we rode to the place,
where S. James the younger did hide himself, and afterward was buried there:
there also they showed where Zachariah the son of Barachiah was buried, and
brought me to another place, where (they say) the virgin Marie used often to
pray. Then came we to the Poole of Silo, wherein M. Burrell and I washed our
selves, and hence we were shown the place where the Prophet Esaias was sawne in
pieces: thence they guided us to an exceeding deep Well, where the Jews (as
they say) hid the holy fire in the time of Nabuchodonozor. Here we ascended
from the valley to a hill side, which lies just South from mount Sion: but
there is a great valley between, called Gehemion, and there they showed me the
place where the Apostles hid themselves, being a Cave in a rock. Ascending
higher hence, they brought me to the field, or rather to be more rightly
termed the Rock, where the common burial place is for strangers, being the
very same (as they say) which was bought with the thirty pieces of silver,
that Judas received as the price of his Master, which place is called
Aceldoma, and is fashioned as follows. It has three holes above, and on the
side there is a vent: at the upper holes they use to let down the dead bodies
to the estimation of some 50. foot down. In this place I saw two bodies, new
or very lately let down, and looking down (for by reason of the three great
holes above, where the dead bodies lie, it is very light) I received such a
savor up into my head, as it made me very sick, so that I was glad to
entreat the Friars to go no further, but to return home to the city. So here
we went through the vallie of Gehemion, and at the foot of mount Sion (having
a little bottle of water which I brought from the Poole Silo) I branke, and
rested there an hours space, eating a few Raisins and Olives, which we
brought with us from Jerusalem in the morning. After I had well rested and
refreshed my self, we began to ascend mount Sion, and a little way up the
hill, they showed me the place, where Peter having denied Christ, and hearing
the Cock crow, went out and wept. Ascending higher, they showed me the house
where ye virgin Marie dwelt, which was near unto ye Temple: then they brought
me to the place, where the Jews setting on the blessed virgin to take her,
she was conuayed away by miracle. Hence we went to the house of Caiphas, which
was somewhat higher upon mount Sion, and there I saw the prison wherein our
Savior was detained. Passing on still higher, they guided me to a little
Chapel which is kept by the Armenians, whereinto entering, at the high Altar
they showed me y^ stone which was upon our Saviors Sepulcher (as they say) and
it is near to the place where Peter denied Christ, for there they showed me the
Pillar, whereon the Cock stood when he crowed. Hence was I brought to the
place where our Savior made his last Supper, and thence I came where the holy
Ghost descended upon the Apostles: whence passing on, they showed me the place
where Christ appeared to his Disciples, the eight day after his Resurrection,
when S. Thomas desired to see his wounds. Near to this place upon mount Sion,
the virgin Marie died, and hard by they showed me a place bought by the Pope of
the Turks, for burial of the Europian Christians, because he would not have
them cast into Aceldama: they told us that the year before, five Englishmen
were buried in that place, whether by the Friars poisoning them, or howsoever
else it happened, but we thought it strange, that all five should die together
in one week. Thence came we to the house of Annas the high Priest, which is
now but a pair of very old walls, and nothing else of it to be seen: but at
the side of one of the walls, is an old Olive tree, whereto they told me that
our Savior was fast bound: and demanding a further reason thereof, they said,
that when he was brought unto this house, Annas being asleep, his people would
not awake him: so during their time of stay, they bound him to the said Olive
tree, and when he awaked, then he was brought in and examined.

Departing hence toward the Southgate of the city, which stands likewise
upon mount Sion, we alighted from our Asses: and entering, I noated it well,
for now I had seen three of the four gates. And being desirous to see the
Northgate also, they brought me to the Church of S. Thomas* which is within the
wall all ruinated: then to the Church of ^. Mark, whether Peter came, being
delivered out of prison by y^ Angel that brake open the gate. Then they showed
me the house of Zebedeus, whence we came to a place kept by the Abashenes, and
there ascending first by a dark way, led on by a line or cord, we attained
to a high place near to the Sepulchra sancta, where I paid two pieces of
silver to go in, and being entered, I demanded what place it was* the same
(quoth they) where Abraham would have sacrificed his senne Isaac. Thence went
we to the prison wherein S. Peter, and S. John were, being the next door to
the prison wherein I was put before: which made me the sorier, that it was not
my fortune to have gone into it, being so near it. Hence we came to the
North-gate, being on mount Caluarie side, where having well viewed the gate,
and perceiving it waxed late, we went directly home: this was my third days
work in and about Jerusalem, wearied not a little with often alighting to
pray: for at each several place before recounted, we dismounted and said the
Lords prayer on our knees.

On the morrow, being the 28. early in the morning we took our Asses, riding
forth at the Westgate, through which I first entered, and passing on to the
Southward, we left mount Sion on the left hand: at the foot whereof they
showed me the house of Vriah, and the Fountain where Bersaba washed her self,
when king David espied her out of his Turret. Thence went we to the place,
where the Angel took up Abacuck by the hair of the head, to carry meat to
Daniell in the Lions den. Next came we to the place, where the wise men found
the Star when it was lost, and then where the virgin Marie rested her self
under a tree, as she came from Bethlem to Jerusalem, which tree they still
repaice, by setting another close to the root of it. Hence road we to the
house of Elias the Prophet, where they showed me his usual place of sleeping:
and this house stands so upon a hill, as from thence I did see Bethlem a
far off. Thence went we to an old ruinated house, which they told me was
Jacobs: which may the better appear to be so, for in the field thereto
adioining, is the Tomb of Rachell Jacobs wife: and some two miles from this
Tomb, is a town in the same field called Bethesula, the inhabitants whereof
are all Christians. In this great field (being between Jerusalem and Bethlem)
did lie the Camp of Senacherib, when he besieged Jerusalem. From hence we
rode to the field, where the Angels brought tidings of great joy to the
Shepherds, which is two miles from Bethlem: and thence we rode to Bethlem to
the Monastery, wherein are some 10. Friars: who welcomed me very kindly, and
brought me first into a great Church, then into a large entry, wherein I saw
the name of M. Hugo Stapers twice set one above another, and between them both
I set my name. Then they guided me down the staiers into a vault, where was a
Chapel set in the place of our Saviors Nativity, enclosing both it, and the
maunger wherein Christ was laid, and also the place where he was presented with
gifts by the Wise men. Over this Chapel is a great Church, built by Q. Helena
mother to Constantine the Great (as they say) and further in I saw diverse
Tombs of holy men and others. Going up to the top of the Church, I saw upon
the leads the name of M. Hugo Stapers again ingranen, which made me look the
earnestlier for some other Englishmens names: but finding none, I carved down
my name and came away the^ went we in and dined with the Friars. After dinner,
they brought me to the place where the virgin Marie hid her self, when search
was made to kill the children. So taking my l^aue of Bethlem, giving the Friars
three pieces of gold, for my dinner and my company with me, being 8. in
number: mounting on our Asses, we rode to the Well, where King David's three
Captains fetched water for him, through the whole host of the Philistines:
which Well stands a little way from Bethlem, toward Jerusalem, and has
three places to draw water up at. Hence went we presently back to Jerusalem,
entering the gate at four of the clock in the afternoon, and at 5. the Turks
let us in to the Sepulchra sancta, each of us paying 9. pieces of gold for our
entrance. No sooner were we in, but they locked the gates, so there I said
till 11. of the clock the next day, and then came we forth: now follows what
I saw in Sepulchra sancta. First I noted hanging without the gate, at the
least 100. lines or strings, and in the gate is a great hole, whereat a little
child may eastly creep in: whereof demanding the reason, they told me that
the hole served to give victuals at, for them which lie within the Church,
which are above 300. persons, men and women, all Christians, and there live
they continually night and day, nor can they have passage in or out, but when
the Turks do open the gate for some Pilgrim, which happens not sometimes
in 14. days: wherefore these Christian liegers in the Church, have there their
whole households, and boorded lodgings there builded for them. The strings
before spoken of, hanging at the gate, have each one a bell fastened at the
lodgings, and when their servants (which are without) bring them any meat,
each rings the bell belonging to his household, and so come accordingly (each
knowing their own Bell) for receipts of their food. The several sort of
Christians, which I saw in this Church, I will in order describe unto you.

First, the Romans, for they bear the greatest way of al. Secondly, the
Greeks, for they are next in number to the Romans, yet little better then
slaves to the Turk. Thirdly, the Armenians, who have bin so long time servants
to the Turk, that having forgotten their own language, they use al their
ceremonies in the Arabian tongue, and so I heard them. The fourth sort of
Christians, are Nestorians, who are as slaves to the Turk, and have no other
language then the Arabian. The fifth, are the Abashenes, being people of the
land of Prester John. The sixth, are the Iacobines, who are circumcised
Christians, but slaves likewise and servants to the Turk. All these
(Christians in name) have bought of the Turk their several places in this
Church, and by-roomes for ease, being never fewer in number of all these six
sorts then 250. or 300. continually there lying, and praying after their
manner. The places where they ordinarily use to go and say their devotions,
are thus as I describe them, and as the Roman Friars brought me to them; 1.
the Pillar whereat our Savior was whipped. 2. the place where he was
imprisoned, while they were preparing or making his Cross. 3. where the
Soldiers divided his garments. 4. where the cross was found by Q. Helena,
which is at the foot of mount Caluarie, and hard by it is the chapel of the
said Q. Helena. 5. the place where Christ was crowned with thorns: which I
could not see, til I was glad to give the Abashenes that kept it two pieces of
silver. 6. the place where the Cross being laid along on the ground, our
Savior was nailed fast unto it. 7. The place on the top of mount Caluarie
wherein the cross stood when as he suffered. 8. The Rock that rent at his
crucifying, which is a thing well worth the beholding for it is slitte, like as
it had bin eleft with wedges and beetles, even from the top to the two third
parts downward, as it were through the brow and breast of y^ Rock: nor is the
rent small, but so great in some places, that a man might easily hide himself
in it, and so grows downward less and less. 9. The place where the three
Mary's anointed Christ after he was dead. 10. where he appeared to Mary
Magdalen in the likeness of a Gardener, and hence we came to the Sepulcher it
self, which is the last place where they use any prayers: from whence I went
to see the Tombs of Baldwin and Godfrey of Bulloigne, and returning thence
back to the Sepulcher, I measured the distaunce between place and place,
spending thus the time from five of the clock before night when I went in,
until the next day at eleven of the clock at my coming forth, writing down
all things which I thought note-worthie.

My companion M. John Burrell and I being thus come forth of the Church, we
went to the Pater Guardians to dinner, where we heard tidings that five other
Englismen were arrived at the city gates, directing toward Alepo. Their
names were M. William Bedle, preacher to the English merchants which are
Liegers at Alepo: M. Edward Abbot, servant to the right Worshipful sir John
Spenser: M. Geffrey Kirbie, servant to the worshipful M. Paul Banning: and
liegers for them in Alepo: two other young men, the one called John Elkynes,
the other Jasper Tymne. These five (hearing of my being there) came all to the
house, and these (though they saw not mine imprisonment, nor were with me at
the sight of those things in and about Jerusalem) can witness that they were
acquainted therewith at the gates, and estfice the other truths beside. These
men, as also my companion M. John Burrell, I left behind me in Jerusalem,
departing thence to see other places in the country of Palestine: but let me
first tell you, what I observed in the cities situation, because I was
enfourmed before I came to see it, that it was all ruined, albeit (on the sight
thereof) I found it otherwise, having a little Compass about me, to set such
places as I could easily come by.

Understand then first of all, that the very heart of the old city was seated
on mount Sion and mount Moria: to the north part whereof, was mount Caluarie
without the gates of the old city, about a stones cast and no further. But now
I find this new city situated so far to the North part, that it is almost
quite off of mount Sion but yet not off mount Moria, which was between mount
Sion and mount Caluary: so that now (undoubtedly) the South walls of the
city, are placed on the north foot of the hill of Sion. The east wall which
does confront mount Oliuet, is a great part of the ancient wall, and so from
the south-east angle north, a quarter of a mile behind mount Caluarie: so that
mount Caluarie, which was in former times a stones cast without the city, and
the appointed place for ordinary execution, I find it to be now seated in
the heart or middle of the new city. This mount Caluarie is not so high as to
be called a mount, but rather a pyked or aspyring Rock for I noated the
situation of it, both when I was at the top of it, and when I came to the
Sepulcher: the Sepulcher being distant from it (I mean from the foot of it)
173. foot, as I measured it: where upon I conclude, that the place of burial,
which Joseph of Aramathia made for him self, was from the foot of mount
Caluarie, 173. foot westward, in which place is the Sepulcher of our Savior.
The Sepulcher it self is two foot and a half high from the ground, eight
foot in length, and four foot broad wanting three inches, being covered
with a fair stone of white color. Over the Sepulcher is a Chapel builded,
the North wall whereof is joined close with the North side of the Sepulcher:
and the Chapel is of like stone as the Sepulcher is, consisting of fifteen
foot in breadth, five and twenty foot in length, and about forty foot in
height. In this Chapel are alwais burning thirty or forty Lamps, but upon
Festival days more: which are maintained by gifts given at the death of
Christians in Spain, Florence, and other parts, to be kept continually
burning: and the giuers of these Lamps have their names engraven about the
upper edges of them, in letters of gold, standing in a band of gold or silver.
This Chapel is enclosed with a Church, and yet not it only, but therewith is
circkled in all the before named holy places, vz. where Christ was whipped: where
he was in prison: where his garments were divided: where the cross was found:
where he was crowned with thorns: where he was nailed on the cross: where the
cross stood when he suffered: where the veil of the Temple rent: where the
three Mary's anointed him: where he appeared to Marie Magdalen: and in brief,
all the most notable things either about mount Caluarie, or Iosephes field of
Aramathia, are enclosed within the compass of this Church, which was builded
by the fore-remembred Queen Helena, mother to Constantine the great, she
being (as I have read in some Authors) an English woman, and daughter to king
Coell, that builded Colchester: which being urged to them, they denied it. I
measured this Church within, and found it to be 422. fadomes about, the one
side of it likewise I found to be 130. fadomes: thus much for mount Caluarie,
which is in the midst of the city now.

From the North-east angle of the city, to the North-west, is the shortest way
of the city, and from the North-west angle to the South-west, is as far as
from the South-east to the North-east: but from the South-west to the
South-east, which is the south wall that stands on the foot of mount Sion, I
measured, and found it to be 3775. foot, which is about three quarters of a
mile. Upon this south side of the city, is a great Iron gate, about which gate
are laid seauenteene pieces of brass ordinance: this gate is as great as the
west gate of the Tower of London, and exceeding strong, the walls being very
thick, and on the south side 50. or 60. foot high: so much for the south wall
and side of the city. The North wall is not altogether so long, but much
stronger: for on the Northside it has been often surprised, but on the
southside never: and on the East side it is impregnable by reason of the edge
of the hill which it stands on, which is five times as high as the wall. On
the north side also are 25. pieces of brass ordinance near to the gate, which
is of Iron also: but what is in other places, as at the corners or angles, I
could not come to see, and demand I durst not. The east wall, containing the
gate where saint Stephen was stoned a little without, and to this day called
saint Stephens gate: I saw but five pieces of ordinance there, and they were
between the gate and the relic of port Aurea, which is to the southward: and
concerning the west side of the city, at the gate whereof I entered at my first
arrival, it is very strong likewise, and has fifteen pieces of ordinance
lying near together, and all of brass. This gate is also made of Iron, and
this West wall is altogether as long as the East wall, but it stands upon the
higher ground: so that coming from the west to the west wall, you can see
nothing within the city but the bare wall: but upon mount Oliuet, coming
toward the city from the East, you have a very goodly prospect of the city,
by reason the city stands al on the edge of the hill. To conclude, this
city of Jerusalem is the strongest of all the cities, that I have yet seen in
my journey, since I departed from the Grand Cayro: but the rest of the country
is very easy to be entreated: yet in the city of Jerusalem are three
Christians for one Turk, and many Christians in the country round about, but
they all live poorly under the Turk.

Now concerning how the country about Jerusalem lies, for your more easy and
perfect understanding, I will familiarly compare the several places, with some
of our native English towns and villages, according to such true estimation as
I here made of them. Imagine then I begin with London, as if it were the city
of Jerusalem.

The city of Bethlem, where Christ our Savior was born, is from Jerusalem as
Wansworth is from London, I mean much upon that point in distance.

The plain of Mamre, is from Jerusalem as Guildford is from London: in which
place or near to it, is the city of Hebron, where our father Abraham lies
buried.

Beersheba is from Jerusalem, as Alton is from London.

Ramoth Gylead is from Jerusalem, as Reading is from London.

Gaza, which is the South-west part of Palestine, is from Jerusalem as
Salisbury is from London.

Ascalon is from Gaza North-east.

Ioppa is from Jerusalem, as Alberry is from London.

Samaria is from Jerusalem, as Royston is from London.

The c^^ie of Nazareth is from Jerusalem, as Norwich is from London.

From Nazareth to mount Tabor and Hermon, is 5. miles North-east: these two
do and very nerre together, Tabor being the greater.

From Tabor to the Sea Tyberias, is eight miles northeast.

From Jerusalem to mount Sinai is ten days journey, and north-east thence.

These places last spoken of (beginning at Samaria) I was not in: but the other
five Englishmen that met me in Jerusalem, coming through Galilee, they came
through them, and of them I had this description: they received of me,
likewise, the description of my journey through Palestine.

The place where Christ fasted 40. days and 40. nights, called Quarranto, is
from Jerusalem as Chelmesford is from London.

The river Iordane (the very nearest part of it) is from Jerusalem as Epping is
from London.

Jericho, the nearest part of the plain thereof, is from Ieursalem as Lowton
hall (sir Robert Worths house) is from London.

The Lake of Sodom and Gomorrah, is from Jerusalem as Grauesend is from London.

The river Iordane runs into this Lake, and there dies: which is one of y^
greatest secrets (in my mind) in the world, that a fresh water should run
continually into this salt Lake, and have no issue out, but there dies, and
the said Lake continuing still so salt, as no weight (of any reasonable
substance) will sink into it, but always floateth: as, a dead man, or a dead
beast will never go down. Nay more, whatsoever is brought into it by the
river Iordane, of any reasonable poyze besides the water, it abides
continually upon the superficies of the Lake, and so being tossed thereon by
the force of weather, makes a cougealed forth: which frothe being driven up
upon y^ banks, it becomes a kind of black substance like Pitch, which there
they call Bytumen, whereof I have brought some part from thence. This Lake is
about eight or nine miles broad, and an hundred miles in length, stretching
from the north, where Iordane falls into it, unto the southward, and has no
further issue that has been seen by any man.

The field where the Angel brought tidings of joy to the Sheepheards, is from
Jerusalem as Greenwich from London.

Mount Oliuet is from Jerusalem, as Bow from London.

Bethanie is from Jerusalem, as Blackwall from London.

Bethphage is from Jerusalem, as Mile-end from London.

The valley of Gethsemanie is from Jerusalem, as Ratcliffe fields from London.

The brook Cedron is from Jerusalem, as the ditch without Algate, which runs
to the Tower from London.

Mount Sion is now adjoining to new Jerusalem, as Southwarke to London.

Thus as plainly, as the time afforded me, have I described unto you the
situation of the city of Jerusalem, and how the Country lies near adjoining,
which by the familiar comparisons, you may the easter understand. But come we
now to the most especial thing of all, to see how justly the Scriptures are
fulfilled, that Jerusalem should be made a heap of stones: the certainty and
truth whereof, all such as have been there (considering and marking it so
deeply as I have done) are able to report: for I could see no ground near to
the city by fifteen or sixteen miles distance (the plain of of Jericho
excepted) but it is all a heap of stones, yea, and i^ such exceeding
abundance, as I wonder how they can live in it. It for^u^ed, my self, M. John,
and my Moore, being within five miles of the city, and lodging in the fields
all night, I sent my Moore to a house not far off, to buy us some bread, for
we had nothing to eat: and he returning to us, brought us word, that the
master of the house nor his children did ever eat any bread in all their
lives: for such is the poor estate of the country, that a man may go ten
miles, before you can see a plot of ground to feed a horse or a Cow on: yet
the countries round about it, as Palestine on the one side, Galilie on the
other, and Syria to the west, are all most goodly plentiful countries: and
Jerusalem it self, which I thought to have found the very fruitfullest place
of all, is the most barrennest place that I saw in all my travail, the
deserts only excepted. I can compare no place in England therewith for the
like sterilitie, unless the vnfruitfulst place in Cornwall, where there is
nothing but rocks and stones, and daily (by the report of the inhabitants) the
stones grow and increase more and more. In brief, let all men that have been
there, or hereafter shall go thither, speak but rightly and without flattery,
and then they will say with me, that Jerusalem, and fifteen miles about it
every way, is no other then a heap of stones, and the barrennest place in all
Mesopotamia. And I am of this mind, that it is quite forsaken of the Lord: for
assuredly the greater part of Turks, inhabiting there, do use all manner of
most odious filthiness: insomuch, that the Christian dwellers there are forced
to marry their children very young, yea, even at ten years of age, for fear
least the Turks should defile or alter them. Boys they keep openly, and
shame not to set them at their doors, to show which of them has the fairest:
and (as the better sort of Christians have told me) there is not that sin to
be found in the world, but it reigns and florisheth in Jerusalem: wherefore
they use these words of it; Terra sancta, e no mais, to wit, it is the Holy
land in name, and no more: yea, the veriest Infidel in all the country calls
it so, for in the Arabian tongue they call it by the name of Cutse, that is,
holy.

So, having my Pattent sealed with the great seal of the Pater Guardian, and
another Letter pattent, showing that I washed in the water of Iordane: the 31.
of. March I departed from Jerusalem, in company of my Moore that help me out
of prison. The 31. at night I came to Ramoth Gilead, and the 1. of April to
Ascalon: the 2. to Gaza, which is on the borders of the Deserts, where I hired
two wild Arabes with two Dromedaries, to carry me to the city of Grand Cayro.
These wild Arabes are no other then thieves, for they are such as make daily
prize of Christians, Turks, Moors and all sorts of people, only their own
nation excepted. With these two Arabes and my Moore I departed from Gaza,
having no other company, and that day (being the 3. of April) we ran these
Dromedaries so hard, as at night I began to wax very weary: wherefore I bad
my Moore tell the Arabes, that I would eat a few Raisins and rest a little:
so we all alighted, for we rode two upon each beast, and having made the^ fast,
we went to supper. In mean while, one of the Dromedaries brake loose, and ran
back again, which made one of the Arabes take the other beast and presently
ride after. The other Arabe went to a cross way over a sand hill, and turned
himself so, that both the men and beasts were out of our sight. Then it began
to grow dark, and I having no company but my Moore, went alone to the top of
the said hill, to see if I could epsy either of my thieves: when suddenly I
saw four other coming toward me: and by that time I recovered the place
where I left my Moore, one of them was close at my heels, and bad the Moore
bring me to him. The Moore told them that I had nothing, but was to be carried
in four days to Cayro by two of their companions, whose names he delivered to
them: whereon they replied, that if this were true, they would do me no hurt:
but if the other returned not with the beasts, then they would make prize of us
both. At this time I had nothing to loose but the clothes on my back, (very
dearly rated at ten groates value) for I had promised the two Arabes, to pay
them 24. pieces of gold, so soon as they brought me to the Grand Cayro: but
my life was the thing I most of all feared. Within 2. hours after, my two
thieves returned, when I might perceive the other four and them to be all
fellows: so they gave them a few Raisins and a little water, whereupon the
four immediately departed: but questionless if my Moore had not bin there
with me, I had bin carried quite away. The 4. day we came to a place where the
the ever had Lents, and there they gave me Camels milk, and the next night we
came to Salhia on the other side of the Deserts: where being sore shaken
(albeit my body was well wrapped with rollers) I was constrained to give them
over, and hyre two horses.

The Dromedarie is a kind of beast like to a Camel, only his head is lesser,
and his legs somewhat longer, with a very small neck: and this difference (in
comparison) is between a Dromedary and a Camel, as is between a Greyhound
and a Mastiffe dog. During the four days, the time of my coming from Gaza
to Grand Cayro, I never saw them eat or drink: it is said they will fast
from water tun days and never drink, but not so long from me at. Thus came I
in 4. days as far, as I was going out from Grand Cayro in twelve days: yet
for all this, I think a good horse will run faster, but is no way able to
continue with this beast, whose pase is a trot, or rather harder if it be
possible. At Cayro I paid my thieves and my two Horses, sending them away, and
gave mine honest Moore six pieces of gold, with some other things beside to
his contentment, and sent him to Mecha with the Carauan. The 7. I stayed in
Cayro al day, and at night came to Bollake, where I took a boat: and the 10.
of April at nine of the clock in the morning, I came to Rosetta, where taking
horse with a Iauezarie, I came that night to the walls of Alexandria, where I
lay all night, because the gates were shut before I came. On the morrow being
the 11. I went aboard my Ship the Troyane, in perfect health and safety, I
thank my God, having bin out in my Pilgrimage from Alexandria just 50. days.

FINIS.

