THE TRYING OVT OF THE TRVTH: BEGVNN AND PROSEQVVTED IN CERTAIN Letters or
Passages between John Aynsworth and Henry Aynsworth; the one pleading for, the
other against the present religion of the Church of Rome. The chief things here
handled, are. 1. Of Gods word and scriptures, whither they be a sufficient rule
of our faith. 2. Of the Scriptures expounded by the Church; and of unwritten
traditions. 3. Of the Church of Rome, whither it be the true Catholic Church,
and her sentence to be received, as the certain truth.

Published for the good of others by E. P. in the year 1615.

E. P. to the Christian reader.
CHristian reader, I having had some interest in the conveyance of the passages
here following, and with the consent of both the writers, taken knowledge of
the matter in controversy; was moved, and did resolve to publish it to the
view of others. Considering, that the subject and question handled, is very
profitable, and the truth therein, necessary to be known. And whereas the
controverters are so different in judgment, and yet both of them for conscience
sake suffer affliction, being separated from the Ch: of Engl: the one, to the
practice of a Roman Catholic; the other to a way, thereunto most opposite; and
both of them being leaders and men of note, in their so much different
religions: it may move a desire to see the thing further prosecuted between
them, and provoke a going forward where the stay is. I have without prejudice,
but not (as I hope) without the good liking of both parties, (who each of them
seemed unto me very willing, that any should read their writings,) put forth
these things: hoping that some benefit may come to the readers hereby: whom I
wish all of them to follow the Apostles counsel, to try the spirits whether
they be of God. His grace be 1. Ioh. 4.
with us all, to guide us in the truth, Amen.

E. P.

The occasion and beginning of the passages following.
MR. John Aynsworth whiles he was prisoner in London, had conference with some
other prisoners that differed in religion from him; about the right way of man's
justification before God etc: which things he after answered in writing also,
with this challenge at the end: Let who will answer it; I could wish for name
sake Mr Henry Aynsworth might see it. If any answer it, let him set to his
name, as I set down mine, to stand to all, and then I will deal with him.

John Aynsworth.




This writing was, as he wished, sent to the party by him nominated: who upon
the receipt thereof, wrote as follows. To Mr John Aynsworth, prisoner in
London, Mercy from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ our hope.
MR. Aynsworth, I received a writing under your hand and name, touching some
controversy in religion: you defe^ding the faith of the church of Rome that
now is, against such as have forsaken her for departing from the ancient faith
of the church that was in Rome when Paul wrote thereunto: among whom we are,
the witnesses of Jesus Christ. You provoke in the end, who will to answer your
writing, but wish for names sake my self might see it, promising, if any
answer it, affixing his name, you then will deal with him. Though I have at
this time other opposites to answer, and affairs important lying upon me, yet
would I not altogether let pass this occasion offered by your self, whom for
nation and name, (and I know not vvhither also for nearer alliance,) I regard
as is meet, greeving for your estate, who are in captivity not so much in body
as in soul: from which if I could procure your release I should be glad. The
way to do you good, or any that is in like error, I take to be this; that we
begin at the root and ground work of our religions, in which if we can
accord, there vvil^e more hope of other things. As first, how our differences
shall be tried and composed; whether by the verdict of God, or of man? If of
God, as I hold; then where this is to be found? vvh^ther in the scriptures of
the old and new testament, or in the vvritings and mouths of other men? If in
holy scriptures, (which is my faith:) then comes to be considered, what
they are, and how to be used. My self do embrace the vvritings of all the
Prophets now extant, from Moses to Mal^chie; who vvrote all in Hebrew, the
Chaldee in Ezra and Daniel counted therevvith: and of all the Apostles and
Evangelists, which vvrote in Greek, as is now generally received. By all and
every of these I offer my faith to be tried, and to make t^yall of other faith
offered. The use of these, to be with all care, and reverence, sobriety,
sanctity, and vvisdome ministered by the holy Ghost. And here may be
questioned, in whom the faith of a Christian should rest, vvhither on the
Churches sentence, without doubt or contradiction: or vvhither he should also
have assurance in his own heart, by Gods word and spirit. If the Church be our
stay; then are we to inquire, where and which it is: and so to consider the
doctrines that it teaches. Among which this is one principal, (which you
treat of in your vvriting,) how our synns shall be forgiven, and we justified
in the sight of God. Thus may we proceed in order: and if you please to begin
with these grounds, I am vvilling (as my leisure shall serve me) not only to
hear what you can say for your religion, but also to inform you where I see
you err. If you like not thus to deal, but will insist on the question in
hand, I shall not be unwilling to defend my Saviors sufferings, as
alsufficient for my salvation, and of all that trust in him. That which shall be
prosecuted betvveen us, (if ought be,) I desire may be done in love and
meeknes, in simplicity and sincerity, with brevity and perspicuitie: all
which I shall labor for, through the grace of God, and exhort you to do the
like. Othervveise from fruitless quarrels I shall furcease, and follow more
comfortable meditations. Thus vvish I your farevvell in soul and body. From
Amsterdam this 4. of September, 1609.

Your friend to use in all Christian duty Henry Ainsworth.




Unto this letter, Mr John Aynsworth returned this answer. I Accept with all
willingness (Mr Aynsworth) of your ready offer, viz. that we should draw our
disputations, and controversies to a maine and principal point, and foundation
of our religion. For as in the spiritual building faith is a foundation and
Spiritualls
main pillar, so also in the mysteries and principalls of our faith, there
aedificij fudament^.
be some that as it were transcend through the whole body of controversies, and
serve therein as Maister-springes, by whose motion and proof all things rest
sufficiently satisfied, and proved to any indifferent judgment. Amongst
others, this question by you propounded has no mean place. For if I square
out all the belief I mainteyn only by approved, and infallible rule; my
affertio^s must needs be as invincible as my rule is uncorrigible. Now unto the
point to be decided I briefly answer. That a man may elici^t a sup^rnaturall
act of faith many things are required; first there must be motiva evidentis
credibilitatis, prudential motives of evident credibilitie, viz. that all Ps.
(...). testimonia (...) a credibilia facta sunt (...).
nations, and men of principal gifts, zeal and sanctity and ^^dowments* have
believed so, that it has stood inviolable against so many and infinite
heresies and persecutions, that it is so ancient, so visible, so constant, and
uniform in all essential poincts of doctrine: That it has been sealed and
confirmed with the blood of so many glorious Martyrs etc.

Secondly, There must be Ecclesia proponens, the Church propounding II.
what is scripture, and what is not scripture, what is unwritten word, viz.
tradition, and what is not.

Thirdly there must be prima veritas, the first verity, ^r Gods veracity, III.
that must be ratio formalis, the formal reason why we do believe.

Fourthly, There must be a supernatural judgment dict^ting that IIII.
now it is good, at least generally to believe.

Fifthly there must be a supernatural concour^^ of Gods holy illumination, V.
and a concourse of his infused habit of faith to determinate the indifferent
power of our understanding to believe, or not to believe. Out of the progress
of which act, an answer to your question may easily be deduced. For when you
ask whither our faith shall be tried, by the verdict of God, or of man, I answer
you directly enough though with a ^^stinction, viz. That if you understand by
what formal motive we shall be tried in our belief, I answer by the verdict
of Gods written, and unwritten word: But if you ask who shall determine our
faith after a propounding manner, so we say the Church concurreth after the
manner of an applying condition, teaching what is Canonical, and that which is
not autentike. And therefore I will prove, first, That only the bare text of
the I.
scripture is not a sufficient rule of our faith.

2. I will prove that the scriptures expounded by the II.
Catholic Church, is a true and indeficient rule of our faith.

3. That this rule is only found in the Roman Catholic III.
church sentence, and not in private men's illuminations, and motions of a
private and unseen spirit.

First then to prove that the bare scripture is not a sufficient rule of our
belief, and that many mysteries, and points are to be believed, that are not
expressly taught, or evidently deduced out of the holy scriptures; I frame
this Argument Nothing is to be believed that is not taught, or gathered out of
the written word; but that the Bible is Canonical, is neither directly taught,
nor by evident consequence deduced out of the same: therefore it is not to be
believed that the Bible is Canonical scripture. The Major is the common
assertion of protestants, but especially I take it a chief ground and
principle of your sect, vide Calvi. de vera Ecclesia reformata page 473. Calvin.
and the Apology of the Church of England page 58. The Minor is The Apol.
approved by Hooker a principal protestant, in his treatise of Ecclesiast.
laws lib. 1. page 84. lib. 2. S. 4. page 100. 102: who there writes thus.
Hooker.
Of things necessary, the very chiefest thing is to know what books we are
bound to believe holy: which thing is confessed as a thing impossible for the
scriptures to teach. And afterward he confirms thus. For (says he) if any
one book did give testimony of all the rest, yet the scripture that gives
credit to all the rest, would require another scripture to be credited, neither
could we come to any pause whereon to rest our assurance this way. So that we
see either that he holds scripture is not to be believed and authenticke, or
else he requires the authority of something besides scripture to make it
authentical. The force of this Hooker.
Argument did drive Hooker lib. 3. paragraph the 8. page 1^6. Zanchius in
Zanchius.
his confess. ^. ^. Brentius in prologo Kemnitij in examine Conc. Trident.
Brentius.
and Doct. Whitak: contra Stapletonum lib. 2. cap. 4. page 298, 30^ Whitak:
to fly unto the authority of traditions to prove scripture to be scripture.
Which if once they grant, that traditions are sufficient to prove and try the
groundwork of our belief, viz. scripture to be scripture; why can they not
ground other po^its of faith of lesser consequence?

2. I prove that the bare and naked word of God cannot be an infallible rule or
square of truth: I prove it thus.

That which is difficult and includes many senses, at least to the ignorant,
cannot be a certain rule of faith: But the scriptures are thus: My Anteced:
Luther in his preface to the Psalms acknowledges. M. Luther.
Tertull. in lib. De praescripti: says, Nec periclitor dicere ipsas quoque
Tertull.
scripturas esse et voluntate dei dispositas, ut haereticis materias
subministrarunt, cum lega^ opportet haereses esse quae sine scripturis esse non
possunt. Where he confesses that misinterpreting of scripture set the door
open to heresies. S. Peter also says that in S. Paul's Epistles 2. Pet. 3.
there be many things hard to be understood, which the unlearned, and unstable
deprave as all the rest of the scriptures to their own perdition. And the
difficulty thereof made S. Augustine, though a Doctor of incomparable wit and
learning in his 12. conf. c. 14. break out in the height of ad^i^ation, and
say; oh wonderful profoundness D. Aug. vide Vincent. Lyran^n^. lib. 1.
^^propha^as haer^s^s. D H^^r. in cap. 5. ad Galatas. Acts 8. De^t 17. ^ John
^ltimo. Act. 15. 2. Pet 1. D. Aug. l. 1. de doctr. Christi. c. 21. et lib 1 c.
10. ^^l. 12. c. 18. etc. 12.
of thy words, etc. Idem to: 3. lib. 2. De doctrina Christ: c. 6. confess that
there was more in the scriptures that he understood not, then of that which he
understood. The ^unuch of the Queen of A^thiopia was daily convers^^t in the
scriptures, yet he confesses that he could not understand them without a
master.

The second part of my Antecedent viz. that the scripture has many senses
litterall; many senses spiritual; of whose manifold, deep and mystical
sense, the ignorant reader cannot be possessed. And therefore since in the old
law when any difficulty happened, the Priest was to decyde it; and therefore
with a far greater interest is the Priest of the new law that has that
spirit of interpretation redoubled, and ratification of his doctrine assigned
and confirmed by Christ Jesus himself. is to expound the hidden senses of
scripture. And therefore S. John vltim^: (...) bids S. Peter and his successors
feed his flock with the spirit of interpretation, which is the food to a
reasonable flock and fold. This made the Apostles when they were to decyde the
controversies about the cessatio^ of the ceremonies of the old law, not to
repair unto their private spirits interpretation, but to a counsel gathered
in Jerusalem, where S. Peter was head: where all was concluded with Visum est
Spiritui sancto et nobis, It seems good unto the holy ghost and unto us. And
therefore let S. Peter himself conclude. That no prophe^i^ of scripture, that
is no interpretation (as the holy fathers interpret) is made by a private
Spirit interpretation.

Thirdly I argue, and by my argument I break the force of a pretended answer
thus: Not only scriptures by themselves are not sufficient to prove what is
Canonical and what is not, but also that scriptures helped by private men's
interpretation are not sufficient to prove the same. For they do not only
allow of private learned men's interpretation, but the poorest handycrafts man,
or the sillpest huswife that is, they doc allow to interpret the hardest places
of scripture, to shoulder the uniform consent of all the fathers, Doctors, and
schoolmen, with some fond toys of their own brain, and invention; yea to
give their gloss of those places of S. Paul where he speaks of justification,
and predestination; whereas they should ^^y Oh altit ido sapientiae et
scientiae Dei: qua^ inco^prehensibilia sunt judicia ejus^ When as they should
rather rely on the ancient Fathers exposition. S. Hierome in his old years
went as far as Al^randria to hear Didimus. S. Hier. ad Paul: Epist: 103. c.
5. 67. used such hard discipline, retirement into the desert, abstine^ce, for*
obtey^ing the true interpretation of the holy scripture. How should we believe
each private handycrafts manns censure, and his silly interpretation against
the uniform consent of the holy Fathers; against the stre^me of the learned of
all ages; But admit they should have i^ war^ly that speaking spirit to satisfy
themselves, how should a man be persuaded they it to be a lantern unto others
stepps* Nay how will they prove against their adversaries, that they also have
not that motion of the spirit? and though we should grant they be illuminated
in the truth of one^^ysterie, how shall we know with like certainty all other
different mysteries. But you will answer out of the 1. Cor. 2. Spiritualis
(...) Cor. 2.
autem homo judicat omnia, ipse autem a neminejudicatur: a spiritual man
judges all things and he is judged of none. To which I answer, admit that a
spiritual man knows something, yet it does not follow that his supernatural
ins^^^^ts extends it self to all things, but only to the knowledge of those
for the obteyning of which that illumination was inspired. For Deliseus that
had a redoubled spirit of Elias says, Domi^^* celavit hoc a me et non
indicavit mihi: Our Lord did hide this from me, and did not show it: why then
may not these simple souls rather fear that their private spirits defect in
the 4. R^g. 4.
declaration of some mysteries, rather then the redoubled Prophet confess ^^s
ignorance in some things. Yet let us grant that some few men should fully
comprehend and penetrate the mysteries of our belief, yet for a twofold reason
we den^ to give unto them a definitive sentence and censure of matters of
faith. First in that we are not so certified who these particular men be that
have these especial illuminations and illustrations, and therefore we are to
prefer the definitive assertion of the Popes holiness and his counsel,
before uncertainty of men's inventions.

2. Since that the effects of this particular illumination, and assistance of
the Holy Ghost, is not manifested and warranted by any extraordinary works or
miracles or the like in the: it were to make a desperate tender of Gods truth,
to point this or that man whole vinp^ore of any controversy, in that many other
men in the pretense of some few men's illuminatio^s, might challenge unto
themselves the like prerogatives of interpretation.

Fourthly I argue, that which by the ^ights and lanterns of your (...) have been
wro^ged in the highest degree to bolster up heresies, cannot be a true and
indeficient rule of faith. For what more frequent with ^eretickes, then at
their fingers ends to ^ite places of scripture to back their heresies: as the
Arians, Pelagians, Luther a^s, and Sacramentaries. The Lutherans and Calvinists
both disagreeing in a maine point of the real presence, the one holding Christ's
precious havy and blood to be really and corporal in the Sacrament, though
with a certain companation; and the other holding Christ to be present with a
signification only: and yet both cite scripture, both of the^ yet ^^^ing
scripture for scripture. John Knell of Kent led with this Fox Acts p. 398.
private spirit, denied Christ to have tooken flesh of our B. Lady. William
Cowbridge says, Bishops have no more authority then Priests page ^70* and yet
by and by led^ up the self same spirit said, that Christ's name was a filthy
name. Alanus Copus. Dialog. 6, c. 17. John Mesel denied the holy Ghost to
proceed from the Father, page 1151. Frith the excellent Martyr of John For,
page 942 943 944* affirms the real presence to be no Article of belief,
affirmative or negative. John of Teurbury, that the Jews of good zeal did put
Christ to death: page 9^5.

Fifthly and lastly Iargue, many mysteries of our faith are believed V.
that are not (...) declared in the word of God, nor so infalliblie
(prescinding from all traditions of the catholic church) deduced thence, so
that they are sufficient to make one believe that wit^ so firm an act, as our
faith requires: therefore that which makes those mysteries worthy of constant
belief is a rule of faith, as well as the written word, whither they be
traditions Divine or Apostolical. My antecedent may castly without all just
contradiction be proved, in that till Moses, the virtuous steps, and perfect
acts of Noe, Abraham, Melchisedech was guided without the help of any written
word, by the hand of tradition, derived from mouth to mouth from man to man:
yea after the witte^ word it appears by Erod. 14. Narrabis Exodus 14.
filio tuo in illa die dicens hoc est quod fecit Dominus, etc Deuteronomy. 32.
Interroga patrem tuum et annuntiabit tibi, majores et dicent tibi. Job. 8.
Interroga generationem pristinam, et diligenter investiga memoriam patrum. And
not only they of the old law, but also they of the new, even after the
coming of our Savior, were without a written word; the Apostles and disciples
being busied in preaching and instructing viva voce. Besides, many things we
believe though we have not the warrant of a written word for it: viz. that
there was a remedy for women children, as well as for men to purge them of
original sin; and something to be used to men children if they were ready to
^y before the 8. day, which was the prefixed time of circumcision: and that such
a parcel of writing was scripture, and such not. Moreover we believe
constantly against the condemned heresy of Delvidius; yea and against (as it
were) the seeming letter of the scripture where it is said that Joseph knew not
our blessed Lady til she brought forth her first son; Now every one knows
the phrase of the Hebrew word 2. Mat.
know, as Abraham knew Sara, and yet we f^^^nly believe according to the
prescript of the church, that she was a perpetual Oirgin ante partum, in partu,
et post partu^ Besides the equallitie of three persons, and their processions,
to Nestorius will not easily be proved, or to an Arian if you stand only to a
written word, for he will cite scripture for himself, Pater major est me; and
if you say that is to be understood D. Hyllar* in l. contra Constant.
introducit Aria: sic loquente^. No^ verba quae ^^^^pta non ^unt.
only in regard of his humanity, and not in regard of his divinity, he will
bid you prove that by the written word; and what place of scripture soever you
shall bring, he will answer it with an other to his own purpose; The like will
the Annaba^tist do about the baptisting of infants: How will you without
tradition prove the procession of the holy Ghost from God the Father, and the
Son, as from one only fountain? How will they justify the not keeping of the
Sunday on Saturday with the Jews, the receiving of the sacraments fasting, the
eating of blood and strangled meat prohibited in the Acts of the Apostles? How
can they cat a black pudding without the help of tradition, since they know it
is forbidden by the written word, and no writ word found plainly to license
it. Therefore S. Paul seeing how necessary the use of traditions were in Gods
church, so often ^. Thessalonians. 2.
commends it unto us. Therefore brethren stand, and holdthe traditions ^6. ^.
Tim.
which you have learnt whether it be by word or by our (...): 2. Tim* 1.
Th'^fficacy' and force of which is so necessary by experience, and so co^ve 1
Cor. 11.
n^^t by the judgment of common sense, that I wonder how men should deny ^.
These. 3.
the necessary use thereof: For I ask if the Apostles were alive and should by
word of mouth tell us the contents of many things contained in the scripture,
without all doubt with all readynes we should believe them; why then will they
not believe them that lived in the Apostles days, and such holy Fathers as
flourished shortly after. Dy^^isnis Areopagita affirms, the Liturgy of the
Mass for the dead to be an Apostolical tradition in fine eccles. Hier. c. 7.
part 3. Tertull. de corona militis. S. Aug. De cura pro mortuis c. 1. D Chrvs.
homil. 3. in epist. ad Philipp. in Morali. D. Damascen. sermon de defunctis:
initio: Also the ^rcede is affirms to be an Apostolica^l tradition: sic
Ruffinus in exposit: symboli in principio: D. Hier. epistol. 61. c. 9. D.
Ambros. sermon 38. D. Augustinus de Symbolo ad Catech: lib. 3. c. 1. Yea that
traditions were of this account we may gather out of the ancient Fathers of the
Church. We may easily gather by the irreverend speeches which Doctor Whitaker
uses against S. Chrysostom: for whereas he in the 2 of the These. 4* graunts
that traditions are as w^ll to be believed as scripture, he says his speech
was irreverend and unworthy of a Father. And whereas Eusebius. lib 1. De
demonstrat. Euangel: c. 8. says the Apostles did publish and propagate the
faith of Christ partly by scriptures, and partly by tradi^i^^s; he briefly
rejects one of the famousest recorders of antiq^^ty, saying his authority is
not to be received. Raynolds also in his conclusions a^^ered to his conference,
1. conclus. page 689. Cartwr. ^. 8. in his defense page 103. affirms that the
fathers did still allow of v^written traditions. Wherefore I will briefly
conclude this point showing that a man ruled by his private spirits direction
can have no faith. For since they believe scriptures only to be scriptures, in
that (...) are delivered up by the Church, why should not they the^ believe any
thing that the Church with a general consent propou^^eth as ^ (...) of our
belief. For if I believe the relation of my friend because my friend tells me,
I must believe all that my friend relates with the like firm assertion and
with the like reason* or else I do not believe my friend, but my own
affection, that is thereunto incli^ed to believe the one, and not believe the
other. No more does no protestant or any other sect believe with a supernatural
act of faith for then would ^e believe all that the scripture propo^^^eth to be
believed, as well as believe the scripture by reason it is of her propounded,
else they believe only their private spirits, dictament, and fan^ies; that
has derived unto the knowledge of many other mysteries as well, as of the
truth of the scriptures.

The second thing I am to prove breefly is, that the Popes defini^ive II.
sentence as he is head of the church, is an indeficie^r rule in matters of
faith. The which is proved out of Luc. 22. Simon ecce Satan expetivit vos ut
cribraret sicut triticu^, ego aute^ rogavi pro te ut ^ides tua non deficiat, et
tu aliquando conversus confirma fratres tuo* Where our Savior that is the
founteyne of all grace and goodness says, that he has prayed for S Peter and
so consequently for his successors since Christ speaks of the confirmation of
the Church against hell gates, not only for a time but for ever; promising
that S Peter and their faith should not fail, commanding both him and them,
and therefore bidding the^ co^firm their brethren. And that this prayer was
powered forth for S. Peter and his successors, appears ^vid^tly. First i^ that
our Savior points forth one particular man saying, Simon, Simon,
particularizing the speech with a pronowne of the second person saying, for
thee, thy faith, and thy brethren. 2. Though our Savior did begin to speak in
the plural number, Satan expetivit ut cribraret vos, Satan desired to sift
you, immediately changes the manner of speech, I have prayed for thee, and not
for ye. 3. Our Savior prays for him to whom he bidds and thou being
converted confirm thy brethren, but only S. Peter and not the Church in
general has brethren: Besides S. Math 16. He says, he builds his church upon
S. Peter. Tues P^trus et super hanc Petram aedificabo ecclesiam meam, and
thereupon he changed his name, of Simon, he makes him Peter and Petra, and
Cephas which name in the Spria^k tongue signifyes a rock, thereby to prevent all
f^^volous answers to a point so clearly declared: As appears first, in that
first he designs him first out by the name of his father Bar Jonas, 2. by his
own name Simon, then does he as it were seclude him from the rest, saying,
super han^ Petram aedificabo ecclesiam meam; then by the authority and
prehe^inence given him, showed by the delivery of the kepes. All which the
ancient Fathers do affirm with an uniform consent, as Tertull: lib. d^
praescript Orig. homil: 5. in Exodus Sanctus Cypr: de unitate Ecclesiae S. Hill:
Cano: 16. in Mat. S. Ambros. sermo. 47. 68. lib. 6. in cap: 9. Luc. D. Hier.
lib: 1. in lovini: S. Epiph. in Anchor: S. Chrysostom. homil: 55. in Mat. etc.
every one of them affirming expressly that the Church of God was built on S.
Peter as upon a rock* Besides this our Savior in S. John 21. gives S. Peter
the office of an universal Pastor, saying, pasce ov^s meas, feed my flock,
which sounds as much as have care of my sold. But in S. John the 10. it is said
that there is but one flock and one shepherd, and therefore since he bids him
thrice feed his flock, he honors him thrice with the style of an universal
pastor: And therefore all the fathers jointly interpret this place of an
especial charge and dominion assigned unto S. Peter, investing him thereby in
the supreme seat and government of his church, and by him he is installed that
had all power given him in heaven above and in earth beneath.

Now lastly and briefly to show that our Roman Church is the III.
true and only Catholic Church of God, that it is that holy city, Apocal.
21. v. 20. that fruitful vine, Psa. 79. v. 9. that high mountain, that direct
path, Is^ 35. verse. 8. that only Dove, Cant: 6. v. 8. that kingdom of heaven,
Mat. 13. v. 24. that only spouse, Cant. 4. v. 8. that mystical body of Christ
Jesu, Ephesians. 5. v. 23. 1 Cor. 12: v: 12. that foundation and rock of the truth,
1 Timothy 3. v. 15 that holy multitude to whom such special directions of the
Holy Ghost is promised, Ioh. 14. 26. that Church against which hell gates shall
not prevayle, Mat 16. v. 18. the which Church was prefigured by the Arlie of
Noe, out of which none were saved from the all drowning deluge; that is that
tabernacle posuit tabernaculum suum in sole, a tabernacle Psalm. 18.
placed in the sun conspicuous of all to be seen; It is that city that
cannot be hidd. S. Math. 8. All which properties belong only unto our Roman
Catholic Church. First our church is Catholic. For in my memory first we
only are catholics, in so much that the name Catholic was hateful to a
Puritaine or a Protestant. And therefore Beza in his preface novi testamenti
1565. calls the name Catholic a vain word. D. Humfrey in vita Iuelli page
113. calls it a vain term: Sutliff in his challenge, a fruitless name; not
unlike Gaude^tius the heretic who termed the word catholic a humane fiction.
Vt D. Aug: contra Gaudentium, lib: 2 c. 25 though it be against the article of
our belief, whereas S. Hier: Apol. 1. adversus Ruff: says, if we agree with
the Bishop of Rome go. Catholici sumus ^ where S. Hier: makes an infallible
note of a catholic man to agree with the sea of Rome. 2. Our Church is an
ancient church, and God is more ancient then the Divill, truth then falsehood,
the good seed the^ the bad cockle; Christ's seamless coat then his rent pieces,
that is Christ's Church concording, then the division into schisms: And if you
grant that once our Church was the true Church, but since it has swarved from
her ancient purity, and incorruption; show I pray you which Pope first gave
place to the defects, by what doctrine first, in what age of our Lord, on what
motive and occasion, who openly repugned it, how that defect increased: But all
these points we can prove on your religions and sects. We can show that there
was neither Wicliff, Nuss, Zuther, Calvin of your religion; Zuther and Calvin
seem first to have broached it, though with in this hundred years, we can
trace the^ forth the years, motives, places, increase of their religion, as
you may read in hystories. We are not ignorant of the motives that made King
Henry the 8. first oppose himself to the Roman church, though notwithstanding
in his ^ir articles he held and ratified seven sacraments of the Church, and
conformed himself to al points of the Roman Catholic church only excepting
the point of supremacy: We can show so that lawful in his days and sworn
to, which of some was held blasyliemy in the latter end of King Edward the 6:
days; That also which was allowed of in his days in his communion book was
def^ed in Queen Elizabeth's days; And that in her days that is rejected in K.
James. And that in his Majesty's days now, whose Highness offers his religion
to be tried by the united consent of the Fathers, and the 4. or 5. general
Counsels, whose trial both his Bishops and you we are assured dare not stand
to: That which the Protestants now held to be a true lantern and touchstone of
the truth, you repute o^^iy as a stumblin^ block and a stinking snuff^.

We can show that interrupted duration of the Roman catholic church according
to that in Daniel the 9. Regnum, quod in aeternum non dissipabitur; and 5. of
the Arts, si ex hominibus consilium hoc, aut opus, dissolvetur, si vero ex D^o
non potest dissolvi. We can show the prophe^y of the psalmist fulfilled, Dabo
tibi gentes hereditatem tuam, et possession^m tuam t^minos terrae, Psalm 2. Et
dominabitur a mariusque ad mare. We can show multitudes of people converted to
our religion in the East and west Indies, in Iaponia and China, by men of our
religion, and sent by an Apostolical mission. We can show how that S. Peter
about the 63 year of Christ came hither into England. Si^ Metaph de Petro et
pa^lo apud Lippo: Beatus Beda l. 1. c. 4.
Camden. in sua descriptione Br^tanniae page 52. et Nicephorus ut pse refert.
We read how Pope Eleutherius sent hither anno 156. S Fugatium, et Damianum who
baptized King Lucius: and lastly, S. Augustine and his companions Moncks were
sent into England and wrought the conversion thereof; and that S. Gregory whom
D. Hu^frey so far extolleth p. 2. ^e^uitis. rat. 5. page 624. Gregorius
nomine quidem magnus, revera magnus, vir magnus et multis divinae gratiae
dotibus exornatus, was with his followers of our religion, shall moninifestly
be proved by D. Humfreys own assertion p. 2. ratione 5. p. 626. In ecclesiam
vero quid induxerunt Gregorius, et Augustinus, nisi onus caeremoniarum,
Missarum solennia, et Purgatorium; so that we see they held those opinions of
Mass and Purgatory that of Protestants is so extremely condemned. Now if we
should urge you to show the succession of your interpreters and teachers from
S. Peter, you will be mute, but we can show who succeeded each Pope, how long
he lived, what doctrines he established. Lastly we can ^now all sanctity,
unity and conformity of doctrine: Out of all which notes we ca^ gather our
church to be Vnam, Sanctam, et Apostolicam. But you can prove no one of these
notes in your church. And when you shall be demanded at the tribunal of Almighty
God why you hold this faith you now profess: you can only answer, the holy and
your private spirit told you it was so, though against all antiguitie of ^yme,
just interpretation of scripture, consent of Fathers Greek and Latin. But when
we shall be demanded why we believe in the Roman catholic church; we shall
answer by reason Christ himself teaches us so, He that hears you hears
me, and he that contemns you cont^net^ me; the church propounds unto v^ to
be b^leeved so: the church, counsels, holy fathers, Doctors, fo^ders of all
orders teaches us so, in that the death of so many thousand Martyrs confirms
it so, so many thousand miracles wrought in the confirmation of it, witneseth
it so. So that we may justly and confidently say with Richard^ be sanet^
Victore lib. 1. de ^ri^^tate. Nam cum omni fiducia ideo dicere poterimus;
Domine si error est a teipso decepti sumus. Nam ista ta^tis signis et prodigijs
confirmata sunt, et talibus quae non nisi per ^e fieri possunt. Ponder and
weigh well (Mr. Ainsworth) these few lines I send you, for I wish from the
bottom of my heart your souls good, and that your eyes were opened to see the
error wherein you have lived; and the more earnestly I wish it unto you for
country, name sake and alliance; and that those good talents of natural
understanding and learning God has endowed you withal, should not serve as
heapers up of your greater conde^natio^, if you should dye out of the Roman
catholic church which God of his infir^te mercy forbidd. To whom I shall pray
that he will of his free infusion of his holy grace, inlighten your
understanding to see the truth, and incline your will with all fervor and
zeal to embrace it. From Justice hall in Newgate the 22. of September stilo
veteri. 1609.

Your friend most desirous to give you satisfaction, to work your conversion
John Aynsworth.




The answer to the former writing. To Mr John Aynsworth, in Justice hall in
Newgate; Grace and understanding from God our Father, and Lord Jesus Christ our
Savior.
I Perceive by your second writing, Mr Ainsworth, your ready inclination, to
controvert the differences between you and us, about the grounds of our
religions; whereto (as in my first I signified,) I also am willing, for your or
others good, to condescend, and prosequute as leisure ^erveth me. God guide me
in this my enterprise: and bless my labors unto you.

The first thing which both of us were to agree upon, that we wrastled not in
vain, was, how our differences shall be tried and composed, whether by the
verdict of God, (as I hold) or of man? Hereunto. (after you have set down
certain general things required that a man may elicit a supernatural act of
faith; which hereafter if need be may be seanned;) you return me this word: I
answer you directly enough though with a distinction, viz. that if you
understand by what formal motive we shall be tried in our belief, I answer, by
the verdict of Gods written and unwritten word: but if you as^ who shall
determine our faith, after a propounding manner, so we say the Church
concurreth after the manner of an applying condition, teaching what is
canonical, and that which is not authenti^.

This answer which you think direct enough, seems unto me very intricate and
full of fear. I had thought never to have me^t with a man professing the
religion of God, that would either deney the differences of religion to be
tried and composed by the verdict of God; or that would doubt to answer such a
demand, without a distinction, when to a simple heart there is no doublenes or
ambiguitie. Again you distinguish with such terms, as do rather dimm the light
then clear the same: for these words, formal motive; to determine after a
propounding manner; to toucurr after the manner of an applying condition, etc.
are more ambiguous ^hen the thing it self propounded and distinguished. So,
were I disposed to follow this game, we should h^re even at first, fall into
contention and strife of words, which the holy Ghost has Me Logomachem. 2 Timothy
2. 1^
forbidden with earnest protestation. From this course I signified before, that
I would be far: and will therefore plainly confirm that I hold, wishing you to
weigh it in equity.

That God only is to be the umpier and arbiter of all questions and
controversies about religion, is manifested thus. 1. Because himself
commands us his people, to Deuteronomy. 5, 32
take heed that we do as the Lord our God has commanded us, not turning
aside to the right hand or to the left; not Deuteronomy 12. 32.
putting any thing thereto, nor taking ought therefrom.

2. Because the corruption of man is so great, as naturally Romans 3, 10 11. -
19. 1 Cor. 2, 14.
he understands not the things of God, neither can he know them; (which
lamentable experience daily does confirm;) man's wisdom is 1. Cor. 1. 20.
foolishnes and Ro^. 8. 7.
enimitie against God. Whereupon all Col. 2. 22. 23. Mat 15. ^
voluntary religion, and humane precepts in divine worship, are condemned as
vain and fruitless.

3 Because, men being Ephesians. 2. 1. 5
dead in trespasses and synns, are quickened only of God, and do live Gal. 3.
11. Eb^. 11. 6.
by faith, without which we cannot please God: and faith is by Ro^. 10, 17.
hearing, and hearing by the word of God. Wherefore without Gods word, we cannot
in faith assure our selves of any point of doctrine, neither ca^ our questions
of religion, ^ou^dly without it be determined.

4. Because, the Priests and Prophets of God, were bound Eze. 3, 17.
to hear the word from Gods mouth, and give the people warning from him; and
not for to Eze. 13. 2. ^.
prophecy out of their own heart, or ^o^ow their own spirit Also in cases of
controversy to teach them Deu. 17. 11. Eze. 44. (...).
according to the law, and judge according to the judgments of God. Wherefore
the verdict of God, is the only true trial and touchilone of religion, all
other, are balances of deceit. The Psalm. 62, 9. secundu^ Hebr.
sonns of base-m^n are vanity, the sonns of noble men are fal^itie: in the
balances they are together leighter then vanity it self. But the Lord Prove.
2, 6.
gives wisdom, out of his mouth comes knowledge and understanding; ^a^. 1.
17.
every good giving, and every perfect gift is from above, and comes down from
the father of lights. Had I to deal with an Atheist or Paynim, I would use
other grounds: but writing to you a professor of Christ, it is enough to lay
down such principles, as all of Christian religion will confess.

The second thing we were to accord of, was, where this verdict of God is to be
found, whether in the scriptures of the old and new testament, (which is my
faith) or in the writings and mouths of other men? To this I have not your
direct answer as I expected; yet you manifest your mind, in that you take upon
you to prove, That only the bare text of the scripture, is not a sufficient
rule of our faith. I will first briefly confirm, that which I set down: and then
I will answer your arguments.

In many parts and in many sorts ( Hebr 1. 1.
says the holy Ghost) God having spoken of old time to the Fathers by the
Prophets; has in these last days spoken to us by the Son: which Son having
Ioh. 5, 39.
witness of the former prophets writings, chose also special men to be Act 10.
40. 41. 42. and 5. 32.
witnesses of his doctrines and actions unto the world, both by word and
writing. Who have testified unto us, that whatsoever God promised to the
fathers, he has fulfilled unto us by 2. Cor. 1. 20.
the Son; and have opened Romans 16, 25, 26.
by the prophetical scriptures, the secret and mystery of the Gospel: so as
none need to say in his heart, Romans 10, 6. 7, 8.
who shall go up into heaven, or who shall go down into the deep; for the
word is near us, in our mouth and in our heart, even the word of faith which
they preached. And by them we learn that all 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17.
scripture is the opneustos, inspired of God, and profitable for doctrine, for
reprehension, for correction, for instruction which is in righteousness, that
the man of God may be (artios and exe^tismenos,) perfect and perfectly fitted
unto every good work. These also, after vocal preaching, did write their
gospel, that such as read, might believe, and Ioh. 20, 31
in believing might have life through Christ's name, and that 1 Ioh. 1, 4.
their joy might be full. Wherefore as we are referred to the scriptures for
assurance of our faith: so also are we willed not 1 Cor. 4, 6. phronein.
to presume, (or be wise) above that which is written. This being the
authority and authentia of the scriptures, as we are taught of God: let us now
weigh your reasons alleged to disable them.

Your first argument is:

Nothing is to be believed, that is not taught or gathered out of the written
1. Argum.
word. But that the Bible is canonical, is not directly taught, nor by evident
consequence deduced out of the same. Therefore it is not to be believed, that
the Bible is canonical scripture. The Major as you say is the common assertion
of Protestants; citing Calvin, and the Apology of the Church of England. The
Minor you say is approved by Hooker a principal Protestant.

I answer; the pillars of your propositions being earth and ashes; the Answer.
whole frame and conclusion of your argument, lies in the dust. I told you
before we entered into this field, that it is Gods word, not man's, that I would
try and be tried by: Wherefore you bet the aier in vain, if by any man's
authority, you think to supplant my faith. Much less will I approve what
every Protestant has written. So leaving others, I return unto your self. Your
first proposition is too general, I grant, many things may be believed, though
they be not gathered out of the written word: but I hold not any thing needful
to be believed for salvation with God; but that which is taught by his written
word. Which perswasion^ ground upon these and other like scriptures, Ioh. 20.
30. 31. 2. Tim. 3. 15. 16. 17. Eccles. 12, 11, 12.

Your second proposition I deney. Your reason, learned from M. Hooker (...) is*
F^^ if any book did give testimony of all the rest, yet the scripture that
gives credit to all the (...) scripture to be credited, neither could we come
to any pa^se whereon to rest, or assurance this way. I answer; Al scripture
(such as I rely upon) is theopneustos, inspired of God, and therefore
authentik, and to be a canon and rule of our faith and actions. To discern what
scripture is inspired of God, none is able but by the spirit of God. For the
Apostle says, What man knows the things of man, save the spirit of a man
which is in him; even so the things of God knows no man, but the spirit of
God; 1. Cor. 2* 11. Of this spirit God powers out upon all his children some
mesure; without this spirit, none 1. Cor. 12, 3.
can say that Jesus is the Lord; though men should see all his mighty miracles,
and hear all his gracious words, yet Ioh. 12, 37 38. 39, 40. Act 16, 14.
could they not be p^rswaded, unless God opened their hearts. Therefore said our
Savior to Simon bar Jonas, Mat. 16, 17.
flesh and blood has not reveled this unto thee, (that I am the Christ the son
of the living God,) but my father which is in heaven. And as of him, so of all,
he says, Ioh. ^, 44.
No man can come unto me except the father which has sent me draw him. Whither
the word therefore be spoken or written, it cannot be believed to be of God, but
by the spirit of God, which therefore is called the 2. Cor. 4, 13*
spirit of belief or of faith; and which spirit is joined together with the
word, in the Saints (as ^sa. 59* 21.
Isaias prophesies:) who thereupon are all Ioh. 6. 45.
taught of God; and have received (as Paul says,) not the spirit which is of
the world, but the spirit which is of God, that they may know the things which
are given to them of God, 1. Cor. 2, 12. and it is the Spirit which testifies,
that the Spirit is truth. 1. Ioh. 5. 6.

The whole word of God being of it self worthy to be credited, and having
testimony of the same Spirit which spoke and wrote it, is also further
confirmed by the power and effect thereof in the conscience, peircing more
sharply then any Heb. 4, 12*
two edged sword, and discerning the thoughts and intents of the heart. The
power, majesty, excellency, of the scriptures above all humane writings, felt
in the heart, and confirmed by the spirit; evidently prove to all that are
Christ's, that they are of God; and if from him, then are they canonical, the
rule and mesure of our faith and actions: and these all do bear witness one
to an other, the latter Prophets and Apostles commenting upon Moses the first
divine writer, and John the last, co^firming and abridging all other from the
first, in his heavenly Revelation. The ear (faith Job. 12, 11
Job) discerns words, as the palate tastes meat for it self; wherefore though
the natural man discerns no difference between Gods canonical and man's
apocryphal scriptures, yet the spiritual man 1 Cor. ^. 15.
discerns all things* and by testimonies of the scripture is able for to
prove that the Bible is canonical, contrary unto your Conclusion; although
perhaps he cannot persuade it, to them which are carnal and have not the
spirit; as the Jude, 19.
Apostle speaks. It this be not, as I have showed; but we must rely upon men,
for the ground of our faith: then would I know, how you can persuade an
infidel, to believe Christianisme rather then Mahometisme, to be the way of
life. For the Turk will say and swear that the Alkoran is of God; as the Pope
will say of the new Testament. And if men's voices shall carry it away, our
belief in Christ is lost. If miracles be alleged, there is still the same
controversy, whither they be divine or divilish: for hethens and idolaters
have had miracles many; and Antichrist, as it is prophesied, shall Rev. 13, 13.
shall do great wonders, making fire to come down from heaven on the earth, in
the sight of men Your other allegations of antiquity, Universality etc. will
not stop the mouth of Iuli^^ the Apostata, but he will bear down Christianity
and restore Paganism, as being ancient and universal. So there will be no
settling of the conscience til it come unto God, and rest upon him alone, and
receive the plerophorian, the full assurance by his spirit; without which men
can not discern between the prophetical writings and the Jews Thalmud,
between Christ's Testament and the Turks Alkoran, or between Gods oracle out of
the Debir in Jerusalem, and the Divils oracle out of his temple in Delphos.

Again, as the Israelites discerned canonical scriptures from others; so do
we: for we Gentiles are Ephesians. 3, 6
coheyrs with them, and of the same body; for there is Ephesians. 4, 4, 5
one body and one spirit, as there is one Lord and one faith. But they relied
not on the Church, or on the Highpreist and his council: for had they so done,
their church must have had privilege not to err, (as you think of yours,) which
if you grant a Jew, he will overthrow your belief in Christ, seeing their
Priests, Elders and people condemned Christ, his Apostles, and their writings.
As you would answer a Pharisee for this point, so mind the like answer to your
self

Finally your plea is overthrown and confounded by your own practice: for you
will have us receive the scriptures for canonical, because your Church of Rome
says so they are: we must believe upon her word, Tobie and Judith to be
canonical, but the third and fourth of Esdras, not: the first and second of the
Machabees to be canonical, but not the third or fourth. If any make question of
this for conscience sake; you seek to resolve him by the definitive sentence of
the Pope who cannot err. But if he ask why the Pope of Rome may not err, as well
as the Patriarch of Constantinople: you then allege (as after to me in this
your letter) Christ's promise to Peter, Mat. 16 and there you scan every word,
and press every circumstance of the text, to make him believe that Peter was
the Rock and head of the Church, and consequently the Popes his successors. Ask
he you again, how he shall know that Matthewes gospel (wherein this promise is
written) is canonical, rather then Nicodemus gospel you will answer because the
Pope has so determined. Thus the very entrance and ground of your religion,
brings men into a maze and Labyrinth: for we must believe the Pope cannot
err, because Christ says such words to Peter; which the Pope expounds and
applies to himself: and we must believe that Christ said them words, because
the Pope has determined that he said them. Thus the foundation of our faith,
must rely wholly upon man, (a clod of clay:) whatsoever he tells us is
scripture, that must we so esteem; how ever he expound scripture, so must we
take it: what he says is tradition or Gods unwritten word; we must so regard
and keep it: be it never so absurd, against the light of nature, against
reason, against the grounds of faith; against the evident testimonies of the
prophets and Apostles; we must captivate all our understanding, faith and
conscience, under the Popes wisdom: and all because he tells us we must so
do. Otherweise, if we may try this principle of yours by the scripture,
through the light of Gods spirit in us; then may we do the like of other,
which be of lesser moment. Consider I pray you this first point seriously; and
the Lord give you understanding in all things. And let me here put you in mind
(though I be not yet come to the end,) of the last motive in your letter, where
you tell me how when you shall be demanded at the tribunal of almighty God, why
you believe in the Roman catholic church; you can answer, by reason Christ
himself teaches you so, saying, He that hears you hears me etc. But
deceive not your own soul; for when Christ shall ask you at that day, why you
have worshipped images, sung mass and Dirige, prayed to Saints and souls
departed, and Mat. 15, 3.
transgressed many other of his fathers commandments by your traditions; you
will answer, because the head of your church the Pope did teach you so; when he
shall ask you, how you knew the Pope to be head of the church, and to have such
authority over your conscience; you will answer because Christ himself spoke
such words to Peter as are written, Mat. 16. When he ask you again, how you
knew that he spoke those words, or that they extended to the Pope of Rome,
above all other: your answer vvil be (according to the grounds of your
religion) because the Pope himself, with his senate of Cardinals did tell you
so. Then vvil your hope be the web of a spider, and your house now seeming
upon the Rock, vvil be found upon the sand: you shall hear the Curse pronounced
upon Ier. 17. ^.
the man that trusted in man, and made flesh his arm, and vvithdre^v his heart
from the Lord; and that all such Mat. ^. 9. Isa. 29. 13.
vvorshiped him in vain, as had their fear tovvard him, taught by the precept
of men. The P^. 73, 26.
Rock of my heart, who is my portion for ever, preserve me and deliver you from
those syrtes and quicksands, where men make ship-vvrack of faith.

Your second argument to prove that the bare and naked word of God 2. Argum.
a^^vvered.
cannot be an infallible rule or square of truth, is this; That which is
difficult and includes many fenses, at least to the ignorant, cannot be a
certain rule of faith: But the scriptures are thus. Your antecedent you seek
to confirm by Luther, Te^tullian; and S. Peter also who (as you write) says
2 pet 3.
that in S. Paul's epistles there be many things hard to be understood, which the
unlearned and unstable deprave as all the rest of the scriptures, to their own
perdition. To this of the Apostle I answer, first, you set the holy text on the
centers, to stretch it out for your us^. The Apostle says (...).
some things are hard to be understood; you would have him say, many things:
he says, they deprave these as the rest of the scriptures; you say, as all the
rest. Secondly this testimony, though it were as large as you extend it,
proves not your antecedent, but only the first part of it, and scarce that
too. For to gather because part is difficult, therefore the whole is; is more
then either his words, or good reason vvil bear. The later part, that the
scripture cannot be a certain rule of faith, follovveth not upon the former: it
may be a (...) though some part of it be difficult, though many men do deprave
it. Our ignorance or perverseness, cannot make crooked that which is most
straight, no more then our Romans ^. 3.
unfaithfulnes can make the faith of God of none effect. The artizen that
works by rule and squire, man through want of skill or heed* work amysse*
but himself is to blame, and not his rule. Again though some scriptures be
difficult, yet many be plain and easy; and God has so tempered them together,
that the vvisest should have vvherin to exercise their wit, and admire Gods
mysterios* and the simplest should have plain documents, vvherby to ground
their faith. It is our fathers vvil also that to some, his word should be in
parables; that Mat. 12, 13. 14. Luke 8. 10.
hearing men may hear and not understand, when to others it is given to know
the secrets of the kingdom of God; who has written his word Pro. 1. 4.
to give unto the simple sharpnes of wit; to the child, knowledge and
discretion. Again you allege the Eunuch, Act. 8. who confesses that he could
not understand the scripture without a master. I answer as before, this
proves no insufficiency in the scripture, but in the reader. I vvil further
confirm it by your own position; vvher afterward you undertake to prove,
That the Popes definitive sentence as he is head of the church, is an
indeficient rule in matters of faith. But these definitive sentences, say I,
are some of them hard to be understood, at least by the ignorant; and many
cannot understand them without a master* if therefore your argument be good,
your position is naught, and you must seek a new rule in matters of faith.
Your humane testimonies say no more then is already heard and ansvvered: if
they did say more and you pressed it, I would make answer as to you, but
leave the Fathers to sleep in peace.

You proceed with the second branch of your antecedent, saying, that the
scripture has many senses literal, many senses spiritual; whereupon you
gather, siure is the old law when any difficulty happened, the Priest was to
decide it, therefore with a far greater interest, the Deuteronomy. 17.
Pr^ist of the new law, that has the spirit of interpretation redoubled, and
rati^ication of his doctrine assigned and confirmed by Christ Jesus himself, is
to e^pound the hidden senses of scripture.

I answer, first that there be so many senses literal and spiritual as you do
say, rests for you to prove in your next, for in this you make none. I hold
the sense of scripture to be one, though applied to many times, places, and
persons. Pentheus in the (...).
Poet, thought he savv two suns* in the firm^ment, when there was in deed but
one: it was but the dif^^r^perature of his own senses that made him so to
think. You suppose the word (which shines as the s^n in the firmament of the
church has many meanings: when it is but the dazeling of your eyes. Secondly
though it were granted to have many senses, yet the law in Deuteronomy. 11. makes
nothing against my faith. For I grant the scriptures are to be expounded by
the Priests and Ministers of God. Deuteronomy. 33. 10. Eph^. 4. (...). yet not by man's
own judgment, or at the will of any mortal (...) but by the 1 Cor. ^, (...).
spirit of God* and by the scripture it self, as did (...). 8, ^
the (...) in Israel. For no minister of Christ, (no not the 2. Cor. 1, 2^.
Apostles; have de^^^nion over our faith: but are in declaration of the teach,
to approve themselves to every man's conscience, in the sight of God, as 2. Cor.
4* ^
Paul say^th Neither might the Priests of old, decide controversies as they
(...) themselves; their words were not oracles: but they were to inform the
people according Deu, ^* ^^
to the law; which the Lord explaineth by the priest Ezekiel thus; In
controversies they shall stand to judge, and they shall judge it according to
my judgments, etc. Ezekiel 44, ^4. Thus Gods law is the rule of judgment; and
the scriptures are not so bare and naked, as to need the rags of men's
inventions to array them. If you yield not in this, I pray you what answer will
you make to the Jews, that shall plead with you against Christ, and alledg^,
how their high Priests and Rulers which were to decide all controversies. Deuteronomy.
17. decided this controversy of Jesus of Nazareth thus, that he was a seducer,
a blasphemer, a traitor, and therefore to dye the death. If the bare and naked
scripture (as you call it,) help you not against their pontifical decrees and
expositions; you will have but a bare and naked faith, the shame whereof, no
^igleaves will hide. But the Priest of the new law you say, is to decide with a
far greater interest. I grant it; for Christ being come, Heb. 9. 1^
the high Priest of good things that were to come, has far greater privilege
and power then any legal Priest; and him we are commanded Mat. 17. 5.
to hear. But he is not the Priest you mean: for you allege from John 2^* that
Christ bids S. Peter and his successors, feed his flock with the spirit of
interpretation, etc. I marvel how this will make for your opinion, that the
bare word of God, is not an infallible rule or square of truth. For do you
think in good ^arnest, that Christ would ha^^^th Apostle feed his flock, with
ought save Gods word, because he bad him feed? then all other Pastors must do
so too. For the same Apostle writes afterward thus, 1 Pet. 5. 7. 2.
The Elders which ar^ among you, I bes^ech, who am a co^lder, etc. seed the
flock of God, and another Apostle says to the Elders of an other church, Act.
20* 28.
Take h^ed to your selves, and to all the flock whereof the holy Ghost has made
you Bishops, to feed the Church of God etc. If the commandment to feed,
privileged S. Peter above the law and word of God: then all Christian Bishops
or Elders, have like privilege, because they have like commandment. But I deny
either that Peter alone was to feed Christ's sheep, or that he might feed them
with any thing, save Gods word. For the Apostles doctrines were the
commandments of the Lord. 1 Cor. 14, 37. and not their own counsels* and if S.
Peter or any other, taught or practiced contrary to the word, he was to be
withstood and reproved, Gal. ^. 11. Wh^rfore ^ven Peter himself (who knew well
the meaning of his commission,) taught the church, that their new birth was 1
Pet. 1. 23 25.
not of mortal feed, but of immortal, by the word of God; and that was the
word which was preached among them; and which he exhorted them still to 1 Pet.
2, 2.
desire that they might grow thereby; and willed the^, that if any man spoke,
it should 1 Pet. 4, ^1.
be as the words of God, and refers them to the sure ^ Pet. 1, 19
word of the prophets, as to a light that shines in a dark place: that strange
it is you should gather any thing against the authority or sufficiency of the
scriptures, because the Apostle was willed to feed the sheep of Christ; unless
you think they should not have wheat but ^haff to feed upon. And if your ch^if
shepherd of Rome use so to feed his flock, and gather such doctrines from
Christ's commandment; I will never go over the Alps to setch my food from him.

You next allege Act. 15. where the Apostles meaning to decide a controversy,
repaired not (you say) to their private spirits interprctatio^ but to a council
gathered in Jerusalem, where S Peter was head, where al was concluded with It
seems good to the holy Ghost and to us.

I answer, you hold not to the point which you took upon you to prove, viz.
that the bare word of God is not an infallible rule of truth: the scripture you
cite makes against you; for the Apostles were publishers not of their own word
but of Gods, 1. These. 2, 13. 1. Pet. 1. 25. 2. Pet 1. 16. They confirmed their
sayings in this Council, by the former scriptures, Act 15, 15, 16. They
expounded and applied the scriptures to their present question, by the same
spirit which wrote them, which was no private but the most publik spirit of
God, 1 Cor 2. 10. 11.
without which no scripture can be well interpreted. And where you say S.
Peter was head of that council, you pass the bounds of the text which
shows no such thing. Christ was Mat. 18, 20 Ephesians. 1. 22.
the head, and he guided them by his Act. 15. 28
holy spirit. Peter, after much disputation shevved his mind, grounded upon the
works and law of the Lord, Barnabas and Paul confirmed the same by their own
experience: then James confirmed verse. 13. 14 etc.
Simon Peter's speech by the words of the Prophets, and thereupon verse. 19.
cr^^o.
gave sentence or judgment what should be done; whereto the Apostles and
Elders with the whole church agreed. Wherefore if any man were head, reason
would lead us to think lames rather then Simeon was the man. Thus the decree
had power and force from Gods word, which by the holy Ghost was serched,
scanned, manifested of verse. 6, etc
the Apostles and Elders; was approved and consented to, of the whole Church
there, the verse. 23.
Apostles, Elders and brethren; all which, and not Simon alone, said, verse. 28.
It seemed good to the Holy ghost and to us. And that all care and diligence
should be used to decide controversies by the word of God; I acknovvledg^ but
to deney Gods word (which you call bare and naked, though it be gloriously
arrayed with al ornaments of the spirit,) to be an infal^ible rule of truth; is
far from my heart, and far from being proved by these your allegations. But
you shut up your argument thus. Therefore let S. Peter himself conclude, 2 Petr.
1.
that no prophecy of scripture (that is no interpretation as the holy Fathers
interpr^t) to made by a private spirits interpretation. But the Apostle
concludes not your purpose, that Gods word or scr^p^ure is not an infallible
rule of truth; therefore you are nothing h^lpen^^ this text, though you
constreyn it to sp^a^ otherw^is^ then the auctor (...) it down: which was not
(is you say) by a private spirit (...); but ^dias epi*. (...): propria
interpretatione says your authentik ^a^in.
of ones own interpretation, or of it own explication or (...). This speech
does no whit disprove the authority, sufficiency, or i^^^llibilitie of the
prophesies of scripture, which the Apostle before did approve, (v^r^* 19.)
Therefore this stands still firm against you, that Gods bare word (meaning
without the rags of men's inventions,) is a^ infallible rule of truth: but how
this infallible rule is to be used, interpreted, applied etc. is a second
consideration. And, though I would not swery from the question, yet to help you
what I may, I will speak a little of that which you allege. If by (...) spirit
you mean an humane spirit, or the spirit natural in man; I grant it: no
prophecy of scripture is of private, or of a m^^s own interpretation: he can
not by all his w^t, learning, or industry explane it, without the spirit of
God. If you mean a private man's interpretation; as that no private man can
interpret any prophecy: I deney it. For the public man with you is the Pop;
and he interprets all; having his supposed soveraigntie from Peter. But if all
other be private men, save Peter and his successors the Popes; then do you
injury to all the other Apostles, Prophets, Evang lists, Pastors and Teachers,
at that time and in ages since: as if they without Peter or the Pope, could not
interpret any proph^sie of scripture. It is also against your own Bishops,
Priests, Jesuits, and against your self; for none of you (but the public
spirit of the Pope only) can interpret any scripture: which if it be so, why
meddle you now with controversies about the scriptures against me, seeing you can
give but a private spirits interpretation, which the Apostle (in your own
judgment) condemns? If all Church officers be exempted from the private
number, and are among^th public, and may all interpret: then will your Pope
have ^^le privilege from this place, above other Bishops* Or if you think, that
no private that is (as you speak) no (...) man, can interpret any prophecy of
scripture, you do injury to Gods people or l^itie. For were not all the lay
o^ people of the church in Cor^^th willed to 1. Cor 14. 1.
covet spiritual gif^s, and rather that they might prophecy; which verse. 31.
all of them might perform in the church? Does not the wind Ioh* 3*
blow where it lysteth, and Gods spirit breath on who^ he pleases? Prophesies
of scripture never were of propre or private interpretation, yet Christ a
carpenters son, brought up Ioh* ^. 15.
unlettered, n^yther Priest nor Levite, but a lay man in Israel, was permitted
to Luke ^. 16, 17. etc.
interpret the prophesies of scripture publikly; and C^iaphas himself cavill^d
not against him, as being a private spirit. The Apostles also were Act. ^. 13.
unlettered and private men, yet were they not for that, forbidden to interpret
scriptures: but if they lived in your church, it seems they should, Consider I
pray you of these things, and the Lord give you understanding.

But you proceed with this matter, and thirdly you argue, and by 3. Argum.
ansvvered.
your argument (as you say) break the force of a pretended answer, thus, Not
only scriptures by themselves are not sufficient to prove what is canonical,
and what is not: but also that scriptures helped by private men's
interpretation, are not sufficient to prove the same. I see this your
proposition, but I see no proof: in sted of that, you digress to complayn that
the poorest handycrafts man etc, is allowed to interpret the hardest places of
scripture. But all this proves not the point in hand, namely that the
scripture is not a sufficient rule of our faith. For this it may be, and is:
how ever men err in expounding it. Of this point I have spoken before: your
assertion is not an argument; and if there were but a pretended answer, yet your
bare position would not break the force of it; the Eccles. 10. 10.
iron is blunt, and you have not whet the edge; therefore you must put to more
strength.

Fourthly you argue thus. That which by the lights and lanterns of your
opinions has been wronged in the highest degree to bolster 4. Argum. ansvvered.
up heresies, cannot be a true and indeficient rule of faith. The assumption is
a rhetorical flourish: for what more (...) quent (say you) with here^i^s then
at their fingers ends to (...) places of scripture? etc. And here you mention
diverse points and persons, and then without conclusion, pass on to an other
argument. The assumption which is personal, touching Luther, Calvin, etc, and
unjustly b^nt against us; I leave to strive about, and could requite you with
the like of your Popes and Prelates, who have wronged the scripture not in the
least degree. Your proposition I deney: for though men wrong the word of God
never so much, either ignorantly or wilfully; yet is the word never the worse,
not less sufficient rule of faith. The Priests in Israel Zoph. 3, 4.
wrested the law, by which they should have taught the people: yet was the law
in it self a true and indeficient rule of faith, to which the Prophets Isa. 8.
20.
referred the people, and blamed those that spoke otherweise, as wanting light.
Our Saviors most holy doctrines were vvronged and depraved in the highest
degree by Pharisees: will you therefore conclude, that his doctrine was not a
true and indeficient rule of faith? Bevvare of such pleading, and learn rather
of the Apostles, who though men 2. Pet. 3, 16
depraved the scriptures; yet 2. Pet. 1. 19.
referred the Christians unto them, as being able to make us wise unto
salvation, through the says that is in Christ Jesus, and to make the man of
God absolute and perfect unto all good works. 2. Tim. 3, 15. 1^.

Fifthly and lastly you argue many mysteries of our faith (...) believed, 5
Argum. ^^^v. ^^^d.
that are not explicitly declared in the word of God, (...) i^fallibly
(prescinding from al traditions of the catholic church) (...) thence, so that
they are sufficient to make one believe that (...) act as our faith requires.
Therefore that which makes these mysteries worthy of constant belief, is a rule
of faith as well as the written word, whither they be traditions divine or
Apostelical.

The first part of this your argument I deney, for neither many nor any
mysteries of our faith, are without their due and sufficient proof from the
holy scriptures. You labor to confirm that you said, thus, because till Moses
(...) word, but men were taught by tradition. You allege also Exodus 14. thou
shall tell thy (...) Deuteronomy (...) ask thy father and he will show thee etc. Job, 8
ask the former generation, etc. Also, how after our Saviors coming, the
Apostles preached viva voce, before they wrote etc.

Your first reason is altogether insufficient: for though the scriptures could
be no perfect rule of faith, before they were written; yet after the writing of
them, they might be, and so were. You might as well say, neither tradition nor
doctrine by lively voice, could be a rule of faith, before it was spoken. You
might also say, the scriptures are not sufficient to make one believe any one
mystery of faith, seeing before Moses, all mysteries were taught by voice. The
Exo 25, 40
pattern of the Tabernacle showed to Moses on the mount, could be no perfect
rule for him to build by, before it was showed. Was it not therefore a perfect
and sufficient pattern, after it was exhibited? Even so the scriptures, now
that they are written, are a sufficient rule and assurance of our faith. Ioh.
20. 31. 2 Timothy 3. 16. 17. Your other allegations out of Moses and Job, will
serve much better for the Jewish traditions, then for yours; and confirm their
Thalmud and Cabala, rather then your papal decrees. But the Apostles turned the
Jews from their 1 Pe^. 1. 1^
vain conversation, received by the tradition of the fathers; and would not
have them Tit. 1. 14.
take heed to Jewish fables and co^mandments of men that turn from the truth.
Our Lord also reproved the traditions of the Pharisees, though received from
their Elders, Mat* 1, 2, 3. etc. by which you may learn (God opening your heart)
that Israel was not left to unwritten verities for a ground of their faith; but
were to tell their children the works of God that they had seen and heard, (as
we all are to do ours,) and for a rule of their faith and life, to Deuteronomy 6, 7.
teach them Gods written law. This you may see by the In your Latin, the 43.
and 77.
44. and 78. Psalms, where the fathers told their children such things as are
written in the books of Moses and Joshua etc. which as they continued the rule
and ground of (...) rough out the Prophets ages, so Malachi the last Angel of
the old Testament comendeth them to the Mal. 4 4.
memory of the church; even as from the first giving, they were the Deu. 33. 4
inheritance of the same. The power and authority of which Law and Prophets
was so great, as our Savior says h^^ Luke 16, 3^
that vvil not hear them, neither vvil they be persuaded though (...) from the
dead again. Bevvare therefore, least while you ^^^k to support traditions, you
supplant Christian faith: for a levv vvil press you by tradition to receive
their Cabala as well as their prophets, seeing you have had these all from them;
and cannot without them (by your own grounds) tell what is canonical
scripture, and what is not: and they do^ affirm that God gave to Moses a
double law; the one written, the other by vvo^d of mouth. ^ambam (...)
Misnajoth. Your particulars insisted upon for the equal (...) of (...). persons
in the god head; the baptising of infant; the pro^ h^ly Ghost; the keeping of
the Lords day; the lawfulnes to ^at blood etc: which you think can not be
proved by scripture without tradition; show that you are too much a stranger in
Gods book* for it afffordeth us sufficient proof for all of th^se* And (...)
us, if we (...) without sure grounds from scripture: and shame would cover our
faces, before Arrians, Anabaptists and other heretics, if we should le^ go our
(...) foundation, to build upon your sands. As for other points of Mass for
the dead etc: which you mention upon certain fathers credit, as it has no
ground in Gods book, so by the same it may easily be refuted: and what God
condemns, no man can justify.

Whereas you all (...) 2 These. 2. and other like testimonies for traditions; I
readily grant you to accept all traditions divine or Apostolical; for they were
the 1. Cor. 14 37.
commandments of God: but your church traditions I refuse, for they are the
institutions of m^n. I grant you also that Paul taught more things by word,
then were written in that his Epistle: but that he taught any thing as needful
for salvation, without warrant from the scriptures, I deney; or that the su^m
and effect of all that he taught, be not in the Prophets, his own and other
evangelical writings* If you will not believe me, believe himself who testifies
that he Act. 26. 22
said none other things then those which the Prophets and Moses did say should
come: believe an other Apostle which says, Ioh. 20. 31
th^se things are written that ye might beleev etc. and that in believing ye
might have life through Christ's name. And whereas you wonder how men should
deney the necessary use of traditions, asking, if we will believe the Apostles,
why then we will not believe them that lived in the Apostles days, and such
holy fathers as flourished shortly of er: you may stay your wonder, if you
consider how Paul 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17.
tea^h^th, that the scripture is able to make a man vvis^ unto salvation,
absolute, and perfect unto every good work* for now there is no necessary use
of other traditions, unless it be for works that are too good, and they be (I
trow) work* of sup^rerogation. You may also answer your own question, if you
mind how there lived in the Apostles days, many Tit. 1. 10, (...).
vain talkers and deceive^s of minds, ^. Ioh. 4. 1 and 2 18.
many false prophets that were gone out into the world and many Antichrists:
and how after their departing Act. 20, 29
there entered in gr^^vous wolves* Now seeing such weeds flourished shortly after
in the garden of the Lord, is it not more safe for us (think you) to keep the
foundation of the Apostles and Prophets (on which Christ's church is Ephesians* 2. 20
builded) then to build upon the bo^^s of after writers? To conclude th^^fore
this point, Christ sends us to Ioh 5, 39.
search the scriptures; his Apostles 2 Pet. 1. 19
do the like; the Prophets before Isa. 34, 16. Psalm. 4. 4.
spoke also to like effect: this counsel by Gods grace I shall follow (...)
these I will exercise my self, not doubting but I have chosen the better part,
which shall not be taken from me. And unto you that ^zelous for the traditions
of your fathers, I show the counsel of the hol^ Ch^st E^^. 20. 18
walk not in the ordinances of your fathers; Mat. 15. 3.
transgres^e not the co^ma^dements; of God by your traditions, and presume not
1. Cor. 4, 6
above that which is written.

The second thing you take upon you to prove, is, That the Popes II.
definitive sentence, as he is head of the Church, is an indeficient rule in
matters of faith. This position if you well understood it, I would not strive
against: for the definitive sentence of that Papa or Father, that is head of
the church, is (I confess) such an indeficient rule. But the Vicar of Rome is
not this Pope; it is Christ himself that is Isai. 9. 6.
Father of eternity; and he is the Col, ^. 18.
head of his body the church; and he has forbidden us to call any man our Pope
or Father upon the earth, for th^r is but one our Father which is in heaven.
Mat. 23, 9. But you understand it of an earthly Pope and head, and would
confirm it by this scripture, Luke 22 31. Simon Simon lo Satan has desired
you to winnow you as wheat, etc. but I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail
not. Here first I observe how you labor to confirm the Popes definitive power,
by the scriptures: so that which before you pleaded against, as an insufficient
ground, now here you make a ground of grounds* and so you are contrary to your
self. For before you taught me to believe this is Gods word, because the Pope
says so: here you will have me believe your Popes sentence to be a rule of
faith, because the scripture says something which you imagine makes for him.
Thus you would lead me as in a round: and I cannot tell what you make the rock
of your faith. But I will follow your argument. Christ prayed for Simon, that his
faith (upon Satan's sifting) might not fayl. I grant it, neither did it fayl,
though he fell greevously. Yet this grace made not Simon, Pope or Head of the
church: for it is a grace common to all the elect members of the body, whom
though Satan sifteth, and they be often foiled, yet rise they again by belief
in God; and though their faith often faints, yet it never fails or is
consumed. And this by virtue of Christ's prayer or mediation, 1. Ioh. ^. 1. 2.
for Gods gracious gifts are Ro^. 11, 2^.
without repentance, and Christ gives all Ioh. 10. 2^
his sheep eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any pluck
them out of his hand. You proceed and say* that this prayer was consequently
for his successors. If you mean successors in his office, I know not who they
be; neither show you the Popes to be the men. If you mean successors in his
faith, I grant it, as before. For Peter had the faith of Gods elect (as true
justifying faith is caled): Titus 1. 2.
in which faith, whosoever succeed or come after him, (as also they that then
lived in like faith with him,) they were and are and shall be by Christ's
mediation, confirmed that their faith (which is their Abak. 2. 4
life) fayl not. For example: Christ chose 12. Apostles, and one of them was
Ioh. 6. 70.
a Divil. Iscariot (who was the Divil,) fell into syn, and Christ prayed not
for him, so his faith failed (though he confessed his syn), and he dyed in
dispeir, hanging himself; for he was the Son of loss or perdition, and
therefore was to be lost, that the scripture might be fulfilled. John. 17. 12.
Simon Cephas fell also into syn, above the other ten, but he was one of Christ's
sheep, no child of perdition, therefore he kept him from being lost, praying
that his faith might not fayl. And as for him, for the rest, at an other time,
he Ioh. 17. 11*
prayed to his father to keep them in his name; and not verse* 20.
for them alone, but for those also which shall beleev in him through their
word. Wherefore Christ prayed not only for Simo^, but for all the Saints;
though special need and use was for him at that time: yet as Paul says of
Abraham's justification, Romans 4, 23, 24.
it is not written for him only, but also for us; so say I of Simons
confirmation by the prayer of Christ: for whatsoever is written, is written for
our learning Ro^. 15. 4.

But you prosequute your argument thus, that S. Peter was bidden co^firm his
brethren; but only S. Peter and not the church in general has brethren.
Whereupon you would have me gather, that this was his special privilege, and no
man's else, save his successors in the headship. Your assumption I withstand as
a fallacy, proving Peter's popedom for confirming his brethren, no better then
as if you should reason thus: Paul said to Barnabas, Act. 15, 36*
let us return and visit our brethren in every city etc. but only Paul and
Barnabas, and not the church in general, have brethren: therefore only Paul and
Barnabas are Popes of the catholic church, and visiters of the same, they and
their successors. If this be not a good reason to prove a supremacy of
visitation; the other is no better to prove a supremacy of Confirmation. For
the church in general is a 1. Pet. 5, 9.
brotherhood, as the Apostle Peter himself calls it; and of this brotherhood,
Peter was one, Paul an other, John an other, and so the rest, not only the
Apostles but all ^. Pet. 1. 1 -- 10.
believers. Wherefore as Simon had brethren, so has every Christian, and all
are brethren each to other, and all brethren Heb. 2, 11* 12.
unto Christ. And Peter as he was 1. Pet. 5, 1*
a joint elder with the other elders; so was he also a joint brother with the
other brethren: or else he was none of Christ's. And as for confirming his
brethren, it is far from proving a popedom: for Paul an other Apostle, Act.
14. 22* and 15, 41.
confirmed his brethren, and Timothee an Evangelist 1 These. 3, 2*
did the like; and Judas and Silas being Prophets, Act 15. 32*
did the same; and all the Angels or ministers of churches, are taught of
Christ to Apoc. 3, 2*
do likeweise. Wherefore Simons commission to confirm his brethren, made him
not Pope, and consequently neither his supposed successors.

But you press the circumstances, that our Savior points out one particular
man, saying Simon Simon; and after, having spoken of al, particularizeth the
speech again, saying, for thee, thy faith, and thy brethren etc. I answer,
there was cause why our Savior should speak to him thus, because in his
sifting, he should show more weakness then the rest: and a special fore,
needs a special medicine. But the fore being healed, the recured person is as
an other man of his degree: and I showed before, that Peter had no privilege in
these things above the other Apostles, Is^ariot only excepted.

You next allege from Mat. 16. how Christ says, he builds his church upon S.
Peter; adding moreover, that he changed his name, and of Simon he makes him
Peter, and Petra, and ^^phas, which name in the Syriah tongue signifies a Rock;
thereby to prevent all frivolous answers etc. I wish you more wary in alleging
of scriptures; Christ said he would build his church upon that Rock (petra) and
had changed before Simons name not into that, but into Petros. And whereas
CEPHAS the Syriak name is ambiguous to signify in Greek both PETRON and
PETRAN; the ambiguitie is cleared by the holy Ghost, in Ioh 1. 43. where Cephas
the man's name is interpreted Petros, that is in English a stone. Moreover that
Simons name was not Petra Rock, is plain by Mat. 16. where the Apostle
distinguishes the terms, adding also a pronoune demonstrative of the ^aute.
feminine sex, which agrees not with a man's propre name; and the Syriak also
by the demonstrative hada, distinguishes the propre name Cipha, from the
appellative cipha, which otherwise by termination had no difference. As it
stands not with the grammatical construction that Simon should have the name
of the Rock: so neither stands it with the theological explication. For the
Rock signified Christ himself, who was figured out to his Church by a Rock, 1.
Cor. 10. 4. which is a title that Moses and the prophets after him, give unto
God; as Deu. 32, 4* 15.
perfect is the work of the Rock; and, the Rock of his salvation; and many the
like: and that he only is the true and proper Rock of the church, we are
taught by this and the like speeches, 2 Samuel 22. 32.
who is a Rock save our God? meaning none else. So Christ is called Ephesians. 5. 23.
the head of the church, and not any Apostle; and he is the only foundation
upon which the church is builded, as it is written, 1. Cor. 3, 11.
Other foundation can no man lay, then that which is laid, which is Jesus
Christ. And Peter himself tells us that 1 Pet. 2.
Christ is the Rock and living stone, unto which all Christians as living
stones do come, and are builded to a spiritual house. And Simon being a
principal stone in this house, had therefore the name Peter Stone, of Petra, as
we all of Christ have the name Christians; and as touching faith, are living
stones, that is Peter's; having obtained 2 Pet. 1. 1.
isotimon pistin, a like precious faith with Simon Peter himself, and the other
Apostles: though as touching order, they were principal, next unto Christ, (as
it is written 1 Cor. 12* 28.
first Apostles, secondly Prophets etc:) and then other officers and brethren,
in their due places.

Moreover were it granted that Christ meant to build his church upon S. Peter;
yet was it not upon him only; for it is written; Ephesians. 2, 20.
Ye are built upon the foundation of The Apostles and Prophets; and again, Apoc.
21. 14.
the wall of the city had twelve foundations, and in them the n^mes of the
lambs twelve Apostles. Wherefore Christ builded the Church upon the 12. not upon
one alone; and it rests upon you to prove that by saying super hanc Petram,
Christ secluded Peter from the rest; for the rest had the rock, and belonged
thereto as well as Simon, though he were foremost in the r^w. And though he only
had the name of Peter, a stone; that exempteth not others from this grace: for
the two that were next unto him, James and John, only had the name of Mark 3.
17.
Boanerges, that is, Sonns of thonder; yet did not they only thonder out the
gospel, or understand (as Job. 2^. 14*
Job speaks,) the thonder of God's power; but the other Apostles also, had
the same office, by preaching of the gospel; though perhaps not in like manner
or mesure of graces. The like answer I make, for the delivery of keys to
Peter; (a thing which you barely mention:) they were not given to him alone.
For as Christ asked his disciples jointly (and not Peter only,) Mat. 16, 15*
whom say ye that I am? so Simon answered not for himself alone, but for them
all. Whereupon Christ pronounced a blessing, and annexed promises, not for him
alone, but (as you grant for his successors also, as I defend,) for the other
Apostles also. This may be confirmed by other like testimonies, as John. 6, 67.
where Christ saying to the 12. will ye also go away? then Simon Peter
answered, Master to whom shall we go? whereby it is plain, that Christ asking
all, when one answered, he answered for all: therefore also the blessing upon
the answer, must concern all; and so the promises not peculiar to Peter, but
common with the rest. The scripture plainly confirms this doctrine: for
where one Eva^gelist writes, Peter said unto him, Mat. 15, 15. another writing
of the same, says, His disciples asked him* Mark. 7. 17. so that Peter spa^e
in the name of the rest; and his words were theirs likeweise.
So also in this particular of the keys; for further proof whereof, set you
down by the scriptures what is meant by keys: and I will show you by
scriptures also, that the 12. Apostles had equal power in using them. Your
supply of proof from testimony of later doctors, I leave as insufficient;
their writings neither being authentik, nor any thing so ancient as the
Apostles writings; and the most ancient records, I stand to be tried by. Yet if
I lysted to fight with such weapons, I could cite Doctors against Doctors, and
many against you, and Augustine De verb. Dom. Sermon 13.
most plainly contrarying your opinion, and saying that the Rock was that
which Peter confessed and knew when he said that Christ was the son of the
living God; and that the Rock was Christ, not Peter: but I will not press you
with man's authority; the book of God shall be my panoplie, and sufficient
artillery.

Your last proof is from John. 21. Where Christ said to Peter, Feed my sheep:
which sounds as much (you say) as have care of my fold: but in S. John. 10. it
is said, there is but one flock and one shepherd etc. and therefore he honors
Peter thrice with the style of an Universal Pastor. This reason has like
frayltie as the former. I deney that Peter alone was to feed Christ's sheep, for
he sent al his Apostles with that charge. Mat. 28. 19, 20. and before this
speech to him, he had said to them all, As my father sent me, so send I you,
Ioh. 20, 21. Peter therefore as he was 1. Pet. 5, 1*
sympresbyteros, joint elder with the rest, (not archipresbyteros, chief
elder:) so was he also sympoimen, a joint Pastor with the rest, and not
archipoimen, Chief pastor, (as you would have him,) for himself tells us that
Christ is he. 1. Pet* 5. 4. The same, Christ also confirms in the place you
allege, John, 10. for there he says, verse. 11. 14*
I am the good Pastor; and verse. 15.
I lay down my life for the sheep; and verse. 18.
I have power to lay down (my life) and have power to take it again, this
commandment have I received of my father: and verse. 28.
I give unto my sheep eternal life, and they shall never perish. With many like
speeches which cannot without blasphemy be applied to any mere man, but to
him which is verse. 30.
one with the Father. And therefore unless you vvil renounce Christ, and make
Peter your Rock, your God, your Savior, that laid down his life for you, to
give you eternal life etc; you cannot make him that verse. 16.
one Pastor over the one fold of Jews and Gentiles. Wherefore neither thrice
nor yet once, is Peter honored with the style of universal Pastor; but only
is charged Ioh. 21.
to feed Christ's sheep, as other Pastors also are required; and our Lord Jesus
Heb. 13, 20.
the great Pastor of the sheep, has given not one but many Pastors for this
work: Ephe. 4. 11.

Having heard your reasons for Peter's headship, I exspected somewhat for your
Popes pretended primacie; but for this you show no evidence from Gods book; you
have none I trow, so ancient. Wherefore your position That the Popes definitive
sentence as he is head of the church, is an indeficient rule in matters of
faith: is far as yet from being proved. And though this preeminence were
yielded for Cephas, yet would I not grant the like for Caiaphas: though Peter
were the Rock on which Christ's Church is builded; yet your house may be
situate on the sands, for ought you have said to persuade the contrary. But
let us see what the 3. point in your letter will afford, which now next follows.

Lastly and briefly you take upon you to show that your Roman III.
church is the true and only catholic church of God, that holy city. Apoc.
21. etc. And first your church (you say) is catholic, for in your memory, you
only are catholics, in so much that the name catholic was hateful to a puritan
or a protestant, citing Beza, D. Humfrie, Sutcliff etc. Your reason has no
weight. What if others should say, your church is the whore of Babylon Apoc.
17. because in their memory you only are lovers of that whore, in so much that
the name whore is hateful to a puritan or protestant. Would you approve of this
argument? Yea but it is (you say) against the article of our belief to deney
the catholic church. I answer, we believe Ephesians. 3. 15, Gal. 4. 26.
there is a catholic, that is an universal church; no puritan or protestant I
think denies it. But that your church of Rome or any other particular church in
the world, should be the universal or catholic church, neither faith nor reason
does persuade. Wherefore the auctors whom you cite, might well blame you for
taking to your selves that ambitious title, which never was given you of God.
If therefore you speak, let it be 1. 1* Pet. 4, 11.
as the words of God; and if by his word you can say any thing to help you,
show it, and by his grace, I will hear* Otherwise your assumed name Catholic,
moves me no more then the name Apostolik, Pr^^tegiani (corruptly called Prester
John,) among the Eth^^pians. I know the Apostle Paul gave the church in Rome no
such swelling title when he wrote thereunto: and if you would have your church
called by a new name, you should let the mouth of the Lord name it (as says
the Prophet Isa* 62* 2.) except you would have it noted to be none of his.
Secondly you say your church is an ancient church: and God is more ancient then
the Divil; truth then falsehood etc* I grant your church is ancient; but I deney
it to be the most ancient. Seeing then the most ancient (by your own grant) is
the most true, bring ^orth the testimonies of your antiquity; and if in the
particulars I show more ancient testimony then you, I will yield. But you
proced^ and say, If you grant that once our church was the true church / but
st^ce it has swarved from her ancient purity / show which Pope first gave
place to the d^fects. etc. I grant there was a true church in Rome in t^
Apostles days; so was there in Jerusalem, in Ephesus, Corinth, Colosse, and
other cities many What their faith and estate was, I see in the most ancient
records, the Apostles a^s and letters unto them What yowr faith and estate is,
I see also by your late council of Trident, and other b^oks of yours,
maynteyning a religion unheard of in ^h Apostles days, as in the particulars
when they come to be scanned (after we have ended these general grounds in
hand) I doubt not but to manifest. How Rome is come to be Lady and mistress
of al churches, I know not by any ancient record of the Apostles, save by that
mystery opened unto John in the wilderness, Apoc. 17. And if your Popes lives
were in Gods record, as were the Kings of Israel; I could easily thevv which
Pope first gave place to the defects etc. but seeing they are not recorded by
him, I vvil not 1. Cor. 4. 6.
pre^ume above that which is written. If upon men's report I should centure
them, I might do many good men vvrong. They that are dead are gone to their
judgment, and have stood or fallen unto the Lord: you that are liv^ng must
ansvv^r for your selves, and your present state; which if you can not vvarrant
by the word of God 1. Pet. 1. 23
who lives and indu ^eth for ever; your dead men's bones vvil be but slender
pillars co underprop your church This I am sure of and testify unto you, Our
Savior and his Apostles forecold of Mat. 7. 15 Act. 20. 29.
false prophets and of grievous wolves, that should come soon after, and not
spare the flock. Who was the first wolf in Ephesus, who the first in Rome
etc, I can not tell: out if our Lord have given us a true rule, Mat. 7. 16.
ye shall know them by their fruits* we may know your Pope not to be head of
the Church, unless of Antichrists, and your church it self to be Nu. ^5, 15
Cos bi-bath tsur, Falsitie daughter of a rock, but not of Christ. Be not
offended at my plain dealing with you; it is a case of conscience, and
concerns your salvation and my own* and I vvish your vvelfare as my own.

Your conclusion, neaping many praises upon your church, many dispraises upon
o^ns and others that have forsaken her, remayns hereafter unto due trial, when
(having finished these first questions begun) you shall set down arguments
from Gods word, either for your selves or against us. In the mean time, I
obs^rve your dispute against us to have no more weight or color, then as if
the AEdomites or Ismaelites (elder brethren to t^^ Israelites) should have
alleged their outvvard carnal privileges and possessions, against their poor
brother Iaakob in Egyptian bondage, and after, a pilgrim in the wilderness: or
as if the Scribes and Pharisees should have pleaded for Annas and Caiaphas and
their proceedings (from Deuteronomy. 33, 8 -- 11. and other scriptures many,) against
Jesus of Nazareth and his disciples. I know he magnificence and pomp of the
false church dazeleth the eyes of many; her sorceries bevvitch many; her
fornications destroy many: but her cup is full of the wine of wrath, and her
lovers shall be cormented with her, but those whom God loves, shall be delivered
from her* Wherefore search in the book of God, and read; let his law be your
light, and make not fleth your arm: se^k wisdom as silver, and search for her as
for treasures; so God may be entreated to show you the way of life, that you
may escape from h^l beneath Which grace I wish, and shall do my andevour to
procure unto you. So rest I your friend for all Christian help to my power;

Henry Ainsworth.
Your letter I received the beginning of this month December 1609. and I write
this the 23. of the same; stilo veteri. From Amsterdam.






John Aynsworths reply. To Mr Henry Ainsworth in Amsterdam. Site audierit,
lucratus eris fratrem tuum. S. Math. 18.
I Perceive now by your second writing (Mr Ainsworth) your readynes to write,
but your vnreadynes to answer all the grounds of my discourse. For where as
still I pressed you with the authority, and uniform consent of those that lived
in the Apostles times, and were their scholars: When I urge you with the
authority, and most ancient record of hystories: When we bring against you the
whole body of counsels and holy fathers, the whole school of Doctors: When we
urge you with the assertions of Luther, C^lvin, Beza, I well, Whitaker, Hooker,
pillars nay first founders of the protestant religion, out of whose near
withered stock, the Br^w^^sts are newly budded, and even in the bud remain as
blasted, by the breath of their own parents; You think this answer sufficient
that they were all men, all dust and ashes and so erred, saying let the fathers
sleep. As though the whole world had been in a dead st^ep of error, until this
present age. As though the Apostles own disciples, that sucked knowledge from
their mouths, had need to be discipled of you for their dangerous errors. As
though the Apostles themselves, Eusebius c. ^ Eccle. hyst.
Dionisius Areopagita, Eusebius. l 4. hist c. 8.
Egesippus, Idem l. 2. c. 20.
Polycarpus, lib. 3. c. 3. et 4.
Irenaeus, Gregor: Nazianz. Chrysostom. Tertul. S. Cypr S. Ambrose, S. Hi^r: S.
Augustine were all deceived, all hoodwincut so long in ^rror; yea that the whole
church that was promised to be the pillar of t^, that was seated on a roch
should be swallowed up of hell gat^s for a thousand five hundred years
contrarn to the firm promise of our Savior, yea that Luther, Calvin, B^za,
I^wel, Whitaker, Humfrey etc. these times grand Jury men, and Doctors, were
all d. c^^ved in giving up their verdicts: And so decrived that they are of you
implicitly condemned as heretics. Surely such a verdict, can never win credit
before any bar or tribunal in the world, where so many eye and ear witnesses
cannot be heard, evidences, and records, of above a thousand years of age, are
not admitted as current; where infinite Doctors and professors, are refused in
their own sciences to be believed: When our adversaries own fathers, freindes,
and adherents are held as partial; and all testimonies of what condition
soever, braved with this that they were all but men, that they have all erred.
What do you Mr Ainsworth but teach me a way to answer whatsoever you can
bring. For I can say you are only dust and ashes, only a man, and lichlier
sure to err, then all they that have lived before you, and then all men that
live in this age with you. Pard^n me in dealing so roundly with you, for it
proceeds through no aversion toward your person, but only to demonstrate the
truth of my cause, and the insufficiency of your answer.

Now to descend down, more particularly unto your answer: you ^arp first at my
proceeding, which I thought by a distinction direct enough, at which you
except: as though direct and distinct, are not in the sense I take them, all
one, and so then to answer by a distinction, is to give a direct, or a distinct
answer. But you are like one, that is even wearied ere ever he sets forth foot
in journey; and therefore to make your journey the shorter, you would conceive
it only in a continued, and dead way, deluding thereby your self with
imagination that your journey is shorter; And therefore I think you in a
confuse dealing seem more fearful of the way to run then I that consider the
question we are to handle by distinct points, dividing my answer by the eye of
judgment into distinct portions. And therefore I answer you again when you
demand of me what shall decide al controversies in religion, whether the word
of God or of man? I answer you directly enough that by Gods written, and
unwritten word, as by a formal motive we are to be tried; and by the catholic
church as by a propounding manner, and by way of circumstance necessarily
required to show what is authentic, and what is not canonica; And so I hope
this answer is direct and plain enough: Ask a Philosopher what burns, and
he will tell you the fire and his quality; but demand how approximation of the
subject concurreth, without which the fire never naturally burns, and he will
tell you it is condicio sine qua non most necessarily required. Ask a
Philosopher, who gives power to some hidden herb unknown, to have his
operation; he will answer the nature of the herb principally, but what does
determine it, hic, et nunc, to work, he will answer the art, and knowledge of
the herbalist, that finds out the secret nature of the herb shows how it is
to be applied, and used to have his due operation. So here I answer that Gods
written, and unwritten word formally, and principally causes us to believe,
but the church that propounds it as Gods word, concurreth as an applying
circumsta^ce; the church being the treasury of all truth / the B. Anth. magnus
epist* 4. ^ D. Hill: 2* lib Trinit.
medi^^^e against all maladies, the ^howse of truth shows us vnfalliblie what
is to be believed and what is not. And therefore you wonder without cause that I
should answer by a distinction, definition and distinction being the two eyes
or guides of reason. But now to proceed to the matter, I intend briefly to show
how my reasons that I gave to prove my assertion, viz: That only the scripture
is not a sufficient rule and an infallible guide of faith, remain yet (for all
your pretended answer) in firm force unshaken.

2. I intend to show how your reasons deduced out of the holy scriptures are
not reasons, in that they are wrested from that sense, in which the holy Ghost
spoke them or meant them.

3. As occasion shall offer I will touch your answer to the other questions,
leaving the exact and direct handling thereof until this controversy in hand
be ended.

First then you set down the first argument which I brought thus; Nothing is to
be believed that is not taught, or manifestly gathered I.
out of the written word: But that the Bible is canonical is not taught, or
gathered out of the written word, therefore it is not to be believed that the
Bible is canonical. Mark then how Mr Ainsworth An ans. to his oppugnation of
my first argument.
smooths up the matter that he has give^ a sufficient answer; when he answers
that the pillars of our propositions are earth and ashes, and therefore the
whole frame of my Argument lies in the dust. Then descending more particularly
he answers that my Major is too general. For he says many things may be
believed, though they be not gathered out of the written word, so that we see
he holds some tradition necessary besides the written word, for he says to be
believed that is with an act of faith, now that which is to be believed must be
certain, and must have also infallible, and most certain motives
proportionable to so firm an act; and must be believed of those at least that
are scholars, who are more precisely to examine the articles of belief then
laiemen, so that we have drawn water out of the rock since you grant that
tradition is necessary to your own belief: which afterward you deny, when you
say there is nothing necessary to salvation but is taught by the written word.
For now I ask those many things that may be believed without the written word,
either have their motives infallible and sufficiently propounded and so they
shall be faulty, if those scholars to whom they are sufficiently proposed
believe not: or else the motives that are propounded are not certain,
infallible, and constant, and so they shall only cause an opinion, or at most
a humane belief; and not a most firm, and constant supernatural art of
faith, that is ever most certain and infallible caused by the written, and the
unwritten word of God, and the church propounding. Moreover your answer is
found halting, when you say, that there is nothing necessary unto salvation but
is delivered by the written word, which is most false, since nothing with you
is more necessary unto salvation then the written word, which word is not
proved by an other written word, for so that also by an other, and so we should
never have an end, so that hence you must confess, though against your
position, that something most necessary unto salvation is to be bel^eved, and
that without the written word; now if that which is most necessary, and the
rule of all the rest, be believed, in that it is delivered by tradition, surely
things of less consequence though necessary to salvation, may also be
believed, though there is no written word of God to affirm it, having tradition
which is Gods unwritten word time out of mind to deliver it.

As for the proof of my Minor proposition, you put down these words I cited,
though not learned out of Mr Hooker. For if any book gives testimony to the
rest, yet the scripture that gives credit to the rest would require another
scripture to be credited, neither could we come to any pause whereon to rest or
assurance that way; and if you answer that all scriptures are theopneustoi that
is in pired of God, I will grant you that, but I will demand how you prove
that this book, or this parcel of scripture without tradition is inspired of
God? For to say it is inspired of God, by reason it is scripture, and scripture
by reason it is inspired of God, is to prove idem per idem, and petere
principium, to suppose that proved, which is given you to prove: And besides I
would know of you, how you know, that your interpretation is only true. But
you have your answer ready ceyned, you say the things of God no man knows but
1. Cor. 2. ^1.
the spirit of God. But how do you prove you have the spirit of God? How do
you prove you have the effect thereof in your conscience Heb. 6. 4, 5
piercing more sharply then a two edged swo^d, For the Mamchei, Montanist,
Arian, ^estorian, Pelagian, Semipe^agian, Lutheran, Calvinist, Familist will
^ll bo^st of this private spirit, will all say they are illuminated of God,
that they have the 1. Cor. 2, 15.
spirit that discerns all things, and they are able as w^l as you to uphold
their religion with wrested pieces of the scripture. Now whereas you object
that the Turk c^n urge against us their Allco^ans antiquity* I answer no: Note
here that when I say antitiquity is a note of the church, I compare only Jews
with the Heathens, and Christians only with Christians, so that it is a true
note since those that are most ancient have the only true religion, and so
thos^ Christians that are more ancient have the only true Christia religion.
si^ce the Roman catholic church can show their beginner, beginning,
increase, and their declining estate: And whereas you object again, that Julian
the Aposta^a may offer plea with us for antiquity* I answer no, since he went
out of the catholic church, to whose faith he was Apostata, and therefore
supposes the catholic church to be more ancient then he, as he particularly
opposed himself against her. And if it be here objected that the heathe^^sme he
^^lo is anci^^ter then our Christianity, I grant all, but not ancienter then
Judai me: For God is more ancient then the Divil, truth then falsehood, and so
those Christians that are most ancient, have the most true religion.

Your second Objection made against this point, I answer that II.
the high Preisthood that was judge did not err, First we might answer that
Aaron willingly and ex cathedra did not commit ^dolatrie, but in fragilitie
and for fear of the peoples displeasure, and so it was an error of fact and
not of doctr^ne. Psalm. 98 Exodus 29 Levit. 8.
in that Moses was never ^viltie of Idolatry, and Moses was joint Priest with
Aaron as it is recorded in the Psalms Moses et Aaron in sacerdotibus ejus et
Samuel inter eos qui invocant nomen ejus. All which appears and is most
manifestly showen also in that he ordered Aaron. Exodus 29 And in that there
Moses is commanded to sacrific^ Applicabis et vitulum etc. man abis eu^ Quod
Moses erat sacerdos and princeps tenent Greg. Nazianz. in creatione de Moyse et
Aaron Phylo Iudaeus lib. 3 de vita Mosis: Et hoc etiam deducitur ex Exodus 24.
et 29 et 35. et Deu. 34. vbi dr. quod Iosue erat spiritu plenus quod Moses
imposuit illi suam manum Deuteronomy. 18.
in conspect Dei etc. offeres incensum super altar And that Moses did execute
all this it appears out of Levit. 8.

Likewise I answer that when our Savior Jesus Christ was condemned, the high
preisthood did not err, in that the high preisthood remained in our Savior;
for he was then chief judge and decider, or ^he the high priest was our
Saviors superior which ye will not grant. For that pr^^sthood was infallible
only till Christ's coming, being also clearly foretold that at his coming the
highpreist should concur unto his death and condemnation, and so not to be
directed by the holy ghost.

Finally whereas you would confute me by my own practice in that I r^solve all
things by the definitive sentence of the Church grounded on Christ's promise to
S. Peter, Math. 16. that his faith should not fail, and that he being
converted he should confirm his brethren all the other Apostles. I answer that
as our Savior was of infinite Mat. 16. Luke 22, v. 31, 32.
grace, and mercy to promise, so he was of infinite power, and fidelity to
perform. Now whereas you object that I know only this promise by Mat. 16. and
that by the Popes and churches s^ntence I know only S. Matthevves gospel to
be canonical, and that the gospel of Nicodemus is not authenticke, I grant
all, but I deny that here there is any maze or circle, that you would feign
from hence infer, since this mutual reference, and reciprocal dependence is
in diverse kinds; and then Aristotle will tell you, that it is no circle or
vicious argumentation to demonstrate a causa ad effectum et ab effectu ad
causam; and a young Philosopher will tell you that the materia and the form do
mutually depend, and reciprocally cause one an other, but the one in genere
subjecti, and the other in genere causae formalis. And as a Jewel in his prize
depends of the knowledge of a skillful lapidary, Mat. 13. et Marc. ^^c. Ioh.
14. ^^ 16. 1. Tim. 5.
and yet the knowledge of the lapidary depends of the excellent nature, and
quallity of the stone: So we answer that the Church does formally depend on the
word of God that shows she is taught in all truth; and yet the word of God
does depend of the determination ^ definition of the church: And therefore S.
Augustine D. August. contra ep: fund: c. 5. Ego vero Euangelio no^ credere^ nisi
me Catholicae commoveret authoritas, et postea: quibus praecipientibus
Euangelio credidi et his his jubentibus tibi omnino non credam.
said that he would not believe the scripture to be scripture without the
authority of the church: And at this answer in effect you wonder, that any one
would have the faith of God, to be tried by any other, then by the written word
of God; therefore either give me leave to be of S. Augustins mind, or leave to
mervaile only at me, since that great Doctor, and holy father does give the
lilie occasion to you of wonder.

Now unto your Corolarium that bad rhetoric, and not solid reason gathered out
from hence, that my faith and hope is grounded on the Spiders web: I answer
that it is not seated on a webb but on a Mat. 16. 18.
rock, against which all heretical persecutions, persuasions, blasphemies,
which is as hell gates shall never prevail. For my resolution and account of
faith that I told you I was one day to give before the tribunal of God, was no
other the^ this which S. Augustine gives D. Aug. lib contra ep: fundame^t:
where he says. In ecclesia catholica etc. In the catholic church does keep
me the consent, and agreement of so many people, and nations, the authority of
the same church began by miracles, nourished with hope, increased with
charity, confirm^d and established by antiquity; In the same catholic church
does also hold m^ the succession of Bishops, from the sea of the Apostle S.
Peter, to whom Christ our Lord after his resurrection commended the fe^ding of
his flock, continued unto him, who at this present occupies this place: And
lastly does keep me the very name catholic, which not without cause amongst so
many heretics, this only church does so obteyn, as although all her^ticks do
pretend vamly to be termed Catholics, yet if any stranger do chance to
demand which is the church of the catholics, there is no heretic so impudent,
as dares show either his house or synagogue. And thus far S. Augustine himself
taught me what answer of my faith I shall make before the eternal tribunal of
God. But when you shall come there to give account of your faith, the best that
you can allege for your self is that you thought and judged it so, that your
private spirit interpreted it so, though against the hight of nature in very
many points, against al antiquity of time* consent and unity of doctrine,
against the whole stream of holy fathers learned Doctors, and most true
expesiters. Who now I pray you Iere. 17, 5.
putts trust in man and makes flesh his arm? Who are taught now by the Mat.
15, 9.
precepts of men? Who but you are led by their own inventio^s, spirits and
illusions? Who but you, commits idolatry in worshipping the golden calfe, the
idol of your own invention? Therefore I will conclude with your saying took out
of the Psalm 73, 26. The roc^. o^ my heart who is my portion for ever preserve
me, and deliver you from that s^ylla of Calvnustical profession, and from that
devo^^ing charibdis, those syrtes, and quicksands of Brownisme, and Pu^itanical
Psalm. 73, 26.
brotherhood, where men make shipwreck of their faith and souls. II.


The second arg. you examine of mine to prove that the b^^e ^ naked word cannot
be an infallible rule or square of faith; you pr^pound it out of my writings
thus. That which is difficult and includes many senses: at least to the
ignorant can not be a certain rule of faith. But the scriptures are thus. My
antecedent you admit proved by Tertullian S. Hierome, and S. Peter himself
whose place you only examine; the others you turn over as you are wont
deeming the^ unworthy of your consideration. You examine that of S. Peter now
where he says that in S. Paul's epistles are certain things hard to be
understood which the unlearned and the unstable deprave, as also the rest 2.
Pet. 3. 16,
of the scriptures to their own perdition. Here you except against me that I
say many things in sted of certain; where in deed I cited only the sense of
that place propou^ding it as the Protestants use for yours and their advantage,
meaning so tacit to prevent an objection. For they answer here that S. Paul's
epistles are not hard, but that many things in the^ are hard. For the Greek
copies have en hois that is in which things; and some read en hais in which
epistles: And whereas you object that I say all the rest of the scripture, in
stead of also the rest of scripture: I answer the holy Ghost may very well
speak generally since the very plainest places of scripture have been wrested
to bolster up heresies: Thirdly you say that this testimony proves scarce the
first part of my antecedent that scriptures are only difficult; but you say,
it does not prove, that scriptures cannot be an indeficient rule of faith. I
answer that it proves both. For in what does S. Peter say that S. Paul is hard,
but concerning many points of our faith and religion, as concerning
predestination, reprobation, vocation of the gentiles, justification by faith.
Of which high mysteries S. Paul is the chief and principal Master. And as for
the example of the artize^ you bring makes much against you. For if an
unst^^lfull Mathematician* or sea man knows not the right use of the
Astrolabe or cross staff, the missing of a hayres breadth, in the right using
thereof, makes him judge wrong of the object infinitely almost although the
instrument in it self be most true: And if the Physician miss the right Dose,
though he gives the right ingredients, he is liklier to kill then to minister
help. So if a man miss of the right judgment and sense of those places of
scripture touching predestination, reprobation etc. the corruption of that
place is able to turn all the other places of scripture that leaves that way
into his own nature.

But now here to your reply that not all but only some places of scripture are
difficult and hard, though we see the contrary by experience, since Luther,
Zuinglius, Calvin, Berengar: have stumbled at the plainest places of scripture*
viz. This is my body; yea they stumbled there at though S. John explicates also
most plainly that place when he says Caro mea vere est cibus et sanguis men's
vere est potus, My flesh is truly meat and my blood is truly drinck. For
Luther will have them one way to be understood, ^uinglius another, Ber^garius
an other, and Calv^ another Neither can the paralleling and comparing of one
place of scripture with another r^n die this, or satisfy the infinite difficults
that arise out of holy scripture. As that of the 2. Regum. 23. 11. The field is
said to be full of lentills. But the 1 Parall: 11. 13. It is said to be full of
ba^iy. And the 1. ^^eg. 7. 15. It is said that the bra^en pillars were thirty
eight cubi^^^ in length, and yer 2. Parall: 3. 19. but thirty five Math. 1. 8.
It is said that Joram began Qzia^: but in the 4. book of the Kings which the
Protestants call the second it is written, that Joram was father to Ochozias,
Ochoizas to Joas, Joas to Ama^^^s, (not Joram) to Ozias otherwise called
Azarias: Mat. 1. and 3 16. Joseph is called Jacob, whereas S. Luke 3. 23 names
him (...): Mat 10 10. the Apostles sent to pr^ach are forbidden to have a
^reffe in their ^a^ds, and yet S. Mark 6 8 ba^ them take only a staff, or rod
in their hand, Mat. 26, 34 and Luke 22, 34. says that before the cock did crow
Peter should deny him thrice, but S. Mark the 14. 30. says Christ's words
were, Before the cock shall crow twice thou shall thris^ deny me: Mar 15 25.
^ayth, our Savior was crucified at the third hour: but S. John 19 14 says it
was about the sixth hour before he was condenmed by P^^ate; So that you see the
comparing of place only with place often times, may bring a poor man into a
maze, or circle, except he add to this the authority of the Church, and the
holy Fathers, and the learned Doctors exposition by whose help all these
seeming contrad^^tions will easily be salved. Now whereas you may answer that
these difficults are in matters of fact, and not of doctrine, and so it much
imports not whither a man reconcil^s these places or no, I grant the first but
I deny the sequ^^^. For since you teach that al difficults of scripture, may be
helped by comparing of one place with another: now when as ignorant men shall
follow this your rule as an unfallible guide, when they see themselves ledd by
it unto a contradiction, they do not only begin to call into question this,
but al other things contained in the scriptures, seeing the self same truth
affirming the little as well as the great, and as much abhorring from
co^tradiction of a little matter as of a great.

The second branch of my antecedent which I bring is, that holy scriptures
has many senses, litterall, and spiritual, yea and often many senses
literrall and many senses spiritual. All this you deny and wonder that I do
not prove it. I answer that no disputant uses to prove como^m^^^mes, and
principles, and we use not to prove common (...), at most Protestants allow of,
viz. of a litterall and a spiritual sense, the l^s^ whereof they divide into
three members, into an all* g^ricell tropological and anagogicall sense: yea
and not without great cause they allow of this since D. August. lib. 11.
confess. cap. 26 et lib. 11. De ^^^^tate Dei c. 19. says also that the
scripture often ha^ many litterall senses. But you against the holy fathers
held that it has only one sense, but as you answer, appliable to diverse
places, times and persons. Here I wonder that you should be so conside^tly
hoveld with your own conc^^t, and so carried away with your private spirit that
you see not that which to most manifest. But even as a pigeon that is seeled in
your soaring spirit you see only the way, at length to your own downfall,
though in your conceit you ascend bolt upright for a season: But that the
scripture has many senses we leave as proved, and if to prove, fitter for
another place: Now it suffices for this place to show that which you grant to
sufficient to prove the second part of my antecedent. For if that one sense
has reference to diverse times places and persons, it must needs be very
difficult, and require some common help besides themselves to obtain their
several true expositions: nay here me thinks you grant that the scriptures
has diverse senses, since you grant diverse as it were formalities of senses
respecting diverse places, times and persons.

Here also in prosecuting of this point you seem to mistake our doctrine. For
we hold that neither Apostle or the Pope have dominto^ over our faith, or
authority to institut. Sacraments of themselves, neither can they make what
they will as a matter of faith, or tradition: But it must be received time out
of mind by the uniform consent of that Church which has kept her pe^petuall
succession of Bishops from S. Peter, and then S Aug. in epist. 118. will teach
you that insolentissimae infaniae est existimare non certe fieri quod ab
vniversa ecclesia fit, that it is a most insolent madness to think that it
should not be right that the whole church does teach. Besides the Pope does not
make a matter of faith, but declares only that such and such a thing is to be
believed, and that by the inspiration of Almighty God guiding him as he is the
head of the church. Neither does he for all this omit to use all humane
helps of counsel and consultatio^ with the learned, that though as he is head
of the church he has a promise from Almighty still to assist him, yet in that
he might not seem to presume in omitting the use of natural and prudentiall
helps and means, he uses all diligent ser^tinp therein. The place of 15. of
the Acts which you examine of mine; where I lay that in the counsel held at
Jerusalem all was concluded with this of S. Peter the head, It seemed good to
the holy Ghost and to us. This I said and still averr makes much against you.
For here the Apostles to end the controversy in hand, trusted not their own
several spirits, but to a mature deliberation and counsel: where S. Peter was
h^ad and vin^eere, though he used an Apostolical inguisition; and therefore it
is noted in the 7. verse that Peter role up, showing thereby that he was head,
and had the preemine^ce of place first to speak* noting also his privilege
that the first Gentills were chosen by his mou^h, though S. Paul was design^d
to convert them. Now unto that which you (...) that (verse 13. and 14.) S.
James (...). stan^^ all and that hence we might rather hold him head of the
Church. I answer that does not hence follow, in that S. James in that he was an
Apostle and Bishop of Jerusalem gave his sentence nert; For surely S. Paul and
S. Barnabas also spoke, though their speech is interposed for the better
declaration of the question to be decided, and for the greater confirmation of
S. Peter's sentence: And though S. James said in his speech I judge, he does not
mean thereby that he gave the principal definitive sentence, since he and all
the rest followed, and seconded by their suff^ages the decision of S. Peter: as
it is plain in the text: The whole assembly for reverence of his person, and
approbation of his sentence holding their peace The which S. Hier^m affirms
saying all the multitude held their peace, and D Hier* to: 2 epist. 89. ad Aug.
c. 2.
into his sentence James the Apostle and the Priests did pass together.
Wherefore I may conclude with S. Peter this poin^t as I did before. That no
prophecy of scripture is made by a private spirits 2. Pet 1, 20
interpretation, and so consequently not by the naked word: And therefore S.
John also bidds them try their spirits whether they be of God, 1. Joh. 4. v:
20. And as for your distinction of private spirits 1. Ioh 4. 20
it li^le avail^th you For though the Pope be also a private man, yet he is the
head of the Church, and has the promise of our Savior that his faith should
not fail him, and though he may e^^ in matter of fact, or sin as well as an
other man, yet in matter of doctrine when as the head of the Church he is to
give his definitive sentence, he can not err, in that he is directed as Christ's
Dicar in earth by the holy Ghost. Yet for all this he does not neglect
natural means for the decision of any weighty cause; But uses all usual
serutiuie of causes, and circumstances, takes advice of the learned counsels.
But you though you be also a private man, yet you can not show me any promise
of the holy Ghost, made rather to you the^ to any other of your adversaries;
neither have you greater signs to manifest the truth then the Protestants
have. Nay every one of your profession thinks he has that spirit of
interpreting; which spirit often times proves no other then the spirit of
A^niball a merry companion; who when he had deceived poor Bullbrooke the
interpreter of the word* by casting out thrice Bullbrooke as from God at the
mouth of a cave whither his reformed brethren resorted to hear from lum
delivered the word of the Lord: afterward showed unto the whole campany that
flocked more and more to this their illum^nated prophet the man of God, so
strangely called, how he alone had deceived the poor man, saying, hang me if
any other spirit, but the spirit of A^^^iball called thrife upon Bulbrook: Yet
admit you should have a spirit to distinguish the truth of one mystery as I
said, yet you have not the spirit to distinguish the truth of all: But that you
might c^y out with the true illuminated prophet now and then Dominus celavit
hoc a me. Our Lord has hidden this from me; that is in not revealing it.
Besides you see that every false prophet brags of his spirit, how then can a
private spirit decide any controversy? And for that you bring of the
Israelites, it were well if you with them from the mouth of the Priest would
learn wisdom. And if you had that visible coming down of the holy Ghost that
the Apostles had, if you had the gifts of tongues, the power to work
miracles; if you were taught with them all truth; if your followers though
illiterated were endowed with all these privileges of the Apostles, then might
they with them take upon the^ to interpret the scriptures. For S. Luke
records, That our Savior opened his Apostles understanding Luke 24 45.
in all truth that they might understand the scriptures, but you can not show
that our Savior has done more to you then to other men.

You now proceed and begin to ponder my third argument, by III.
which I did occure a future answer. Not only scriptures by themselves, but
scriptures by a private man's interpretation, or comparing one place with an
other are not sufficient to be a rule of faith. Which you say I dor not prove
here* to this I answer, I did prove it there but the more sparingly in that
this point seems to be partly proved in that which goes before. Yet to give
you full satisfaction I will a little reinforce the force thereof: For since the
scriptures has diverse senses, or as you say diverse references to sundry
places, persons and times; how can a private spirit of a man assure one that
this and no other is the true sense of this place? Or how can you discern that
the true spirit interprets this unto you? For the communication of this infused
spirit must either be by a public message be delivered you, so that those
that are your adherents and followers may be assured, by some visible sign
that the holy ghost dictates unto you: and I think by these visible apparitions
and communication of the holy Ghost, you will not mainteyn your spirits
interpretation. Or else the holy ghost secretly instil^eth into you what is the
true sense; But here I demand of you how you are assured of this working of the
holy ghost, since there was never yet here^ick so senseless, or error so
gross, but would tell us of this private assurance of the holy Ghost. And
though the communication of the true spirit should be manifest to your self,
yet you could give no warrant or assurance thereof to us; to the Protestant
adversaries, or to your own followers. How would you be able to convince an
Aria^, that will thwart you with that of S. John, my father is greater then I:
If you say this place is to be understood in regard of his humanity and not in
regard of his divinity, he will bid you show scripture plainly to affirm
that. How will you answer an Anabaptist that will have no man to be baptized
before they come to the years of discretion to give a reason of their faith?
How will you answer us Catholics or the Protestants when we demand of you why
you follow the vulgar translation, in saying Elder, when the original and all
other languages almost has still the word Presbyter, which signifies Priest to
all? Nay since the holy scriptures admits diverse senses and do not explain
themselves, how should a poor artificer persuade himself that this sense which
he apprehends is only the true sense; Nay that he is easily deceided herein by
a p^dicated opinion I will show. For when he comes to read that S. Peter in his
first epistle salutes them from Babylon, he in that he may not admit S. Peter
to have been at Rome, will not have Babylon there to be Rome, but he will have
S. Peter to salute them from that Babylon in Assyria. But when he comes to ^^ad
Apoc. 1^, and 18. Babylon again, in that he has rooted malice against Rome
he will have her alone to be that Babylon, he will apply all these mischeifs
and deformities to the church of Rome.

Now if you object that comparing one place with another will afford, the right
sense; I ask you how you are certain of that since that place with whom you
are to compare it has diverse senses, or references, how are you assured to
compare it to the right in regard of each circumstance. Nay if these spiritual
men be the only decidants, why do they when the word signifies an evil sense
translate traditions, though it be the self same Greek word, Col. 2. v. 20. Why
are you ledd with traditions; And when in diverse places the self same word
imports Apostolical traditions, in stedd thereof they read, ordinances,
institutions etc. Why did they in the printed Bible 1^62 thrust in Romans 11.
Baals image, which now Bible ^595 to corrected. And if every image be an idol
as they translate it, why Genesis the first can we not say God created Ada^
according to his own idol? And that all images in the old law were idols Exodus
25. 3. Regum. 6. Why do they make the Hebrew and Greek word that signifies
hell when they list only to signify the grave; Though it be against scripture
it self. Genesis 37. I will go down to the grave to (...) mourning, which cannot
signify though racked in sense the grave, since he thought his son to be
devoured of wild beasts, and so unburied without a grave: But when the self
same word, Prove. 15. speaks of the dan^ied, they translate only hell, how
then can the Prove. 15.
parallising and co^paring of one place with an other settle all doubts of the
ignorant, stop the mouth of the contrary part who shall affirm that it is not
the true sense? Nay if scripture be a most manifest interpreter of it self: Why
did Luther that affirmed before this assertion of yours in assertione
articulorum 10. damnatorum retraetate and recall that opinion of his before his
death, in colloq. conviviali titulo de verbo Dei. No man can understand says
he the Bucolica of Uirgil except h^ be first five years a shepherd: No man
can understand his G^o^^icks, except he be five years a husbandman: so let
every man know that he has not tasted sufficiently the scriptures, except he
has governed in it a hundred years. Nay if holy scriptures be so easy of
themselves to be understood; why does Luther call the epistle of S James
stramineam, and unworthy of an Apostolical spirit? Why does Beza writing on
the eight chapter call into question the whole book of S. John, when he averrs
that it was not probable that our Savior was left alone in the temple with a
woman, or that he did write in the dust with his finger.

My fourth argument you being forth thus. That which by the IIII*
lights and lanterns of your opinion, has been wronged in the highest degree,
to bolster up heresy, can not be a true, and indeficient rule of faith. You
geaunt my assumption and you instance it in Luther, Calvin, Beza: Only to
answer this you think it sufficient to say it is a rhetorical flourish. No
flourish that by your own confession has flonge down your strongest pillars:
But you say it is the fault in them, which willingly I grant, but with this
addition, that there is the like in you. And I pray you tell me, if all that
have gone over such a bridge, being in their right senses, perfect judgme^ts
have been drowned, would you think, that bridge remaining, thus unrepaired as
it is, a sure and safe way. So if all, or most that have trusted to the naked
and bare word of the scripture only, and to their own wits and spirits have
grossly and dangerously erred, will you hold it so remaining an vndeficient
rule? Nay if the bare word so co^firmes them in their errors, that without some
one common and visible judge they still remain stiff in their errors: can the
bare word be the indeficient, only, and the infallible rule? But that it is
so: dispute against the Lutheran, Calvinist, Zui^glian, Anabaptist, Protestant,
Fa^^list, and they will ell ^ite place of scripture, interpretation for
interpretation, spirit for spirit ^ieng and re^ying you with places, and
spirits dictam^ns, telling you long stories of the communication of the holy
Ghost. Wherefore I will conclude briefly this argument that the naked and bare
word of the scripture cannot be an infallible rule and judge, s^t does not make
the party overthrowen certain, that the sentence as much as lies in the
judge is passed against him; which is the property of the sentence of every
supreme judge, that his decree be plainly seen and that without all
contradiction the party overthrowen in law may yield unto it; For else there
is no end of sentence, no end of judgment if the party overthrowen, may with
the like probability as before recom^nence his suite, and offer plea without
any ^^d.

My fifth argument which you put down thus, Many mysteries V.
of our faith are believed which explicitly are not declared in the word of
God, nor so infalliblie (prescinding from all traditions of the church) deduted
thence, so as they are sufficient to make a man believe with so firm an act of
^aith as is required. Therefore that which makes that worthy of constant
belief is a rule of faith, as well as the written word, whether they be
traditious divine or Apostolical.

Now to all the places I bring to prove traditions How the world was only
governed and taught by traditions till Moses time, who was the first penman of
the holy Ghost, and to that Ero. 14. Deu. 32. 37. etc. you grant that
traditions were before necessary, but you deny that they are now a rule of
faith. But you assign no reason but only this in disputing as if it were the
total rule of faith; where I would infer only that it was a partial together
with the word of God. And whereas you object that these traditions spoken of in
Deuteronomy. might for the Jewish Cabalists, which are rejected by S. Peter, 1. Pet.
^. Tit. 1. 14 as vain conversation and Jewish fables; Is plain against the
holy scriptures Deu. 32. interroga patrem tuum, et anuntiabit tibi, majores
tuos et dicent tibi. Ask thy father etc. Ero. 14. Narrabis filio tuo in illa
die dicens hoc est quod fecit Dominus: Et Job. 8. Iud. 6. Psalm 43. Psalm. 47.
Eccles. 8; where it is plain that the holy Ghost speaks of such traditions
that are good to be followed and not to be esteemed vain, idle and fabulous. To
that of S. Pa: to the These. is plain that the Apostle speaks of that which
was taught by word of his mouth, yea of such traditions as you call humane in
us. For when S. Chrysostom. comes to explicate the 2 Thessalonians. 2. he explicates it
so plainly for such traditions as we have in controversy that D. Whitaker de
sacra scriptura page 678. says that S. Chrisost. spoke in this point
inconsiderately, and unworthy of so great a father. Therefore S. Paul and S.
Chrysostom: understood more here by traditions then you would willingly
understand. And that not only things of little consequence but of greatest
moment, are believed only by tradition, I prove manifestly since the Bible can
not be canonical without it were delivered by the hand of tradition from time
to time as authenticke. And besides, how can you prove the procession of God
the son, and God the holy Ghost from God the Father, as from one beginning, or
the consubstantilitie of the blessed Trinity? How are you able only by bare
scripture to prove the remedy in the old law used to women children for
original sin, and to man children when in danger of death before the eight
day they necessarily were to receive remedy of their sin? How prove you that
our blessed virgin Marie was a perpetual virgin, ante partum, in partu, et
post partum? how are your able to prove this by the bare letter against Helvidius
the heretic; vide D. Hier. cont. Helvid. et D. August: haeresi 84.
for he urges you with the plain text, and with original phrase viz. That he
knew her not till the brought forth her first son; and the word know you know
what it imports in the Hebrew phrase: As Abraham knew Sara: So that you see we
believe this perfection of the blessed and perpetual Uirgin Mary by tradition,
though the bare text seems to make against it: How do you prove that our
sunday should be celebrated on sunday and not on saturday by the bare letter
without tradition? How do you prove the celebration of Easter as it is now,
without tradition? How do you prove the Creed of the Apostles out of the
naked word? How do you prove without tradition that you should receive the
blessed sacrament kneeling? the receiving of it fasting? the eating of blood
and stra^gled meats prohibited in the Acts of the Apostles? How are you able
to prove all these or any one of these by convincing reasons out of the holy
scriptures alone? All these you say you can prove, not alleging one place of
scripture for any of them, though you have been most copious to prove idem per
idem in other points to little purpose. Now you say only it would go hard
with you if you could not prove these without tradition, and me thinks it goes
hard with you since you prove not one particular of them all. Therefore I desire
you that you would not confound your trace so like the Fore, or hare in
doubling, and turning; but that you would answer distinctly to each poinct as
it lies if you answer. Wherefore to shut up this point I will conclude with S.
August: Genes: ad litt: ^. 10. ^. 23. that as he says that the not rebaptising
of infants were not to be believed if it were not taught by tradition: So I say
these forealleaged mysteries were not to be believed without the direction of
tradition.

Now since we are come to the answering of your arguments, which are nothing
but allegations of scripture falsely applied, me thinks I cannot better compare
them, then as to so many orient pearls and rich Jewels, hung and placed out of
order in an Judian, or ^thiopians lips, nose, arms and legs: so these
places of scripture in that they are racked and wrested from their right sense
and meaning, their luster, and beauty is rather a disgrace the^ ornament to
the wearer.

For when you bring the place of Deuteronomy. 5 32. to take heed that we should do
as our Lord commanded us; not turning to the right hand nor the left, and of
that of Deuteronomy. 12. 32. not putting any thing thereunto, or taking any thing
therfrom. I answer first granting that God commands this, but I deny that
hence can be gathered that in that we should do as our Lord commands us,
and that we should not turn unto the right hand or to the left, that the holy
scripture should be the only rule and v^ptor of faith: F^r as it does not
follow, nothing is to be added to the fourth commandment, and the fourth
commandment is to be observed, therefore there is only the fourth
commandment, and it is therefore the rule of all the rest.

2. I answer that all additions whatsoever are not here prohibited but only
such as are contrary to the word of God; For many other Prophets as the penn
men of the holy Ghost did add diverse yea most part of the holy scriptures.
But now it is plain that the definitions and traditions of the Catholic
church, by whose mouth the holy Ghost does dictat are most consonant to the
text of scripture. For the holy Ghost speaks by them though not tanquam
calamus velociter scribentis.

For Luke 10. it is said he that hears you hears me, and he that contemns
you contemns me: Math. 18. If he do not hear the church let him be to thee
as an Ethnicke and a Publican, and S. Ambrose expounding the last of S. John 18
v. where S. John says If any man shall add unto these things, God shall add
unto him the plagues written in this book. S. Ambrose says he makes not a
protestation against the expositors of his prophecy, but against heretichs;
For the expositor does add nor diminish nothing, but only opens the
obscurity of the place, and shows the moral and spiritual sense.

Now to answer your second argument, I wonder how you being a man of
understanding should be so much deceived as to think that these places make for
you, against us. For we holding firm our assertion can cite all the self same
places Romans 3. 10. 11 19. that man naturally understands not the things of God;
and that man's wisdom is foolishnes. Coloss. 2. 22. For we affirm it the gift
of the holy ghost by an infused habit of faith that we believe; and that by the
direction of the holy Ghost promised that the Church cannot ^^r; neither do we
when we allow of tradition make at our pleasure voluntary religion, for we
acknowledge tradition also to be the word of God, the voice of his spouse that
is taught in all truth, guided up the holy ghost unto the end of the world.
Wherefore your argument proves nothing since you presuppose that proved that
rests yet to you to prove.

The like answer I give unto your third argument, viz. that men are dead in
trespasses Ephe. 2. 5. Math: 15 9. that faith to by hearing, and hearing by the
word Romans 10 17. But I deny that the word is the total or only rule of faith,
since we find many things to be believed that are not expresslie found in the
written word, nor thence deduced.

And to answer briefly unto your 4 Argument, I grant that the Priests and
Prophets were bound to hear the word, and that of Ezekiel. 13. 2, 3. that they
should not prophecy according to their own heart, or follow their own spirit,
but I deny that they should follow only the written word or that following the
voice of the Church, the interpretaton of holy Fathers and Doctors they follow
their own hearts and their own inventions. So that you see how weak your
arguments be, so that they might with more reason be returned on your self.

The second thing which you say I take upon me to prove: but II.
more rightly to say only to propound, till the decision of this main
question be ended; which was whether the definitive sentence of the Church and
Pope be an infallible rule and guide of our faith. Thus question I say, I only
intended rather to propound the^ prove, that we have not at one time diverse
pro^s together in the fire; But now to handle it by way of vellitation and not
of purpose to prove as you would hence infer: But you so mangle in propounding
the reasons that I do only point out, that they might seem not to prove that
which they intend. For you leave out the force of the argument; as the
circumstances of the promise unto S. Peter by our Savior, and the prerogatives
and privilege given unto S. Peter; that he is named first amongst the
Apostles: That he alone walked with our Savior on the water; Of the sundry
promises of our Savior made unto him that hell gates should not prevayle
against him, that he being confirmed should confirm his brethren; that our
Savior washed S. Peter's feet first; that S. Peter only of all the rest should
receive a reveled promise of his particular Martyrdom of the cross; That he
after infusion of the holy ghost first promi^ (...) the Gospel; That the first
miracle in confirmation of our faith is made by S. Peter; That he as a supreme
judge did condemn the hypocrisy of Ananias and Saphiras, that he first
discovered Simon Magus and condemned him; All which and other circumstances
concurring only in S. Peter shows manifestly that S. Peter had preeminence
above all the other Apostles; that he is the rock and head of the Church, that
Cephas so particularly pointed out by the holy Ghost, calling him first by the
name given him at his nativitie Simon, by the name of his father Bar Ionae, and
by his new imposed name Cephas; that no cavil might be took at a legacy so
strongly and particularly confirmed unto S. Peter. Now all that you bring or
can allege against this belike is that the name Cephas was interpreted Petros,
which in Greek either signifies a rock, or a stone. I answer it avayleth
nothing, since Petros signifyes, either a rock, or a stone; now if you ask, why
he is called Petros and not Petra; I answer, in that the masculine gender best
fitted the name of a man: And that S. Peter is the rock plainly appears out
of the very text; For it is said in the Caldei tongue super hoc Cepha; and in
the vulgar super hanc Petram; where our Savior signifies the rock of which he
had spoken Mat. 16. 1^.
of before, the which according to your gra^maticall construction you seem not
much to deny, since you confess that Cephas signifies indifferently a rock or
a stone, now your private spirits interpretation would only limit it unto a
stone, though against S. Hier: most slit^full in languages and tongues in c. 2.
epist. ad Gal. where he says it signifies a rock: Optatus lib. 2. contra
Parmen: says that in Greek it signifies a head: As Christ is called the head,
Isa. 8, 28. Daniel: 2. Psalm. 117. Math. 21. Romans 9, 1. Cor. 10. Ephesians. 2 ^. so
after a kind of a measured proportion S. Peter by the delegatio^ of our Savior
is his Vicegerent in earth, a visible head of a visible Church.

But to that which you object that S. Peter answered as the mouth of the
Apostles and therefore had not these promises made unto him alone; makes much
against you, for to be the spokesman of all the rest, the Masterspring of all
their judgments, seems to grant him superiority, and preeminence: And though
S. Peter was the mouth of the rest, I grant all, but not only the mouth, but
also the head; And if S. Peter could not have the prerogative of place given
unto him in that he represented the Church: No more could the sons of Abraham
be two sons in that they represented two nations. And whereas you object that
all the other Apostles were foundations, A^oc. 21. 14. I grant they were but
not the principal. Neither both the headship of S. Peter derogate from Christ
Jesus our head, since S. Peter is but subordinated to Christ Jesus, and only
of his free institution: and if that place 1. Cor. 3. be understood absolutely;
Other foundation can no man lay, then that which is laid which is Jesus Christ,
then is that of S. Pa: 2. Ephesians. false where he bidds us build upon the
foundation of the Apostles: so that you see a less principal foundation or
roch may well agree with the absolute, most perfect rock and foundation Christ
Jesus, and that the Apostles may be a foundation though S. Peter be chief.

And that no man might reply that this doctrine of the Popes supremacy is but
a late doctrine; see Carthw. lib. 2 page 507. 50. lib. 2 page 97. Fully
against Saunders rock page 248. 271. upon the ^hemis^ restament where he
affirming that the fathers of the council of Nice began the foundation of the
Popes supremacy; which was one of the first 4. general counsels so many
years ago.

And that this poinet of the Popes supremacy does not lack force of reason to
confirm it, I will only allege one general reason is prove it. The
ecclesiastical Hierarchy is no worse governed, then any temporal regiment
and government. And therefore Math. 25. It to compared unto a kingdom that is
governed by one King, and Heb. 3. to a family well governed. Caut. 6. to a
Camp well ordered. But in all well ordered common wealths there is ever
required some visible judge besides the written law; since there must be a
supreme judge to know and take notice of the controversies when they arise, and
to ponder well and examine the reasons of both: 2. there must be one to
erplicate the sense of the law, and to pronounce sentence in the behalf of one
party, when it shall be necessary: And lastly there must be one to compel those
that refuse, to due observation thereof. Now since the church of God is as well
ordered, as any other government, and that there arises the like difficults in
her laws explication, as can happen in any temporal and political
government; It is against the providence of God and love to his spouse the
church, to deny her those helps, which necessarily must be granted to all
well governed common wealths. Therefore as the sentence of a supreme judge in
explicating the sense of the low is to be followed; so by a greater reason S.
Peter's successor guided by the holy Ghost, in all difficults of moment is to be
sought unto for counsel, is to be heard with obedience when he counsels, is
to be obeyed when he proceeds with his powrfull jurisdiction.

Now when you are come to my supply of later Doctors, branding the most
ancient and venerable Fathers of the Church with noveltie; and only you please
your self with this answer that you account them all as insufficient: I wonder
how any man can say or think this, but I wonder more how you can averr, that
you could cite in this point Father for Father, Doctor for Doctor with us:
although you cite S. August. 11. de verbo Dei sec. 12. where he says that
Christ was the roche and not S. Peter. I answer first he does not manifestly
contrary us. For though 1. lib. retract. c. 23. he does approve rather of that
opinion, yet does he not manifestly contrary, that he thinks the other opinion
false, or improbable; For he ronfesseth that the whole Church, in a hymn of S.
Ambrose does acknowledge that S. Peter was head and rock of the Church;
Wherefore after he had proposed the common opinion of the Church, and his
private judgment: In great humility he concludes all. Let the reader choose
whether of these two opinions is the probabler. Hence we may note how ill a
friend you are to S. August. thus to put him on the rack: and how you may
enforce fathers to seem to speak for your cause in great number if you bring
those that makes against you: and me thinks you that rely most in expositio^s
of scripture, on still of la^guages, should not only rely of S. August: words
here that in this for lack of skill of languages mistook a little: But this is
certain that S. August: in Psalm. 63, et contra parts Donati calls S. Peter and
his successors the rock, against which hell gates shall not prevail: So sapes
Tertull. De praescript. Orig. homil. 5. in Exodus S. Cypr. De unitate Ecclesiae.
S. Hyllar. cant. 16. in Math. S. Ambr: sermon: 47. 68. lib. 6. in c. 5 Lucae. S.
Chrysostom. homil. 55. in Math. S. Cyrill. lib. 2. c. 1, 2. comment, in Ioannem.

Lastly you produce that which I bring out of S. John 21. where it is said Pasce
oves meas seed my flock, in which words I assumed S. Peter's privilege and
power to be noted; since here a Pastoral office is granted unto S. Peter,
that is to feed with pasture, to lead, to defend, to govern, chasten, and
heal. But you say that all the Apostles were alike charged here to feed. But
the contrary is manifest out, since he said only to him feed my flock to whom
he said before, love thou me more then they? In which words he excludes all
the others: Besides Christ speaks to S. Peter that he should feed his general
flock though he may speak unto the other Apostles that they should feed their
particular charges. Wherefore S. Leo says 3. anniversario assumptionis. says
Petro hoc singulariter creditur, quia cunctis Ecclesiae rectoribus Petri forma
praeponitur; and so we may answer that in this general charge given to Peter,
the particular charge implicitly was commended unto all the other Apostles.

And though the other Apostles were said to be joinet Priests with S. Peter 1.
Pet. 5, 1. It is spoken in regard that they were joinctly Priests in the
exercise of their orders, and not in regard of the preeminence of place, in
which respect S. Peter was head of all the rest of the Apostles, though the
others did joinctly labor with him in the conversion of nations.

Now after you have a little smoothed up your self that you have done your part
in this poinct, then begin you to say that my affertio^ is not sufficiently
proved: But as for that, you might better leave it to the judgment of the
indifferent reader, then to take upon you to be pliant and ju^^e in the self
same cause. But whereas you say I lack an^i^uitie to prove the supremacy of
the Pope, I hope no, since the Protest (...) own Doctors teaches that it began
in the Nicea^ council; and I think when we shall scan the matter how it come
in then I know we shall prove it of equal age or the self same with that of S
Peter. But to say the truth I did not intend to prove this point of purpose,
but only to give you a taste what doctrine in this we follow; Therefore if in
this you impugn Cardinal Bellar: doctrine as it lies, you may at once
impugn both that learned man and my self, to whose learning I acknowledge my
self a scholar.

The last thing which you examine of mine is about the name Catholic; which
feign you would challenge unto your self, but after better consideration you
seem to refuse it, because it is not warranted by the written word. But why
do not you as well reject the name Trinity, consubstantialitie, three persons
and one God? Nay why do you not reject as well the Creed of the Apostles? For
if the church be a catholic mother, surely she has Catholic children of
which you will be none. But you belike say with Gaudentius the heretic that the
name Catholic is a humane fiction. D. August. contra Gaudent. in praefatione
novi testament.
lib. 2. c. 25. Or with Beza you helshe when you call it a swelling title you
think it a vain word, or with Humfrey in vita Iuelli a vain term. But you
do well since you have neither universality of time, place, or person of the
Catholics: Nor the unity of the Romans having such divisio^s and sectaries
amongst you to deny both: But we can say with S. August: writing upon the Psalm.
65. Iubilate Deo omnis terra let the whole world and not only one corner of
Amsterda^ rejoice, we can show you the prophecy of Esaias fulfilled in that the
Gosuell is preached to all nations. Genesis 2. 6. Psalm. 2. Isa. 54. Mat. 28 Mat. 5
Luke 8 Mal. 1. that the whole world is replinished with the fruit of our
doctrine: Neither is this the voice of the Israelites or AEdomites against the
Israelites in glorying of fleshly privileges; For, these are noted as
principal signs of the Church of God, and that if it were as invisible as
your Church was, it should be excelled far by the synagogue of the Jews that
still for all their scattering, have retained in sundry places visible meetings
and congregations, visible use of their sacraments and ceremonies: The which
consideration made Castalio in the preface of the Bible of King Edward the ^.
after he had considered the promises made by our Savior to his Church that it
should be spread over all nations and that hell oats should not prevayl
against it, and how invisible their Church had been, how unheard of the
essential points of their doctrine, enforced him to say that either these
promises are to be fulfilled, or that God else is a liar: This also made George
David to deny the verity of Historis Georgij Davidis Antverpie^.
the Bible in that the promised visibilitie of the Church was not performed.
Nay then a little to see whither we or you make the best resolution of our
faith, Let us consider that we Roman Catholics use all means and apply all
helps and motives to the due eliciting of an act of faith. For first we have
all motives evidentiae credibilitatis required unto an act of faith: We have
all antiquity, unity, universality, visibilitie, confirmed by the consent of
Dortors, by the institution of most holy religious orders, we have the
conversion of nations, the power of miracles: the infinite number almost of
Martyrs that have sealed our doctrine through al ages with their bloods: 2. we
have a certain visible, and infallible way to decide all controversies, which
is the Catholic Church that propounds what is to be believed, and what is
not: 3. we have Gods divine veracitie speaking by the mouth of the Church which
formally makes us to believe: 4. we have a supernatural judgment to believe
in common at least in that all people all nations have so believed. And lastly
through all these we have a pious affection through the working of Gods holy
grace to believe hic et nunc, hoc et illud, and that without any difficult,
since we first believe there is but one true Church, and that Church cannot
err, and so with great facility we believe ought that the Church shall propound
unto us to be believed. But you have none of these, but only a prejudicated
opinion not to believe ought we say, and a presumptuous spirit to prefer
pour interpretations before all the Doctors of the Church: And if you would
endeavor to convert any Turk, Jew or Atheist, you could not make him of your
opinion, till you had convinced him in each particular and several poinct. But
when we shall come to deal with an Atheist or an infidel; we can give him
such evident motives, such profoundnes of reasons, that even by the light of
nature he may think almost that our articles of faith are worthy of belief,
and after we have persuaded him to believe that there is but one true church,
one means of salvation, and that this Church is guided in all truth by the
holy Ghost, with great facility I can induce him to believe any one article of
our belief that this only true, and most firm church teaches. Let therefore
any one judge whose foundation is grounded on sand: who is seated on earth and
ashes. And as for the rellicks of the poisoned cupp they are all too
blasphemonsly false if you would pour them upon us; and I think they might be
applied to your congregation if I would descend down into particulars.
Wherefore that pour understanding may be enlightened and judgment corrected read
the Bible but not only with the scholiast of your private spirit, but with the
holy fathers and learned Doctors expositions. Therefore I will conclude with
that short exhortation S. Augustine sent unto his friend Honoratus lib: De
unitate Cred. c. 8. You see you have been love troubled with these broiles of
parties in the world, and now if you think your self to have been tossed and
turmoiled enough, and would at length have an end of these verations follow the
way of the Catholic discipline; in which the prophecy of Isoia the third is
fulfilled. And there shall be in it a path, and a way, and a holy way it shall be
called, the befiled shall not pass by it, but this to you shall be a direct way,
so that fools can not nuffe if they follow it.

And thus Mr Ainsworth I have mainteyned my arguments, answered your
objections, though not so spedily as I could have wished, having other
business: And now here I could wish you do not secare lignum eadem linea,
that you would when you answer me examine ^. Bellarmins grounds, reasons,
doctrine and authorities as they lie, that so you may the better give your self
and others satisfaction, and the more worthily deserve an answer; And thus with
hearty prayers for your conversio^ I leav you the fourth of March 1610. from
Justice Hall stilo veteri.

Your friend to give your understanding the best satisfaction he can. John
Aynsworth.




The answer to the former reply. To Mr John Aynsworth prisoner in justice hal,
in London: Grace and mercy, from our Lo. Jesus Christ.
Whereas my first writing gave you to understand that I held all differences in
religion were to be tried and composed by the verdict of God, whereunto I humbly
submit the trial of my faith and actions always, and in my second, (because I
did not see you condescend hereunto,) I showed reasons of such my persuasion:
you (Mr Aynsworth) in your reply, first tax me with unreadynes to answer all
the the grounds of your discourse; and secondly entwite me, as one that
charge with error, them that lived in the Apostles times, ^ were their
scholars, the most ancient record of historyes, the whole body of councils and
holy fathers, the whole schole of Doctors etc. yea as one that has implicitly
condemned for heretics; Luther, Calvin, Beza, Jewel, Whitaker, Humfrey, etc.
The first I leav to the indifferent readers judgment, whither I have omitted
any ground of your discourse pertinent to our present cause; or you rather have
omitted of mine, in your reply. If you blame me for omitting discourses
impertinent, I must bear it still: for still I mean so to follow the matter in
hand.

The second I leav to your own second consideration, and all unpartial
judgment, what cause you have so to accuse me. Do I otherwise debase me^, then
by comparison with the most high God? do I speak of the fathers, worse then
the scriptures (which I alleged) speak of al men? And will you match earth with
heaven, frayl man, with God, as joint umpiers in religions controversies.? If
not, why are you offended, that I cleay to God alone: that I would leav the
farhers to sleep in peace; (which you out of charity, do interpret a dead
sleep of errors:) whom you (it seems) would rouse out of their graves, as if
you thought to find a 1. Sam. 28
Samuel at Endor, when the Lord himself answers you not by Vrim, nor by
Prophets. And much you mistake me, (if not purposely); as if I thought my self
not dust and ashes as they, or any more privileged from errors then they.
There be thowsands of them whom you implie as taxed of me with error, whom I
prefer for wisdom truth and holiness before my self: yea I match not my self
with the least of Gods servants: but by the grace of God I am that I am; and
his word, (not my own) is that I st^d upon, and do oppose unto all the world:
but I judge no man, neither will I be judged, in cases of conscience, by man's
day. Isa. 2. 22,
Cease you therefore from the man whose breath is in his nosthrels: for wherein
is he to be esteemed?

Or if you will not cease, the truth it self out of the mouth of God and man
shall force you hereunto. For in my former answer, I set down fowr reasons,
fortified with many scriptures, to prove this position: That The 1. point of
controversy.
God only is to be umpier and arbyter of all questions and controversies about
religion: which was the first point to be accorded between us. You (after you
had generally censured them to be nothing but allegations of scripture falsely
applied,) answer to the first, confirmed by Deuteronomy. 5. 32. and 12. 32. by denying
that hence can be gathered, that the holy scripture should be the only rule or
umpier of faith. For (say you) as it does not follow, nothing is to be added
to the 4. commandment, and the 4. command is to be observed, therefore there
is only the 4. command. and it is therefore the rule of all the rest. The
reddition of this your similitude, shows not his face (perhaps least it should
blush:) but lies hid in silence.

First you gather a consequence, which here I strowed not: I spoke of God, and
of his verdict and authority; not of the scriptures as yet. For whither it be
by writing or by speaking, or any other way that God manifests his will unto
us, it is to me all one, and the authority of the scripture is a second point.
Thus your answer is not here to the purpose.

Your reason annexed, is a fallacy, concluding from a part against the whole
unequally. The scriptures cited speak of Gods commands in general: you take
one in particular; and because one is not all, therefore all must not be all,
but more then all must be observed; which what they will be I cannot tell,
unless the commandments of men. Mat. 15. 9.

2. You answer, that all additions whatsoever are not here prohibited, but
only such as ar contrary to the word of God: for many other prophets, as the
penmen of the holy Ghost, did add diverse, pea most part of the holy scriptures,
etc.

In deed this answer is your own, none of Gods: you show no tittle of his word
for that you speak. But I will show you the contrary. Prove. 30 ^. Add not unto
his words, least he reprehend thee, and thou be a liar. Lo here all additions,
and not only things contrary, are forbidden. Again; though it be but a man's
testament, (says our Gal. 3. 15.
Apostle,) when it is confirmed, no man does abrogate it, or adds thereto. If
you add This I. A. answers not, but Gal. 1. for it.
to your natural fathers testament, civil laws would count you an unnatural
son; and your distinction would not help you: much less can it help you, for
doing such wrong to the will of our father which is in heaven.

Your reason is direct against you: for the Prophets being penmen of the holy
ghost, added nothing of their own: the additions were 2. Pet. 1. 21,
Gods own. If the Prophets and Apostles might add nothing of themselves, much
less may we. Thus God yet reigns alone. And if you would have man's oil to
lighten your lamp, hear what Chrisostom says for this point: In opere
imperfect. cap. 7. Mat. See also Ambrose 1. de paradiso. 5. 12. where he
co^de^neth al additio^s and concludes Nihil igitur vel quod bonu^ videtur
adde^dum est.
Every Doctor is a serva^t of the law, for neither may he add unto the law any
thing of his own sense, neither may he withdraw any thing according to his own
understanding, but preach that only which is found in the law.

Whereas you add, that your traditions are also from the holy ghost, for Luke
10. it is said, he that hears you, hears me, and Mat. 18. If he hear not
the church, let him be to thee as an ethnik and a publican: First, these are
spoken to all Christ's ministers and of al his churches: and therefore make no
more for Rome, then for Corinth or Ephesus. But you still keep from the point,
and yield the cause unawares. For be it tradition, definition or whatsoever, by
whomsoever, if it be Gods, not man's, it is yenough, and all that I would prove
in this first particular. After it shall be scanned whither your traditions be of
God or no.

Whereas therefore in answering my second agrument, you wonder how I should be so
deceived, as to think the places that I cite, make for me and against you: you
may wonder rather at your own mistakeing (that I say no more,) who when I plead
for God only and his alsufficiency, by opposing as the scripture teaches,
man's corruption and folly; you will not yield, though you have nothing to
contradict. And even thus you turn over the 3. and 4. reason, by denying them
to prove that thing, which I there did not cite them for. Such oversight
hereafter I hope you will amend, that you weary not both me and your reader.

Now to your former answer which was with a distinction in this plain point,
whither God only, or some other, should be Isa. 33. 22.
judge and lawgiver to his people for their religion and controversies
therabout: the same distinction you urge here again, which whither it be a meet
and distinct answer, or argues not rather fear, let the prudent judge. For you
yield not plainly to the thing by me propounded, which neither religion nor
reason would stick at: only atheism vvil deny. For if there be a God, and he
of man to be served, and man knovves not the things of God til by himself they
be reveled, neither may do more or less then by the Lord is commanded, (as I
have before proved:) hereupon it vvil follow undenyably, that in all doubts and
controversies of religion, Gods voice and verdict must decide what is truth
and what pleases him. Whither he show it by himself from heaven, by Angels or
by churches, or by particular men, by writing or by speaking, it is and ought
to be all one to us. But the more to convince you, you shall have humane
testimony; as of Ambrose, who says. Epist. l. 5. epis. 31 Ser also Hilar. l.
1 de trinitat et l. 4* ratio est* ^^a summi lovis.
The mystery of heaven let God himself teach me, which made (heaven:) not man,
which knew not himself Whom should I rather beleev concerning God, then God
himself? Or if you be not moved by this Fathers judgment; the hethen shall rise
up and condemn you, who esteemed true law, apt to command and to forbid, to
be the right reason of the great God; and that divina men's summa lex est. The
2. point of controversy.
the divine mind, to be the cheiflavv. Cicero de Legib. lib. 2.

The second point now is. Where this verdict of God is to be found; whither in
the scriptures of the old and new Testament (as I beleev;) or in the writings
and mouths of other men. To this I had not before, neither yet have your dir
(...) answer. What makes you shun the light herein, is easy to discern. To
confirm my faith that the verdict and will of God is to be found in holy writ,
I alleged divine testimonies Heb. 1. 1. Romans 16, 25 29. and 10, 6. 7. 8. 2.
Tim 2. 16, 17. Ioh. 20. 31. 1. Ioh. 1, 4. 1. Cor. 4. 6.
many: to them you answer not one word: neither yet do you yield to the truth.
Beware you wink not with your eyes, that you may not see. But seeing the holy
scriptures move you not; you shall have candle light, to see the sun shine.

C. Bellarmine, (to whom you referr me, twice in your last writing, and to
whose learning you acknowledge yourself a scholar,) ingeniously confesses
saying: Preface to the first tome of his works.
Neq, n distputari potest etc. There can be no disputing (says he) except we
and our adversaries first do agree in some common principle: now we and al
heretics agree in this, that the word of God, is the rule of faith, whereby men
are to judge of points of doctrine: is a commune principle granted of al men,
from whence arguments may be drawn: and is the spiritual sword, which in this
battle may not be refused. Behold here the first point plainly yielded by your
champion: which you, without dark distinction, could not be drawn unto.

The second concerning the scriptures is in effect also yielded, when he says
Bellarm. De verbo Dei. l. 1. c. 1.
That the Prophetical and Apostolical book^, according to the catholic churches
mind, explaned both by the 3. council of Carthage. c. 47. and late council of
Trent, sess. 4. is the true word of God, and the certain and stable rule of
faith. Lo here again my second assertion justified by your C. that the word
of God is to be found in the Prophets and Apostles vvritings. As for the
meaning or understa^ding of these scriptures, explaned by the church; that
remains for a third De verbo Dei l. 1, c. 2.
consideration. But further to confirm this second, he says, The rule of the
catholic faith ought to be certain and known; for if it be not known, it will be
no rule to us; and if it be not certain, it is no rule at all But nothing is
more known, nothing more certain then the holy scriptures, which are contained
in the Prophetical and Aposiolical writings: that most foolish must he needs
be, which denies that credit is to be given unto them. Again he confesses,
that ibidem.
the holy scripture is a most certain and a most safe rule of believing These
things spoke your Cardinal, though perhaps not of himself but as being Ioh. 11,
51.
high priest that year, when he disputed against the Libertines and others that
despise tho scriptures of God. And thus has the truth obtained testimony out
of your masters mouth whose learning I crow his scholars will not withstand; or
if they do, this d^o n^s given against them by the lesait^: Bellarm: ibidem.
They fight with Moses, with the Prophets, with the Apostled, which Christ (...)
to God the father, and the holy Ghost, which contemn the holy scriptures and
^ael^s of God.

Thus have I proved sufficiently as I suppos^, in my former and this writing,
that God, word and will is to be found in the prophetical and Apostolical
scriptures; that if you longer resist, you will be condemned of yourself. Other
humane testimonies out of August. de doctr. Christ l, 2 c. 9 In has omnibus
libris, nempe sacrae scripturae, timentes Dau^, et pietate mansueti, quaeru^t
volu^tatem Dei.
Augustine, Hier, and many like Doctors, I could further all edge to confirm
this trach: but the witness of God is venough for me; and both it and the
testimonies of your Cardinal, are sufficient against you.

And now I come to your first assertion which you took upon you to prove,
That the bare scripture is not a sufficient rule of our belief: ^ that many
mysteries and points are is be believed, that are not erp^^sl^ The 1 of your
assertions.
taught, or evidently deduced out of the holy scriptures. Against this I
brought in my former vvriting, evident testimonies from heaven, as 2. Tim. 3.
16. 17 John. 20. 31. 1 Cor. 4. 6. and others, against which you open not your
mouth.

An ^g your first argument, that we might not by any aequivocation The 1. of
your arguments.
mistake one another, I shevved my meaning distinctly, how things many man be
believed, though they be not gathered out of the written word, understanding
hereby a common or humane belief, wherein men may vary without danger of
damnation. As for example; a man may beleev that the Apostle Matthew ^vvvvis in
AEthiopia, Thomas in India, Jude in Persia and upon the report of human^
records And so Peter at Rome, if you vvil. But for salvation with God, I said,
not any thing is needful to be believed; ^ave that which is taught by his
written word. You in your reply, seeking advantage by words, conclude that I
hold some tradition necessary besided the written word; and thus now have
drawn (as you say) water out of the Rock, since I grant that tradition is
necessary to m^ belief. Whereas I used not the word necessary, but may be: and
evidently restreyned things needful for salvation, to Gods written word: to
that your water is spilt on the ground, and cannot be gathered up again; how
ever you may strive about words, when matter fails.

Again, my assertion; that nothing is needful to be believed for salvation with
God, but that which is taught by his written word, is you say, most false,
since nothing with m^is more necessary to salvation then the written word,
which word is not proved by an other written word etc. Where first you fight
against God, who says, in John, 20. 30. 31. Many o^ her signs did Jesus in
the presence of his disciples, which are not written in this book, but these
things are vvritte^ that ye might beleev that Jesus is the Christ the son of
God, and that in believing ye might have life through his name. And again, in
2. Tim 3 16. 17. All scripture (is) inspired of God, and profitable for
doctrine, for reprehension, for correction for instruction which is in
righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect and perfectly ti^t^d unto
every good work These are the testimonies of the holy Ghost as your self vvil
not dency: and in them, both faith and all good works are deduced from the
scriptures and what more, think you, is needful for salvation with God? ^ how
then is my assertion most false? do you not gave the lie unto the holy ghost?

Secondly, I wish you to deal plainly and distinctly with me and my words; as I
endeavor to do with you. I hold the word of God to be absolutely Romans 10. 9-17.
necessary as a means for ma^s salvation: which is the ^rst point, this word,
2 Pet. 1. 21 Pheromenoi.
was first spoken, afterward written: by men that weret^aried by the holy
ghost. To our first fathers, the word spoken was necessary, and sufficient,
whiles it was not written: to us now, the written word is left, as a
necessary mean or instrument, sufficient to teach us Gods vvil, and bring us I
might better alledg this against you, that your catholic churches set^nce, is
not proved by an other catholic churches sentence.
to salvation: which is the second point. Against the sufficiency hereof you
except, that this written word is not proved by an other written word: vvheras
before I have proved, that the scriptures of God do prove and approve, and
co^firm one an other, and his spirit which is in the^m, and ^n al his people,
does seal that they are true More sound and sufficient proof there needs not,
nor ca^ be had. You rely upon the church; but I say with the Apostle, 1 Ioh.
1, 9^.
if we receav he witness of m^: the witness of God is greater. As you carp
here at the written word, so did the faithless Pharisees as the spoken
word; yea at the eternal speaking word the son of God himself. Thou bravest
witness of thy self (said Ioh. 8. 13. 14.
they) thy witness is not true. Though I bear witness of my self (said Christ)
my witness is true: for I know whence I came and vvnither I go; but ye
cannot tell whence I come, and which ^r I go. verse. 15.
Ye judge after the flesh. Even so, the scriptures bear witness of themselves,
(say I): you accept not this their testimony. And why? doubtless because
you know not whence they came: you judge after the flesh. Our Lord Jesus had
the Ioh 5 3^^
vvitness of John Baptist, and other men many; but he received verse. 34.
not the witness of men, nor verse 41.
praise of men. So the holy scriptures have witness of the church and saints in all ages: but they receav not the witness of men, as that which is most
irrefragable. Christ had verse. 36.
greater witness, then John's: for the works which he did, bare witness or him,
that the Father sent him. So the works which the scriptures do, in the
consciences of men, bear witness that they are of God. The Father himself which
sent Christ, verse. 37.
bare witness of him: so the Father which has sent u^ the scriptures, bears
witness of them. Ye have not heard his voice at any time, (says Christ,) ver^
17. ^^
neither have ye seen his shape: and his word ye have not abiding in you, for
whom he has sent, him ye beleev not. So say I to you; if ye beleev not the
scriptures, it is because the word of God abides not in you: if you hear not
them, neither will you be persuaded, though one rise from the dead again: Luke
16 31. But lo how you require proof of a received principle: (for which, by
laws of right reasoning, you deserv not to be reasoned with; as a Christian.
It is the speech of an atheist, to call for proof that there is a God: of a Turk
o^ p^ynim, to call for proof that our divine scriptures, are of God. Professed
Christians grant this, why should we then war one with an other, about our own
received grounds? The books that I hold to be inspired of God, authentik,
canonical; your selves grant ^o to be. Cease therefore I pray you to ^ight
against God, least by your own mouths you ^s condemned.

But as yet you cease not; for demanding how I prove without tradition, the
scripture to be inspired of God; and my interpretation to be only true: you
say I have my answer ready coined viz. 1. Cor 2. 11.
the things of God no man knows but the spirit of God. It is well my answer
has been coined in the Lords mint: and it shall be well with you if you receiv
your money from no worse coyners. But what fault find you with this coin? you
ask: how I do proov that I have the spirit of God? For my self, first I answer,
with The Apostle 1. Cor. 2, 11.
what man knows the things of man, but the spirit of man which is in him? I
cannot make proof of that to an other, which can be known but to my self: only
as the tree is known by the fruits, so may my spirit by the Gal. 5. 23 -- 25.
fruits thereof be discerned whither it be of God or no. For my interpretation
I answer, it may be truth it may be error; let it be tried by the scripture it
self, of them that have the Quo spirituscripturae factae sunt, eo spiritu legi
desiderant, ipsae etia^ intelli ge^dae sunt. Bernard. ad fratres de monte Dei.
spirit of God Further proof there is none on earth: till the great day come,
when all secrets shall be made manifest. But for the scripture, (which is the
thing you should keep unto,) it needs not my proof that it is inspired of God:
it has proof in it self of God, then which can be no greater. It is as if you
should ask me proof, that there is light in the sun, my answer would be, all
whose eyes have the spirit of life and sight in the^, do see it: the blind
and senseless can never discern it. So is it much more in the things of God.
Learn it (I pray you) of our Savior: who says, that the Ioh. 14. 17
world cannot receive the spirit of truth, because it sees him not, neither
knovveth him: but ye (my disciples) know him, for he dwells with you, and
shall be in you and verse. 26.
he shall teach you all things; and Ioh. 15, 26
he shall testify of me, Ioh. 16. 14.
he shall glorify me, for he shall receive of mine and shall show it unto you.
Now this Anointing or holy spirit, all that are Romans 8, 9
Christ's, have, (none other in the world;) and it dwells in them; and they
1. Ioh. 2, 27.
need not that any man teach them, but as the same Anointing teaches them all
things, and it is true and is not lying. If you say with Nicodemus, Ioh. 3, 9.
how can these things be? I answer with Christ, verse. 11.
Verily verily, we speak that we know, and testify that we have seen: but ye
receive not our witness. If ye cannot perceive verse 8. Eccles. 11, 5.
the vvind that blovveth; nor know how the bones do grow in the womb of a
woman with child: how should ye know the work of God, that works all? If you
see not Gods spirit in the script ^res, it is because the eyes of your heart are
blinded: yet the light Ioh. 1. 5.
shines in darkness, though the darkness comprehends it not. If you still call
for testimony and proof of the spirit; you have been answered, 1, Ioh. 5, 6
it is the spirit which testifies, that the spirit is truth: and if you refuse
to walk in this light, you must grope in darkness till you lie down in sorrow.

But you still object, (as having a mist before your eyes,) that the Manichie,
Montanist, Arian and all other haeretiks, will v^a^^ of this private spirit
etc. be ^t ^o, and cannot you ^ John 4. ^
try the spirits (as the Apostle bids) whither they ^e of God? doubtless
if you were of God, you should not only try and find out, but overcome them;
for greater is he that is in the Saints, then he that is in the world: this
promise have we received from the Father; 1 Ioh. 4, 4.

Again you consider not (though you were put in mind) that Jews and Turks
and Ethniks, will beat you with your own weapons. For the I^vv rests upon
the books of Moses and the Prophets, which are the ground Act. 26 22 23.
of our Christian religion: and from them he reasons against jesus of
Nazareth our hope. To allege now against Jews, the authority of your
catholic church, or Pope, is no more then for them to allege against youth
authority of Annas and Caiaphas, and the church of Israel. If you confound not
the Jew by scriptures (as did Act. 17. 2. 3. and 18. 28.
the first Christians,) and by 1 Cor 2. 4.
demonstration of the spirit and of power; your self vvil turn back and be
ashamed; for no other weapons, will vvin the victory in this field. And the
same will foil all Antichristians and heretics whosoever: for though they
take up the sword of the spirit, which is Ephesians. 6, 17.
the word of God; yet the true spiritual man, whose eyes are in his head,
will return that svvord Ps. 37. 15
into their own hearts, and slay them therewith. For the weapons of our
warfare 2 Cor. 10, 4.
are mighty through God, to cast down holds: and a wise man goes up into the
city of the mighty, and casts down the strength of the confidence thereof:
Prove. 21. 22. I, but the Roman catholic church (you say) can show Turks their
beginner, beginning, increase and declyning estate. And vvil not the Jew say
as much against us Christians; that they can show our beginner, beginning,
increase etc. If this be your best defense, the Turk will laugh you to scorn.
And IVLIAN the Apostata, would not have his mouth stopped by your slight
answer, because he himself went out of the catholic Ch:, which was more ancient
then he: for then if a Jew should now come to your catholic church: his
brethren Jews might stop his mouth, (by your yeason) because he goes out of
a church more ancient then himself. Julian pleaded not for his own person, but
for Paganism as much more ancient and universal then Christianisme: which if
they be unfallible demonstrations of the truth, our faith will perish; unless
we deduce our antiquity from paradise, where in deed Christianity did Genesis
3. 15 20.
beginn. And so the truth will prevayl in antiquity against all opposites:
but then Gods word and spirit in his scriptures and servants, must be ou^
bulwark, as now they be mine. If your Church, Pope, and traditions, will not
stand you in stead against Jews, Turks, ^ thinks; but only for to contend a
while, against your even Christen: then do you not build upon the Rock, nor
lay such a ground as all Mat. 16.
h^l gates can not prevail against: for these misc^eants will prevail against
it: but we that rely on Gods word and spirit, shall by his grace stand for
ever, even as the Apostles did by these, convert all nations under heaven.

Whereas I further th^w^d you ^h insufficiency of your plea for church
traditions, by example or Israel, whose church and priests ^ared, and condemned
Christ etc. You answer m^ Ioh 9. 22.
, that the high preisthood that was judge did not err; n^ not when ou^ Savior
was co de^^^d: in that the high preisthood remained in our savior, for he was
the if judge etc. But doubtless the Pharisees would have smiled a^ ^his
answer: wherein you ^^ke for granted, the main controversy Question was then
in Israel whether Jesus of Nazareth were the true M^s^^^, the high priests,
scribes, rul^r, said no, he is a deceiver, and has a D^l; and if any confess
him to be the Christ, let him be excommunicate. Does any of the rulers or of
the pharisees believe in him? but this people Ioh. 7. 48. 49.
which know not the lawer cursed. If you ^ad then lived it seems you would
have confuted all the Rabb^nes with this, that Jesus was the Messiah because he
was the chief priest, and judge; But had you not c^^aved othervveise to the
scriptures, (as did the Apostles, and s^novv do,) they would soon have stopped
your mouth with this, that hard controversies were by the law to come unto
the Deu. 17. 9
Priests of the Levites, (not a Priest of Judah, concerning which tribe. Moses
spoke Heb 7. 14.
nothing touching the preisthood,) and unto the Judge that should been th^se
days, in the place which the Lord did Deu. 17. 8
choose (which vva Jerusalem, not Ioh. 1 46
Nazareth, or Ioh. 7. 41
Galilee whence Jesus came,) and h^y should show the sentence of judgment
etc: and he that would not ^^a^ken to the Pr^^^ or Judge should die. But we
are the Priests of the Levites (would they say), and by our o^ce must teach
the people betvveeneth holy and prof^n^, and in Ezekiel. 44. 23 24.
controversy must stand to judge; according Deu 17. 11
to ^h^ law which we teach and tell, must m^n do: now we have a law John. 19
7
and by our law he ought to dye, because he made himself the son of God. If
now your religion had been known that the Church, the preisthood, can not err:
the simple people might have chosen Bar^bb^s, rather then Jesus, (as in deed
they did,) and have had much more color to plead for Annas and Caiaphas, then
you have for your Pop^: and succession (the pillar of your catholic church,)
would have born down all the disciples of our Lord. Beware therefore how you
build upon these ^oggs, least you betray the Gospel, unto stubborn Jews.

Besides all this, if you knew the scriptures, you might find long before, that
the church of Israel erred. Did not the priests, rulers and people, condemn the
Prophets of God sent in several ages; and was not Jerusalem the Mat. 4. 5.
holy city, and seat of the preisthood, g^ Luke 13. 33 3^.
of their blood? Was not vile and gross idolatry practiced often in Judah and
Jerusalem: by the Priests and Princes? so that Jerusalem Ezekiel. 23. 11.
A^OL^^AH, m^^red her self with inordinate love and with her fornications, more
then her idolatrous sister AHOLAH or Samaria. For Judah 2 Chr. 2^. 6.
forsook the Lord, and turned their faces from his tabernacle, verse. 7.
shut the doors of his house, quenched his lamps, and neither burnt incense nor
offered burnt offerings in the sanctuary, unto the God of Israel: and will you
say in all this, the Church did not err? Vriah the Priest 1 king 16. 10. 11
etc. 16.
made an altar idolatrous like that in Damascus, and polluted Gods worship in
the temple. Pa^h it the son of Imm^r the Priest Ier. 20. 1. 2
being governor in the house of the Lord, persecuted Jeremiah for preaching
the truth; and himself prophesied verse. 6.
lies. A general defection was in the church, they, Ier 32. 32. 33.
their Kings, their Princes, their Priests, and their Prophets, the men of
Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, they turned the back unto God, and not
the f^, and s^^ verse. 34.
their abominations in the house whereupon his name was called, to defile it,
and verse. 35.
built the high places of Baal, and offered their children into Molech. The
heads of Jerusalem judged for rewards, Mica. 3. 11
and the priests taught for hire, and the prophets prophesied for money. And
will you yet say, the church did not err? The Lord said by Malachi, that Man 2.
5. 6 etc.
his covenant, had been with Levi, even life and peace: and he gave him fear,
that he feared him, and was afraid before his name: the law of truth was in his
mouth, and no iniquity found in his lips: for verse. 7.
the Priests lips should preserve knowledge, and they should seek the law at
his mouth; for he is the Angel of the Lord of hosts. But of the Priests that
the^ lived he co^plaineth that they verse. 8.
w^r gone out of the way, had caused many to fall by the law, and had broken
the covenant of Levi; for which God made the^ verse. 9.
despised and vile before all the people. And where now is the privilege of the
preistood, not to err? And if the church then erred, (as many more proofs may
yet be brought, if you still denev it,) how did the godly for a ground of their
faith? Will not the law of the Lord and his good spirit which he gave to N^hem.
9. 20.
instruct them, susteyn is now, as it did them then, against all errors
heresies and idolatries? Otherweise Christians now under the gospel, should
have less grace or benefit by the scriptures and spirit of God, then thee had
then: which is contrary to all the promises. Th^se things I dor the more insist
upon, to enforce you to a de^p^r consideration of your estate, and foundation
of you faith, which you lay upon the sands: for though the church is to be
respected and honored above all societies in the world her doctrines,
admonitions, censures to be regarded: yet may we not make an idol of her, nor
set her in Gods throne: himself has taught us from the beginning, that the
Lev. 1. 3.
Anointed priest may syn to thr syn of the people; a verse. 22.
ruler might syn: the verse. 13.
wh^l congregation of Israel might syn: and all were to offer sacrifie^ for
their trespasses: that all flesh may learn to be silent before God and confess
themselves to err But Gods word ^tr^th not; his scriptures are Psalm. 12. 6.
as silver fined 7 times, no dross is in them: therefore the scripture is above
the church, and that perfect rule must guide us, not the imperfect doctrines of
men.

Now whereas I showed how the Labyrinth of your religion leads to the Pope,
the center of your circle; and makes him a ground of grounds, whereon (...)
b^ild our faith that he must tell us what is divine scripture, and what is the
meaning of every point of scripture, and what is unvvritten verity etc. and
none may doubt or contradict: you give me an anansvver from Aristotle and
Philosophy, but altogether neglect the true sophie or wisdom that is from
above. For by what ground from God Iam. 3. 17.
may I be assured, that the B. of Rome, rather then of Ephesians s^^, etc, is the
only man in the world, on whom my ^aith must rest o^ that there is such a
mutual reciprocation betwixt Gods word and him, that the one necessarily
depends on an other, the word on the Pope as touching us? I know the church, as
it is manifested by the scriptures, so bears witness again of the scriptures,
and holds them forth, or should, as the pillar and ground of truth. But this
not always, nor necessarily. For how th^n is it come to pass, that the church
of Ephesus, which in Paul's time was 1 Timothy 1. 3. and 3. 15.
the pillar and ground of truth; has long since been swallowed up of heresies?
Why may I not fear also, that the church of Rome, (whom Paul w^rn*d Romans 11. 20
2^.
not to be hie minded out to fear, least God who spared not the natural
branches, the Jews, would also not spare her, but verse. 22.
cut her off,) is swallowed up of like evils? And to follow your own
similitude; how do you manifest that the Pope is the only skilful Lapidarie,
that must value the Carbuncles, Saphirs, and al other precious stones that
shine in the scriptures? If a Lapidary should show you a chaulk stone, and say
it (...) a diamond, and prize it a^^ording: would you beleev him and give him
(...) price yet, you beleev the Pope, when he tells you that the fabulous books
of ^obie and of Judith and other like apocryphal; are canonical inspired of
God, to be prized as dear as Mos^s and the Prophets. As he shows little skill
in this art, that gives such rubbish in sted of the Topaz and Chrysolite^ so
dare I not trust him in valuing the stones upon Aarons Ephod, or shevving the
virtue and uses of them, vvh^r of he is more ignorant (as experience has
taught) them many other men. Yet you refuse the holy Ghost the spirit of al
truth, who 1 Cor. 2.. 10. 11. Job 28. 12. 13 -- 23. etc.
only is able to value the word of God, and undoubtedly to manifest the wisdom
of the same: to build your salvation upon a man, who may himself (as anon I will
prove by your own confession) be the child of damnation. Now verily I am loath
to put my soul into his hand, that has so little care of his own: or make him
the only Pilote of my ship, that sails himself into the gulf of h^ll.

And whereas you would have me giv you leav to be of S^^^g^stines mind, who
said he would not beleev the scripture to be scripture, without the authority
of the church: if he and you understand Christ the head of the church and
auctor of the scriptures, good leav have you. But if you mean his supposed
Vicar the Pope, (for so your catholic church shrinketh into one man) or any
such prelate, you may take leav if you will, but I vvil give you none. For
Augustine who vvrote a book of ^etractations, r^p^^nting his own sundry
errors and oversights, might err in this, as well as in other points: and it
is not wisdom for any man, to follovv him in all things, that was deceived in
many* And this is such an assertion, as behoved him either vv^l to explain it,
or plainly to retract it: and not to leav a stumbling block before the blind*
And if you vvil needs blindfold your self and follow him: yet give others leav
to use their ey-sight, least they fall into the ditch. And herein I (not you)
follovv Augustines stepps: for when controversy was between Hierom and him
about Peter's syn, Galat. 2. and Hierom alleged many Doctors to back his
opinion, and then desired of him (as you do now of me) to give him leav to err
with such men if he thought him to err: Augustine answered Epist. 19
that he had Paul himself, in sted of them al yea and above them al, and to him
he did fly and appeal from them al, that were otherweise minded: and asked
leav of them, that he might rather beleev so great an Apostle then any other
how learned so ever. As you would have leav to be of Austins mind for the other
point: so will I take leav to be of his practice in this.

Your ^. argument now follows, drawn from the difficulty and hardness The ^.
of your arguments.
to understand the scripture. Whereto I answered granting some things to be
difficult in the Bible: but deneying the inference, that therefore it is no
certain rule or square of truth. You reply, that the testimony alleged (2.
Pet. 3. 16.) does prove it: for in what (say you) does S. Peter say that S.
Paul is hard, but concerning many points of our faith and religion, as
concerning predestination, reprobation, vocation of the gentiles, justification
by faith, of which high mysteries S. Paul is the chief and principal master. I
answer, First you confound the things, with the scripture which manifests the
things: whereas these two differ much. Predestination is a hard thing for men
to understand, whosoever speak or write of it: but the scripture that treats
hereof is plain in it self, and Paul is not so obscure as your Pope. Secondly
the Apostle says that the unlearned and unstable do pervert (or wrest) these
things as the other scriptures also: but what is this against those that be
taught of God, and stablished in the truth by his spirit. Evil minded men will
wrest al things De intelligentia ^. haeresis, no de scriptura est: et sensus
non sermo fit crimen. Hilarious l. 2. de Trinitat.
be they never so plain. Shall we therefore have no rule, no sure ground of our
faith? To come the^ near unto you in this point, I freely grant that many high
mysteries are in the scriptures, hard to be understood of us, ignorant men, but
withal I add this, that those mysteries are made more hard, by your Popes
determinations. For whereas men might have some good mesure of light in these
mysteries, by the plain scriptures: it is come to pass by your Popes and
prelates glosses, interpretations, co^ments, etc. that darkness and gross
darkness has covered many people, who if they had never read any thing but the
book of God, inought have seen much more clearly, through his grace. You do
not right therefore to complain of difficulty and insufficiency in the
Prophetical and Apostolical writings: Why rather mind you not the^saying of the
holy Ghost in the scriptures, Prove. 18, 8. 9. The words of my mouth are al
plain to him that will understand, and straight to them that would find
knowledge. But you make Gods holy and comfortable words, to be crooked, dark,
deceivable rules: and his divine oracles given for the salvation of men, to be
like the doubtful Delphik oracles of the Divill, uttered for men's destruction.
You think the late fathers and your Popes can speak plain to simple men's
understanding, but all the holy Prophets and Apostles could not (or would not)
speak to the capacity of the simple, so you make them the greatest deceivers
of souls in the world: and a pagan might justly scorn our heavenly law, if it
be a leaden rule, a nos^ of wax^, as some have blasphemed it. But hogs esteem
draffe better then pearls; and though the wisdom of God powers out her mind
unto them, yet in them is fulfilled the true proverb, wherefore is there a price
in the hand of the fool, to get wisdom, and he has none heart? Prove 17. 16. But
where may we think to find the place of wisdom, if it be not in the Prophets
and Apostles writings? For touching these points you speak of, if a man read
the late Fathers, Augustine, Ambrose and the rest: he shall find them often
dark, difficult, intricate, contradicting themselves sometimes, and one
another. And if he compare your Popes determinations with the holy scriptures,
he shall find as good agreement as between harp and harrow. For example; Gods
plain law says, Exodus 20.
Thou shall not make to thy self a graven (thing) or any similitude of things
that are in heaven above, or in earth beneath etc. thou shall not bow down to
them, neither serve them: and again, Deu. 27. 15
Cursed be the man that shall make a graven or a molten (thing,) the abomination
of the Lord, the work of the hands of the artificer, and shall set it in a
secret place; and all the people shall answer and say, Amen. These evident
scriptures may persuade every simple heart, that it is a fearful syn to make and
worship similitudes of God and of Christ, and of Saints departed or any the
like* Now let him come to your catholic churches interpretation, and read your
Cardinals gloss, that Bellarm. de imag sanct. l. 2. c. ^3.
such scriptures reprechend idolatry, that is to say, the worshipping of images
which are esteemed for Gods; or, by which they are worshipped for Gods, which
indeed are not but as for ibidem. c. (...).
the Images of Christ and of saints they are to be worshipped, and not only by
accident and unproperly but also by themselves and properly; so as they do
terminate (or end) the worship, as in themselves they are considered, and not
only as they bear the part of the exemplar (or person represented): and let
him read your learned distinctions of the worship latria, the worship dulia and
hyperdulia and other like schole points dug out of the abisme of the rock of
Rome: and the man will be amazed to find such comments upon such a text; and
make him ween his wits be not his own. But I make no doubt there be thowsands
and ten thowsands upon earth, that if they read Moses law, and your churches
comments upon this point, they will say Moses is surer and playner and easier to
understand, then your Cardinal, a great deal. And as of this, so of other
things many* that to leav the scriptures, and rely upon your church
determinations, were to blow out the candle that men may see by the snuff.
Moreover, if that cannot be an indeficient rule of faith, wherein some things ar
hard to be understood: then doubtless your ^* assertion is overthrown, which
says, that the scriptures expounded by the catholic church, is a true and
indeficient rule of our faith For by the catholic church you mean the Roman
Ch^* and in the Roman church you restreyn al to the Pope: now his exposition
does often times as well clear the truth, as a cloud before the sun. Yea even
the playnest places, which in holy writ are as bright as noon day; your church
has enveloped with Egyptian darkness: as Marriage honorable Bellar. de Romans
pont. l. 3. c. 23.
among al, and the bed undefiled; says the text, Heb. 13. 4. If among all
(says *your gloss) comprehends al men wholly: then marriage shall be honorable
also between father and daughter, betwee^ mother and son, between brother and
sister. etc. Drink ye al of this, (says Mat. 26. 27
our savior:) Let a man examine himself (says the 1 Cor. 1^. 28.
Apostle) and so let him eat of this bread and drink of this cup. We yet see
not (says your quick eyed Bellar. de Rom pont. l. 3. c. 23.
Cardinal) that place of the gospel where we be taught, that both parts of the
sacrament of our Lords supper are to be ministered to al Christians. For our
Lord says not, Drink ye al Christians of this, but drink ye al of this etc.
Such catholic expositio^s do illustrate the scriptures, as the smoke of the
pit did the sun and aier, Apoc. 9. 2.

But me thinks you deney that the Pope has dominion over (your) faith, neither
can make what he will, as a matter of faith or tradition. He does not make a
matter of faith (you say) but beelareth only that such and such a thing is to
be believed. It is well, if you can keep you here: for if he be but a declarer
of the faith, he is by office but as al other Bishops and ministers of the
Gospel: and Peter's primacie will be no more then Paul's, who said, 1 Cor. 4. ^
Let a man so think of us as of the ministers of Christ, and disposers (or
stewards) of the mysteries of God. But if the Pope have not indeed dominion
over your faith, then I trow, men may try his declarations, by Christ's word
who has dominion over our faith and sowles. Then are not the Popes
declarations authentik, canonical, of necessity to be believed, unless he
prove them by the scriptures, which himself acknowledges to be divine and
canonical. And thus the scriptures will be found a sufficient rule of the
Churches faith: and men must by the word and spirit, try the spirits of the
Popes, as well as of other Bishops. Otherweise when Platina, in vit^. Steph. 6.
Pope Stephen the 6. repealed the decrees of P. Formosus, and condemned his
acts: and contrariweise P. Plat. in. vita Romans et Theod. 2. etc.
Romanus and other his successors justified Formosus, and condemned Stephen;
and yet after that again P. Sergius the 3. allowed Stephen, and condemned
Formosus; (as your own records do report:) how should men know, what Popes
decrees to follow, if they may not examine them by the book of God, nor have
better stay for their faith, then the wethercock of the Vatican. And whereas you
speak of all humane helps that the Pope uses, of counsel and consultation with
the learned etc; they be fair shows* but your Cardinal tells us, that the
catholic church Bellar. de Pontif. l. 4. c. 15.
has always believed that he is a true ecclesiastical Prince in the whole
church, who can of his own authority without consent of the people, or
counsel of Priests, make laws which bind the conscience, can judge in causes
ecclesiastical etc. and that when he teaches the whole church, in things
perteyning to faith; Ibide^. c. ^
he can not err by any hap or chance and Ibide^. c. 5.
not only in matters of faith, but in preceps of manners also prescribed to
the whole church, he cannot err. What marvel is it then though your Lawyers
say, Extrav. de tra^s^. episc. Quanto: (...) glossa.
His bare will, must be holden as a law; and that Extra de concess Praeb.
Proposuit. In gloss.
whatsoever he does, no man may say to him why do you this; and that Did.
81. Si qui sunt. In glossa.
whosoever obeyes not his precepts, incures the syn of idolatry and paganism.
You may tell me, that the Pope has not dominion over your faith: but your
Canonist, tell me, that 16. q. 1. Quicunque. In glossa.
he can dispense against the law of God; that he can dispense 15. q. 6.
Authoritate, In gloss.
against the law of nature; that he can dispense Did* 34. Lector.
against an Apostle; that he can dispense Panorm. Extra. de divort. cap* sin.
against the new testament; yea that he can dispense concerning Sum. Angel. in
dict. Papa.
all the precepts of the old and new testament. And may we now think, that
he has not dominion over your says? or may we think, that when he is come
which should 2* These. 2. 4.
sit as God, in the Temple of God, that he will do greater things then these?
But of your Popes preeminence, we are to speak in another place.

To return therefore to the scripture which you deney to be an indeficient rule
of our faith: you objected that it had many senses, and still you stand to it,
as proved: well, I am content to leave it unto judgment. But though it were
so, yet this is not proved, that therefore it is no sure rule of our faith: save
by your churches exposition. For why might not the church in Corinth, which
were made rich by Christ 1 Cor. 1, 5.
in all kind of speech and in all knowledge, so that verse. 7.
they were not destitute of any gift: why might not that church (I say) declare
the many senses of scripture, as well as the church of Rome? Or rather, why may
not the holy ghost, show any church or any member or Christ's church, the
meanings of the scripture; and so it remayn as a firm rule of faith, and the
Spirit of God the sole authentik expositor of the same? But here you urge again
your bastard phrase, falsely fathered upon S. Peter; 2 Pet. 1. 20.
that no prophecy of scripture is made by a private spirits interpretation:
though I blamed you before, for speaking in such sort. If you can not perceive
heavenly things, consider earthly. Your one body has but one spirit, which
gives life to the whole and to every member of the body. The same spirit does
quicken the hand and foot, that quickneth the head and heart: although a greater
measure is in the principal members, then in the inferior. Even so by the
scriptures we learn, that the catholic church is Ephesians. 4. 4.
one body and has one spirit; and though the many members of this body have
Romans 12, 4. etc.
not one work, but have received diversities of gifts, yet it is 1. Cor. 12 4.
the same spirit. To verse. 8, 9. etc.
one by the spirit is given the word of wisdom; to an other the word of
knowledge, by the same spirit, and to an other faith by the same spirit; and so
all the gifts to all the members. This is the most public spirit that the
church has; and every member of the church has the same: so there is no
private spirit which Christians have, as you by tradition it seems have
learned. Now seeing all Christians have the same spirit that the Pope himself
(unless he have the spirit of Satan:) how is it that he only must be the
publik spirit and interpreter of the word? Because (say you) he is the head of
the church, and has the promise of our Savior that his faith should not fayl
him. This I deney. Now you believe it, because the Pope himself tells it you;
for your own private spirit may assure you of nothing. I will disprove it by
your next words, and known experience* For you say, he may err in matter of
fact, and syn as well as an other man. then say I, he may go to the Divil for
his facts, and synns, as well as an other man: then is he the successor of
Judas Iscariot, not of Simon Peter: then the gates of hell, prevail against
him. And thus your Rock is rent in pieces; and your building is on the sands.
You rely upon one whom you know not but he may be a reprobate; a child of the
Divil; yea a divil incarnate as Pope John the 23. was found and judged to be by
the Sess. 11. and 12.
Council of Constance) and then he may Ioh. 8. 44.
lie as well as his father the Divil; and then (if you take not heed) he may
murder your soul, as well as his father the Divil. And how then dare you make
him your rock, your hope, your confidence; to believe all that he says; not to
believe Gods word, unless he tell you it is Gods word, not to believe any
meaning of the scriptures, but as he tell you the meaning is. If men were
brute beasts without understanding, they could not be more overruled then
thus: but the Lord says, Psalm. 32.
be not as the horse and as the mule. And if the inhabitants of the earth had
not been Apoc. 17. 2.
drunken with the wine of her fornication, the great whore could never thus
have benumbed their senses, and bereft them of heavenly light If you deney that
your Popes may be reprobates and Heariots, though they may syn: your own popish
records will teach you, by as undoubted marks upon them, as ever had Cain: the
dearest lovers of your catholic chair, branding their holy fathers with titles
of Geneb^ard. Chr. l. 4. Platina: in Benedict 4 (...) Christop^. 1.
prodigious, wonders, monsters, for their beastly lives; and so some of them
are known to have dyed, without repentance or faith in God; that either they
never had faith, or else their faith failed, and then Christ prayed not for
them, as he did for Peter; and so their pretended privilege lies in the dust.

The 15. of the Acts alleged for Peter's primacie, I have before answered; and
leav it unto judgment, you urge now again, verse. 7. that P^^er rose up,
showing thereby that he was head etc. a strange collection, that if a man rise
up to speak in an assembly, he must need, therefore be head; you might better
have gathered so, if he had sitten still and spoken; for sitting of the two,
rather argues authority, then standing up. But tell me I pray you in earnest,
when Gamaliel is said to Ac^. 5. 3*
rise up in the council of the Jews in Jerusalem: would you gather from this,
that he was the head of them all. Or when Paul Act. 13. 16.
rose up in the synagogue of Antiochia; was he therefore the head? If not, why
dally you thus with the holy scriptures, to gather such conclusions as common
sense will not bear? But if you would plead for no other headship, then this,
that your Pope may rise up and speak in councils; it will easily be granted: but
then if others should judge and give sentence from the scripture, (as James
Act. 15. 13. 19.
there did) your chair of Rome would soon be overthrown.

Like weight is in your next words, that the first gentiles were chosen by his
mouth; for that you should say, Act. 15, 7.
God chose that the gentiles by his mouth should hear the word of the Gospel and
beleev. What primacie of power you can build hereon, I cannot tell: order I am
sure there must be in all things, so there was with them, and is with us, and we
grant, unto you. But the Lordship which your Pope claims is to be Bellar. de
Pont. l. 4. c. 15.
a true ecelesiastical prince in the whole church, of his own auctority without
consent of the people or counsel of the priests, to make laws which bind the
conscience etc. with other like exorbitant power, which has neither proof nor
color of proof from this 15. of the Acts, but the contrary is plain by the
scripture, as in my former writing I showed, and leav it to the judgment of the
prudent.

Your 3. arguments force you would reinforce by a long speech of private The 3.
of your arguments.
spirits interpretation, of errors and heresies and unfit translations,
manifold and ambiguous senses etc. where I must acknowledge, you have put to
more strength, but you have not whet the edge, as I said unto you: so that your
purpose is not effected. For all that you say, may with as good (if not better)
right, be retorted upon your selves; and the Pope himself, who has as private
and erroneous a spirit as al other Bishops, has given as absurd and erroneous
translations, wrested the scriptures, broched as deadly errors, and is as
unable to prove his mission from Christ, as any prelat^ or priest in
Christendom. So in all your discourse you have neither proof from scripture, nor
argument upon ground of reason: therefore I need not spend labor in vayn; and
the points some of them are before handled, othersome belong not to the matter
in hand.

With like success you repete your 4. argument, that the scriptures The 4. of
your arguments.
have been wronged by our men, to bolster up heresies etc. you say I grant your
assumption; but deceiv not your self or others, I did leav to strive about it
because it was personal, touching Luther, Calvin etc. who when they lived were
able yenough to mainteyn their cause against Rome gates, though as men they had
their infirmities. I told you the like charge might be returned upon your
Popes and Prelates. Your proposition I deneyed, and showed reasons of my denial,
from the scriptures. You reply (as your manner is) with your popular carnal
reason, that al sorts of heretics allege scriptures and boast of the spirit,
and unless there be a supreme judge, strifes can have no end. You have been
answered, that so it must be, and 1 Cor. 11. 19. Act. 15. 1. 2.
so it was in the Apostles times; who yet referred not Christians to the Pope
as supreme judge; but labored to compose controversies and correct errors Act.
1^. 15* 16* 1. Cor. 15. 3. 4. 25. 27. 45. 54.
by the scriptures. Strife will continue without end, til the world have an end,
then al war shall cease: in the mean while the church is militant, under her
head Christ. and no other. He alone walks Apoc. 1. 13
amids the 7. golden candlesticks; al churches have their several Act. 20. 28
Phil. 1. 1.
Bishops and Pastors, and only Christ is 1 Pet. 5. 4
Archpastour; at his appearing, shall supreme judgment be. In the mean time,
they be Antichrists, that usurp his office and place.

But why allege you this against the divine scriptures only? for do you not
think that men have wrested the late Fathers also, to bolster up heresies: yea
and councils too; yea and the Popes own decrees? Now if whatsoever be wrested
to bol^^er up heresies, can not be a true rule of faith: then the world will
soon be without rule; and so that 2 These. 2. 8.
Anomos, that unruly and lawless fellow foretold of, will be fittest to be
their captayn even as he has been now too long a day, sitting in that city,
which in S Ioh is time Apoc. 17. 18.
reigned over the kings of the earth, and fayn would mainteyn that regiment
still.

Your 5. and last argument, was for unwritten traditions. You affirmed The 5.
of your arguments.
that many mysteries of our faith are believed, that are not explicitly
declared nor infallibly deduced from the scriptures. I deneyed, that any
mystery of our faith was without due and sufficient proof from the scripture*
Now you reckon up diverse matters as before, and ask of me proof for them,
otherweise then by tradition. My answer was and is, that some are your own
inve^tio^s, and I will not undertake to approve but to reprove them by Gods
word: others that are truths I can prove by Gods word, better then you can by
mouth tradition. But you find great fault and think it goes hard with me since
I prove not one particular of them all: and therefore desire me to answer
distinctly to each point as it l^es etc. I marvel you would expect proofs of
these points now. Would you have me enter into battle with Arrians and
Antitrinitarians, Anabaptists and other like heretics, and show how I can
convince them by scripture? I list not so to digress. When th^se matters in
hand are ended, if you will take up their buklers. I will fight against you by
the scriptures only; if you will adventure the credit of your unwritte
traditions, in the battle. In the mean time, make you proof (as order
requires) of your argument; and seek not to turn it away, by setting on foot
new questions.

The scriptures that you brought to prove unvvritten traditions, I answered. In
this your reply you say, that I dispute as if you made traditions the total
rule of faith whereas you would infer only that it was a partial, together
with the word of God. Then belike you grant some word of God without unvvritte^
tradition: and where is that but in the scriptures? If we have Gods word in
the scriptures without unvvritten tradition* how is it, that vvhilear you
reasoned, we could not know scriptures to be Gods word, but by such
tradition? Do not you make mouth tradition the total ground of your faith? For
take away this tradition; and the scriptures, you think, are lost; then Gods
word is lost, unless unvvritten tradition give it us. So dead tradition is
the ground of grounds, that must tell us what is scripture, what is the
meaning of scripture, what is true beside scripture: and so in effect is all
in all? Though yet to make it a partial rule of faith as you speak, is too
much: man may not think to part stakes with God, his word is yenough, if we
can be content.

You say I object that those traditions spoken of in Deuteronomis might make
for the Jewish Cabalists which are rejected by S. Peter etc Nay, I know they
make neither for them nor you: but, as I said, rather for them then for you. I
proved unto you out of the Psalms, Ps. 44. and 78. secundum Hebr.
that the Fathers taught their children written traditions; I proved by other
divine testimonies, that yenough is written in the scriptures, for Ioh. 20. 3^
2 Timothy 3. ^6 17.
faith and all good works. As for Gods acts in all ages, fathers are to tell
them to their children: such tradition I allow. We tell our posterity now by
tradition, the great work of God in confounding the Spanish armado that came
against England in the year 1588 If I in my days should see Rome ^ become
Rumee as Sibylla Orac. Sibyll. lib. 3.
prophesied, and the Pope like Nabuchodno^or Dan. 4. 30.
turned out to gra^^e, or like Pharao Exodus 14.
drowned in the sea: I would hold it my duty to tell it my child, and my
childs child, that it might never be forgotten. But yet for a ground of faith
unto life, I would vvarn my children to hold to the scriptures, as the
instrument of God, able to make them wise unto salvation through the faith
which is in Christ Jesus; as Paul 2 Timothy 3. 15
said to his son Timothee.

You say, it is plain that the Apostle 2. These. 2. speaks of such traditions as
I call humane in you. I deney it, and have plainly disproved it in my former
vvriting, by the same Apostles own testimony, Act. 26. 22 1. Co. 14. 37. and
you have not a word to say against it, but shun those ancient Apostolik
records, and betake you to later humane writers, as Chrysostom. But remember
your own words, God is more ancient then the Divil, truth then falsehood. The
Apostle shevved his own meaning, long before Chrysostom had a mouth to speak.
But if you can better see by Chrysostoms candle, then by Paul's bright sun:
behold what Chrysostom. in Mat. 22. homil 41.
the Doctor says. Whatsoever is sought unto salvation all now is fulfilled in
the scriptures. He that is ignorant, may find there what to learn: he that is
stubborn and synful, may find the scourges of the judgment to come, whereof he
may be afraid: he that labors, may there find glory, and promises of
eternal life. This speech does far better become his golden mouth, then your
plea for humane traditions.

The 2. thing which you took upon you to prove. (or, as now you The 2. of
your assertions.
faintly say intended rather to propound then prove,) was, That the scripture
expounded by the catholic church is a true and indeficient rule of our faith. I
vvil ease you if I may of this labor; if you understa^d the position well, I
grant it to be true. By the catholic church I trow you mean not the
multitude, al believers: but the head of the church. So I willingly yield,
that the scriptures expounded by Christ the head of the catholic church, are a
true and indeficient rule of our faith. But when you came to make proof of your
positio^, you set it down thus, that the Popes definitive sentence as he is
head of the church is an indeficient rule in matters of faith. Where all men
may see your lode starr. You pretend the scriptures and word of God: but if a
man deal with you by them, (as I now have experience,) you flee to later
humane vvriters. If you be followed in them, you retire to your Catholic
church: ask your meaning by the catholic church, and it is the Pope with his
definitive sentence, as your self have expounded it to me: He virtualiter (as
Hervaeus, de potest. Papae c. 23
one of your side says) is the whole church. All the other are but stales, he
alone is the man that must strike the stroke. And if he give sentence against
you, I shall never trust him: so you deal on the surest side for your selves.
You intended rather to propound then to prove this point (as you say,) that we
have not at one time diverse pro^s together in the fire; and now again, you
handle it by way of velitation (you say) and not of purpose to prove? Whereas it
is the mayn ground of al controversy between us. For question being whither
Gods written word, or the Popes definitive sentence must judge and rule our
faith: I cleav to the scriptures, you to the Pope. Now my ground is in part
granted by your selves, for the scriptures which I build upon, your council
Sess. 4.
of Trent has allowed for canonical, and come from God: and whither you
granted it or not, I have given you reasons that are unanswered. But your
ground I utter ly deney, and grant not your Popes definitive sentences to be
canonical but haeretical: and would have proof of that you say. You list not
yet to have this iron in the fire, belike least it burn your fingers. Yet in
this your velitation, you bring most of your valiant men into the field,
leaving out some few casshierd soldjers; and brave me with a great many of S.
Peter's prerogatives, which are indeed but a cold iron for the Pope. For though
al you say for Peter were granted, yet nothing at al is said for the Bishop of
Rome more then for the Bishop of Babylon. You would have men think, that if you
have so many men in a skirmish or velitation, you have many more against a day
of battle. But if these your velitaries be discomfited (as some of them are
already,) I suppose your armado will never enter this field. Let us therefore try
their strength.

1. S. Peter (you say) is named first among the Apostles. True, he is so
usually, except in 3. or 4. places: This may argue a primacie of order, but of
no authority over his brethren. The Apoc. 21, 19.
first foundation of the wall of the heavenly Jerusalem, was a Jasper, the
stone of Exodus 28.
Benjamin, the Apostle Paul's Phil. 3, 5.
tribe* will you grant me hence to conclude that S. Paul was head of the
catholic church?

2. S. Peter alone walked (you say) with our Savior on the water. True, and
there Mat. 14, 28 30, 31.
he showed his weakness more then others, and was reproved by our Savior for
his little faith. Does this deserve the headship of the church? Elias and
Eliseus walked 2. King. 2.
through the water; and Shadrach Meshach and Abednego-walked in Dan. 3, 25
the mids of the fire; and herein showed their great Heb. 11, 34.
faith: yet were they not therefore heads of the catholic church.

3. Our Savior promised (you say) that hell gates should not prevail against
him. Our Savior does say, not Mat. 16. 18
against it, that is, the church; of which Peter was a principal member.
Hell gates shall not prevail against Ioh. 10, 27 28, 29.
any true Christian: are they all therefore heade^* But hell gates (if horrible
synns be part of their strength) have prevayled against sundry of your Popes,
by testimony of your own records: such I trow were not heads, unless of the
beast. Apoc. 14. 17. 3.

4. He was to confirm his brethren. So were all the other Apostles and
Ministers, Act 14, 22, and 15, 41 32. 1 These. 3, 2. Apoc. 3, 2.
as I proved at large in my former writing: and marvel you bring this argument
now again bleeding into the skirmish, before you had cured any of his vvounds.
If you cannot heal him, you should let him rest.

5. Our Savior (you say) washed S. Peter's feet first. It may be so, though
Bellarm. de Ro^ po^^, l. 1. c. 2^.
some Doctors doubt of it. It is sure some was first, for they could not all be
at once. It is sure also, that Peter showed then more Ioh. 13, 6 ^, 9.
weakness then his brethren; for which he might well have need to be washed,
but not deserve to wear a triple crown, as your Pope.

6. S. Peter only received a reveled promise of his particular martyrdom of
the cross. Performance is more then promise. James Act. 12, 2. and 7, 59.
and Stephen suffered martyrdom before Peter. And if the cross be that which
must prove the headship, the penitent Luke 23 4^ 43.
thief may lay claim to the crown.

7. He after infusion of the holy ghost, first (you say) premulgates the
gospel. I would the Pope were his successor in this. Peter was first I confess
in many good things: for which he deserves praise: but that he was first in
this, you prove not. When they had the infasion of the holy Ghost, Act. 2, 4.
erxanto.
they began (says the scripture) to speak. It may be Peter was indeed the
first, for he was first in order among them, and as is like in age: but not in
office above the other Apostles.

8. The first miracle in confirmation of our faith, is made by S. Peter. And
you shall work another miracle in confirmation of my says; if from this (though
it be granted,) you can by sound argument conclude him head, as your Pope
expounds the head ship. Howbeit the first miracle was the speaking with strange
tongues* (for that Act. 2. 7, 11.
all men admired:) and who was first in that, neither I nor you can tell.

9. He as supreme judge condemned the hypocrisy of Ananias and Saphira. And
Paul as supreme judge condemned the blasphemy of Hymenaeus and Alexander, 1.
Tim. 1. 20.
delivering them to Satan: and the forcerie of Elymas, Act. 13, 11.
striking him with blindness. If miracles prove supremacies, the church shall
have many supreme heads.

10. He first discovered Simon Magus, and condemned him. If the Pope would do
so too, Simonie at this day would not be so rise. When Platina in vit. Sergius
et Bened:
Sergius tertius, and Benedictus 4. got the Popedom with briberie, and
Alexander the ^. Guicciard. hist. Ital. l. 1.
bought the voices of many Cardinals: whither was Cephas or Magus their
predecessor? If the virtue made Peter head: the cont^arie vice made your Popes
the tail. How be it your Prelates (if Bernard. Epist. 42. ad Archiep^s. Senon.
Budaeus de ass. l. 5.
writers say true) have been more ready to receive with Mat. 26, 15
with Judas, then to give Act. 8, 18
with Simon.

All these and other circumstances concurring in S. Peter, shows (you say)
manifestly that S. Peter had preeminence above all the other Apostles, that he
is the rock and head of the church^^. They are shows in deed, and
circumstances standing a far off: but never a one of them have stricken a
stroke in this your ^^l^tation. Peter had for the most part preeminence in
order, I readily grant: but his office and authority was one and the same with
the other Apostles. Mat. 28. 16. -- 20. Ioh. 20, 21. 22, 23. Paul relating the
offices ordained of God in the church, says; 1 Cor. 12 28.
first Apostles, secondly prophets (...)* and again, Ephesians 4, 11.
he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets: but the scripture no where says,
first Peter the head of the church, then Apostles. And that Peter was neither
head nor Rock, I proved in my former writing, if you will admit of proof from
Gods book: if not, then keep your shows and circumstances still, but make no
such conclusions with a manifest-lye.

You proceed and say, that Peter was particularly pointed out by his own name,
his fathers name, and his new name Cephas, that no cavil might be took at a
legacy so strongly and particularly firmed unto S. Peter. His legacy is no
way by me impugned, I know it is firm, though not so great as you would make
it. But you impugn the legacy of the other Apostles, unto whom in Peter was
promised, and after to them all generally performed, whatsoever power Peter had
in the ministry of the gospel. Mat. 28. Ioh. 20. Act. 2. yea you impugn the
dominion of Christ himself; whiles you would make Peter the Rock and Head of
the catholic church; contrary to the scriptures. 2. Sam. 22, 32. 1 Cor. 10, 4.
Ephe. 5, 23. And whither you have answered all that I brought to prove Christ
only the Rock, let the equal reader of my former writing judge; you make bold
and bare affirmations, without proof of holy scripture, or humane learning:
Petros (you say) signifies either a Rock or a stone; but what learned auctor
do you show for it? and he was called Petros (you say,) not Petra, because the
masculine gender best fitted the name of a man: as if Christ were not a man,
unto whom the title Petra, Rock, is by Peter himself given. 1. Pet. 2, 8. But
he is unto you the Rock of scandal, whiles you stumble at his power, and
headship, and give it to his enemy the Pope, under the pretense of Peter. And
that your church has made shipwreck against this Rock, not only of faith, but
of learning also, appears in this, that you make Cephas, (upon Optatus
credit,) in Greek to signify a head; as Christ (you say) is called the head,
Isa 8, and 28. Dan. 2. Psalm. 117. Mat. 21. Romans 9. 1. Cor 10. Ephesians. 2. What,
do all or any of these scriptures show that Cephas signifies a head? nothing
less. You that entwite we with my private spirits interpretation, should have
been better avized then thus openly and directly to oppugn the publik
interpretation of the holy Ghost, Ioh. 1. 43. where Cephas is interpreted
Petros, a stone, and not Cephalee a Head. Or if you think the Apostle had also
a private spirit, and knew not Syriak and Greek so well as Optatus, yet might
you have preferred the publik approved learning of your own linguists, who
Dictionar. Syro chald ad sacri appar. instruc. Reg. bibl. Tom. 6.
interpreting Cephas a Rock, show that Optatus head wanted wit, in this that he
said it signified a head; and they want conscience, that upon this false
ground, apply these scriptures that speak of Christ the head, unto a mortal
creature, whereas the Tsur k^istes. 2. Sa^. 22, 32.
Rock is the creator, and Tsur Theos Deuteronomy. 32, 4, 15, 1^ 30. etc. whereto your
authentik Latin also agrees.
God himself as the Lxxij Greek interpreters, (if you will learn of them) will
teach you. But let me follow your arguments.

You say my objection that S. Peter answered as the mouth of the Apostles, and
therefore had not these promises made to himself alone, makes much against me,
for to be spokesman of all the rest, the master-spring of all their judgments,
seems to grant him superiority. If every spokes-man were master-spring of all
their judgeme^ts for who^ he speaks: it were something that you say: but ask a
jurie of any 12 men in England, whither this be true in the foreman of the
quest, The spokesman in a Council; the speaker in a parhame^t; are they the
master-springs of all their judgments with whom they sit? When Ioh. 14, 5.
Thomas, when verse. 8.
Philip, when verse. 22.
Jude spoke unto Christ in the name of the rest, were they master-springs of
all the others judgments? I perceiv your Rock the Pope has but a weak
foundation, that is born up, by such sandy conclusions.

If S. Peter could not have the prerogative of place given unto him, in that he
represented the church: no more (you say) could the sonns of Abraham be two
sonns, in that they represented two nations. You want help to make up your
argument, thus: But Abraham's a sonns were 2. sonns still, though they
represented 2. nations: therefore S. Peter was S. Peter still though he
represented the Church. Very true; and all the Apostles were Apostles still,
though they represented the Church. And so Antichrist shall be Antichrist still,
though he take upon him to represent the Church, yea and 2 Thessalonians. 2, 4.
God himself.

You grant me that all the other Apostles were a foundation Apoc. 21. but not
the principal. Neither would I have you ^o grant, for Christ himself is the
principal, vea and the 1 Cor. 3, 11
only foundation properly; and all the Apostles are foundations Metonymi^e.
figuratively; among whom was order, Apoc. 21. 19.
first, second, third, etc, and excellency in graces; but not preeminence of
authority; for they were all sent of Christ, as Christ of the Father, Ioh. 20.
21 and the church of Christ is builded upon them all, not upon Peter only.
Ephesians. 2. 20.

S. Peter's headship (you say) derogates not from Christ Jesus our head, since
S. Peter is but subordinated to Christ Jesus, and only of his free
institution. That institution say I is yet to show whereby Peter should be head
more then the other Apostles. The headship which you give unto Peter does
derogate from Christ; for as the church is but Ephe. 4, 4
one body, and has but one spirit, so has it but verse. 5.
one Lord and verse. 15.
head Christ, who is present Mat. 28, 20
with his Church all days till the worlds end, walking amids the golden
candlestiks of his Churches, that there needs no universal Vicar, but only the
Angels of every particular church, as the 7. churches in Asia show. Apoc. 2.
and 3. But he was a head of your church (and therefore I trow could not lie)
which said Pope Leo. Epist 8^
that Christ placed Peter as it were a certain head, to power his gifts from him
as it were into all the body, for having taken him into the fellowship of the
indivisible unity, he would have him named that which himself was. And
elsewhere the same Pope preaches that if God Sermon 3. in a^nivers.
would have any thing to be commune unto other Princes with [Peter], he never
gave but by him whatsoever he gave to others. Thus rored the Lion of Rome,
against the Lion Apoc. ^. 5
of the tribe of Judah. What marvel was it then though an other P. Gregory the
7.
of your Popes, praying to S. Peter as to his God, said, Platina in Greg. ^.
Jurline thine ears o blessed Peter prince of The Apostles, and hear me thy
servant, etc. acknowledging further his faith to be in him. If these things
derogate not from Christ our head, I know not what can do. It is no marvel
though one of your Canonists c. Cu^ ^nter. Inglossa extrav. Ioh. ^2.
called him Our Lord God the Pope: for the Pope is Peter (as Father Campian
Rat. 4.
tells us:) and Peter (as Leo says) is assumed into the fellowship of the
indivisible unity, that is of God, and therefore is made a God, and prayed
unto, as a God: and yet you would bear men in hand, nothing is derogated from
God or Christ. Yea your self in your former writing made him the universal
pastor Ioh. 10 and he I am sure is God, for he is one Ioh. 10, 30
with the Father. And if Peter was but subordinate (as you say) to Christ; your
Popes (I trow) be now superordinate: for Christ's kingdom Ioh. 18, 36.
was not of this world, neither did his servants fight: he was no Luke 12, 14
Judge or divider of inheritances: but Popes are Iulins 2. Gu^cciard. hist.
Ital. l. 9.
fighters with the t^poral sword, and have their kingdom of this world, as
politik princes; and divide not only private men's inheritances, but even whole
kingdoms, deposing Princes, and disturbing States, as the world has long felt
with greef.

From Peter's primacie you slide along to the Popes supremacy: for which having
no word of God, nor any so ancient testimony as the Apostles, you flee to the
name of the council of Nice, where some say the foundation began. But against
such innovation when or whersoever it was hatched, I allege the whole new
testament of Christ, where Apoc. 2. and 3 Act. 20 1. Pet. 5. Ephe. 4. 1. Cor.
12. Luke 22, 25, 26.
Angels and Bishops of Churches are found of equal authority, not one above an
other. And me thinks I could fetch your popes supremacy from more ancient
ground then the council of Nice, even from Dio^rephes, 3. Ioh. 9.
who loved preeminence in the Apostles time But this ground is slabby, and the
Pope I know will be loath to set his foot on it. You proceed therefore, with a
general reason thus.

The ecclesiastical hierarchy is no worse governed then any temporal regiment.
For it is compared to a kingdom governed by one King, Mat 25 to a family well
governed, Heb. 3. to a camp well ordered, Ca^t. 6.

But in all well ordered commonweals, there is ever required some visible
judge, besides the written law, since there must be a supreme judge to take
notice of controversies when they arise a^. 2. there must be one to explicate
the sense of the law, and to pronounce sentence etc. and 3. there must be one
to compel those that refuse, to the due observation thereof. Now in the church
there arise like difficulties in her laws explication etc. Therefore S Peter's
successor endued by the holy ghost, in all difficulties of moment is to be
sought unto for counsel: is to be heard with obedience when he counsels, is
to be obeyed when he proceeds with his powrful jurisdiction.

This your reason is faulty from head to foot. The first part fails in
comparing together a visible humane polity, and a visible hierarchy. Whereas
humane polities concerning worldly matters are merely visible, earthly,
temporal: but ecclesiastical polities are partly invisible, heavenly and
eternal. Those, respecting this world and life only, have worldly dominion and
glory: these, respecting chiefly the next world and life; have no worldly
dominion or glory; but is for the meek, poor, persecuted for righteousness sake
etc. Mat. 5. My kingdom (says Christ) is not of this world, Ioh. 18. 36.
Again the rulers of the gentiles have domination over them, and they that are
great exercise authority over them, but it shall not be so among you etc. Mat.
20, 25, 26. These things being thus minded and distinguished, I grant, that the
church is no worse governed, considering the nature thereof, then any temporal
regiment, considering the nature of it.

Secondly you fail in applying to your Pope the scriptures intended of Christ
only. For he (not the Vicar of Rome) is the King of that one kingdom, Mat. 25.
he is the master of that one family, Heb. 3, 1, 6. he is the Captayn of that
ordered camp, Cant. 6. Apoc. 19. 11. 13, 14, 16* etc. So that he that
challenges these titles and honors besides Christ, is Antichrist.

To the second part of your reason I answer, 1. that in well ordered commonweals, the laws are above the magistrates, according to Tullies saying, De
Legib. lib. 3.
as laws are above the magistrates, so magistrates are above the people. What
good order may we then think is in the papacy where Popes are above Gods law?
2. That for explicating the sense of the law etc. in well ordered commonweals,
it is a ruled case, that L. Si. Cod. De legib. et constit. princip.
he who made the law, should interpret the law. According hereunto, in the
church, the laws given of God in the scriptures are above the Pastors Ezekiel.
44, 24.
that govern the people by them: yea above Deuteronomy. 17. 18, 10, 20.
Kings: and Gods spirit which gave those laws, is the supreme 1. Cor. 2. 10.
interpreter of them. As for outward order, in difficulties, the Mal. 2, 7.
Priests lips should preserve knowledge, and the people should seek the law at
his mouth. If he Zoph. 3, 4
wrest the law, and teach false doctrine, men should Mat, 15, 14.
let him alone as a blind guide, least they fall with him into the ditch. But
herein you miss proportion in making many commonweals, and but one church:
whereas there be also many churches. For though there be but one catholic or
universal church, which is invisible, comprehending the Ephesians. 3, 15. Heb. 12,
22 23, 24.
whole family in heaven and in earth: yet are there many particular churches
visible, as Gal. 1, ^.
in Galatia, Apoc. 1, 4
in Asia, and other parts of the world. Now you imagine one visible catholic
or universal church, having visible officers, and a visible head the Pope,
invested as praesident Ceremoniarum. l. 1 c. 4.
Vrbiet Orbi, all the world over: and all particular churches with their
Bishops, to be under the guidance of that visible head. This is neither
according to God, who appointed no such order: nor according to man; for is
there any one Monarch over all the world, unto whom all nations with their
governors do obey?

Your conclusion is vvorst of all. For by Peter's successor you mean the Bishop
of Rome only. Whereas Peter being an Apostle had 1 Cor. 4. 9.
no successor in his Apostleship: as he was Bishop or Pastor, all Bishops in
all churches are his successors: and not only the Bishop of Rome. 1 Pet. 5. 1.
2. Act. 20. 28. Again you vveen that your Pope is necessarily endued with the
holy ghost, vvheras the starr of the Roman Romans 1^, 20. 22.
church, as well as of any other church, may Apoc. 8. 10.
fall from heaven, and may have the Apoc. 9, 1 Ioh. 19.
key of the bottomless pit. And why Rome should have preeminence above all
other cities in the world, I cannot tell, unless because ^ by her policy our
Lord Christ was crucified. For which, above all other cities she deserves the
visible curse. And if God in justice has wasted Jerusalem Da^. 9. 26.
for this syn: how can we think that he has blessed Rome, which has spilt the
blood of Christ, and of may other his Saints. The book of the Apocalypse shows
plainly the contrary, Apoc. 17. and 18.

Again you would lay an intolerable burden upon the churches: for every sinner
is to be judged and excommunicated (if he repent not,) by that particular
church whereof he is a member; as is Christ's plain rule, Mat. 18. 15. 16. 17.
compared with 1 Cor. 5. 4. 5. 12. 13. but you applying Christ's rule to Rome
only, would constreyn al men al over the world, (when they deal with their
brethren for syn and follow them to excommunicatio they not repenting,) to come
to Rome before the Pope, which is unpossible; Oth^rweise, by what rule from
Christ, cite you men thither? Wherefore you conclude that which your premises
no way do prove; and beg the question, to gayn the time.

But you are angry that I Ieav your supply of later Doctors* whereas I told
you plainly at the first, that I would try and be tried in religion by the
holy scriptures only; as being the undoubted rule of truth. If you would not
thus have dealt, why began you the battle? I have far greater cause to except
against them, then you can have against my records of the Prophets and
Apostles: for your fathers are but children in respect of the^, nothing so
ancient, nothing so authentik, in any comparison; nothing so plain, nothing so
constant: but contrary one to an other; contrary (some times) unto the truth;
contrary to themselves* Example by Augustine, plainly averring with me: you
bring him retracting, or leaving indifferent. How then should we trust him,
that trusts not himself? So I told you, Doctors might be alleged against
Doctors: you marvel at it Nay marvel at them and at your self that allege
them. You quote Chrysostom. homil 55 in Mat. and there though (these be not the
words you mean,) he savth upon this rock will I build my Church, that is faith
and confession: whither this make more for you or for me, let indifferent men
judge. You cite Origin, homil 5. in Exodu^: whereas if you would read him on
Matthew, you may find how he counts al Christians, Peter's, which the Pope will
not allow. You produce Ambrose, sermon. 47. whereas the same man, upon Ephesians. 2.
says, upon this rock will I build my church, that is, in this confession of the
catholic faith I appoint the faithful unto life. Thus if I would weary my self
and my reader in your wilde^nes, I could send you up and down, from one father
to an other; and from the same father in one place, to himself in another; as,
for Hillarie whom you quote, I may cite ^yssenus, in testimon. ex vet. Test. de
Trinitate: and from Cyril. l. 2. c. 1^. comment. in Joan. as you allege him, I
can direct you to the same Cyril, de Trinitat. l. 4. And when now shall we get
out of this wood? But wander you there alone if you will, I mean not so to toil
in vayn. Yet co^demn I not the men, but reverence their labors: how ^eit I
reverence Gods word more: As for me, I would not have you or any rest upon my
words, but upon the proofs which I bring from the book of God: which though it
be Apoc. 10. 2*
little, yet they that verse. 9. 10.
eat it, may verse. 11.
prophecy among people and nations and tongues, and to many kings And me
thinks, you need not be offended, that I refuse to fight with dead men, and do
deal with you by the scriptures only: for you have (as you may think) the
advantage, who besides my weapon, that single two edged Ephesians. 6. 17.
sword of Gods word, which you may use also as you can, have likevveise to
help you the arrows of the Fathers, the halberds of the Councils, the bullets
of your schole men, the canons of your Canonists, with the panoplie of your
Popes; from whom all Bishops (as a Bishop Durand Rational l. 2. c. 1.
says) do grow as members grow from the head, and of whose fulness they do
all receiv: that if my cause be not very good, you must needs drive me out of
the field. Use therefore if you please the reasons of all or any of these, and
I vvil answer them to you, not to the dead: but if you muster their bare names
only; be sure, you shall neither fray nor hurt me. Next you retire to the place
of John. 21. feed my sheep. I told you all the Apostles had that charge Mat. 28.
19. 20 John. 20. 21. The contrary (you say) is manifest, since he said only to
him feed my flock, to who^ he said before, love thou me more then they, in
which words he excludes all the other.

Think you, in good sooth, that the former charge laid upon all, was taken
from them and now laid upon Peter only* because upon special occasion he was
spoken to alone? Why then, Peter also was himself discharged, when after
this, Christ spoke to Paul alone, Act. 26. 17. 18.
sending him to the gentiles to open their eyes etc. and to 1 Cor. 1. 17.
preach the gospel. But it is a strange collection of you, that when a company
of men are sent with one commission, and one of them having failed in his
fidelity, is in special excited unto duty and diligence; all the other should
be excluded. Do you not see how after this, Paul shows, (Ephesians. 4.) not
Peter only, but Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers, to be
given of Christ for the building up of his church?

Your conclusion to be inferred hereupon, (if you conclude the question,) will
be much more unreasonable. The point you undertook to prove, was that not Gods
word in the Bible, but the catholic churches (yea the Popes) definitive
sentence as he is head of the church, is an indeficient rule in matters of
faith. To confirm this haeresie, you produce here Christ's charge to Peter,
Freed my sheep. Behold Now the strength of your argument; If Peter was to
feed Christ's sheep: then not Gods word in the scriptures, but Peter's
definitive sentence (and consequently the Popes) is an indeficient rule of
faith. But Peter was to feed Christ's sheep: John 21. Frgo etc. The
unreasonablenes of which consequence (if the bare rehearsal of it do not
convince,) may be showed by the like thus. If the Bishops of Ephesus were to
feed the church of God: then not Gods word in the scripture, but their
definitive sentences were indeficient rules in matters of faith. But the
Bishops of Ephesus were to feed the church of God, Act. 20. 28. Ergo.

If the Elders of the churches of Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia and Bithynia; were
to feed the flocks of God: then not Gods word in the Bible, but their
definitive sentences were indeficient rules in matters of faith. But the Elders
of those churches were to feed the flock of God, 1 Pet. 5, ^ 2. Ergo.

Behold what deep waters you have dug out from the Rock of Rome: their
spring, I trow, comes from the bottomless pit. If you say, those Elders were
under Peter as a head, therefore they were to feed with his definitive sentence,
not their own. First I deny that so they were under him; and you shall never
prove it whiles Rome gates do stand though I grant their office was inferior
to the Apostles. Secondly, if you could prove it, yet would it make against
you: for if because Peter was their head, therefore they must feed with his
doctrine only* then because Christ was Peter's head, Peter was to feed with
Christ's doctrine only. But Christ was Peter's head, acknowledged by Peter
himself to be 1 Pet. 5. 4.
Arch pastor; so taught by Christ himself John. 10. Therefore Christ definitive
sentence only, not Peter's, (much less the Popes) is the indeficient rule of
our faith. And thus my cause is confirmed, and yours overturned by your own
weapon.

Yet you proceed and say; besides Christ speaks to S. Peter that he should feed
his general flock, though he may speak unto the other Apostles, that they
should feed their particular charges. I would we might once have an end of
words of wind. You say al things, but prove nothing; unless your definitive
sentence also must be taken for a law. But then I am sure it is against Christ's
law: for, as he neither used the word general to Peter, nor the word particular
to the other Apostles: so when he sent them with their charge al indifferently,
it was unto Mat. 28. 19.
al nations* yea into Mark. 16. 1^.
all the world; to preach the gospel to every creature; and as the Father sent
him so sent he them. And where now I pray you, were their particular charges?
But let it be as you say; let the Apostles and al ^Ioh. 20. ^^
Christian Bishops their successors, have these precincts; in all nations, in all
the world, and what place is over and beside, let your Peter the Pope have,
there to menage his supremacy.

But here you bring your S. Leo to speak for S. Peter: and I know he was his
friend, for I showed before how Epist. 87.
he placed Peter in the fellowship of the indivisible unity, so making him a
God: I know also and have showed that in the same 3. anniversarie sermon which
you cite, he speaks more for S. Peter then you bring here: how be it, though
the Lion roreth, he has got no prey. For the headship has been proved to be
Christ's, not Peter's: and the Apostleship to be Peter's with the other Apoltles.
And though you again and again do barely affirm S. Peter was head of all the
rest of the Apostles: yet I must tell you again and again, that I hold not your
definitive sentence (nor the Popes neither) to be Quicquid n. no^ ab Apostolis
traditu^ est, scele^ibus plenum est* Ambros. comm^nt, in ^* Cor. 4. 9.
a right rule of faith, but if you can bring the word of God for you; that,
thr^ugh his grace, I will gladly receive.

In the end of this your velitation, you leav me to impu^ne ^. B. ^armines
doctrine as it heth etc. But your captayn comes not into this field, he lies
entrenched within the walls of Rome, and triumphs in the Vatican. It is you
that have bid me battle, and as you entered not these lists without an alarm,
so you will not depart (I trow) without an io triumph. Yet to say the truth, in
answering you, I have answered your Cardinal: for your reasons be his* and you
have taken them out of his skonc^. Only you have culled them out here and
there, in other order* and have taken the most pregnant arguments that he has*
Which being by him and by you propounded, by me now answered: you are to look,
whither the propugning of them shallye upon him or on you, against this my
impugnation. Or if you will let them dye, you may sound the retrait*

The 3. and last thing which you promised to prove, was, that this rule The 3
of your assertions*
(the indeficient rule of faith,) is only found in the Roman Catholic church
sentence, and not in private men's illuminations, or motions of a pri^^t and
unseen spirit. Both parts of this your divided proposition, I disallow: and
mainteyn a third, viz* that this rule is to be found in the writings
Prophetical and Apostolical: because (as your Cardinal has* well said,) Bellar.
de verbo De. l. 1. c. 2.
nothing is more known, nothing more certain, then the holy scriptures which
are contained in them: and this Ibidem.
is a most certain and a most safe rule of believing.

Before when you came to show your proof, it was, that your Roman church is
the true and only catholic church of God. Which* though I do deney, yet if I
did grant it, it would not prove your assertion. For it is the voice of the
Ioh. 3. 29. 36.
bridegroom, not of the bride, which is the ground of men's faith; the catholic
church is Ephesians. 5 24. and 4. 15. 16.
to receiv laws and rules from her head Christ; not to prescribe laws or
rules to her members. There is Iam 4. 12.
one Lawgiver, who is able to save and to destroy. But because your church must
first be proved true and catholic, before her sentence can be approved:
therefore I was content to look into this first branch, requiring proof that
your Roman church is the true and then the only catholic; for I deney both
What proofs you brought before, and how I answered them, I leav to indifferent
consideration: and will now again take a view, how you mainteyn your proofs.

First you say, I fayn would challenge the name catholic unto my self. I
answer, this is not so: The catholic church is the Gal. 4. 26
mother of al Christians, of which I am an unworthy child: but were not worthy
to be named her child, if I would challenge her title which belongs not to me,
nor to any her daughters, the particular churches on earth.

Secondly, you say, that after, I seem to refuse it because it is not warranted
by the written word; asking, why I do not as well reject the name Trinity a^.
I answer again, the contrary to that you say is true: for I proved and that by
the written word, (which it seems you could not do) that there is a catholic or
universal church* and if need were, could bring many more proofs. Why then do
you injury me so openly before the sun, and then run on to dilate upon your
own wilful mistaking? such dealing does not become any true member of the
catholic church*

But you can show us (you say) the prophecy of Isaiah fulfilled, that the
gospel is preached to all nations.

But we need not be showed that by you; for it is showed us by the Ap ostle
almost 16. hundred years ago. Romans 10. 18. and 16, 26.

The whole world (you say) is replenished with the fruit of your doctrine. The
more is the pity, if it pleased God: for your doctrine is not the gospel, but
the Popes definitive sentences. But this also we have been taught many years
ago. As al Apo. 13, 3.
the world wondered and followed the first beast: so the second verse* 12.
did all that the first beast could do before him; and made verse. 16.
all, both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond, to receive the mark.
The waters where the whore fitteth, Apoc 17. 15.
are people and multitudes and nations and tongues. Apoc 18. 3.
All nations have drunk of the wine of the wrath of her fornication. Papisme
is large, Mahometisme larger, Paganism largest dispred, in these our last and
most dangerous days.

But our invisible churches (you think) are excelled far by the Jews visible
meetings in sundry places. But the Apoc. 12. 6 14. etc.
woman that fled into the wilderness, was seen of God, and dear unto him,
though she were hid from the visible Dragon,, and his persecuting Angels. Esau
had much more visible glory then his poor brother Iaakob, when so many kings
reigned in AEdom, Genesis 36. 31. etc.
before any King reigned over Israel. Fevv souls were saved in the Ark, when
many perished in the syn-floud. And this makes many George David's to deney the
verity of the Bible, and believe the traditions of Babel: because the Apoc. 1^
promised visible destruction of the church of Antichrist, is not yet performed.

But you Roman catholics have all motives (as you say) of evident credibilitie;
as 1. all antiquity. Nay stay there, the most antique records of the holy
Prophets and Apostles, you dare not stand to be tried by: but shun them, and
flee to your late traditions, and Popes definitive sentences. So your church
vvil be her own judge whether she be a whore or no; vvheras neither Ezekiel.
23. 4. etc.
Aholah nor Aholibah, would give that sentence against themselves, though men
verse. 44.
went unto them as to a common harlot: but the righteous men, verse. 45.
judged them after the manner of harlots.

2. Unitie] not in the truth but in haeresie: for your church has by degrees
from age to age so declined from the laws of God, that she is one with her
self; but become an alien from Christ. For proof vvheof, let the ancient faith
of the church in Rome, when Paul wrote* thereto, and the new faith of the
church of Rome decreed in the Council of Tre^t, be compared together; and we
shall find as good unity betvveen them in many things, as betvveen light and
darkness. Besides what unity is in your religion; the late broiles in England
betvveen the Jesuits and the seculars, (to omit all former schisms that have
been in Rome it self) may show. Though by the Popes povvrfull hand, they are
now tied together, at least by the tails, like the I^^^. 15, 4*
foxes in Palestina.

3. Universalitie], even as it was in the days of Noe, when the ^^ood came
and destroyed them L^k 17, 26, 27.
all: for verse. 30.
so shall it be in the day when the son of man shall be reveled. Universality
of abomination, shall procure from God univorsal desolation: for with her
enchantments were deceived Apoc. 18, 23.
all nations.

4. Disibilitie.] Even notorious to all that have eyes to see. For if a city
can not Mat. 5, 14.
be hid, that is situate upon a mountayn; how should not that city be seen,
which is set Apoc. 17, 9, 18.
upon 7. mountayns; on whose top, your woman sayleth.

5. Confirmed by the consent of Doctors:] for her Apoc. 18, 23.
merchants are the great men of the earth.

6. By the institution of most holy religious orders:] for the vvoma^ is Apo.
17. 4
arrayed in purple and scarlet, and gilded with gold, and precious stones and
pearls: in her house are Pro. 7. 14.
peace offerings, and the pays her vows; and verse. 17.
perfumeth her bed with myrrh a^oes and cinnamon: because Christ's institutions
and most holy orders, are too mean and base for her royalty.

7. The conversion of nations] for the Apoc. 17 2.
inhabitants of the earth are drunken with th wine of her fornication: Prove.
7. 26.
she has caused many to fall down vvounded, and great is the number of all
that are slain by her.

8. The power of miracles] showing Mat. 24, 24. 2 These. 2, 9, 10-. 12
great signs and wonders, that if it were possible the very elect might be
deceived: but that all they may be damned, which believe not the truth, but
have pleasure in unrighteousnes.

9. Infinite number almost of martyrs that have sealed her doctrine with their
bloods, etc.] for among her other merchandise, are also the Apoc. 18, ^3.
souls or lives of men; whom she exposes by sending into the nations to sovv
her darnel, and to sell her vvares: till the kingdoms of the earth, ( verse. 6.
revvarding her as she has revvarded them,) do cut off these chapmen from
land of the living. How be it she her self has made many more martyrs, by
killing Christ's vvitnesses that have spoken against her, as England, France,
Germany and many other nations testify: for in her must be found Apoc. 18, 24.
the blood of the prophets and of the saints.

Thus have I confirmed your notes by the scriptures, which you did set down
barely without proof: that all men may see, your marks may be showed by the
word of God. Other Apoc. 18, 14.
apples there are which your souls lust after, all which shall depart from
you, as God raises up the vvitnesses of his truth against you. But you proceed
and say*

2. You have a certain visible and infallible way to decide all controversies,
which is the catholic church, that propounds what is to be believed and what
is not.] A sure way in deed, wherein you may walk safely, till God rise up
to judgment against you. You boast to be the only catholic church; and to
have the only true belief: we except against you by the word of God: your
church which now stands charged to be a harlot, will be her own judge, and
decide the controversy her self. If you grant Mahomet but this one ground for
himself: I vvarrant you he vvil vvin the field. And if you can prove unto me,
but this one ground, (which being the question, is here begged by you,) I
will soon receive al^ doctrines, traditions, ceremonies that your mother Isa.
^, ^0. Mal. 4, 4. Ioh. 5, 3^. Act. 17, 2. and 26; 2^. ^ Tim. 3, 15, 16, 17. 2.
Pet. 1, 19.
church propoun ^eth. But I have shevved you a more certain plain and
infallible way, (the old and good way wherein our Fathers* vvalked,) to
decide all controversies by, which is the holy oracles of God written by his
Prophets and Apostles: which if you vvil not yield to walk in, but continue
in your catholic aberrations: you and your church shall perish in the hovvr
appointed; and then shall be said, Apoc. 18, 20.
O heaven rejoice of her, and ye holy Apostles and Prophets, for God has given
your judgment (not her own) upon her

3. You have (as you say) Gods divine veracit^e speaking by the mouth of the
church, which formally makes you believe.

But we (say I to you) have Gods divine veracitie speaking by the Luke 1, 70 2
Pet. 1, 19.
mouth of his holy Prophets, which have been since the world began; and also
the ^ Pet. 3, 2.
comandements of the Apostles of our Lord and savior, which effectually make
us Romans 10, 17.
believe, through the spirit God 1 Cor 2, 12. Isa. 59. 21.
which is given unto us. That God Mat. 22, 31.
speaks in them is p^ayn, and your Bellarm. de verb. Dei; l. 1, ^. ^*
selves grant: that undoubted veracitie is in his words, Ps. 19, 7, 9.
is evident, and your selves dare not deney: and by this divine veracitie we
submitt our selves, our churches, our faith, our actions to be tried of all.
But your church lifts up her self, to be her own judge and lavvgiver: and
vvil not suffer her self to be tried by the holy scriptures. Thus glorifieth
the her self, and lives in pleasure, and says in her heart, Apoc. 1^, 7.
I sit a Queen: but strong is the Lord God verse. 8.
which will condemn her.

4. You have (as you say) a supernatural judgment to believe in common at
least, in that all people, all nations have so believed. You need no
supernatural judgment for this, for it is a popular carnal reason, which the
natural man easily receives. But the spiritual man by supernatural light from
the law of God, believes Abak. 2, 4. Heb. 10, 38.
in particular, Ioh. 6, 66. 6^, 69.
though all people all nations should depart from Christ, because he has the 2
Pet. 1, 19
sure word of God in the scriptures, and the spirit of God, by a covenant from
the Lord. Isa. 59, 21. And by this means he discrieth Apoc. 17, 3.
in the wilderness that woman, and her verse. 5.
mystery, how she sits verse. 1.
upon many waters, or verse. 15.
peoples; of whose wine the nations having drunk, Ier. 51, 7.
therefore they rage.

Lastly through all these you have (as you say) a pious affection through the
working of Gods holy grace, to believe her et (...) hoc et illud, and that
without any difficulty, since you first believe there to but one true church,
and that church cannot err. etc.

I confess in deed you have the Mat. 7, 13
broad and easy way, wherein you run on with great facility, (if God of his
grace stay you not) unto your perdition. For by these false grounds your minds
are so bewitched, that with Prove. 7, 21.
her great craft she has caused you to yield, and with her flattering lips
has entised you, and ye follow her straightway verse. 22
as oxen that go to the slaughter, and as fools to the stocks for correction;
verse. 23.
til a dart strike through your live^, as birds hast^^^ to the snare, not
knowing that it is for their lives. For by believing this and that as your
catholic mother does propound, and not trying nor daring to try her
propositions by the book of God: you have quite lost the ancient catholic and
Apostolik faith which was in the Churches of God in Rome, Corinth, Galatia,
and throughout all nations, as whenever you bring your opinions to the trial
by Gods authentik writings, will appear. And though you glory of S. Peter for
your Rock, as your ancestors Ioh. 8. 33. etc.
gloried of their Father Abraham: yet will you not follow his holy plain and
Apostolical counsels, when he referrs you to the 2. Pet. 1* ^9.
sure word of the Prophets, and 2 Pet. 3, 2.
to the commandments of them the Apostles of the Lord: giving you warning 2
Pet. 2, 1, ^
of false teachers to come after, which privily should bring in heresies of
perdition, whose damnable ways many should follow, by whom the way of truth
should be evil spoken of.

What remains then if you proceed in this evil course, but as you cleave to
your late fathers synns, so you be partaker of their plagues. And if you will
not hearken to that Apoc. 18, 4.
voice from heaven, Go out of her my people: you shall hear and feel the
effect of that voice which the Apoc. 19. 17. etc.
Angel standing in the sun, cries so loud, to al fowls of the heaven to come
unto the supper of the great God, where they shall eat the fleshes of Kings and
high captayns, and of mighty men, and of horses and horsemen, and of freemen and
bondmen, of small and great: when the beast, and the verse. 20.
false prophet which deceived with miracles them that received his mark, shall
be cast alive into the lake of fire burning in brimstone. To save you from this
perdition, lo how large a letter I have written unto you this second time,
testifying unto you the word of God, and against the erroneous grounds or
quicksands rather, whereon you build your faith. God offering me this occasion by
your self, I have out of the love of my heart, endeavored to save your soul
from death, by showing you the way of life: choose life therefore that you may
live. Look into the book of God, (wherein you seem to me to be a stranger,) and
pray unto him for understanding in the same: so shall you find more light to
your eyes, more comfort to your heart, then the ca^t lodes of later Doctors,
Fathers, Councils etc. can give unto you. And if you will not be warned, I shall
lament your estate: yet whiles I may, I will do you good, and as for all
reproaches, taunts, vituperies which you have already uttered, or may yet further
utter against me, I shall willingly bear and bury them; and use all good means I
can, to save you from the damnation of hell. God open you: eyes, and persuade
your heart unto the sight and obedience of his most holy ^ Jude, v. 3
faith, ^ once given unto the saints. Amen. From Amsterdam this 16. of April.
1610.

Yours if you will be Christ's Henr: Ainsworth.
If you have said what you can against the scriptures of God and their
alsufficiencie for man's faith: you may (if you please) show your strongest
argumets for your Roman catholic church (as you call her) and her definitive
sentences. Or proceed, if you think good, to some other grounds and mayn
controversies between us. Only be advertised to follow the good counsel of him
whom you count the Rock of your faith; If any man speak (let him speak) as the
words of God 1. Pet. 4. 11.






There being no reply to this second answer of a long time, about 3. years
after H. A. wrote, as follows. To his very loving friend M. John A^nsworth
prisoner in Newgate: be these in London.
MR. Aynsworth I was glad to hear of your former release ou^ of bands, and
exspected your answer to my last letter, which you promised: but now lo some
years are past and I hear not from you. It is not my desire to contend with
you, but to save your soul from death, by converting you from popery to true
Christianity. I had not begun this busynes, but that I was provoked by your
self: if you mean to give over and so signify, I also vvil so rest, but with
pitying your estate and praying for you. If you think good to prosequute your
work begun, I also purpose God assisting me, either to manifest your
aberrations, or to yield unto you. I am the more occasioned thus to write, by
reason of an other challenge lately made by some of your side: but reason would
that the old be mainteyned, or let fall, before way be given to any new. Thus
with unfeighned desire of your good, I commend you to the mercy of the most
high, remaining your friend to command in all Christian duty*

Henr: Ainsworth.
From Amsterdam this 12. of April 1613.



I. A. his answer to the former short letter. To his loving friend Mr Henry
Aynsworth ^ Amsterdam deliver these.
MR. H Aynsworth. That you were so kindly glad for my releasement out of
prison, I am to thank you; but whereas you say you ery^cted my answer to the
lost of yours as I promised, I cannot see how you can take any just erceptions.
For first my releasement was but rather a cha^^ge of restraint, then absolute a
freedom being a banishment, so that I have been enforced to coast many parts
since: and before my banishment immediately all the books and papers I had,
were taken from me here in prison, amongst which (I take) pours and my
^^^ferentes were. As for the latter reply, I can not tell where it is now;
though I promise you I had half answered it, and had fully satisfied you
therein, if my papers and I had not suddenly been severed. Although I averr
there is no special poinct therein contained that I take I have not abunda^tly
satisfied in my former. That you seem to say I gave the onset, it much imports
not whether I did or no; I seeking to draw you from the Egyptian darkness,
that is so palpable. But this I can remember, this question now controverted by
you was by your self proposed: howsoever in your former rep^^e you desired to
change the thesi^ or discourse, which argued, you had little advantage or hope
to prevail in the former. We both agree belike in the intention, each seeking
each others conversion, though we are ex diametro opposed in our assertions. I
wonder what hope you should have by any thing you writ, to pervert my
obedience to the Church of God, that you so seeffingly term Poperte, but
therein you show your ignorance, distinguishing a Roman catholic and a true
Christian, although all Papists in your opinion are not true Christians* But I
could with better reason retort; and desire to convert you from Death^nisme, or
Judaisme to true Christianity. For I take according to your grounds a man
might prudently doubt whether you are baptized or not, in that your Parents or
Ministers might as much slight (as your sent does) the necessity of baptism.
If I had your last papers though tedious* and long, in a few lines I could
answer any thing that urges me therein, and that is not answered in my former
replies. But this is sufficient you have p^^lded to me only quotations, and
that d^sparatas, hanging together sine calce in lieu of the reasons,
antiquity, universality and consent, which I urged against you from Distories
the registers of time, from Holy Fathers and Doctors the interpreters of
scripture, and from all kind of witnesses. All which you call carnal motives,
the errors of flesh and blood, or some such other scor^f^l term of the Fathers
and Doctors. reasons I proposed to you (as I referr my self to any indifferent
judgment) are full for all your pretended reasons in full force. But ^erein you
mi^^e, for being only exercised to coape with Protestants, against whom your
writings ar in full force; in that they urge against you antiquity, visibilitie
and consent of Counsels and Fathers; all which being brought by us against
them, they fly presently from all these to their private spirit and
interpretation, yet they are no reasons or urge not against us: For we
Catholics have still one rule of faith that must tri^ all* Romans 12. v. 7* for
keeping of which rule the Romans Romans (...). v. 7* Romans 6* v. 17. 1.
before* 6* 6* v. 17. were before praised; which square S. Paul commends into
Timet^^e as ins depositum. This line of truth, and analogy of faith makes us
all agree, and it makes us not to be Ti^* 6* 20.
vanqui^ned of our enemies.

Therefore* (...) not (...)* (...) Ainsworth ^f ^ d^e not hear you, for I must
^^t believe you against this rule though you were an Angel from heaven in that
by private interpretation against the rule of faith you invert the gospel of
Christ. ^. (...)*


As for the beginning of your new subject, I know neither the controversy* nor
your Antagonist. If you be minded to deal further in your question begun,
answer my argumento, and that briefly and in form; For I charge you that by
the multipl^^^tie of quo^^tions you have rather avoided then answered my
reasons.

But if you be weary of this subject, at your pleasure you may begin another,
provided it be still a maine, essential or substantial po^^ce.

But since you seem so willing to give me satisfaction in any thing. I desire
you briefly and yet distinctly to answer these questions I shall propose.

First I demand how you challenge your faith to be the same of My first
question.
the Apostles: I desire to know which of the Apostles s^h^ll^rs whether Abdias
Bishop of Babylonia, whether S. Dyonis^^s ^rcopagita, S. Ignatius, whether S.
Polycarpus, aut S. Clemens the scholar of S. Peter, or the canons of the holy
Apostles did teach this your doctrine; if they did teach show how long it did
continue in the visible church of Christ, what monuments you have to warrant
you therein.

2. Set down the essential and fundamental points without which your religion
can not stand; and which being granted your religion is granted.

3. Name the authors that successively from thence unto this time, have
mainteyned these poincts you now hold.

4. Who and on what occasion did suppress them. (Howsoever, I desire you to
give a direct answer to these (...). questions hers propounded.)

5. Whether it was in time of persecution, or in the time of peace that your
church began to be invisible; In the time of peace there was no adversary to
make it invisible; In the time of persecution; no man can persequ^te an
invisible thing.

6. I ask you which of the Martyrs of the primitive church yo^ will allow of
for your Martyrs; whether of S. Laurence or ^o. These questions can not be
answered neither by Protestant, p^^itan or Brownist*or any other sectary.


7. Whether you allow of Constantius the first Christian Emperor to be of your
religion.

8. Whether you will allow of any of our three conversions of England to have
been to this religion which you now profess.

9* Whether you hold that those that have died or shall die resolved Roman
Catholics, have been or shall be saved?

10. Whether you will grant the Church of Christ, or the synagogue of the
Jews to be more visible or less subject to ruin, and subversion.

11. Whether you allow of the last edition of the protestants Bible; or else
what edition you propound to your flock ^^^etest to be followed?

12* Whether sufficiency only (since I take you hold ordering or imposition
of hands not to be used) is to be required to make one of your teaching Elders;
or if only that suffices not, to assign what more is required.

To these questions I entreat you Mr Henry Aynsworth, and that earnestly to
give an orderly breife and distinct answer to each one of these questions* for
on the resolution of these, many fruitful consequences may be gathered to make
easy any poinct hereafter to be controverted between us.

But now briefly to set down my arguments which I maintain* still, you have not
satisfied in no one poinct: I will therefore briefly set them down in form
desiring an answer as brief, yet as solid and as substancial as you can
affoard; only granting, denying or distinguishing, which in deed is to answer
in form like a scholar:

Your conclusion as I take was this. The written word of Mr Henr. Aynsw.
position.
God contained in the Bible is the only and sufficient rule of our faith:

My reasons were these in substance, to prove the contrary, though the same in
word I can not affirm, not having one line of yours or my conference: ^.
Reasons refucing M. H. A. position, and yet unanswered: If you say answered,
^bridge them, ^s I have done my 5. Reasons. D. Aug. contra ep. fundame^t.
Manich* c. 9. ^. Ratio.


That which is not known for Gods word, cannot be the only rule of faith:

But scriptures by themselves are not known for scriptures:

go. the bare scriptures which is the written word of God can not be the only
rule of faith:

My Major is most certain and evident; My Minor I proved out of Dr. Whitaker,
Hooker, Zanchius, Brentius, all holding tradition necessarily to distinguish
scriptures from no scriptures. Also I take I proved this out of the holy
Counsels, and out of S. Augustine contra epistolam fundamenti Manichaeic. 9.
Ego Euangelio non crederem, etc. I would not believe the Gospel except the
authority of the church should move thereunto.

Neither did you answer my Minor, when you said scriptures ^r known by
themselves; For first you slight and let slip the authority of those that in
common reason I should believe asso^ne as your self: 2. You do not answer to
the authority of S. Aug: 3. your answer is against common sense. Since if
scriptures were as prime a principle as that the sun shines, or that honey is
sweet, no man could be^ ignorant thereof that had all his natural faculties:
and if more then the natural faculties, and the object disposed be required,
you eats your own words. For then it is not so known a truth, And how shall I
know I have this spiritual eye of discerning truth more the^ my adversary,
that accepts of some things for no scripture, that I do Conc. C^rth. 3. canon^
4^. Laodi^. Canone 19.
allow of as scripture? etc. Why had not S. Aug: this ^ie that with whole
Council of Carthage accpted of the books of Machabees as divine and Canoricall
scripture: why had not S. Hierom that translated the holy scriptures?

Another reason that I urged was thus. Many things were believed The ^* Reason.
before the written word of God, and many things are now believed that are not
expressly taught in the written word of God, go: Diverse things believed not
expressed in the written word. The perp: virginiti^ of our B. Lady.
the written word of God is not only the rule of faith: The first part of my
Antecedent is easily proved; For the church of God till Moses time was well
governed, and yet had no written word: My second part was proved: I giving
instance that the Sacrament in the old law for exp^ating of original sy^ in
women. The mystery of the B. Trinity, that God the holy ghost did proceed from
God the father and God the son as from one beginning. That Easter day should
be celebrated on Sunday, and not on Saturday, That the Creed of the Apostles
is to be believed; and yet no one of these is expressly taught in holy
scriptures; you said yes; but you cited no place of scripture for probation
thereof: Moreover you have not satisfied 2. Th^s ^. ^ 15.
the places of holy scripture I cited to prove traditions; especially you have
not answered to that place of S. Paul* 2. These. 2. D. Chrysostom. hom. 4. (...) 1.
These. ^*
v. 15. nor to the authority of S. Chrysostom. homily 4. i^ ^. These. 2. wherein
Dr. Whitaker says he speaks unworthy of so holy a father, nor to the place
off. Basil or S. Hierom or S. Aug. S Basil: S. Hierome. D. Aug: De Genesi ad
litteram lib. 10. c. 23. Conc. ^. Carth. canone 47. Council* Laodic. canone 59.
D. Aug. lib. 1. c. 3^* cont^a Cresconium: affirms the book of Maccabees to be
canonical.
De Genesi ad literam lib. 10. c. 23. where he tearheth many fasts, feasts,
solemnities to be kept and believed only through tradition, and he testifies
there that in no wise we could believe the baptising of children without
unwritten tradition:

Another which I used was this. That which is most difficult, The 3, Reason.
hard and almost for occurring difficults inexplicable, can not be to the
unlearned at least, a certain and unfallible truth. But the scriptures are
thus, as well witnesses your own conscience, and diverse places I set down,
that seem to contradist one another, go:

Moreover how should an artificer know, whether this Bible be well translated
or no, since he can neither conferr it with the original or the vulgar Latin.
And I showed how these difficults are not trivial; Amongst other places I cited
that place of S. Peter the ^* chapter Epistle ^* Pet. ^, (...)*
v. 16. In which are certain things hard to be understood, which the unlearned
and unstable deprave, as also the rest of the scriptures to their own
perdition. No doubt S* Peter means of those things S. Paul delivered touching
vocation, grace, justification, and predestination; In which I showed how
parvus error in principio magnus est in sine; to which the words of S. Peter
alludes to, as also the rest of the scriptures, meaning that an error in some
one transcendall poinct of these, do cause error in many other places that
depend hereupon But is these and more plainly examplified, I had nothing but
quotations im^ertinently alleged, and no determinate answer to the difficult.

That whose only the has been defective and erroneous, yea to 4. Ratio.
the greatest Elercks; to every one howsoever unf^ilfull, and unlearned can not
be a certain and unfallible rule of faith. But that the bare scripture is so,
I showed by diverse seming plain piares cited by the Arrians, Pelagians,
Semipelagians, Donatists, Euthera^s, Anabaptists, ^t. All which vie scripture
for scripture; If you give an interpretation of their place of scripture that
they bring to confirm their hereste, they will give also an interpretation of
any place of scripture that you shall bring to refute them: if your
interpretation be a correspondencie to scripture, theirs also shall be so.

The fifth Argument of mine I framed thus. God is as provide^t 5. Ratio. The
^i^ch Reason.
for necessary means to direct his church; as he is provident to Empires,
kingdoms, common wealths and families. But all these besides the written law,
have ever some one decyder, vnweere or tribunal to ^hoke controversies, or
diffentions in the seed, to mow them down in the flower, to e^tirpate them in
the very root. go, the word of God is not sufficient in it self to settle all
controversies.

Thus as I remember ran the sum of my reasons, which you has not answered in
your last, or in any other reply of yours. Now since my reasons remain in
their full force; I can not see any reason why I should be bound to spend much
time in answering fruitless and impertinent allegations:

But here as I remember transcending the bounds of this question now
controverted, though I confess the matter you proposed is in the confines of
this present; you brought a place out of S. Augustine, that on S. Mathewes
words c 16. says that Christ did build his church on the faith of Peter and
not of his person, on Christ Jesus, and not on S. Peter; First to this place I
answer Mat. 16, 18. See Theophilact on this place. Ioh. 21. ^. 17. Chrysostom:
lib. 2. De sacerdotio. Luc. 22. 32. Math. 16. Tues Petrus. Council. Chalced.
Art. 3. page 118. Tertull: de praescript. Orig. homil. 5. in Exodus S. Cyp. De
vnitate Eccles. S. Hill: canone 16. in Math. S. Ambros. sermon. 47. 68. lib 6.
in c. 9. Lue. S. Hier: lib. in Iovinia. et in cap. 2. Esa. etc. Luc. 22. 32.
vide D. Cypr. epist: 55. numero 6. D. Bernard^. epist. 190. S. Aug: interpreted.
that in one sense S. Augustine says the first, yet I deny that ever S.
Augustine does deney that the church of Christ is built on the person of S.
Peter. And well map the Church be said to be built on the faith of S. Peter,
and yet also on his person, because the person of S. Peter touching his faith
is no frail mortal creature, but is a strong unshaliable rock as the faith it
self, In that Luke 22. It is sand I have prayed for thee Peter that thy faith
may not fail: Since we believe that this prayer is obtained, we must beleev
that by the warrant of Christ's prayer, the person of Peter ^ib. 1. ret^act. c.
2^.
and his faith shall never be severed; so S. Aug: calling sometimes S. Peter the
roch of the church, and sometimes his faith does mean one thing: The which S.
August. himself testifies, for remembering that he had taught that in the
person of Peter the Church was founded; quod in eo tanquam in Petra ^^^data sit
Ecclesia in which sense it was fong by many in the hym^^s of S. Ambrose, Hoc
^^sa Petra Ecclesiae canente culpam d^^uit: At the crowing of the cock the rock
of the chur^ (...).
(Peter) lamented his fault, he concludes the whole matter of these two
expositions. Harum duarum sententiarum quae sit probab^^^or eligat lector. Of
which two expositions which to the probabler. I leave to the readers choice:
What have you not by this allegation of S. Augustine? Nay what will you loose
if you should come to answer the holy fathers that affirm the church to be
founded on S. Peter.

That you write you are sorry for my error: I wonder you should be so careful
for my souls good, that are so negligent of your own. For as I take in the
last of mine I showed how full of fear the last resolution of your faith would
be when you should give account at (...).
that eternal tribunal; In that all you can answer for your self is that your
own phancie apprehended so; your private spirit interpreted so. Where my faith
is warranted by Gods word, driivered by the holy catholic church, confirmed by
General and Provinstall Councels, sealed by thousand of Martyrs blood,
authoris^d by antiguitie (...).
of History, ratified by holy Fathers Doctors and instructors of holy orders
in all ages, having the profession of our religion inferted in our natural ^
language, churches, crosses, buildings, money ^ most ancient monuments, al which
motives warrant me that I shall render an answer without all fear or dread. All
these and (...) motives you may have to yield to us; but you could never not
^^^we me the least semblance of reason why I should yield to you. God send you
make right use of them for the good of your soul, that you man at length be
reduced to the true church of Christ, for which I shall heartily pray.

John Aynsworth.
I received yours dated the 12. of April the 20. of the same, and I end this
the 29. of April stylo veteri. Justice Hall in Newgate.






H. A. his answer to the former letter. To his loving fr^ind Mr. John Aynsworth
prisoner in Justice hall in Newgate, be these in London.
GRace and mercy from God the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, ^e vouch safed
unto you. 1. Whereas you g^ve me to vnder^tand (Mr. Aynsworth) that my writings
among others were taken from you, so that you could not answer them as you
promised, and that if you had my last papers, in a few lines you could answer
any thing that urges you therein, etc. I have out of my love toward you, and
in compassion of your estate, sent you a copy of my last writing, not urging
you to answer, unless you think the goodness of your cause will bear you out,
but desiring you to yield unto the truth there showed you. You brought for your
defense C. Bellarmines reasons: I have manifested the weakness of them. If you
can fortify them, or your cause by any other, I am willing (as I have begunn)
to take notice thereof, and either to refute them, or yield you the Victory. If
you leave off, I also will rest, and let the prudent judge what we both have
said.

2. You (as if you would beginn a new combat) propound 12. questions for me to
answer: I told you before, I would not digress to by matters, for so we might
run into confusion fruitless and endless. Also your questions (most of them)
are of Fathers Doctors etc. since The Apostles times, by whom I showed you that
I neither might nor would try any religion, til the Divine scriptures be
proved insufficient, which will never be.

3. You then propound the controversy a new, as if we were now again to
beginn, when we are almost at an issue: so might both of us weary our selves in
vayn. Your first long writing to me, has made my answers the longer, for I
desired (and still do) brevity with perspicuitie. Least through want of your
papers, you should swarve from the questions in hand, I will set them down, in
the words that they have passed.

My assertions were question weise, when I should enter into dispute with you,
to see if you would grant;

1. That our differences in religion should be tried and composed by the
verdict or word of God: not of men.

2. That Gods word is to be found in the scriptures of the Prophets and
Apostles, who vvrote originally in Hebrew and Greek. By these I offered my
faith to be tried, and to make trial of other faith proposed.

Yours were, which you said you would prove; and so indevoured;

1. That only the bare text of the scripture, is not a sufficient rule of our
faith.

2. That the scriptures expounded by the catholic church, is a true and
indeficient rule of our faith: or (as you set it down when you come to make
proof,) That the Popes definitive sentence as he is head of the church, is an
indeficient rule in matters of faith.

3. That this rule is only found in the Roman Catholic church sentence, and
not in private men's illuminations and motions of a private and unseen spirit.
Or (as after you express it, when you labor to prove it,) That your Roman
Church is the true and only catholic church of God.

Your arguments for these were long discourses, I could not therefore answer,
but by refelling your treatises. In these I follow your footing still in my
last vvriting, now again sent unto you. Hold I pray you to the points in
hand, and be as brief as you can, I vvil labor to satisfy you in fevv words.
But if you make outrodes to long narrations; blame not the length of my
answers, which are but according to your own size; and eeke your arguments
no more with humane testimonies, til you have disproved the certainty and
sufficiency of the Divine oracles: which if it were possible for you to do,
you might colourably persuade fools unto Atheism, but no wife man would ever
suffer affliction for your traditional and humane religion. Be you warned, yea
entreated, to save your sowl from eternal flames; God has offered more means
of mercy unto you then to many others; if you shut your eyes against the light,
(which shines in darkness though the darkness comprehends it not,) you will but
heap up unto your self wrath against the day wrath; but my prayer unto God is
for your salvation in Christ, to whose grace I commend you.

From Amsterdam this 28. of May 1613. Henr: Ainsworth.




I. A. his answer to the former letter. To his loving friend Mr Henry Aynsworth
at Amsterdam deliver this.
SOme week ago (Mr Henry Aynsworth) I received your letter and your last reply
coppied out again (as you say) to give me satisfaction. An answer whereof some
three years ago I had returned, if the papers then, and I had not been
severed; And long ere this since the intended deliverie thereof I had fully
satisfied each point thereof, if some three weeks after the notified aryvall
thereof, the deliverie had not been delayed.

For your pains and good will I thank you. But I wonder that through private
affectation, so much payns, and good will should be so far from being secundam
scientiam, that a man might doubt rather whether you writ not contra
conscientiam, since to any indifferent judgment the motives for our catholic
religion, and for her doctrinal assertions are so clear, and therefore doubt
not but that I shall answer you; although her well grounded truth would defend
it self though I were silent.

But God willing I will shortly send you the answer to your large biscourse, and
to give you ta^t of that which I will prove in fully answering your replication
(though to write so large a coppie forth is more tedious the^ difficult) I will
prove these seven points at least. First I will show the weakness of your
reasons; 2. I will prove that not only the written word of God, but the
unwritten word of God tradition, and the authority of the Church is the rule
of our faith. 3. I will show how my five Arguments for all your pretended
answers remain in full force. 4. I will prove how you walk in a circle, proving
the word of God by your private spirit, and your private spirit by the word of
Gods 5. I will defend our catholic opinion to be free from any circular or
ridiculous proof. 6. I will show the Popes definitive Sentence, together with a
general Council at least to be an assured groundwork of faith: 7. I will show
to you or any indifferent judgment that your building is on sand, and the
resolution of your faith at the last day of judgment groundless and full of
fear.

But now to show that you have in nothing answered my last letter, I propounded
certain necessary questions briefly for the more clearing of this or any other
disputation to be had between us: of which though there were twelve in number,
yet you have not answered one word to any, which either shows you glosed
before when you said you writ all before for my good* or else rather that you
could not answer one, which you might have done in four or 5. lines, denying
or granting. So that I must needs infer that you cannot show which of the
Apostles did teach your doctrine that you now hold: 2. that you can not show
which are the essential poincts of your religion: 3. that no ancient Doctor
did maintayn the doctrine you now held: 4. that you can not show who, in what
time, and on what occasion did suppress that doctrine: 5. that you can not show
your church to have begun to be invisible in the time of persecution, or in the
time of peace: 6 that S. Laurence nor any of the primitive martyrs were of your
religion: 7. that you approve of no ancient history, and that you must grant
Constantine our first Christian Emperor not to be of your religion: 8 that no
one of the 3. conversions of England was to your religion: 9. that you must
grant the church of Christ to be more subject to invisibilitie, ruin, and
subversion then the synagogue of the Jews: 10. that you have no Bible or
written word of God that you allow of in all, and so that you have no rule of
faith for all. To all these you answer with silence in your heart calling them
carnal motives no doubt.

3. I answer you that in putting down briefly my 5. arguments in form, I show
you have not answered: But you in your silence to them shows that your answers
consists only in multiplicity of words that admitts no abbreviation.

4. You then set down your 2 conclusions and my 3. contrary assertions. ^ou
blame my tediousnes, but I answer, my outroades are to trace only your
wildgoose chase, that is bounded in no circuit of a Methedicall discourse. I
shall be the longer in this present discourse to come, so to avoid proliritie
hereafter, still referring my self to this to come, how long so ever you shall
dispute. Desist then Mr Henry Ainsworth to follow your private spirits phancie;
and hold your self by that three fold chain ^in^^ntius Lyrinensis prescribes,
that is antiquity, universality and consent, so should you save your self
from that headlong precipitium that the author of evil the Divil tempts you
to; when by the private interpretation of scriptures he inst^uates to a man
Mitte deorsum S. Math* ^* for it is written Psalm. 90. cast thy self from the
rock of the church, scriptum est from the trabition and authority of the
church, from the consent of holy Councels and fathers; for scriptum est, your
private spirit must be your tower. God send you may recover your self from your
imn^nent precipitium, that dying out of the church of God you do not eternally
burn in the quenchless flames: from Justice hall Julie 24 1613.

John Aynsworth.




To this letter H. A. gave no answer, but exspected the promised large reply
from I. A. which now follows: as the third in defense of the Church of Rome.
To Mr Henry Aynsworth at Amsterdam.
6. 16. Ierem. State super vias, et videte et interrogate de semitis antiquis
quae sit via bona et ambulate in ea, et invenietis refrigerium animabus vestris.
ALthough your reply was slight, and wily, rather seeking to transfer the
question then to examine it to the true ground, bespangling the rough rugge of
your doctrine with multiplicitie of wrested places of holy scripture, which
makes me fitly resemble you to some Ethiopian, behanged all over ears, ^yes,
nose, lips and arms with Jewels, and pearls that by their luster, beauty,
and misplacing makes the Nigroes fowllness the uglier. Yet of such importance
is the decision of this question being This question the chiefest question of
contro^^^sic^.
the keye, and Master-spring to all the other doctrinall, and controversall
questions of religion: That howsoever your exploded doctrine and shuffling
replication needs no answer, being like a Comet that consumes it self, yet to
complie with the worth of the question, and to satisfy your followers desires,
I have once again returned you an answer.

In which I will show that your reasons being rather seming reflections then
true beams (as you say) of the word of God, do vanish of themselves.

2. I will prove that the true and indeficient rule of our faith is not The
partition of the treatise into 7. parts.
only the written word of God, but also the unwritten word of God, tradition,
the authority of the church of God in Councels ^ Fathers is the ultimate
decyder of all matters of controversy.

3. I will show how my reasons for all your pretended answers, remain in full
force.

4 I will prove that in your opinion you walk in a virious circle, pro^^ i^ the
self same by the (...)* the word of God by the private spirit, and the private
spirit by the word of God.

5 I will defend our Catholic opinion to be free from any such circular and
r^diculous proof*

6 I (...) show the Popes definitive sentence together with a general Court
(...) atleast to be a firm, and an assured groundwork, and rock (...).

7 And lastly I will demonstrate to you, or to any indifferent judgment, Mr. H.
A. his (...). How (...) steeme of the s^^^pt. The (...) ^ of the fathers
besides the written word of God required.
that your building is on sands, or sp^ders ^^ks your arc^u^^^ and res^^u^^o^
of your faith at the last day of judgment to be groundless and fu^l of fear:

8 First then to begin with your reasons, which (...) I maint^yne to be nothing
else but a^^er a^^ous of scripture f^^sty applied, I do think it (...) before I
answer your reasons grounded on the bareterts of scripture* to signify what a
worthy and most reverend es^eme we have of the scriptures, and of each part of
them. We reverence them as Gods holy word derived from the fullness of truth.
^^e hold this volume wor^^^ to be meditated on day and night. Jos. 1, 8 Psalm.
1, 2 (...) hold it as seven times refined s^^ver. Psalm. 11, 7. A most clear
light illuminating our eyes Psalm. 8 8 that it is a light (...) our steps
Psalm. 1. 8. ^2* and v 105 and 130. 140. We hold all the holy scriptures to be
most just 8. 8. Prove. to be a frerie speech and buckler of defense. We also
defend that the holy scriptures are diligently to be searched unto Joh. 5, 39.
^^om. 1. 1. ^^om. 15, 4. that whatsoever is writ in them is writ to our
edificatio^: that all the scriptures are profitable unto us 2 ^un. 3, 16 2.
Pet. 1, 21. that men 4. D. August. lib. 1 cont. Iuha: c. 2. et lib. 2. (...)
ep^log^ejus oper^s. As S. Aug did oppose the (...) time, so we do oppose you.
Mr. H. A. (...) for calling the holy fathers earth and ashes.
delivered this scripture inspired by the holy Ghost. Yet we hold also though
we worth^ly esteem of them yet we can not ^^clude the e^plications of the
holy church in the holy Fathers and Councels, guided, and directed, by the self
same truth. And S. Augustine did oppose by the authority of the holy fathers
his predecessors, against Pe lagius and other ^ereticks saying, ^rag^lis ^t
arguta eorum novitas e^c. The weak and w^^^ novelti^ of heretics is to be
co^f^n^ded by the authority of holy Fathers: and a little after this great
Doctor* and holy Father^ acknowledged by Calvin himself to be the faithful
wriness of antiquiti^, 4. (...) stitut. ^. 14, sess. 25 and B^za calls him the
Prince of a^ Divines concerning dogmaticall po^^cis in c. 3. ^^om. v. 12 as if
on purpose he did answer your barbarous contempt of them calling them dust and
athes; ^et only in regard of their mortali^e as the scriptures calls them,
but when the uniform consent of the Fathers Greek and Latin was objected
against ^^u: What sa^es D. Augustine, shall light be darkness, and darkness
light that (...) aclestius. Julia: should on: ly see, and that Hyllarie, Greg.
Amb^^se ^ier. August should b^ blynd^ So we see how two worthy champions of
yours has raised S. August: a Samn^l (...) confound a (...) not at Endor but
at Amsterdam.

^ But whereas by your submission you would seem^ to (...) am^nd (...) your
(...) that you (...) th^re be a tho^^a^d of the^ that I sa^ (...) that you
pre^^^ for (...). trut^ and holiness before (...). For if you understand this
of the (...) fathers before (...), I pro^^ that you cannot (...) that without ^
visard to (...) your (...), since I will prove that in (...) dogmatical (...)
they differ from you, and so by your (...) ^inpeere (except you will be
wilfully blind) they (...) before you. If you understand Jewel, (...) etc. the
Protestant Doctors, these in truth by your (...) neither do or can prefer
before your self (since by your (...) have no true church as I hear you teach
against Mr. (...) and so there difference must rather be heretical then (...)
and if it be a true church, why make you a sch^m^ in d^parting from them*

Now to come to the solution of your arguments if there were any. (...)
There be 4 ^n number cited, as you say grounded on the holy scriptures, but
not one appearing in substance or in the true sense of the scriptures.

First you object out of Deuteronomy. ^. 32. Keep and do that (...)* God commanded
you, ^e shall neither (...) to the (...) to the (...), but by that our Lord God
commanded you (...) you (...) What can you infer hence but that the law
ought strictly to be kept* and that we ^ught neither to add or to take from
the 10 commandments, that is to make the 10. commandments (...) o^
supera^undant, what is this to your purpose to prove that the written word
alone is sufficient to decyde all controvers^es. For as here (...)
testification of the law or ^rp^icati^n of the law was (...), (And that it was
the office of the Priests to explicate the (...) of the law app^ares Deuteronomy. 1^.
v. 8 2 Paral. 19 1^. 2 P^^ 26 16 (...) Deuteronomy 32. v. 7. Psalm. 43, 1. Prove. 3* 8*
(...)* 6* ^6* (...) 8* 1^* (...) 4* 4 3. 2 These. 2* 15. 2 (...). 2* 1.) so we
sa^ the proposing of the word of God by the church; and the (...) of the Church
b^ her h^ad, counsels and h^lfe ancient fa^^^^^ (...) not resist but rather
help the scriptures. And a^ to ^^plicate the law (...) neither (...) de^it^e to
the right hand or to the l^ft* no more (...) ^^ to (...) the scripture
according to v^^^ersalitie, antiquiti^ and cons^nt: (...)
And here (...) ^^ to be understood that such an addition is prohibited that to
(...) to the law of God as appears up (...) which (...) before (...) 4 chap.
v. 3. where he brings in before (...) how he did (...)* B^al ph^gor for (...)
of (...)* for adding or (...) as the te^t ^^p^ies, v 2 ^. 4 Deuteronomy.

Again (...) out of Deuteronomy. 12. ^2. That (...) I co^^aund ^.
thee that (...) to (...) Lord* thou (...) ^^t add o^ (...); what is here
(...) but an heath* (...), and an (...) of their children to God as they did to
their idols as appears out of the 30 verse of the same chapter. Is here any
prohibition of c^nsicating the true sense of the law? And in the self ^^me
sense ^ prohibition No true explication prohibited
of an idolatrous or fal^^fying addition is prohibited Deuteronomy. 4 v. 2. ^^u shall
not add unto the word I speak unto you, and in this sense that of the ^po^ the
last chap. v. 18, et ^9. and first of S. Paul to the Gal. chap. 1, v 8 as S.
Aug: teaches us in tract. 98. in Johannem. How the author himself slippes in
tripping of my reason.


10. Now whereas you retort my reason urged against you, shows you have good
will to maintayn the tennis play how unpractised soever you are therein: For
as I remember I reasoned thus taking occasion out of Deu. 5, v. 32. no man may
ad unto the fourth co^ma^deme^t and it is to be kept, therefore the 4
commandment is to be kept and only to be kept: As it should follow by the
self same reason. No man may add in that ^^^^d to any particular scripture,
and this or each parcel of scripture is the word of God; therefore this or each
parcel of scripture is only scripture, or the word of God. Or thus, the
scripture is a sufficient rule in that kind for that which it teaches,
therefore it The conclusion often tym^s with more art co^cealed, then v^rballie
ever deduced The 1. of Gal. ^. v. makes against himself.
is the only sufficient rule; where you may plainly see if you will not blin^^
that I conclude sufficiently against you. But you complayn that my redditum or
conclusion does not show his head; I answer, we do not use ever in the
schools the premises being presupposed ve^^^lli^ to infer the conclusion
which follows necessarily. As if I should argue thus. Whosoever builds his
religion only on the private spirit is a flat hereriche, But Mr. Henry Ayns
worth does this; the go. without any more I know will excuse me from inferring
a lame conclusion, in that every one that has common sense will see what
follows.

11. Now to answer to that of the Gal. 1. v. 8. But though we or an Angel from
heaven should euangelise to you besides that I have euangelised un to you be he
an anathema: which text makes much against you; and does nothing prove that
which you would infer viz. that the written word of God is sole sufficient.
For first there it is said besides Contrary glosses only prohibited. D: Aug:
lib. 17. co^tra Faustu^ docet; qui supplet quod minus erat, non tollit quod
mi^us ^rat.
that which I euangelize that is either in writing or word of mouth; so that
you see tradition is not obscurely implied: 2. we may note out of these words,
that the text does not prohibit any explication or true gloss on the text, but
only that which is contrary, for verse 6. he marvails that they should be
transported to another gospel. So that you see all additions, and not contrary
additions are forbidden in this and the like place. But first here your
gospelling is against S. August: lib. 17. contra Faustu^ where he teaches that
the Apostle says not more the^ you have received, but besides that you have
received, or else S. Aug: says he should have prejudicated himself that did
desire to come to pre^ch to the Thessalonians, and he concludes; he that
supplies that which was too little, does not take away that which was too little
or w^nting.

12. And S. Augustine in his 98, tract notes that the word besides does not
prohibit more or other preaching or teaching (as the trabitio^^ S. Aug. says
the word besides prohibits only that which is contrary. S. John himself
otherwise by M. H. A. should sin.
and explications of the church be) but such as are contrary or disagreeing
to the rule of faith, and S. Augustine notes that the Apostle both not say if
any do euangelize to you more the^ you have received, but besides: For if he
had forbidden any more, S. John had sinned that wrote after the Apocalypse.

13. You upbraide me in saying this answ. is none of the word of God but my
own, saying that I have not a tittle of the word of God to prove it which you
have: and for to prove pour purpose you ^^te the 30 of the Proverbs the 6. v:
add nothing unto his words least he reproove thee; which text proves no more
the^ the other text explicated; that co^rrarie doctrine ^ not explicatio^s a^
here prohibited; so that we see our archer has lost another bolt shot at
rand^^ to seek his brother.

14. But whereas you say my answer is not warranted of God, is not true: For
read Ro^. the last, v. 17. Observe diligently those that cause division The
like showed.
and diffention besides the doctrine you have learned, where Eras^us turns it
in his translation contra against; and your Bezaes translation reads so if
contrary; S. Ambrose also reads si contra, My doctrine warranted by Gods own
word. The desinatio^s of the church are Gods. Mat. 18, 17. et 1^. De^. 19, 15.
so that we see repugnant, and not explicating doctrine, contrary and not more
doctrine of the self same kind is prohibited.

15. Whereas you say my reason is against myself, in that the Prophets did not
add of their own but of Gods; no more I say the definitions of the church be
man's own but Gods, there being one self sam^ of Christ and hi^ Church, He that
hears you hears me, and he that contemns you contemns me, S. Luke 10,
16. which is true also of particular churches, but so fart forth as their
doctrine accords with the Roman catholic church.

16 But where you say you will inlighten my eyes with the lamp oil that
stincketh by your false interpretation of the holy fathers sense, I am little
beholden to you. For S Chrysostom and S. Ambrose in those places cited by you will
have nothing else understood, but that the expositors must apply themselves to
the true sense of the scripture, and the law, ^ not to corrupt the sense though
on good pretenses. But you (...). H. A. if you would ha^ the dust wiped of your
spectacles, might have seen Dyonisius Areopagita in the year of our Lord 100
and In opere imperfecto c. 7. Math. D. Ambrose lib. de Pa^adiso c. 12. Nihil
igitur l. quod bonum videtur.
the Apostles scholar in his first chapter of his celestial Hierarchy, show
how the Apostles did declare their doctrine partly by writing and partly not by
writing: yea you might Mark well Deuteronomy. 32. verse. 7. Psalm. 43 1. Prove. 1, 8.
Esa. 38. 19. Ier. 6, 16. Eccle. 8, 11. 4. Esdr. 14. 3. 2. These. 2, 15. 1. Tim.
6, 20. 2 Timothy 2, 1. and see whether unvvritten traditions are not to be
observed, seen. (...). S. Chrysostom. plain words for tradition.
better have sca^ned first, and answered that place cited by me out of h^l^ S.
Chrysostom: on the 2. of the These. oratione 4. Stand and keep your traditions,
where the holy Father says it is plain the holy Fathers did not deliver all
things up ^^istle but many things without writing, and those things See (...)
lib. 3. c. 4. Clemens Alexand lib. 5. Streat: c. 2. Orig. lib. 5. super numeros
Athanas. epistola ad Epictetum D. Ambrosius lib. de ^ide 3. c. 7. epistola 83.
D. Aug: lib. contra Cresco: Grammat. c. 33* lib: contra epistolam Manich: qua^
vocant fundamentum c. 5. et epistola ^6. ad Casul. vide n. ^1.
also are worth^ of faith; and S. Chrysostom: says, Est traditio nihil qu^ras
amp^ius; which words are so plain that they made Or I^w^l to say they were
words unworthy so h^lp a father: And that S. Ambrose did approve of tradition
is plain out of his 34 sermon on Lent, where he reproving those that would keep
certain days after Lent, when this after f^st was neither (as the feast of
Lent) neither delivered by the authority of our antestors. So that we see if
we should but give Mr. H. A. the S^^cons place but to put oil into our
lamps, he would add his dust and asks to quench it rather (...) contemning
still as he does the authority of the holy Fathers, in terming their
authority produce^ against him, dust and ashes.

17. Mr. Henry Aynsworth objects against me that I have turned over his third
and fourth Arguments o^ reasons; denying them to prove that which they were
cited for: I answer I possed them over; But see here Mr ^. A. has turned them
off the ladder to their last d^steni^; not showing that they proved ought what
he intended by them: we may suppose his reasons were wounded to death in the
answer^^ the former, o^ like runa^ates have forsaken their arms that THE II.
PART.
of ^ ^^ted barely before, but one appears in his likeness; I hope ou^
adversary will acknowledge or amend his slight dealing herein.

18. The second part that Iam to prove is that the rule of our faith The rule
of our faith the written and vnwritte^ word jointly. Tra^it: was once the total
rule, therefore it may be the partial. The ^h: of God taught only by tradition
2470 years. Tradition directed men after written law vide n. 16.
is not only the written word, but jointly the unwritte^ word of God,
tradition and the authority of the church, counsels and Fathers is the
ultimate decyder of all matters of controve^ste.

This I prove first thus: That which was the total rule of our faith before
the written word of God, may be well the partial rule of our faith after,
where the written word of God does not sufficiently e^^ress^ diverse mysteries
of us to be believed. But tradition was a sufficient yea and the total rule of
our faith til Moses time the first (...) in of the holy ghost, go* tradition
now together with the written word is a sufficient rule of our faith. My major
through out this whole tract shall be proved; My minor is granted by Mr H. A.

20. Secondly, Not only before the law of Moses men we^^ wholly directed by
the month of tradition, but after also as it appears in Deuteronomy. 3^, verse 7. Ask
thy fatners and they shall annantiate unto thee, ask thy ancestors and they
shall tell thee, showing that of many things that were to be believed we
should depend of the instruction of our ancestors, for in the words young
(...) diat^^y before that is implied co^^ra generationes singulas; and Psalm.
43, 1. Oh Lord we have heard with our ears, our fathers have (...) unto us
that which thou have wrought in their days, and in the ancients days. Prove 8,
1. Hear oh son the discipline of thy father, and do not leave the law of
thy mother. Isa. 38, 19. The father shall make known Many places of the old
testam^ for tradit:
to his son this truth; where truth and discipline shows rather matters of
discipline, and doctrine, then matters of fact as Mr H. A. would interpret: and
Jere. 6, 16. Stand upon the ways, and see and ask of the ancient paths, what
is the right way and walk in it, and ye shall find rest unto your souls: which
is plain there that the Prophet does not only speak of matter of faith, but
to prevent error and (...) of doctrine: also see Eccles 8 11. 4 Esdr. 14, 3. 2 Timothy 2, 15. 1 Timothy 6 20 2. Tim. 2, 1. what can be hence inferr^d but that the
Isra^lites and Christians were to be directed by the help of traditions. 2^. S
Dyon: Ar^opag (...). Cl^meas Alex. Th^anc^^^ fathers most plain for the
allowing of tradition. Origin S. Athanasius S. Basil.


See the holy fathers so firm and so frequent for this great truth, that
falsehood it self of our adversaries cannot tell how to oppose, see (...). cited
before number 16. (...) in the ^ere of our Lord 80 lib. 3. ^. 4. calls
tradition dives deposico^um a rich treasury or ^usrodie. E^emens (...) lib. ^
Strema: ^ 4 in the year 200 say is that the knowledge of traditis^ by
succession is come from the Apostles, et lib. 7 Stromat: ^. 9. he calls
unwritten tradition the (...) of truth. Origenes in the year 240 in his 5.
(...) in Numeros et tr^^t: 29 in Math: teaches that we believe and do many
things by tradition. S. Athanasius in his epistle ad Epi^t^te tu^ says That it
is sufficient to answer to his adversaries that it is not the doctrine of the
Catholic church, and that the holy fathers have not thought so. S. Basil also
says he can believe many things by the unwritten witness of the Apostles; the
2. Council of (...) in action 7. approves the authority of unwritten
traditions. D. ^ier: in the year 390 in his dialogue contra Lucifer: affirms
that for The 2. co^cel of Nice S. Hierom ^ S. August;
his part if there were no scripture, yet the consent of the whole church were
sufficient. And S. August: De baptismo contra Donatistas lib. 7. c. 53
affirms, that which the universal church holds, neither is it instituted, but
was ever retained we may judge most rightly to be delivered by the Apostles,
idem epist. 86. ad ^asul:

Yea if our adversaries testimony is availeable in confirming a truth against
themselves for us. See how Martin Luther in his 22. yea our ^a^ adversar^o^
confirm this. M. Luther.
Lypsick disp. submits himself to the judgment, and determination of the holy
church: and in his epist. ad Marchion^^ Brandeburg: which is to be found in his
second in Germane language folio 2* 3. He is not ashamed to say it is an
horrible thing to hear or say that which is contrary to the uniforme
testimony of faith, and the doctrine of the holy Catholic church that from
above a thousand with uniform consent she had kept. John Calvin in his book
against Pig^^ius John Calv.
brag^ingly but with dissimulation affirms that he would not refuse the trial
of the universal Church and warrant of tradition. Phil. Melancthon in his
epist. ad Fr^der. Myream De locis veteris Theol de caena Domini affirms that
it is not safe to depart from the consent Ph: Meli^c.
of the ancient church, and in his epistle ad Iohannem Cratonem v^^tatista: he
confesses that doubt in a man's conscience is a tortu^er, and that the
universal consent of doctrine must prevail for confirming of a truth, and he
graunts that the best Masters are Irenae us, Tertullian and S. Augustine that
have left many monuments of truth for us, to whom they did adjoyne the rule of
faith the suffrages of the learned, the consent of the Apostolical churches,
and this is that which he affirms they deduced from the Apostles or from
Apostolical men.

23. And not without great reason does God use that means both to ad estimation
to his holy mysteries, and to preserve these precious stones for the Jewellers
that did know how to prise the^, that even natural reason Diverse reasons whi^
God uses traditions
has taught, and that the very Heathen Philosophers have used, thereby to add
prise and to distinguish the fitness of the auditor. Pythagoras therefore taught
his scholars rather by word of mouth and relation of others then by Dictats or
writing: Gallen also lib. 2. de Anatomicis Adminiculis declares how the
ancient Physicians did preserve and teach their medicines and receipts only
by verbal relation from one from another. Cicero 1. De legibus affirms that it
is a great error in a well governed common wealth to have all governed D. Hill:
supra. 2. Psalm. Orig. homil: 5. Number:
by written laws. And therefore the most ancientest and famous Rabbines and not
only they but our Hyllarius and Origin do teach that Moses had not only
delivered him the tables of the law in the mountaigne, but also most secret and
hidden mysteries, and explication of the law which truth the author of the
first book of Esdras does not obscurely testify c. 14: 5. I have declared to
Moises many miracles and I said unto him saying these words thou shall speak
openly, lib. 4. Esdras c. 14. v. 5
and these words thou shall hide; and of such secret mysteries that of the
Psalm. 43. and psalm. 77. Deutr 32. is to be understood. And in regard of these
hidden mysteries Dyonis. Areopag: lib. de caelest: Hierarchia ^. 1. most
diligently warnes Timothy, That he should not disclose these things to the
rude people. So that Dyonis. Areopag.
we see God writ in Moses heart many things, that he did not write in the
tables of stone; This made St. Paul to speak the bidden mysteries in secrett,
and to give the little ones milk in that 1. Cor. 3. 2* Hebr: 5. 1^*
their weak stomachs could not brook other meat; And yet by pour rule Mr.
H. Ainsw. newborn babes like Ostreches should devour pro^, in freclie
reading, applying and epplicating the difficult places of scripture.

24. Now since the second and third question are so nearly confined that the
ending of the one is the beginning of the other; the ending of my reasons the
beginning of your answers; and so requiring a resutation The second and third
parts con^ined*
of them I thought good having in general proved the necessity of tradition
bes^des the written word, to end my second part, and with my particular proofs
to begin the third poinct in interlacing the reasons and answers and
replications together in order, but both as briefly as I can.

25. My first Reason to prove that the written word of God without THE 3. PART.
1. Ratio*
the v^written word of God Tradition, and the definition of the ^h: is not the
rule of faith in sum is this

26. That which is not known for Gods word cannot be the rule of Major Minor
Conclusio My Major proved.
faith: But scriptures by themselves are not known for Gods word go scriptures
by them^^lves are not the rule of faith.

27 My Major is most certain, since nothing can be the indeficient rul^ of all
truth revealed, and to be revealed, but the word of the first verity God,
which is either the written word of God contained in the Prophets and the
Apostl^s, or the unwritten word of God contained 27. Still it is Gods word
whether it be mediat or immediate: spoken or written. My Miner proved. S.
August* saying. Proved also by Protestants.
in Apostolical traditions, definitions of the church and the uniforme consent
of holy Councels and Fathers. For still it is Gods or a Kings word whether it
be immediately spoke by himself, or by the mouth of another whom he authoriseth
to speak, or whither it be in writing: And nothing else ca^ be unto us the rule
to direct our faith except it first be known to be the word of God.

28 My Minor is also true proved out of S. Augustine contra epistolam
fundament: Manich: c. 5, Ego Euangelio non crederem nisi me ad haee commoveret
Ecclesiae authoritas; I should not believe the gospel except the authority of
the church should move me thereunto. Lanchius in his confess. c. 1. and Brentius
in his Prologo Kemnitij in examine Council. Trident. Whitak contra Stapl. lib.
2. Hooker in his Ecclesiastical policy lib. 1, page 84. et lib. page 200. et
142. do all affirm that tradition of the church is necessary to distinguish
what books of scripture be scripture and what not. And reason it self teaches
us, since we do not hear or see God or his known Prophets to write or speak
this that is proposed unto us for the word of God: most co^venient What S. Pa:
mean^ by his ^epositum. Platform of words and phrase over and above the
scripture to be observed.
it is, least we wander in infinitu^ in proving the word of God by the private
spirit and the private spirit by the word of God, that there must be one
certain rule or depositum fidei, and therefore St. Paul to Timothy ^. 6. chapter
20. Oh Timothee keep the depositum avoiding the profane noveltie of voices,
and avoiding the opposition of falsely called knowledge, which certain promising
have e^red about faith, and what that depositum is S Paul in his 2. to Tim 1.
v. 13, ^* 14* shows. Have thou a form o^ sound of words, which thou have
h^a^d of me in faith, and in the love in Jesus Christ. Keep the good depositum
by the holy ghost which dwells in us: showing that Timothy and Christians
ought to keep a certain platform of words, delivered to them over and above his
epistles; which rule of words appropriated to high mysteries, and matters of
our religion, as Trinity, Person, D. Aug l. 10. de ^iv. D^i c ^3.
Essence, Consubstantial, Transubstantiation, from one beginning Sacrament
which the Apostle calls so^^^d words verba sana* ^

29 You in (...) this my first a g^^ne^t, say that things may be bel^^ved
though not gathred out of ^he written word, understa^^^ng th^rby His ans to my
^^st a^^
a humane and a common belief. I know not what you mean by this, except you
would have Gods written word only to be b^le^ved by a humane faith. And
therefore when I took you at your word and ^athered th^nce, that some tradition
(or as you will term it traditum) is necessarily believed besides the written
word. For wh^ we speak absolutely of belief in divinity it is to be
understood of a divine, and not of a humane belief, and when you speak of the
cheef rule, you say it may be b^leeved without the written word, I might I did
rightly infer out of his words.
infer that necessarily it was to b^ believed, since you hold that the word
of God is the word of God, and that necessarily and so to be believed: So that
you may see that your water has rather wet your shoes, th^n that mine was
spilt on the ground.

30. 2. Whereas you say I do vnj^stly condemn your assertion that nothing to be
believed is necessary for salvation that is not taught by the written word, I
say most justly, and I convinced you of falsehood sufficiently when I said
nothing is so necessary to salvation by you, as the written word, which word
is not proved by another written The writ word not proved by another written
word: go* by tradition. A place of script* produced, ans. Another answered.
word of God. To infirm which proof of mine you produce two texts of
scripture John. 20, 30, 31. That the signs which Jesus did, which signs are
written that we may believe. And the 1. of Timothy ^. 16. 17, Where all
scripture is inspired of God etc. is said to be profitable for doctrine, for
reprehension, for correction, for instruction. etc. These places prove nothing
for your purpose. The first proves not that all things or sayings of our
Savior that he did or said are written, though those signs were: for all the
signs the whole world could not contayn, see a little after, S. John 21. v. 25.

31. And the second place proves no more, but that the scripture is good for
these ends, but it proves not that scripture is sufficient without tradition
etc. and ecclesiastical laws to all these ends. And one might deduce out of
these words to better reason then you, each parcel of scripture in the old and
new testament were sufficient for all this without any other. So that you see I
do not fight with the holy ghost but with the perverter of the holy ghost.

32. 3. You desire me to deal distinctly and plainly with your words, I answer
I hope I do, Then you begin to answer Mr H* A. his first answ. how the word
of God is known so to be.
distinctly to my words, vidz. the written word is not proved by another
written word. You answer first that the scriptures of God do approve and
confirm one another, and his spirit that is in them, and in all people does
seal that they are true. For proof whereof you cite the first of S. John 5, 9.
The witness of God is greater, and John 8, 13. 14* I answer that Christ needed
no testimony for himself. John 5, 33. But I receive no testimony of man,
meaning that How Christ both has no need, and has need of man's testimoni^
he is greater then man and that his divinity does not depend of man's witness,
yet for the benefit of others S. John is said to give testimony of him: 1.
John through the whole chapter almost: and Acts 1, 8. Christ say unto his
Apostles that they shall be witness unto him, in Jerusalem, and in all Jewrie,
and in Samaria; also Martyrs are said to be witnesses: But now we do not say
that scriptures in themselves needs any witness; for in actu 1. and in regard
of themselves Scriptures in actu 2. and not in 1. needs witness.
they are scripture by themselves proceeding from God* but as they be in act 1
secundo and to be believed of others so they need testimony of others.

33. After he sees this d^fective he flies unto the private spirit (though he
says it is in all people) to unseale the authority of his word. For if he
understand by that spirit in all people, that is of all ages, times and His 2.
answer.
persons then must he accept of those books of holy scripture, and of that
sense and explication, that by consent of holy Councills, Fathers Doctors and
expositors haith been received.

34. If he understand this spirit in all people virtuallie, and actuallie if
What he means by the (...) in all people.
they do apply themselves to the right understanding thereof. This spirit by
just reason they can not understand, since then we must rather believe St.
Hierome that spent all his time and labor retyring himself to the desert for
the understanding of the scriptures.

35. What must Mr. H. A. understand else then that this spirit is in That this
spirit is not in the church of Amsterda.
all the illuminated brethren of the church of Amsterdam^, and yet this can not
be well understood, since I hear Mr. H. A. stiffly maintains by the word of
God with his company against Mr. Johnson there and his, that this present
church of England is not a scismaticall but an haeretical church: What is then
one of these clear Eagle sight teachers blinded so in spirit that he can not
discern by the word of God what makes a church or a man haereticall?

36. But now to prove that the comparing of one place with another His third
Answer.
(which is your other refuge) is not sufficient to distinguish what is true
scripture or the true sense thereof. For if it be so to be understood What is
to be understood by comparing one place with another.
that after the collation of one place to another, that by the nature of the
scripture compared so the true sense shall be understood; I infer no, but
rather by this comparison the difficulty is often increased by a seeming
contradiction. If it be understood that by comparing of one that by a little
and a little. If it be understood that vy comparing one place, with another by
a little discourse the true sense and the scripture will be discerned; I say
men's discourses are very erroneous without the especial assistance of gods
holy grace which the church of God has promised in her defining; yea
Collatione in diverse times in the self man often causes diverse judgments
Heretics have had still this comparison o^ places.
the very self same man in diverse times out of the self same confere^ces of
places of scripture has inferred diverse conclusions. If you say the spirit to
distinguish this is to be had by prayer. I demand where these infallible
promises are to be had for these infallible illuminations; and what more
certain whether we pray as we ought. And since Novatus, Donatus, Sabellius,
Arrius, Cunomius, Macedo: Jovinianus, Pelag: Caelest: Nestorius have had for
their heresies diverse texts, and co^ferences with others to grownde heresies,
how should one infallibly to their judgments overthrow them in this. For if you
object to the Arian, I and my Father am one; he will object out of the self
same St. John, My father is greater then I: If you sai^ this by ^^llation of
scripture is to be understood Your ground not able to confute an Ar^an.
in regard of his human^^^^ and not of his divinit^e. He will (...) likewise
that unity signified in the other place is to be understood by references of
other places of scripture in regard of consent and vni^y of will, and not of
nature.

37. 2 And that the seal of your spirit can not distinguish this truth (...),
yea not so much as probably* I move. For frist I ask what this seal of the
spirit is? Does i^ co^^^st only of Gods particular illumination that ye
should have this touchstone What the seal of your p^it is.
to discern scripture. If so you contradict your self Mr. H: A: for so you
grant that a man has a divine faith, and the spirit of discerning all before
he read^s the scriptures: for this spirit must distinguish them, and so you
have built without your ground, and guided your faith without your ruler the
written word of God. His ground t^ach^th ^ m^^ bele^ves before he reads the
scripture. Another a^s. of his. Calv. ^. inst c. 7. S. ^, 2. 4 (...) ^.


38. If you answer this spirit consists in the evidence of the thing reaveled
as you seem to gra^nt: When you bidd me ask your proof that there is a light
in the same; seeming so with Calvin to grant that the scriptures are
distinguished by themselves, as light from darkness, sweetness from sowrness,
this is most false, for then every one that had but natural perfection of the
organ, and free proposing of the object should distinguish this light and
sweetness.

39. If ye answer this spirit consists in the authority of God, how will you
prove this in particular to be revealed of God, and not the other part of
scripture. If you reply you can prove it by the Majesty of the writing. How
will you answer and show to every particular man's cie that there is more
Majesty in Ecclesiastes then in the Ecclesiasticus? How will Luther
demonstrate against the whole church that S. James epistle is strawie, the
epistle to the Hebrews, Apocalypse etc. to be doubted of.

40. When I object against you that the Mani^h^i, Montanist, Arrian, Pe^agian,
and all other heretics will boast of this private spirit. Nou answer that I
have a mist before my eyes or else I would discern them. I answer I do
distinguish them, and leave them (...) Al heretics do b^ag of their private
spirit.
by the church of God to the pit of hell, but not by my private spirit, but by
the ordinary means the definitions and declarations of the church, whose
office is to distinguish these spirits infalliblie; whose doctrine we are
punctuallie to follow, if we will have in all things this spirit of truth, and
with one answer I satisfy How I distinguish heretics.
the multiplicitie of places of scripture he ap^d up to no purpose.

41. Whereas you would whet the edge of the Jews sword against m^ in that they
may object against Christians the law and the Prophets, The Jews cannot
object against us the law and the Prophets.
yea and antiquity. I answer the law and Prophets yea antiquity it self
promising our Saviors co^^ing, and fulfilled by his coming in each particular
cirstumstance proph^^ied and promised, does rebat the edge. And I could show
out of the (...) ^abbines themselves* S^hillaes prophecies preaching of S. John
Baptist, conversion of S Paul* the destruction of Jerusalem, their ^^rse and
continued dispersion only to be justly inflicted on them for tru^^fying of our
Savior; I could show strange motives of their General motives to con^^nce a
Jew.
(...) errou^. Neither can the Jew (as you object) as we against the ^urk or
and H^r^sie our begin^er, beginning, increase and declyning estate. For the
Jews can show our beginner their Messiah, our beginning he burial of the
cer^monial law prophe^ied and performed by all titles of truth, but who can
justly show our declining estate.

42. Neither is the objection of a Jew against a new Christian because he went
out of them of such force as our is against Jul^an or any other Apostata. For
they cannot defend themselves with any show of truth as we can defend our cause
with evident motives of ^r^dibilitie, as I shall hereafter show. And Julian
might object that Paganism^ is more ancient then Christianiti^: but not then
the (...) law, which was complete and ^erfected as it was prophesied and
promised, by the coming of the new law. Where you say Gods word and spirit in
the scriptures must be the bulwark, I answer a bulwark, but not able to defend
you from gun shot, and a s^onse only for your selves. For as yet there was
never any of your sects, protestant or any other heretit^ that was able to
convert any nation to their religion: But men of our religion have converted
all nations and do still convert as well witnesses both the Judges, Japonia
yea and C^ina it self.

43. I showed you one way how the high preisthood did not err in the
cond^mnation of our Savior, in that the Preisthood was ^^served How the high
priest hood did not (...)*
in Christ Jesus person. True it is the Hipghpreists, Scribes; and Rulers
questioned this, but their ignorance was most vi^^ible by their own law, and
by that law he should live, since that law declared him to be the son of God.

44. Against your forced rock, and running over many wr^sted places of
scripture to prove the church of God invisible, it were sufficient for me to
oppose many evident and clear places of scripture interpreted by the holy
fathers Greek and Latin for the pepetuall visibilitie of the church. 2. (...).
^. v 13. 1. Pa^^l. 22, 10. Psalm 4^, 17 Psalm. 45, 5. Psalm. 47. 9. Psalm. 86. 1.
Psalm. 88, 29 Psalm. 101, 17. Ps. 128, 1. Psalm. 131, 14. Cant. 3* 4. Isa. 9, 7.
Isa. 33, 20. where the perpetual flourishing of the church of God is described
Isa. 40, 8. Many places o^ ^ol^ scripture to prove the visibilitie of the
church.
Isa. 59, 21. Isa. 60, ^9 where it is said the Sun and Moon of the church shall
not cease: Jer. 6 16. Dan. 2 44. Ose. 2, 19. where God is described to espouse
eternally his espouse unto him. Mich, 4, 1. where the church is described to be
a high seated mountain to whom all people have recourse. Mat. 5, 15. where the
city seated on a hill can not be obscured. Math 26. 18. where the church is
described to be built upon a rock against which hell gates shall not prevail.
28. Math. 2. Our Savior says he will be with his disciples to the end of the
world Lu^ 1, 32. Lu^. 21. 32. Luke 22, 31. Where Christ says he prayed for S
Peter that his faith should not fail him. Joh. 14. 1^. He says the father
shall give them another spirit which shall remain with them eternally. John
17, 11. Act. 5, 38. Ephe. 4, 11. yea and the Creed made by the Apostles does
acknowledge the perpetual flourishing of the church of God. I believe the
catholic church: whose generality can not stand without visibilitie*

45 I answer to your contrary doctrine that the church of God That the church
of God has never erred. Ada^ did not err in doctrine and if he did against our
adversaries own grounds.
never since it was a church has erred. If Genes. 6. there was then a church,
Ada^ the head did err in fact not in doctrine, and if we should grant that he
did err our adversaries are bound as well as we to answer, since not only the
visible church then with us, but the invisible church with them should have
erred: But true it is that there is was then no perfect church, but only a
material, and a formal beginning of a church.

46. To that of Genesis 6. where all their hearts are described to be set on
mischeef, is not to be understood that all then were naught. For not long
before M^^husalem and diverse holy men died Sem and J^phet also were zealous of
Gods honor, and their wives also most religious, in whom the church of God
might be preserved.

47. I answer also. In the time of Moses, Aaron and the people did commit
idolatry in worshipping the golden ^alfe; yet Moses Moses and all the Levites
free from ^dolatrie.
the head of all; and all the Levites were free from that sin. So that we
read Erod. 32. If there be any of God (says Moses) let him jo^ne with me, and
all the sons of Levi were gathered unto him.

48. I answer, In the time of Judges after Josh. The Israelites Judge. 2. How
the word all is to be understood. In what sense Elias was said to be left alone.
are described as though they had sinned al; which is an usual figurative
speech of Sy^echdoche of the whole for the part, as Exodus 9* 6. where it is said
all the beasts of Egypt are dead. Isa. 2. v.* All nations shall flow unto him.
Phil. 2, 21. All men seek their own, Ioh. 3. v. 33. And no man did receive his
testimony.

49. To that of the Prophet Elias 3. Reg. 19. where Elias complains that he is
left alone. I answer that then the people were divided into two kingdoms, the
one of the Jews, and the other of the Israelites. A^hab did govern the
Israelites, but holy Josaphat did govern the Jews; the one did destroy altars
and kill Prophets, the other did hear Prophets and erect altars. And though we
should grant that Elias did think himself left alone in Israel; yet Almighty
God did answer him; I will leave 7. thousand men in Israel that have not bowed
their knees to B^al

50. I answer that Esaias the Prophet in his first chapter does use the self
same fi^ure of Syn^^hd^che; also the self same manner of speech is used the 4.
^eg. 21. For Manasses himself did r^pent and redeem m^nn, and many were never
seduced; so understand that also of the Prophet here.

51. That of which Azarias does prophetise 2 Paral. 15. is to be understood of
the Israelites that were dificient, and not of the Jews that were constant. I
grant also that at the coming of our Savior the church was but a little one:
yet I say it was preserved in Marie, Joseph, Zachary, Elizabeth and Anna the
Prophetess; In just Simeon and the Pastors.

52. That of Daniel the 9. the host and sacrifice shall fail is to be
understood of the destruction of Hierusal^m, and the c^^^ing of the Jewish
sacrifice, Luke 18. Our Savior does not absolutely speak of faith but of an
external faith; and of an excellent faith. 2 These. 2. Is to be understood the
particular departing of Antichrist and his ^rew from the church. And so by
these grounds to the usual objections against the perpetual visibilitie of
Gods church, we may answer any thing that has been or may be produced.

53. Yet to confirm this truth with one short reason, I argue thus. A brief r^^
so that the ch: of God is and has been stil^ visible.
This church of God if it must be invisible: Either it must begin to be
invisible in the time of peace or in the time of persecution; in the time of
peace there was no opposition to make her invisible; in the time of persecution
no body could persecute an invisible thing.

54. Now whereas you said you show how the labyrinth of my religion leads to
the Pope the center of our circle. True it is I said the vltimate resolution of
our religion is to be resolved into the veracitie of God revealing as into the
formal caus^, and into the authority of the church as into the applying ^ause.
And I am glad you have tra^ed me not to your heretical quicksands but to S.
Peter's rock.

55. And that you may see the resolution of my religion is no other but that of
S. Cyprian lib de unitate Eccles. where he compares ^ou The resolution of my
religion the same with S. Cypr.
in regard of the church of Rome as Beams in regard of the sun, as boughs in
regard of the tree; as a river in regard of the fountayn. So that he concludes
he that separates himself from the church of God he must needs vanish, fade and
dry up, in that they lack their origin by which all unity is preserved*

55. I gave you 2 or three instances to show how the word of God might in a
diverse kind depend of the Church, and the church of the How the word of God and
the Church may dep^^
word of God, as we prove the self same a priori et a posteriori, the operation
of the stone or herb depends of the skill and knowledge of the herbalist and
lapidarie, and their skill and knowledge depends of the innated and inward
propriety of the stone and herb. For neither can have his effect without
mutual help of both, except chance which is no regular action be the applier;
and so I take you have thalked your self a way to a ridiculous building without
foundation as I shall show anon.

56. You answer nothing to this but that I prove out of natural philosophy as
though divinity though it excels is not concordant to natural reason: whereas
we can believe nothing that we see implies by the light of natural reason.

57. To the places that you object of the 1. of Timoth. 1, 3. rather proves
against you then makes for you. For it shows all the while that she did not
reach otherwise to the church she remained sound. And that which you cite 1.
Tim 3, and 15. would make you trest salve if you did daily consider it. For
there he warnes her that she might conform her conversation to the house of
God the pillar of truth; And though the text says in the house of God; yet it
must be understood in the particular church that must have reference to that
place (as we shall prove hereafter) where S. Peter did establish his chair.
Ioh. 14, 16. Mat. 16. Math. 28 Ephesians. 4, Ioh. 17. Luc. 22. Psalm. 2. Eph^s. 2.

58. When you seem to draw out of my speech that I deny for my witness the
spirit of God is your error and fraud. For I hold I do not deny for my
witness the spirit of God.
that which is taught out of these places 1 Cor* 2. 10, 11. Job. 28, 2 13, 22.
etc. to signify nothing else but that the holy Ghost teaches the church in
all truth, and her members with reference to her; and my private spirit I ought
not to follow; so that if I might be your Pilote I would save you from that
bottomless gulphe that ghaspes to receive your erroneous soul.

59. St. Augustines authority you let slip denying him a fit Master to
follow, you say he might retractate this; but neither you do nor can show that
he did retractate it.

60. As for S. Augustines opposition to S. Hierome, it was in some small matter,
and not in a matter defined up the consent of the church.

61. My second Argument was this in substance.

Major. That which is hard and for occurring places almost inexplicable cannot
be to the rud* and ignorant at least a certain ground of faith. Mmor. But the
scriptures of themselves are thus.

Conclusion. go the scriptures by themselves can not be a certain and
infallible rule of says to the ignorant and rude at least

62. My major proposition is most certain. For a rule must be known and
certain, and more fit to our capacity to be conceived then that which is to
be ruled and certefied thereby.

63. My Mmor also I prove both in regard of many seeming contradictions, of the
Hebraimes, nature of things therein contained being high mysteries.

64. In answering of this Argument, you say some things are hard in the
scriptures, I proved this difficulty and hardness was in The difficulty and
hardness of the scriptures in principal matters.
principal matters which I proved out of the second of S. Peter 3. 16. Our most
dear brother Paul according to his wisdom given him has written to you as
also in all his epistles speaking of them in these things, in which are certain
things hard which the unlearned and unstable deprave, as also the rest of the
scr^p^ures to their own destruction. Hence is gathered that not on ly the places
of S. P^ul touchi^g vocation, justification, sanctification, predestination and
^^pr^bation in^^p^icating which points S. Paul is most frequent, but also any
other place is subject to be depraved as the word implies as also the rest of
the scriptures. And S. August. in his book de fide et operibus c. 14, shows
that one of the chief matters they did deprave was about justifying by faith.
And I showed you here as erring a little in some Parvus error in principio
magnus est in fine.
mathematical instrument, makes a man's sight and judgment quite contrary as
appears in the use of the Astrolabe or cross staff: So I say the least
error in any of these transcendental doctrinal points does shake the whole body
of belief.

65. You say the matters are hard, but the places that treats of them are
easy, as though in such short words of poincts that desire His answer refuted.
so many hundred quires of paper to examine them they can be easy; as though
the words do not befit the matter. And that not only the matter, but that
also the manner of penning is difficult appears out of S Augustine 2. lib. de
doctrina Christ. et epist. 119, and S. Ambrose epistola 44 in principio
acknowledges the difficulties he had to understand the manner of writing of
scripture: And S. Hier: to Paul: epist. 103. c. 5. 6, 7. et epist. 65. c. 1.
confesses that in his old age when rather he should teach then be taught he
went as Not only the matter but the manner of proving is difficult.
far as Alexandria only to hear Didymus, and to have his help to understand
the scriptures. And S. Augustine in his epistle 119. c. 21. acknowledges that
there were more things he understood not then that he did understand.

66. That of Proverb. 8, 8. 9. is to be understood either of general doctrine
or of precepts of manners and good life, and so Gods words are easy: which
explication we give you as a jewel unto your hand to that cited of you Prover.
17, 16. Wherefore is there price in the hand of a fool. etc.

67. Then you seem ingeniously to grant the scriptures to be hard but you
instance that the determinations of the Pope does make the^ harder. You say
Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 25, 15. Images are absolutely and plainly prohibited here: But
I deny it and prove that idols are The brazen serpent before an image became an
idol.
only here prohibited, and not images. Which that of the brafen serpent proves
that as long as it was an image it was erected, and kept by Gods commandment,
but when it grew to be an idol, when the people began to adore it as God (as S.
August notes in his 10. lib. de civitat. Dei c. 8.) Ezechia^ 4. Regu^. 18.
broke it into pieces. And that of the 2. of Cor. 6, proves as much; (...) that
place can not be understood of images but of idol, for the temple was adorned
a. Cor. 6, 16*
with Cherubins which were images. And therefore it must be read How agrees
the Temple of God with idols, and not with images Our adversaries ignorance
like that of the Moabites and (...).
as you commonly read and translate. But I (...) you as S. Ierom says in c.
25. Eze. of the (...) and (...) that were idolatrous Gentiles, that comm(...)
of (...) and seeing the propitiatory shadowed over (...) Cherubims, (...) as
the Gentiles so Judah also has (...) then religion they putting no more
difference between the Gentiles heathenish idols and the Jews lawful images
then you.

68. As for your wilful error in citing of Cardinal Bellarmines probable
opinion as the determination of the Pope, I must much blame you: But you may
know that both his opinion, and the different opinion of Ga: Dasques are both
probable in schools.

As for the subtle and most true distinction, of the worship of Latria,
Latria. Dulia.
Dulia and Hyperdulia must needs seem strange and insipidd to him that never
tasted peradventure one grain of the salt of the Universities, or one line of
the schoolmen.

69. Yet here you take upon you like a great ^abbin that I say the Pope cannot
make of himself a matter of faith, but that he only declares what is a matter
of faith, and that such a thing is to be believed. It is well you say that I
hold me here. But then you infer^ that the Pope can do no more then other
Bishops; and Peter's primacie will be no more then Paul's which you prove 1. Cor.
4, 1. So let a All the Apostles alike in power of order but not in jurisdictio^.
man esteem us as the Ministers of Christ, and the dispensers of the mysteries
of God: I answer they be all alike in power of order but not of jurisdiction,
and in a juditiall determination to settle controversies in the Church of God:
which appears in that in the council of Chalcedon that had determined the
matter controverted, and 630. Bishops having subscribed, the Popes Legates
being also present in that Council having defined and judged with the rest,
what needed The Popes confirmation of the Counsel of Ch^lc. required. contra
hereticum Eutich.
then a solemn ratification by the Popes own letters to confirm the Council,
but that the Emperor and other Bishops did acknowledge a sovereign power above
all other particular Bishops. See Leo epistle 61. et in epist: ad Martianum
Imperatorem 59. where he says Constitutionibus synodalibus etc. Unto the
constitution of the Council which has pleased me both for the confirmation of
the catholic faith, and for the condemnation of the heretics I have added my
verdiet. And this verdict or sentence was not a bare consent, but a judicial
confirmation, and ratification of the Council, appears out of his letters
sent the self same time unto the Empress Pulcheria This was a judicial
confirmation.
saying, Whereas the most godly Emperor has willed me to direct my letters to
the Bishops present at the Council of Chalcedon; quibus quae illic de fidei
sunt regula definita firmarem, by which I should confirm such things as have
been there defined touching the rule of faith I have gladly fulfilled his
request.

70. And he adds this reason immediately; Ne fallax cujusdam simulatio
sententiam mea^ vellet habere incertam, To the intent that no man by any
deceiptfull dissembling may take my verdict or sentence herein uncertain, To
the intent that no man by any deceiptful dissimbling may take my sentence or
verdict herein uncertain.

71. So also the Affricane Bishops having discussed the heresy of Pela^ius and
(...) sent their definition therein to the Sea Apostolic to be confirmed by
Silvester, and the Council of Constantinople by Damasus and the Council of
Ephesus by ^aelestinus. Diverse Councel^s confirmed by Popes.
Does not all this Mr. H. A. prove to you that the prerogatives of the Pope in
defining and ratefying any thing is above al other Bishops, which privileges al
ages would not have given, but that they did see as s. Peter had primacie over
the other Apostles, so his successor must have over other Bishops.

72. And to show this I will follow the thread of your matter, ^ not the manner
of your discourse that in the interim is farced up with foul mouthed slanders
(as I shall touch anon). The next Act. 15. against M. H* A.
page you begin to examine that of the 15. of the Acts of the Apostles alleged
by me as a congruencie to argue S. Peter's primarie, v. 7. Peter rose up,
showing thereby that he was head of the Church. Where first you show your wilful
fraud, in that you would have me gather his superiority by his bare rising
up. Where I gathered rather by the due circumstances that passed there in that
place. For the text says, when there was made a great disputation Peter rising
up said to them, you know that of old days God amongst us chose that the
Gentiles by my mouth should hear the word of the Gospel and believe. In which
chapter first we may note by the way verse 6. that the Apostles and ancients
assembled to consider of this word, which place ^o^futes your proceedings that
would have all men to give their voice and to be present in Council, which is
the place of the Apostles and ancients, and not of many others though holy
men that were at Jerusalem, according to that of Deuteronomy. 17. Malach. 2. Agge 1,
2* Lur. 10. 16. where the sentence of the Priest is said to settle that which
is hard difficult and doubtful; must keep the law, must be heard as God.

73. 2. I note the 7. verse that when there was made a great disputation Note.
each party producing his reasons, and arguments for their assertion. S. Peter
rising up and speaking by his authority composed that great disputation, that
is settled the height of their difference which argues superiority. For what
decorum or manners were it, if two Doctors of like authority disputing, the
third of the same or of less authority as Calvin would have, should stop the
current of their disputation, when it touched the point of the difficulty,
when there was a great disputation, when their reasons as the text both not
obscurely note were in aequi librio unsettled, when there was made a great
disputation. So that we see it is a sign of great authority to speak so first
as to interrupt the great disputation to prefixe an end, to firm a definition
to the proposed question.

74. As for that which you object out of the 13. and 19. verse from The 19, v.
examined.
that of S. James giving sentence from the scriptures sh^wes that out of your
partial affection you would be content to give with Calvin primacie to S. James
so to derogate from St. Peter's and the Popes authority. When nothing else ca^
be inferred out of S. James but that which S. Hierome epist. 12. inter
epistolas Aug: inferro, and that which is implied in the 12. verse et tacuit
omnis multitudo, and all the multitude held their peace showing thereby the
power of his S. Hieron.
decision, and that as Saint Hier: inferrs S. James and all the Apostles did
pass. Who will not then acknowledge a general authority in him that with his
sentence composeth different suffrages and motives.

75. That which S. James speaks verse 15. and 16. is nothing else but a
confirmation or an explication of S. Peter's sentence. First Also v. 15. 16.
Act. 15.
he approves S. Peter's vocation mentioned by S. Peter, by the testimonies of
the Prophets, and nextly he does as to win the goodwil of the Judaizing
Christians moderate that sense of S. Peter, that would have all legal
ceremonies removed; that so they might take that speech better at his hands
then at S. Peter's, S. James being their Bishop of Jerusalem he expou^ds that
which he thought most conventent to be done: And the whole Council and not
only Saint James promulgates and determines that decree. So that we see the
The reason why S. James did speak.
definition of the principal question is only S. Peter's and the prudential
Council to the settling of the busynes to each parties liking is only S. James.

76. But presently after to signify his willingness to say something, he
objects that Peter's sitting still would rather argue authority the^ his rising
up: To which I answer that admitting most true it were his sitting does argue
his authority as well as his rising up: and S. Peter's judicial and attentive
hearing the debating of the question till there was a great disputation, and
then being noted to begin to rise that to rising the heat of disputation
coming to head, and the disputers vehemency requiring a period, that he
began then to S. Peter did not speak risen but rising.
rise argue preheminencie of authority. And it is not said that he did speak
these words risen, but when he was rising: what have you then concluded.

77. But on goes our subtle disputer to prosecute his great doubt, and argues
out of the 5. of the Acts 34. where Gamaliel is said to rise up in the council
of the Jews v. 34. But here he conceals what the Church distinguishes calling
him a Doctor of the Law and so signifying that it was his office as Doctors
that be Cardinals do Why Gamaliel rose up.
in the Popes conclavi to cramine matters by way of argument, and not to
determine and define; then he conceals the immediate cause of his rising up
including a far inferior office then that of the head, v. 35. to command the
men to be put forth and only a while to signify that he spoke rather like a
friend then like a judge. And that Gamaliel did secretly favor the Apostles
then, the very words of the text Gamaliel spoke rather as a ^^^ind then as a
judge.
teaches and notes how your doctrine not grounded on God and reasons as yours
s^^^l come to ruin, he bidds them take heed what they mean to do with these
men, showing that Th^^^as and four hundred men, Judas and his company that
followed all perished: and here inferring that they should leave to persecute
them. For if their work were not of God, of it self it would come to ru^, as
all other heresies and sects have and shall, so that we see the text cited by
you is the pronouncer of your own ruin.

78. And that Gamaliels sentence was rather a favorable persuasion then a chief
Judges resolution appears that howsoever he Gamaliel did use rather a
favorable persuasion then a definitive sentence.
was a pollitike statesman, yet he was a secret favourer of the Apostles and
their preaching. For he did procure S. Stephens burial 20 miles from Jerusalem
as B: Lucianus Martyr notes in the invention of the body of S. Stephen. Also
he receives and nouriseth Nicodemus when he was spoiled and expelled by the
Jews, and buried him there by S. Stephen as B: Lucianus testifies.

79. And that which you bring out of the 17. of the Acts 16* rather hinders
then furthers your purpose, since we may gather that as S. Paul being entreated
by the princes of the synagogue verse 15 to preach, took upon himself without
any more to do, rising up and Act. 17, 16. makes against him.
with his hand beckening for silence, shows there that he was the chief
preacher, so S. Peter rising and composing their controversy shows that in
that kind he was the chief. So that we see we have woven the web to entangle
flies of your own kind.

80. That which you bring before out of the 2. of Peter v. 20 cited by me thus,
No prophecy is made by private interpretation, you call but do not prove it a
bastard phrase, showing that such ill befitting terms proceeds from a bad
conscience. Your gloss Ephesians. His similitude against him self.
4, 4. Romans 12, 4. 1 Cor. 12, 4. v. 8, 9. urges against your self. For though
there is the very self same soul in the head and foot, and in each part, yet
it works otherwise in the head then in the foot; as the spirit in the cheese
of his Church, then his members; so as it is the office of the head to decyde
busyness, and not of the foot, so it belongs unto the head of the church and
not to every particular craftsman to interpret scriptures; and verse 21 the
self same doctrine is explicated in that it is said, For not by man's will was
prophecy brought at any time, but the holy men of God spoke inspired by the
Holy Ghost, showing that the self same spirit whrewith they were written and
resident in the church must interpret scripture. And that you ought not
condemn (as you do) the uniforme consent of all the fathers of all ages and
nations. Thus does Mr H. A. as a boie hoodwin^kt at blindman buffe belabor
himself and his own fellows in stead of his adversaries.

81. And that which I bring for congruencie for the primarie of S. Peter Act
15, ver: 7. where he would gather that if the Gentiles were chosen by his mouth
to hear the gospel that he was chosen also to preach unto them: his inference
is nothing to the purpose since we grant the Popes primacie is from God and
not of the election of men. The First* of Pope Stephen examined.


82. I grant that Pope Stephen the 7. called Stephen 6 did revoke many decrees
(which yet are not definitions of Pope Formosus in the year 89. But this
argues only a violence in fact, and not an error in doctrine, and faith. And
hence I infer that it argues an essential assistance of the holy Ghost that
could mainteyn his church though in the hand of the bad, water the garden of
the church through stony water pipes, make his ark of Noah to fl^ate though in
the tempestuous flood Genes. 7, 8. mainteyn his church against hell gates. But
all that can be opposed herein does not prove that the Pope. Stephen did this
as the head of the church, but out of the violence of his private spirit, which
appears in that Sigebertus notes that all that were with him reclaimed from
that violent proceeding. And in the Council he did approve only of his fact,
being flattered by factious Cardinals Sergius Benedictus and Martinus.

83 Note also that at this unaccustomed course of the Pope the corporal church
of Lateran fell down, and the Images of the church where Pope Formosus body was
intombed did salute Formosus as Luitiprandus lib. 1. c. 8. witnesses. And
though I grant that Pope Formosus witnessed for a holy man
Pope Stephen was a wicked man in the course of his private spirit, yet we may
see the great respect that Fulco the Arch B: of ^hemes did humbly and
submissively salute him, which was not in regard of his particular defects but
as he was head of the church. In which respect S. John the 9 that condemns
him and his accomplices, yet calls him Pope of happy memory. All which motives
makes a strong argument for us, that since of so many Popes so few could be
ta^ed (though most of them unjustly of our adversaries) yet for all the
wickedness of some God has still preserved the unity of faith; that although
all the other sees have had many heretics that have governed. Yet the sea of
Rome had never any that by his definitive sentence did define heresy. And we
have read of an Arrian Bishop promoted to the sea of Rome that he might defend
Arianism, yet he being elected to that sea he did condemn that heresy.

84. The Canonists that you cite, as to extend the power of the Pope above the
law of God, no doubt are falsely understood or cited; But to disprove them in
each particular I cannot, in that I am not so well read in the canon law; and
if I were I am in prison, and have not commodity of books, and to send for
10. or 12. great volumes to look 3 or 4 places that I assure me are either
falsely alleged or injuriously applied, will not quit cost, especially since I
convince you of one especial untruth hereafter where you say the Canou^sts call
and esteem the Pope our Lord God the Pope.

85. But di^^urnished of books as I am I thought good to let the author to
the protestant pulpit babell, that has no doubt seen and pondered the
decretalls answer you, that on credit of some cracked and cracking Crashaw that
ingrosses such babels for whole sale, whose citation or such like you are glad
to re^^^le.

86. For that which the author cites out of Decret 40* in appendice Decret. 40*
examined.
ad c. 6. The words of our Countreyman Boniface, famous for sanctity of life
and justly called the Apostle of Germany. Where he setts down rather a
history then a decree of doctrine, a matter of fact rather then a doctrinall
definition. True it is he says men rather sought instruction from the mouth of
the Bishops then from mouth of holy scriptures, and tradition. Yet to show how
far he Boniface no flatt^^er of the Pope.
was from flattery, he shows that as the Pope may do most good, so he is
eternally scourged with the Divill himself, if he draw by his example others
into hell. So that we see he shows rather what was done the^ what should be
done. As if a ma^should say such a man is his Master, it follows not that he
should approve the unnatural maistership. Yea S. Boniface was so far from
preferring the Pope before God, that in the self same canon he teaches the
contrary in eadem appendice ad cap. 6. did. 40. Where he affirms
Christianity ad ^ 6. distinct* (...).
does depend of the Pope in secundo loco post De^ in the second place after God.

87. And whereas Decretum distinct. 19. ^. 6* where it is said that the
decretalls are numbered amongst canonical scriptures; that is to be understood
in regard of the canonical writings of the Councels, and not in regard of
canonical writings of the scriptures, in which sense both the beginning, body,
and end of the book shows that Cretian speaks.

88. As for that M. H. A. writes that the Pope can dispense against How the P.
dispenses against the law of nature in some sense.
the law of nature, you must know that things may be prohibited by the law of
nature after a threefold manner. First when there is a prohibition of a thing
intrinsecall ill in it self, and that by no circumstance it may be made good,
as to hate God or to lie; and this is indispensable to the Pope. 2. Other
things are intrinsecall ill and prohibited till some matter or circumstance be
changed, as to steal in extreme necessity, or to kill and execute by public
authority; and in these the Pope can dispense according to the cessatio^ of
the matter or mutation of the circumstance: 3. Things in their nature may be
commonly ill, yet for the public good there may be given some dispensation,
and so the Pope does dispense in marriages: if you would have satisfaction to
what accurring doubt soever therein read, Sanches de Matrimonio.

My third Argument as I remember was this. That which ^^* My third Argumen^*
has still been a rule to them that have erred, cannot be a certain rule to
direct all in faith: But the scripture interpreted by the private spirit (as
every one pretends given from God) has led many into dangerous and most
horrible errors, go the scriptures though directed by the private spirits
interpretation cannot be a rule of faith. My major is most certain. My Minor
is also certainly known, since there was never yet any heresy so absurd or
monstrous, that did not pretend to use for his weapon cited places of
scripture, and their collations as the Arrians, Pelagians, Semipelagians,
Lutheranists and Calvinists, go that private spirits interpretation cannot be a
certain rule to all.

90* To this Argument* you say I have put to much strength, but you say I have
not whet the edge. All that you can bring against me is that you say you can
retort it on the private spirit of the Popes determinations and definitions:
but you can not deem but that the church has more promises, and so
consequently her visible head as I shall prove. And so I see howsoever you
would not be cut with the edge, you care not much to admit a fore bruife by M.
H. A. contented to be dry beaten.
the blows. And it is the greatest disgrace a man can have still to be dry
beaten as you confess you are and are sure to be; But for your virtuall
retorsion I shall actually answer you in his due place.

91. That you object out of the 1. Cor. 11, 19. Act. 15. 1, 2. Act. 15, 15, 16.
etc. proves rather that there must be one visible supreme judge to decide
controversies. As for your calumniations they are most proper to men of your
coat, and rank: and when time, place, and paper will scarce give sufficient
vent to our reasons I wonder you should blow abroad these glassy bubbles
breathed against the Sea Apostolic. But the best that you can answer is that
they will serve your children of Amsterdam to run after. I never return your
jests The uniform consent of the church may easily distinguish whether
scriptures (...) ^acked.
but provoked by you. Where you say that counsels and Fathers may be racked to
favor heresy as well as the scriptures I deney that they can be, but that the
uniform and general consent of the church may easily distinguish them.

92. My Fourth Argument as I take was this.

THere be many things we believe by a divine, and not by a human art of faith
which are not revealed in holy scripture, nor with such evide^ce deduced out of
holy scriptures (if you exempt the authority of the church. My antecedent I
proved by instances; that we believe against Helvidius our Ladies perpetual
virginity; Many things believed not expressed in the (...).
that God the holy Ghost proceeds from God the Father and the son as from
one beginning; the twelve articles of our belief as they ^^e; the abstayning
from strangled meat, baptising of infants, relebration of the Sabbath on Sunday
and not on Satterday, the receiving fasting and kneeling ^c. All which I did
urge against you. You answer you have sufficient proof of these things that are
of faith; but you show neither scripture, or deny them to be believed with a
divine a^t of faith, or give reason why we practice other things out of
scripture contrary to the practice of the primitive church.

93. And when I have twice or thrice desired a distinct answer That^
^o ea^^ particular, you would satisfi^^^e with your marvel that I would have
you enter battle with the Arrians. Anti-Trinitarians (...) and have you
convince them by scriptures. And with great reason I prove I urge this: For
since you adventure to assign an ad^quate rule of faith, you are bound to show
me how this rule of yours is able to mainteyne it self against whosoever, and
to distinguish truth from falsehood, as I offer to do by my assigned rule: So
that this is not to put on foot new questions, but it is properly (...) press
the footing of our chief questions answer.

94. You proceed and would have me to mainteyne Tradition to be the total and
not the partial rule of faith together with the written word of God. Hence you
infer that I grant some word of Intri^secal he the word of God is so of it
self* but to be known of us it depends of the tradition of the Church.
God without tradition to be known. I answer the word of God as it is
extrinsecall the word of God and to be known of us depends of tradition, and
the authority of the church. Though intrinsecallie and in it self it is the
word of God though it be known to none; so that you may see in what sense I
make tradition to be the rule of faith, and apostolical tradition also I
affirm to be also the word of God though unwritten.

95. Here make you a long digression, and you show what acts kept by tradition
are to be kept, and to be remembered to children, and after ages; as you say to
see the destruction of Rome, but we know certainly the opposers by their
oppositio^, will work themselves their destruction, and confusion of their
Babylon. And we know that Balaam in stedd of cursing Gods people did bless
them. John Fox was your Nabucodonosor turned so out to grass that he durst not
come near the wall (by reason of a deep mellancholie apprehension for fear of
being crased like an vrinall.) As for the spanish Armadoe whatsoever the
Spaniards intended to do here in England, our Countrymen did perform much at
Cales, howsoever they ded speed at Lisborne before. I answer only this, God
and St. George for my religion, King, and Countrymen. I would do that which
befitted a good subject, but these your instances are malicious and odious.

96. To that plain place 2. These 2. v. 15. Therefore brethren stand and hold
the traditions which you have learned whether it be by word of mouth or by
epistle. This place is so plain that S. Chrysostom: affirms S. Paul herein to
have meant of unwritten traditions, that Doct. Whitaker says his speech is
herein very unworthy so holy a father. And that which you bring out of S
Chrysostom against me, shows that all sufficient precepts of manners and good
life are set down in scripture. That which you bring out of the 26. of the Acts
22, we say that in tradition nothing is spoken besides that is contrary to the
Apostles speeches. As for that which you bring the 1. of the Cor. 14, 37. is
nothing to the purpose. For we do not deny but those things that are written
are true. But if you would have more plain places of scripture in defense of
tradition, ^^s the 15. of the Acts 41. Where he in confirming of the church
commands them to keep the precepts of the Apostles, and what precepts S Paul
means he explaines himself chap. 16. v. 4. He delivered unto them to keep the
decrees that were decreed of the Apostles, and ancients that were at
Jerusalem, which deliverie without question were by word of mouth, what these
decrees were it is uncertain by scriptura, though they may be kept by the help
of tradition.

98. The fourth thing that I am to show is to prove how you walk THE FOVRTH
PART.
in a vicious circle, proving the self same by the self same, as the
authority of the scripture by your private spirit, and your private spirit by
the authority of the scripture, by which manner of proof you may prove any
thing.

99* For first and foremost you do not distinguish what are scriptures and what
are not, by the authority of the church. For so you should admit of all that
she does receive, and if ye reject any thing that she has doubted of you
should as well as you refuse those books called Deutrocanonici of the old
Testament, you should as well reject those Deutrocanonici of the new testament
as the epistle to the Hebrews, Judas epistle and the Apocalypse, but the touch
of your trial is the private spirit, and the unction not of the holy Ghost,
but of an addle head, and a self conceipted phancie.

100. And that you like a blind baiard walk in this round though you may
apprehend you have gone many a mile; and to show that Mr. M. A. walks in a
circle.
you have confined your self in the self same circle I prove.

101. For first I ask how you know the scripture of the Prophets and Apostles
is Gods word; you answer the spirit of God, the testification and witness of
the spirit, the anointing of the spirit do testify Ioh. 15, 16. Ioh. 16. 14.
Ioh. 3. 9. 11
to you that they are written by God. But then again I demand how you prove
that you have that spirit of God this spiritual anointing.

You answ. what man knows what is in him but the spirit of God that is in him
1. Cor. 2. He answers again that he can make no proof Here it is proved that he
does petere principium.
of that to another that is only known to himself; and again no man knows
how the wind blows, or knows how the bones do grow in the womb of a woman,
Eccles. 11, 5. it is the spirit that testifies 1. Joh. 5, 6. So that we see you
prove the scripture by your private spirit, and your spiritual anointing, and
you prove you have this spirit by the scripture. As if a child should prove he
were no bastard, in that his mother says so, and she likewise prove that she
her self were honest in that he says so: Or prove the Church of Amsterdam to
be a true church, in that the Amsterdamian spirit interpreting the scripture
says so. And that the Amsterdamian spirit is a true spirit, in that the
Amsterdamia^ spirit says so. So I demand of you how you do know the scripture
to be Gods word, you answer out of the Mr H. A. walks in a circle.
testificatio^ of the holy ghost; And how you know the internal testificatio^
is from God, you answer likewise out of the scripture interpreted by the
Spirit. My sheep hears my voice, and how do you know how it is the scripture?
You answer by the testification of the Jo. 10. 27.
inward spirit, so that we see your discourses like puppets have their motion
from one string, and speak by the mouth of the same interpreter. His discourse
is unprofitable.


102. But now to show the falsehood and unprofitablenes of your circular
discourse, I demand what you hold the testification of the inward spirit to be.
For you must hold that it proceeds from God, as well as your inward habit or act
of faith: and then again I ask Mr H. A. to solution circular, fruitless and
endless.
whether you be certain by the certainty of faith that you have this inward
act of faith that you have the testification of the spirit. Then I argue this
certitude must proceed from an other testification, and that from another, and
the other from another, so we shall run headless in infinitum.

103. Besides I ask whether that testification of the spirit, since it can not
have his residence in the will, being a certain persuasion He cannot tell what
this inward testificatio^ is.
or speech of God belonging to the understanding; and so it must be a certain
notice or cognitio^. If it be obscure I ask how it is distinguished from
faith: if it be clear and evident how is it to be distinguished from the
knowledge or vision of a thing; so that we see you affirm a thing that indeed
you do not understand what it is.

104. But before I gathered your mind when you said the scriptures of
themselves are so clear that by themselves they appear for scriptures, so
that you seem to resolve that which you believe in Mr H. A. resolution
uncertain.
to the holy scriptures and the formal reason why you believe it into the
testification or persuasion of the spirit, yet this also you do not hold to
always. For other times you resolve both the one and the other into the
testification of the inward spirit with you most often, which shows your great
inconstancy grounded on sear.

105. But admitting that you had only said the things to be believed, or
fides externa were to be resolved into the holy scripture only. Yet so you
should admit of as great an absurdity. For so you should say the gospel of S.
Matthew, or the whole scripture taken totally together are not canonical and
authentic, nor that Mr. H. Aynsw: is predestined or that his sins are
remitted. All which Many absurdities sequeles of his doctrine
Aprove. For nothing he is to believe, for which he has not the express word
of God. But none of these are expressed in the word of God. If he will say he
will gather these by necessary consequence; his adversaries may oppose him,
and he can show no certainty; If he fly unto the inward testification of the
spirit the^ I infer that the things to be believed are not to be resolved into
the scriptures alone. So Mr H. A. eats his own word though without one grain
of salt or pretense of reason. Yet to show this a little more plain I reason
thus. Is the scripture the word of God? you answer it is, and that without all
question; But I demand how you know it is the word of God; if you answer by
the testification of your inward spirit, you ride your first circuit; If you
say it No parcel of scripture affirms the whole scripture to be scripture.
appears by it self, this is not so plain since most parts and parcels of
scripture have been doubted of and that by scholars. Yet admit scripture were
so clear a light by it self, yet you cannot avoid as great a difficulty. For
I ask whether you will prove the whole scripture by the whole, and then every
one will see you ^^ie for refuge thither which you ought to defend. If you say
that the whole scripture is proved by some particular parcel of scripture, you
are bound to show me that which you can never perform, viz. that any part of
scripture does affirm the whole scripture and every part and parcel thereof
to be scripture.

106. And if I should grant you this, yet another absurdity at the suit of
reason has arrested you. For by what will you try that What should authorize
that scripture that should give authe^tickness to all the rest.
particular parcel of scripture that so authoriseth all the rest to be
scripture? Thus you see in defending your private spirit you have undergone the
labors of Hercules, the difficulties arising as Hydraes heads two for one as
one is dissolved.

107. Besides this opinion of theirs does not only lead a man into these
endless windings, but it makes against common sense, that God should leave his
holte scriptures so careless, at six and sevens unsettled that every hereticli
might challenge to himself to be taught from God, so that he might reject the
authority of all the Fathers* By his opinion Gods provid^ce is weakened
which could not choose but puff up men with pride.

108. Against which men I reason thus, Either the holy Fathers had this spirit
of God or else they had not. If they had (as surely they should have if Mr H.
A. did not feynedly prefer them before him) then they infalliblie were
instructed by his spirit in matters Whether the holy fathers had this spirit
or not, makes against him.
of faith, why are their authorities rejected by Mr Henry Aynsworth as earth
and ashes? If they had not, then this spirit is a new and so not a true
spirit, since it differrs from that spirit that ruled the ancient fathers
many whereof were the Apostles scholars.

109. But that the holy Fathers had this spirit I prove, since you cannot deny,
but that they were of the elect and the sons of God, but they can not be of
the elect and of the sonns of God without his spirit John 10, 27. My sheep
hear my voice 6. Joh. 45. erunt omnes That the ancient fathers had this
spirit.
docibiles Dei. 1. Joh. 2, 27. You have no need that any teach you of ought.
And here by better reason the places that you cited before for the proving of
your private spirit, return on your own head Joh. 14. 17. verse. 26. Joh. 15, 26.
John 16, 14. Romans 8, 9 1. Joh. Mr H. A. places of scripture retorted on himself.
^, 27. Joh. 3, 9. v. 11. ^ 8 Joh. 1, 5. 1. John 4, 1. there is no trial of
the spirits, then to try whether it be of God, but these men^s spirit were of
God since they were of the elect: And if you prescribe the tree of the spirit
by the fruit Gal. ^, 22, 25, these men's virtues, learning, piety (as you
confess) are to be preferred before your self.

109. Again I will not only prove your spirit to be dissonant fr^ the holy
fathers, but that it is not Apostolical; For if the Apostles had been inspired
with this spirit every one had ^^ayed it, so that by himself without the help
of another he could have distinguished of His spirit not Apostolical.
truth from falsehood, what needed then a Conne^l to be held at Jerusalem,
since every one could sufficiently distinguish of this truth.

110. And to show further how your spirit is encompassed with difficults I
argue thus: This spirits testification is ever infallible or not. If it do
deceive them it is not of God; If it be still infallible how can there come such
various controversies in the Church of God.

111. If you answer this is ever infallible when it agrees with the word of God
to which it is to be compared. But then I argue if this spirit does never
testify but when it is read, what will they do then if they were to dispute
with a Turk, if he should deny the His answ. pretended
whole Bible, or about a controversy of the whole Bible whether it be
Canonical or no^

But admit that the testification of the spirit were only to be tried by the
written word of God, How comes it then that the Lutherans and Calvinists are at
such an unreconcilable diffentien in comparing the scriptures, This is my body,
and this is my blood, by their private spirits interpretation; every one
contends to have this spirit, to have the true sense of the word. How will you
then be able to settle these variances by the bare word to the liking of both.

112. And to answer the placrs that you do or may be produced for the
mainteyning of the private spirit, I will give general grounds General grounds
reselling the private spirits proof
to answer all, answering some in particular. First then to that of John 10,
27. My sheep hear my voice. you must mark what sheep he means, viz. the sheep
that he committed to S. Peter as Pastor, John 2^, 17. feed mysheep. And not
content with this he shows how these sheep should hear his voice Luc. 10. 6.
He that hears you hears me, and he that contemns you contemns me. The other
place is of Esaie the Prophet 54. 13. I will give all my sonns learned etc.
Jer. 31. 34. Herafter the man shall not teach his neighbor all shall know me
from the least to the greatest Joh. 6. 45. out of which and such like places
they falsely gather they have testificatio^ of the spirit.

113. But these men abuse scripture drawing it to their own sense; For these
places and the like does not prove that which they seek, but only show a
threefold difference between the old testament and A threefold difference
between the old and new testament
the new. First in that the Prophets did teach in the old testament but Christ
Jesus himself did teach in the new ^cv. 1. 1. Where our Savior is said to
have spoke to the Fathers in the Prophets but to us in his Son: 2. Moses and
the Prophets did propound to the people what they were to believe, but Christ
Jesus vy his inward prace given them did help them to believe, he not only
teaching them by his voice, but also helping them by his grace. 3. that Moses
and the Prophets did preach Christ only to the Jews, but Christ, and his
Apostles to all nations ^o^. 10. 18. in omnem terram exivit sonus eorum, so
that interpreting what places soever you have or shall produce The Catholic
opinion defended from such a idle proof.
for the establishing of this private spirit shall easily be answered by
referring them to these places.

THE 5. PART

114. That I am to prove is to defend our Catholiche opinion from such an idle
proof or circular resolution of our faith. The which that I may better
perform, some common grounds are to be handled before that being presupposed
the difficults that oppose our opinion may be the better cleared.

115. First then we must (...) suppose that since every Heathen or Jew does
know by the light of nature that their is one God the author of all things, and
that we are created to serve and honor him, and that God is the rewarder of
virtue and punisher of vice. And A general doctrine first to be presupposed.
since by discourse he may naturally reach unto this, that although it was most
free for God to create any thing or to will any thing ad extra, yet supposing
that he has created and so if not necessarily yet infaliblie by the excessive
propension of his goodness, he does propose to men the best and fittest means
for his honor and divine service. And since the Monarchical government is best
as appears by necessary subordination of creatures, elements, nations,
causes, beasts unto one supreme Mr. spring of all: So since God having created
man would be worshipped of him, It is most ready to any man's discourse that he
has ordained one uniform kind of church or service to al people. The which as
it cannot choose but seem most probable to a man through the great conveniencie
and congruitie. Yet if we shall suppose that the multiplicitie of religious and
ceremonious services should as co^tradictories or contraries thwart one
another, and so their supreme end. It would necessarily be gathered out of the
co^pass of any reasonable reaching brain, that al these religions were not
instituted of God and that every man was bound to weigh and ponder the
motives, and to see which religion had greater credibilitie.

116. 2. This being presupposed I will prove that our Roman Catholic church
compared with what religions soever of the Heathens, ceremontal of the Jews,
heresies, and sects of Christians, is to be preferred in any reasonable man's
judgment before any of them. Since I will prove that the motives of our
religion are of evident credibilitie:

117. 3. I am to prove that the motives of our Catholic religion are to be and
are of most evident credibilitie, whether they be taken The motives of our
religion of evident credibility.
by themselves, or whether they be parralleld with the doctrine of the Gentile,
Jewe, or heretic, and the motives of our religion must be of evident
credibilitie, appears out of the Psalm. 9 2. Testimonia tua credibilia facta
sunt nimis. Heb. 2. the preaching of the Apostles is said to be confirmed by
signs, and miracles; 2. if there were not motives of evide^t credibility, no
man prude^tly should be thought to assent unto faith.

118. And that the motives of our religion are of evident credibilitie The
author of our religion the first motive.
appears in the particular relation of them.

119. The first motive of our religion is from the author of our religion who
to have been is as certain as that Alexander or Aristotle was. And that our
Savieur did not teach false things of ignorance, or malice appears by his
doctrine preaching and his virtues and power prophesied by the Prophets, and by
the Syb^liacs by the silence of oracles, of whom S John Baptist honored so by
the very Jews for sanctity of life does give such testimony of; who^ the
Apostles also did testify, and not of ignorance since they preach those things
they saw; nor of malice, or gain, since they preached without any hope of
temporal commodity, or preferment, they being condemned and despised of all.
And it appears out of Josephus lib. 18. Antiquitatum, and by Tertullian libro
co^tra Celfum, and Porphyrius where it is said Deos This argument S. Chrysostom:
orat. 2, et 3. contra I^^ a os* et D. Augustine lib. deca^^chisandis rudibus.
The second motive.
gentium etc. The Gods of the Gentiles pronounced Christ to be wise and godly.

120 The second Argument and motive of edident credibilitie is taken out of
particular prophecies concerning our Savior; which motive Justinus in his Qbus
Orthodoxos q. 2. et 146. Tertull. in Apoll. c. 20. D. Chrysostom: 18. in
Iohannem. D. Aug: 1. De consensu Euangelico c. 28. usque ad finem. Also the
prophesies of our Savior, propagation of the Church, conversion of Gentiles,
persecutions of Christians are daily seen to be fulfilled.

121. Hitherto all Christians may usurp these motives as then own: But when
those that they shall seek to persuade shall ask of them what the essential
points of their religion are without which it cannot stand: If they be
demanded which of the Apostles scholars did teach these points of doctrine
that they boast they teach, and say they have received different from the
Roman Catholics grounds. Where their church has lurcht this thousand five
hundred years. Why none of the ancient Fathers writings are for them; no
hystories the records of time; whether their nation was first converted to
their religion, here they are gravelld and can use no other or further motive,
which has been the reason why yet never any nation to this day has been
converted to their religion. To these and other questions of the self same
nature Mr H. A d^st not and yet dares not answer I or no, though there be 13 in
number and of great moment set down in my last letter.

122. But here our Church can go forward with her third motive The third
motive antiquity.
of most evident credibilitie, which is ^ercht from the antiquity of our
religion, and doctrine; Which Argument S. August: contra epistolam ^auda:
Manich. uses. Justinus also in adhortatio ad Gentes, Lact. lib. 2. Divinarum
institut: c. 14. Cyrillus Alexand* contra Iul: Aug. 18. de civit. Deic 18.
Josephus the record of our antiqui^ie libio 1. contra Ap^onem shows that it
exceeds all profane mom^ments. Justin: Apolog: 2 Tertull. Apolog. c. 19.
e^alij. And if we understand of Christ Jesus and the Apostles doctrine, it
appears by the perpetual succession of Bishops from S Peter's chair, which
Argument Irenaeus lib. 3, c. 3. Tertull. De praescript. c 6. et Hieron: contra
Our Antiquity in cluded in the name Catholic.
Lucifer: versus finem uses to prove our church to be the most aunent, true,
and Apostolical church.

123. Which antiquity also does appear out of the name Catholic which we
have still retained though our adversaries have labored what in them lies to
deface that name, so the Montanists called Catholics Psychias that is animales
Beza in praefatione novi testa. printed 1565. calls the name catholic a vain
word: Humfrei in vita Iuelli a vain term page 113. Sutlcif in his challenge page
1. fruictless name: the like did Gaudentius as appears out of S. Aug. lib. 2,
contra Gaud. c. 25.
in that they refused to observe their three fasts; and the Calvinists terms
us Papists; But al in vain. For no sooner can a man ask where a catholic
dwells, but presently they will direct them to some of us, which argument S.
Aug. uses.

124 Our 4. Argument may be the sanctity of our doctrine, teaching most
congruous to reason, and so behooful in respect of God, our Muscul: in his
preface locorum commu: for catholic church in the creed read christian church.
neighbor and our selfs, as appears by our fasts, religious vows of
Priests, so that all is conformable to that of the Psalm. 18. his law is an
immaculate law converting souls.

125 The fif^ motive is out of the admirable and divine manner of promulgating
our faith both in the Apostles times and in their ^ Motive
Apostolical followers, that our faith should be first established by poor
fisherme^; 2 in that the things they preached went against men's will and against
the hair of human inclination. 3. In that they did persuade men to this
religion not with hope of private lucre or styles of honor, but by cou^selling
of a pecfect resignatio^ of our wills to God in all things. 4. In that by the
efficacy of this their doctrine most potent eloquent and learned men have been
converted, according to that the 1 Cor. 2. Se brethren our vocation qua non
multi sapientes, which Argument Justinus Apolog: 2. Christ. homil. 34. in Math.
Aug. 22. de civit: det. c. 5. Dainast. 4. de fide c. 4 uses.

126. The 6 Motive is that since God and his servants have 6 Motive
been ever mamfested from deluders, and imposcers by true miracles done to the
proffit of many, and not for ostentation as appears the power of miracles
in the conflict of Moses and Aaron with Pharoes Magi Exo. ^. Elias with Baals
Prophets: B. S. Peter with Simon Magus as Egisippus relates. Of Eugenius the
Catholic Bishop with Cittola the Aria^ Bishop as Greg. Turonensis witnesses
lib. 3. ^ist. c. 3. The which success has animated our Catholics to urge the
Gentlies to the trial of their religion by true miracles as Arnobins lib. 1.
et Tertull. apolog. lib. 23. And S. Joh. 5. our Savior affirms that the works
he did, gave a greater testimony of him, then the testimony of S. John
Baptist; and Joh 8. We know that that comes from God. And Erodi 4. Whereas
Moses objected that the people would not hear him, he gave him the power of
miracles. And as our Savior uses this Argument Joh. 10. If you will not
believe me etc. S^S. Chrysostom. homil. 3 in 2 Cor. Tertul. in apologet. c. 2^.
Arnobius lib. 1. uses the like. ^ Motive


127* The seventh motive which S. Chrysostom. uses homel 26 in Mat. D. Hier. c.
^. in Mat. Lact. lib. 3. inst. tut. divinarum c. 23: is taken from the
efficacy of our doctrine that did stopp the mouths of the idols, and has
resisted heresies of all ages: see Ruff lib. 10. c. 10 et. Victorem lib. 1. de
persecut. Vand^l; And those that were sent of the Jews did acknowledge this
motive Joh. 7. Never any man spoke like this man.

128* The 8. motive is the great constancy of our religion that 8. Motive.
has flourished by the persecution of the Gentiles, and of heretics whereas so
many great opposers heretics have buried themselves and their names in
oblivion: This Arg: used Gamaliel Act. 5 If this work be not of God it will be
dissolved. This argum: Tertullian uses against Scapula^ et apolog. c. vltimo
et Justin. in dialog cum Tryphone. S. Aug. lib. 22. de civitate dei c. 6.

129. The 9. Motive is of the great and constant martyrdom 9. Motive
of infinite people that of all nations, sects, and conditions have died for our
religion. Just Martyr in his Apolog: ad Senate. Romans acknowledges that he was
most moved with this motive. Lact. lib. 1. Just. c. 13. et 14. which motive
must have as all the rest relation to one another. For it is the cause and not
the pain that makes a Martyr: and so Sanguis Martyrum est semen Christianorum
Tertull. apol. c. vltimo.

130. The 10. motive is by the prodigeous, untimely and most 10. Motive
unfortunate death of most of the opposers of our religion: see Medina^ lib. de
certa fide in deum; this Argument Tertullian uses against Scapula^ et D.
Chrysostom. oratione contra Iudaeos; It were well Mr. H. Apnsworth you would
teach your children the truth of these traditions.

131. The 11 Motive is the testimony given by our adversaries themselves of
us. Josephus lib. 18. antiq: gives testimony of Christ, 11. Motive
the Sybillaes, Lactantius lib. 1. c. 5. 6. et 7. Just. in 2. Apolog: brings
the commendations of ^ several Emperors of Christians; Plinius 2. in Tertull.
in Apolog. c. 2 writ an epistle to Trajan the Emperor in commendation of
Christians; Protestants, safe we Catholics dying so may be saved, that the
Fathers confessed Papists were virtuous holy men, this motive S. Aug. his book
de civitate dei saice is of great force to confirm any doctrine. Socrates,
lib. 4. c. 27. et Theod. lib. 4. c. vltimo affirms that barbarous nations
elected Christians for governors.

132. The 12. Motive is the inward motions inspirations illustrations, 12.
Motive
and internal consolations that Catholics find in their religion, and
spiritual exercises which S. Thomas Aquinas that well had drunk of that
spiritual fountaigne, acknowledges to be a chief motive in- 2. 29. 2. ar. 6.

134. Out of all these I frame my first demonstration of the truth The first
Demostration of the Catholic truth.
of our Catholic religion against Gentiles, Jews, and Heretics. That
doctrine is most evident eredible, whose author is o^ an meffable vvritie, and
singular sanctity; who also was prophected before by many holy men, and
contains nothing co^tradictorie to the light of nature or repugnant to
manners, but contrariwise is a doctrine of great wisdom, sanctity integrity
and efficacy, which by the infinite propagation thereof, and by many miracles
has been divinely confirmed, which has remained firm and stable against all
persecutions of Gentiles Jews and Heriticks; For the profession and defense of
which doctrine, infinite men of all sects, ages and conditions, have most
willingly suffered exquisit torments; Whose professors have been most holy
illuminated men: But our Remane religion is this, as appears by a particular
induction, go. our religso^ is most evident credible.

134 The second Demonstration that I make for the confirming The second
Demostration
of this former is thus taken out of Gods divine providence he has of al our
humane actions especially touching those actions as touch the eternal
felicity or honesty of manners, and about the true worship of himself: go it
is against his providence that a man directed by so many prudentiall motives,
especially since his faith is suffici^tly proposed to all to be believed. But
God has permitted our Catholic cause to be warranted by all these most
credible motives: go it is most evident that our religion is from God and most
true.

135. These being presupposed it is the part of a prudent man to assent unto
many motives of credibilitie, especially having received a precept of faith and
in general having well pondered them, he is bound to dispose himself unto a
pious affection that he may give a firm consent by the working of the Holy
Ghost in particular to that doctrine and faith warra^ted by so many evident
motives of credibilitie.

136. These motives of evident credibilitie being hic et nunc assented unto,
here we come to resolve our principal intended doubt of the resolution of our
faith; presupposing still that the formal motive of our faith is the first
verity, or authority of God obscurely revealing. To faith two judgments
required Into what one evide^t judgment of credibilitie is to be resolvedi^* to.


137. Now since to faith there concur two judgments, the one evide^t of the
credibility of the thing to be believed, the other an obscure but a certain
belief of the verity of the thing to be believed, so we see there is a
twofold resolution. viz. of the resolution of the evident, and certain
judgment of credibilitie; and of the second of our judgment ceretaine but
obscure.

138. First then I say our evident judgment of the credibilitie of the thing
being rather presupposed, then presupposing an act of faith is resolved only
into these related motives of credibilitie, and into the foresaid human
inducements as into the formal reason of our believing. That this evide^t
judgment is to be had before an act of faith.


139. Secondly I say that every one according to his capacity is to have the
for said certain, and evident judgment of credibilitie before he elicit an act
of faith, that prudently he may be judged to give his asse^t. So the
Samaritanes are said to believe for the word of the Samaritan woman, so the
Regulus is said to believe for the recovered health of his son. So the
C^nturion is said to believe for the signs of the passion of our Savior; And
to this end our Savior gave power to his disciples of confirming their
doctrine by my racles Praedicaverunt etc. They preached our Lord cooperating
etc. And S. Aug. lib. 1. ad Simplic. q. 2. demands this quis potest credere
nisi aliqua vocatione: et de spiritu et littera c. 34. He affirms it thus
Neque e. anima rationals etc. For neither a reasonable soul can believe with a
free will, if there be no vocation or persuasion, for which he should believe.

140 Thirdly I affirm our certain yet inevident judgment of the truth of the
points of our faith to be believed, and so the assent of our faith if it be as
it ought; that is if it be accomodated and proportioned unto the object, and
end of our faith as it is necessary unto salvation, death either require a
particular motion of the Holy Ghost, or an infused habit of faith, as it
appears out of the 7. chapter of the Aransicanum Conc. and out of the Trident
Sess 6. c. 5. et canone and. Where it is affirmed, that without Gods preventing
grace, and the illuminatio^ of the holy Ghost, no man can believe things
reveled as he ought, that is that Gods justifying grace be given him.

141. Fourthly I affirm that this certain and inevident judgment In to what
our certain mevident judgment is to be resolved into
of the truth of our faith into these humain reasons and motives as into the
moving, applying, and impulsive cause, but not as into the formal motive of
believing. And the self same judgment is resolved into the supernatural light
as into the true efficie^t cause of that certitude and proportion which it has
with his adequate object and end both being supernatural.

142 If I be demanded therefore why I believe ^. persons and one God, or any
other thing. I answer if you ask of me the formal reason why I assent, I
answer, I believe because God has revealed it. If I be thenas^ed how I know
God has revealed it. I Why I believe any article of our bel^^se. Why I
certainly and evidently do believe. That the^ is committed no circle herein.
Two diverse objects.
answer I do not evidently know this though certainly I know it for the same
revelation, and infalible authority, which the church of God as an intrinsecal
condition or application, applies to me to be believed.

143. But if I be further questioned, since the revelation of God, and the
proposing are both obscure and inevident, how cames it the^ that I certainly
and evidently do believe.

144. I answer then I return unto the motives of evident credibilitie that
may induce any prudent man to believe that says, and that church warranted by
so many motives.

145. Neither is here committed any vicious circle between the authority of
God and the church; as I have before convinced you in your grounds to commit.
For first the authority of God revealing in virtue of which the infailibilitie
of the proposition is believed, and the self same infallible proposition in
virtue of which we believe that God ^^ies and reveals, has two diverse
objects. For the object of the infailible proposition is that God reveals; And
the object that God reveals, or of the revelation of God is the verity
believes.

146. ^. I say in that when out of the authority of God revealing Whi^in our
opinion there is no circle.
is given the formal reason of our believing; the motive is given by the formal
cause. But when out of the infallible proposing of the church, a reason to
given why we believe the divine revelation. If it be understood aright it is
not to be given by a formal cause or motive; but by an intrinsecall and
requisite application of the motives why we believe, which is done by the
proposing of it by the church, so that there is no circle ab eodem in idem,
secundum idem, which Aristotle only co^demns 1. Post. text. 5. as I have showed
before.

147. Yet to go one degree further in showing how we are free We are free
from a circle.
in another regard from this mere circular, and fruictless resolution of
theirs, I presuppose that then is committed a circle when the self same is
proved by the self same to him that grants neither or does aequallie deny
both, or doubts of both. For proof of which we learn out of Aristotle that
we ought to proceed from that which to known to that which is not known: or
at least from that which is granted to that which is not granted, for so we
shall proceed from that which is known after a manner, to that which is not
known.

148. Whence I infer that he should commit this circuler discourse that to an
Ethnic that equally should deny both scripture and the infallibility of the
church, should prove that the scripture were of divine authority in that the
church teaches us it; and the church of infallible authority in that the
scripture teaches us it. But to a protestant that admits of most of the
scripture, it is no circle to prove the infallibility of the church which he
denies from the scripture which he admits of: but first you do not give a
resolution of your faith (as I do) that is powerful against Ethnic or
heretic: 2. though we admit of scripture yet we cannot be urged thereunto by
you; that receiving from the church the scripture, will not believe all See 1
^^.
that she proposes alike to be believed.

149. The foresaid manner of proof is usual both in the scriptured and in
ancient Fathers. The Pharisees did admit of Moses, and deny Christ. Therefore
our Savior convinced them with these words Joh. 5. 46. If you did believe
Moses you would believe me for he gave testimony of me. Again contrariwise
the Manicheies did admit of Christ and the gospel, and did deny Moses and the
Prophets, and therefore S. Aug. contra Faustu^ Manichaeu^ and in his book lib.
1. de moribus Ecclesiae Catholicaec. 1. et seq. did convince the Manichees. The
like manner of proceeding we take to instruct a Catholic that should deny
any parcel of scripture, we convince him by the judgment of the church to whom
he submits himself. And Heretics that deny tradition, the church and the
Popes author^tie we convince them out of scripture and out of the writings and
uniform consent of the holy Fathers thowsands of whom M. ^. A. says he
preferres for wisdom truth, and holiness before himself, whose universal
consent of them living in all times, being most expert in tongues, near our
Saviors times; many of them being the Apostles scholars not partial to
either of our causes, writing so long before many delivering matters of facts
that does prove or confirm many poi^^^ of our doctrine, I cannot see how you
can deny them: especially since you say you admit so far of them as they
agree with scripture. For S. Hierom translated it, S. Ambrose, S. Aug. S. Greg.
S. Barnard interpreted it; and they all cite many places of scripture to prove
fundamental points of doctrine of our religion. But I showed how the holy
Fathers agreed with scripture to which you are silent.

150. But that you do not proceed after the self same manner is plain. For
though you abound with wrested places of scripture which we admit of all in
their true sense: Yet you deny the interpretation of the Fathers interpreting
the scripture; that by common consent and your own grant should better
understand them then That M H. A does not urge any granted ground against
(...) see 143.
you: And we do not admit of scriptures as a sufficient proof by themselves,
but together with the interpretation of the holy Fathers; of whom by your own
words you should admit of since you prefer their wisdom, truth, and holiness
before your self.

151. Wherefore, then M. H. A. would you have me believe you alleging only
scripture for your self, and i^ sense depraved, before the holy Fathers that
cite scriptures both for them and us; and whose judgment you say you prefer
before your self. For first you entangle That I should not believe him
himself, persuades me
your self in an endless circle. For you prove the private spirit to be true in
that the written word says as interpreted by you that it is true; and you
prove the written word to be true by the private spirit, both which we deny;
since we will have neither the written word alone, or private spirit to be the
rule of our faith. And you do not only commit a circle but persuade against
your own persuasion; since you would have me to believe you only citing
scriptures, before thousand M. H. A. woven up in an endless bo^^o^.
Fathers citing scriptures also, whose worth by so many titles you prefer
before your self; suerly, suerly you have no gift in persuasion.

152. And not only thus vnreasonablie do you proceed, but as the Manichies to
S. August. you object many places of scripture, whose infere^ces still ^re Nol^
Catholicis credere, do not believe the Catholics; I can then return you this
answer with St. Aug. Catholicis praedic^tibus.
no^ recte facies per Eua^geliu^ me cogere ad Manichaei fidem q. ipsi Eva^gelio
Catholicis praedicantibus credidi You do not well by scriptures cited from the
gospel to urge me to believe your Brownisme against the Catholic faith. For
this Gospel out of which you cite these words and wrested places, I received
from ^he Catholic church, from whence you would di^^wade me.

153. The ^. thing that I am to show is that the Popes defini^tive The 6. Pa^^.
sentence at least with a general counsel is sufficient to determine The mayn
question might for 2^ Mr. H. A. argument have been transferred How the judgment
of the church and in what sense is infallible. The Catholic church is the rule
of faith in manifold senses. Hervaeus interpreted vide n. 165. Mat 10. 2. Mat
17. 1. Marci 9. 2. Marci 4. 33 Luc. 8. 51. et 18. Ioh. 21. 2. 18. 11. Ioh. 3.
1. Ioh. 8 1. 10 Mat. 2. Marc. 3. Lucae. 6. To be named still first, rather
argues primacie of authority then of order.
all controversies, and is a sufficient groundworke of faith. This you say I
propound faintly in that I did allege I did not of purpose dispute it; though
as you object it was the maine question.

154. I answer most true it is according to my answer wherein I did voluntarily,
yield to this to which by force of argument I was never urged, so it is the
maine drift of the question. But in regard of the satisfaction of you or your
arguments it is not the maine question. For when I say there is something else
required besides the written word to make it a complete rule of faith. I did
not answer faintly when I granted more then that to which I was urged For your
Argument required to know how the judgment of the church and in what sense
might be infallible; might have a manifold sense. For if you take the
definition of the church; for the consent of all the fathers and doctors of the
church so it is infallible. If you take it for a general Counsel confirmed by
the Pope so it is also of infallible authority: If you take it for the
definition of the Pope with the council of Cardinals defining ex cathedra, so
it is of infallible authority. And since in all these senses the Catholic
church is an indeficient rule to determine a matter of faith, and to interpret
the scriptures, I did not therefore faintly answer when I insisted on the last.

155 As for your rhethoricall flourish, and forged resolution of my faith, I
have sufficiently excluded our opinion from that circle in which you stick
fast. Nervaeus when he says the Pope is virtualy the whole church, means
nothing else; but that he is the spiritual head to direct the whole church by
the infallible assistance of the holy Ghost.

156. As for my vellitation those few that I brought were sufficient to
overthrow your groundles opinion. As for my reasons in the armadoe of mine as
you term the^, that you say will never enter the field. It may be well they
scorn to oppose one that lies at their fellows mercy already.

157. Now you come to examine the prerogatives of S. Peter: Out of the whole
series of which, and the circumstances thereof and not only outof each
particular I draw an infallible Argument, but you in an swering them rather
seek to shun or avoid a blow then to give any.

158. First you grant that ever almost S. Peter is named first of the
Apostles, you except some 3. or 4. places; but you cite none, though otherwise
most frequent in multiplicitie of cited places to no purpose. Hence you grant
that primacie of order and not of authority may be gathered: You say this
gratis: But since the holy Ghost both not repeat this prunacie to no purpose;
surely there his authority above his other brethren is argued thence. And
since to be named still first through the whole scripture rather argues primacie
of authority then of order. Why should not we rather i^fer^ the usual then the
unusual signification, especially since in all records we see the prioritie
of the place is given to the preheminencie of the person.

159. But let us examine one place the 10. of Mat 2. And the names The 10 of S
Mat. 2. examined
of the 12. Apostles be th^se. The first Simon who is called Peter, and Andrew
his brother, and so Marci. 3. Luc. 6. he is still named first. Which cannot be
understood of prioritie of your order you understanding thereby prioritie of
years or vocation. Since S. Andrew that is named next excelled S. Peter in
years, and was first called. As S. S. Andr. ^. der and called before S. Peter.
Ambr. witnesses on the 2. of the Cor. 12. and he infers then that although
S. Andrew was his elder, yet S. Peter was his superior. This place made so much
for this that Theodorus Beza although he confessed all copies agreed herein;
yet he would have this word first to be ^oisted in: see Beza in the annotations
of the new testament 556.

As for that of the Galatians where S. Paul not numbering or Why S. Paul
mentions S. James (...)
reckoning the Apostles of set purpose (as the 3. Evangelists do) me^tioneth
first S. James Bishop of Jerusalem, whom first he met: and who led him unto the
other Apostles as it appears Act 21. I. Calvin seeing in his conscience the
force of this Argument (at which you wink) grants that hence may be gathered
that he was first of the 12. Apostles, but not the head of the whole world.

160. As for that which you object the 21. of the Apocalypse 19. where the
foundation of the wall of the city is described to be adorned with precious
stones. And then you infer in that in the Priests 21. of the Apoc. 19. makes
against himself if it prove ought in reference to that of Exo. 28. 1. 18. 19.
habit or ornament the Jasper which is as you say the stone of Benjamin: by his
place makes against you, if I would play the part of a Cabbalist or
naturalist: But the scripture it self Exodus 28, v. 18, 19. confutes you. For
there in the first place is said to be placed the stone Sardius, Topazius and
Smaragdus. In the second the Carbun^^^, the Saphyrus, and the Jaspis. So that
we see the Jaspis or the stone Benjamin by your doctrine should not have the
first place.

161. Secondly against my congruitie alleged for S. Peter's primacie Math. 14.
29. where S. Peter walks upon the water. Out of which place S. Chrysostom
homil. 57. and S. Bernard lib. 2. de consider: ad Eugeniu^ does infer S.
Peter's prerogative above the other Apostles, you say rather argues his
weakness of faith. 2. S. Peter walks on the water
Whereas indeed S. Peter's words if thou be the son of God are an argument of
confidence, and believing manifested by the word following command me to come
upon the waters; And that our Savior argued S. Peter of little faith, was when
he feared the strong wind, and began to sinck, not for his walking upon the
waters before others, no other having with that firmnes of faith asked or
attempted to come to our Sa^: though they saw him. Those places cited 2 King.
2. Dan. 3. 25. Heb. 11. 34. proves that ever such miracles do not prove
superiority, or of dignity before others; which we intend not to prove; but
only that this together with many other circumstances do prove superiority of
S. Peter.

162. 3. Our Savior calls S. Peter the rock and says on this rock I will
build my church, and that hell gates shall not prevail ^ He is caled by our
Savior the rock
against him. First you say John the 10. 27. 28. 29. that hell gates shall not
prevail against the just* which if you understand in the Calvinistical sense
that one once justified can not be again the child of wrath, which is a most
horrible falsehood and against the holy scriptures* Roma. 11. 20. but thou by
faith does stand, be not highly wise but fear; et: 21 Revel. 2. 5. But if
not, I come to the, and will move thy candlestick out of his place.

163. It is against the principles of faith; since so all Christians being
truly baptized and so regenerated in grace, could not sin to death and so
all should be saved.

164. You take it for a great matter that I grant the Pope may sin in
matter of fact, and be reprovated if he die in mortal sin. It is our
Catholic doctrine, and the Pope goes to confession commonly oftener then any
ordinary Priest; yet this proves nothing that the Divill prevails against him
as he is head of the church, as he defines ex cathedra* As for your blasphemous
speeches torn out of the Apocalypse, in his place I shall return them on your
own head, and of the heretical sons your father.

165. 4. You object against that which I cite out of S. Luke 22 31. And our
Lord said Simon Simon; Behold Satan has required to have you to sift as
wheat, But I have prayed for thee that thy faith may not fail thee, and thou
once converted confirm thy brethren, you answer that the other Apostles were
to co^firm their brethren, I answer as particular pastors Act. 14. 22. et 15.
41. and 32. 1 These. 3. 2. Apoc. 3. 2. but not as the supreme pastor by special
assistance of Gods grace, dissigned here to confirm his brethren. S. Aug. lib.
q. novi testamenti q. 75. to: 4. teaches that Christ praying for Peter prayed
for the rest because in the pastor and prelate the people are corrected or
amended. And S. Cyprian Epist 55. n: 6. says that hence infidelity So
Hervaeus is to be interpreted ^. 155.
or a false faith cannot fasten on S. Peter; and in the self same chap. he
affirms though there were 12. Apostles, yet for keeping unity he would have
one head of all. You say you will consent with the holy Fathers so far forth
as they agree with scripture; (...) bie will not you consent then unto them
when they allege thus scripture for the Popes primacie? But I proved that you
admitted the^ so far as they agree to scripture that is to your own phancie,
to which as guilty, you are altogether silent. As for the places cited by you
Act. 14. v. 22. I find therein nothing to your purpose but a gross corruption
of the holy text in your opinion translating presbyter, Elder, which soundes
as well as if you would translate the Major of London the Elder, against the
common understanding and use of the word. But in the old testament you
translate sacerdos a Priest; and yet here you translate Elder.

166. That which you prove the 16. of the Act. 41. proves that S. Paul* did
confirm particular churches; but not the whole church as head by office; and
in that he commanded them to keep the Apostles precepts and the ancients,
proves tradition against you. And that particular pastors precepts are to be
kept, and not only things expressed in the written word. That the 32. ver.
affirms that particular may particularly comfort others; the 1 of the These.
3. 2. proves only, that Timothy was sent particularly only to confirm them;
and the like can only be inferred out of the third of the Apoc. 2. which is so
far from proving the special confirmation promised to S. Peter that the
confirmation is by the vigilencie of one that had the name, only to live etc.
Thus we though you object my objections bleed; I am assured your wrested
places as poor same soldiers are to retreat on crutchess.

167. 5. I gathered by a congruencie that S. Peter was head in that his feet
were first washed by our Savior, Ioh 13. 6. 7. where presently after he had
spoke of washing, the text says. He comes therefore to Peter, by therefore
has reference to washing, and to S. Peter's first washing: you stand not much
hereupon, but according to the opinion of most of the ancient fathers you
admit S. Peter was first washed. Only you except that he showed greater
weakness then his brethren. I answer, that his refusing to wash was out of a
respective love that he had to our Savior, but understanding presently that of
our Savior, If I wash the not, v. S. S. Peter to show he had a perfect
resignation (not expressed by any of the rest) he presently pe^ldes, Lord not
only my feet, but also my hands and head.

168. 6. I infer that S. Peter only received a revealed promise of his
Martyrdom but here you that slights any thing objects that performance is more
the^ promise. And S. Stephen ^ James Act. 12. 2. 7. 59. suffered Martyrdom
before; I answer, that an assured promise absolutely to come is not worse but
rather better then an accelerated performance, if the performance of the other
be differred for greater good as S. Peter's was: And the theife on the cross
for dying repentant, may challenge a crown of glory as Christ Jesus promised
him, and not to be the head of the church as it was promised to S. Peter.

169. 7. I gathered S Peter's pre-eminence above others in that Act. 2. v. 14.
S. Peter as the head of the rest made the first sermon when the Jews objected
they were full of win^. But Peter standing with the eleven lifted up his voice
and spoke to them, ye men Jews, and all that dwell at Jerusalem etc. v. 15.
he answers for the rest. For these are not drunck as you suppose: and that he
was not only superior in age, or order only I have showe^ Therefore Mr. H. A.
does as it were grant this and with that the Pope were as forward as S. Peter
in these, and such good offices. I wi^^ al^o that we had also that abundance
of Gods especial grace that was given to the Apostles. But you cannot deny
but that S. (...) diverse other Popes that you condemn have been forward in
preaching.

170. I infer 8. the pre-eminence of S. Peter in that the first miracle was
done by him. You here more merrily then seriously answer ^^ 5. Ambrose sermon.
6^. gather out of S. Peter's working of the first miracle, that he was head of
the church.
that I shall work a second miracle in converting you, if from this though
granted by you I could prove him head as we expound it. I answer from most of
these congruancies solely by themselves I do not bring any convince^ng
argument, but from the whole series of them together I do convince you, since
you cannot deny but the Apostle whom our Savior first names, promises
special assistance, calls him the rock, first washes his feet; that sitts
ever first; first in all assemblies speaks, does the first miracles, must
needs be head of all the rest, or else all these primarie offices should not
casually or commonly happen: Since then if you were not through obstinacy
hindered you would be converted, I admit that the first miracle was speaking
of tongues Act. 2. 7. 11. but I speak of dest^^ce miracles and beneficial to
others, and in his first preaching I showed he had pre-eminence above others.

171. 9. I enferred that S. Peter was head in that as supreme judge he
condemned the hypocrisy of Ananias and Saphyras 5 of Act. 5. which was the
sentence of excommunication by S. Aug. judgment lib. 3. contra epist. Parmeni.
c. 2^. to 7. And that S. Peter did give the first judicial excommunication,
does it not infer that he was the head?

172. That which you object out of the 1 of Tim. 2. and Act. 13. 11. proves
that S. Paul excommunicated some, but it does not prove that he exercised that
judicial authority first, therfeor it proves nothing.

173. 10. I infer S. Peter's prerogative in that he first discovered Simon
Magus and condemned him; to which place you make an outroade in objected
symonies committed by the Pope; when you might ferth your instances nearer home.

174. After all these proofs briefly touched, and congruencies I inferred
thus. All these, and other circumstances concerning S. Peter shows manifestly
that S. Peter had preheminencie above the other of the Apostles; that he is
rock and head of the church: How they have urged I desire not to be my own
judge, but referr my self to the indifferent judgment of the reader.

175. And that this pre-eminence of S. Peter was only in order I have proved
and will hereafter prove. The place that you bring 28. of Math. 16. 20 but that
particular men are to be joined as witnesses; and that God hears the
congregation of the church praying. But that which you bring S. John. 20. 21.
22. 23. I could prove that the church of God by the mission of the Apostles
remains for ever. That the church is to be heard as Christ himself by the
re^^ parative mission: As my Father sends me so I send you. I (...) infer
preisthood; and might from the verse 25 infer with the holy (...) power to
forgive sins; but it is sufficient that your place (...) proves nothing, and
if it be proved ought it were equallitie of (...) not of jurisdiction. Mat.
(...). (...)* 1. Ioh 4* ^* Ioh. 2^. (...)*


176. And whereas I infer a reason in brief that the legacy of S. Peter's
primacie was so particularly distinguished that no man can doubt thereof, Since
his own old name is specified there Simon; his fathers name the son of
Jonas, and his own imposed name: Peter et Cephas, you say you do not impugn
the privilege of Peter, but that I do impugn the testament of the Apostles,
which I have showed and shall still show is a great untruth.

177. And that I do not impugn our Savior the head of the church, when I
make our Savior the head of the church, when I make Saint Peter the
ministerial and subordinate head to him: I proved that as God is said to be
our only Father; Mat. 23. 9. And yet it is said that we have many fathers.
Christ Jesus is said to be the foundation, 1 Cor. 3. 11. And yet the Apostles
are said to be foundations Ephesians. 2. 20. So Christ Jesus 2 Samuel 22. S. Mat.
23^ c. v. 9.
32. ^ Cor. 10. 4 Ephesians. 5. 23* he is said to be the rock and head. And S.
Basil 1. de paenitentia says, Though Peter be a rock, yet he is not a rock
as Christ, For Christ is immovable by himself; He is the light; And the
Apostles also are said to be lights, 2 Mat. 5. 14. He is Priest, and yet he
made Priests.

178. When I say Petros either signifies a rock or a stone, you bid me
produce any learned authority for it. I answer I could produce many. But I
appeal for this time to your own conscience since Christ spoke, Mat. 16. in
the Syrick language in which there is no difference between a rock or a stone,
Petrus or Petra. Yea though Petrus and Petra differr in termination in the
Greek, yet they indifferently signify a rock or a stone as the protestants
translate Ioh. 1. 42. And that S. Peter was still accounted the rock, and head
of the church, appears by that place of S. August. lib. 1. retract. ^. 21.
that you cited against me. But I see in conscience you are satisfied of S. Aug.
opinion that you are silent. And Tertull: de prescript: Orig. homil. 5 in
Exodum* Stus. Cypr. de vnitate Ecclesiae: Stus. Ambrosius sermon 47. et 68. et
lib. 6. in c. 9. Luc. every one affirming Cephas signifies a head and that
which is the foundation to a house is in proportion a head to a body
that the church was builded on S. Peter.

179. Where I say that it was Petros in the masculine gender, in that the
masculine gender was most fittest for a man, But that our Savior, the first of
Peter 2, 8. was named a rock might well be since all that admitted of his
doctrine would never deny, but that he was head of the church, and so there
was no need to change the gender as there is here.

You tax me that I on Optatus creddit would have Cephas to signify a head. I
answer that I do not remember it; and I grant that I have no ^^ul in the
Spricke language. But surely I either spoke of the greek word Cephalos, or
else intended to show that which is the foundation to a house, is in proportion
of a head to abodie. So that if you grant that Cephas to signify a principal
stone of a house or rock; it is sufficient to me that so it signifies an head
or proportion.

180. Whereas being urged you seem to grant th^^ S. Peter was the mouth of the
Apostles, I prove still to make against you. For either he must be the
spokeman or Mr. spring by election still where he speaks first; which election
of theirs you cannot prove out of scripture; that he should as the foreman of
the jurie or the speaker in the parliament: or else being chief ever in place
and speech, he must have it by authority given him as I have proved it before.

181. You seem to except against my breife confutation of your words when I
reasoned thus. If S. Peter could not have prerogative of place in that he
represented the church, no more could the sons of Abraham be two sons in
that they represented two nations. Here you infer for me but they were two
so^ns etc. go. S. Peter was S. Peter still etc. I thancke you for your pains,
but you do not mark that I do of purpose omit to infer the sequel, which
every one may see to follow: but you have forgot to have compassion of pour
self, that unarmed admitts of the Argument in that you satisfy me nothing
therein, but here like some railing minister out of his text, begins to talk
of Antichrist whose forerunner himself is.

182. To that where you say all the Apostles were equal, though there was
order as, first, second, and third, Apoc. 21. 19 Whence is that order fetched
and derived, but since not in the first ordering or age as I have proved,
therefore in the free election of Christ Jesus, that chose and made worthy S.
Peter the first That of S. John 21. 21. Ephesians. 2. 20 proves that they were all
equal in the execution of the power of order which was equal to al; not in
power of jurisdictio^: and that they were equal as they were Apostles, but not
as they were ^ys. And if all the Apostles had the like power of jurisdictio^
with S Peter yet it does not follow that all Byshopps should have like
jurisdiction with the Pope. For Byshopps are said to succeed the Apostles as
Priests are said to succeed the 72. disciples, who did not succeed properly as
appears out of Anacletus epist: et ex Beda in c. 10. Luc. And the reason is
given in that the 72. were not Priests, neither did they erercise any
jurisdictio^ which appears in that Philip; and James and the 5. other Deacons
were ordered A^t. 6 by the Apostles, and that they were of the 72. appears out
of Epipha^: heresi 20.

184. That admonition Romans ^. 11. 20. 22. and that of the Apoc. 8. 10. is to
be understood that if God should forsake her she should perish; that is in
sensu divi^o (...) in sensu composito as the Sea of Rome is guided by the holy
Ghost, and is there fired is ^he cann^^ finally fall, yet it is a far
different question of the infallible decree of the Pope and of the infallible
residence of the Pope at Rome; though both be truths in a diverse degree, and
both firm howsoever ^^pugned.

185. We do not hold that the Pope is necessarily endued with Gods holy
grace. For in matter of fact we hold, that he may sin as well as any other,
but we hold a necessary assistance of the holy Ghost as he defines ex cathedra
as the head of the church.

186. Here you cite two places out of S. Leo. that writ in the year of sur
Lord 454. accusing him that he said too much for the S. Leo. defended
Sea Apostollick; in saying that he the head infuseth grace to the whole
church; And that God takes up S. Peter into the fellowship of the individual
unity, he would have him named that which himself was; et sermon 3. and what
he gives Princes he gives by S. Peter. Where here first you see our religion is
no vpstart religion, that so many years ago was maintained by so holy a
Father, and whom Theodoretus in his epistle so much commendes: 2. we se^ this
holy Pope Leo to do no otherwise but that which S. Peter did in his second
epistle, 1. c. v. 4. where he says that by the precious promises ye may be
made partakers of the divine nature: and so by the assistance of the holy
Ghost S. Peter is by participatio^ said to be so directed by the ^. Trinity,
that his definitio^s shall be the definitio^s of the holy Ghost, according to
that, He that hears you hears me.

And not unlike is that of S Paul, I will fulfill that which is wanting of
passions of Christ. And by the participation of Gods grace we are said to be
heirs of God, coheires of Christ Romans 8. 187. And for this participation ^.
Greg. the 7. says incline thie ^ares oh S. Peter, prince of the Apostles: Not
meaning thereby to ask any thing of our B. Lady or of S. Peter, but only that
they would be intercessors for us. And since you conclude with this scoffing
Epiphonema: Thus roares the Lion of Rome, contemning so the holy Father of the
church, I will end this point thus with you. Thus That the Pope is not called
the Lord God the Pope.
in a lower keie braies our A. of Amsterdame against the victorious Lion of
Juda, and against B. Leo his vicegerent on earth.

187. But now your Artesmaster has taught you a further ^etch. For having
these words of s. Leo, he thinks he may prevail to deceiv the ignorant reader,
if to a point of truth he makes an addition of untruth; and so with a color he
goes further on and affirms, that the Canonists calls him our Lord God the
Pope, cum inter glossa extravag. Ioh. 22. Here the first untruth is that the
Canonists say as though it were a general rule or suppositum or an ordinary
style of the Canon law; when as yet there was never found any adversary of
ours so bold faced that durst tax any author but one and that but in one place.

188. 2. It is but Dominum nostrum Papa^, our Lord the Pope in many ancient
copies, in which God is wanting, which soundes no otherwise then this, our Lord
the King, and that it is an intrude^ corruption of the text may manifestly
appear by the manuscript of Zui^s the author of that g^e^^e, yet extant in the
Pa^i^^^ library, and may be seen there.

189. 3. Admitting it were so in the ram^on law, and in the Canonists which is
false, yet it would not follow in this style though in sound to (...) insolent
that we should make him or account hi^ our Lord God. For the scripture does
often honor men with the title of God, to signify thereby only the
participation of his grace or authority, so Psa. 8^ 6. I said you are Gods,
and children of the highest al: where those to whom the word is reveled be
called Gods as Christ himself does declare Joh. 10 35. Exodus 21. 6. Judges
also are called Gods. The cause of both shall be brought before the Gods Exo.
2. ^ and ^. thou shallt not detract from the Gods, Moses Exo. 7. ^ who is
called the God of Pharao.

190. As for that of deposition you seem to be ignorant of our opinion, For
we do not hold that the Pope has at his free liberty this power to depose,
but when all other means have been used, and for the universal good of the
church, and when there is a hopeful What we hold of deposition.
success. And this doctrine that the Pope has indirect authority over Princes
as s. Greg. Nazianz. teaches the foul may chasten the body when it is
rebellious to her end, so may the spiritual power use the best means for the
obtaining, and conserving her end to which the end of the temporal is
subordinate. And this indirect authority of the spiritual power over the
temporal is grounded on scripture Exodus 22. v. 18. Deuteronomy. 2^. 1. Deuteronomy. 17. 12
3. Reg. 18. 40 4. Reg. 10. 11. 1. Esdr. 6. 10 1. Esdr. 7 26. Psalm. 105. 34.
Dan. 3. ^6. Act. 5. et 13. 11. 1 Cor. 5. 6 Tit. 3. 10. 2. Joh. v. 10. Which
places we do not interpret so rigorously that it is lawful for the
comminaltie as you do to depose him; or that it is lawful to kill an anointed
King, which doctrine we abhor as bloody: A declaration of which we may give
Proofs out of holy scripture to prove S. Peter's primacie.
that of so many Antipa^es (though they are ever the greatest enemies to the
Sea Apostollicke) that ever any one was privately or publicly made away; But
how barbarous your procedings have been in that time to which you have not
answered.

191. Though I have proved before that S. Peter had pre-eminence of authority
above the other of the Apostles; yet I thought good to set down certain
proofs out of the holy scriptures to prove S. Peter's primacie, and so also
the Popes, and so then to confirm them by the authority of the holy fathers;
so that their authority citing scripture cannot ^ee refuseh. Math. 10. v. 2.
Simon is called first Mat. 15. 6. he changes his name that it now signifies,
a head or superior; and the channging of a name I proved commonly to be
mysterious. Mark. 16. 7. The Angel directs Peter to go before their as
there captain. Luc. 22. ^1. He prayed particularly for S. Peter that his faith
should not fail him; and viddes him confirm his brethren. Joh. 1. 42. He
calls him Cephas that is a great stone, a foundation stone Joh. 1^. 5. Christ
washed S. Peter's feet first John 20 4. S. Peter came first to the monument.
Joh. 21. 15. he bidds him 3. times feed his shee^. Act. 2. 14. Peter speaks
for the rest Act. 5. 4. Peter exercises first the power of excommunitation.
Act. ^5. 7. S. Peter in the council of Jerusalem first gives his definitive
sentence Gal. 1. 8. S. Paul came to Jerusalem to see S. Peter.

192 For the confirming of which primarie of S. Peter so established by holy
scriptures, the holy Doctors are s^^lai^e that falsehood it self cannot deny
it. For s. Clemens Romanus in the year of our Lord 80. says that S. Peter by
the merit of his faith was assigned Epistola 1. 2^ lacob^
to be the foundation of the church, and he is the first of the Apostles etc.
where you see that to be the first is to be the foundation of the church:
Dyonysius Areopagita in the year of our Lord 100. lib. de divinis nominibus c.
3^ teaches that St. Peter was The Greek fathers affirm the Popes primaci^.
supreme honor, and the ancientest head of divines: Hy^^olytus in the year
220. in his oratione de consummatione ^^ndi, calls S. Peter prince and rock of
faith. And Origenes in the year 230. in his 5. homily on Ex^^^s, he calls S.
Peter the rock and sollid foundation of the church; et ad Psalm. 1. as you may
read in Eusebius lib 6. ^. ^^: he calls Peter the rock against whom hell
gates shall not prevail; et 17. homil. in Lucam he calls him Prince of the
Apostles; and on the 6* to the Roma: he expounds that of S. John 20. of the
threefold charge of feeding his sheep to be made the foundation of the church.

193. And Eusebius Alexandrinus in the 260. in his homily of the resurrection
expounding those words, Say unto the Disciples and unto Peter, he there
declares how only to Peter he gave the keis. Petrus Alex: in the year 280. in
his sermon de Poenitentia calls Peter the Prince of the Apostles. And
Constantyne the Emperor in the year 280. in his donation calls Peter the
vicar of God on earth. And the first Council of Nice in the year 325. canone
39. Arabic^ calls the Bishop of Rome the prince of all the Patriarchs, S. A^ha.
in the year 340. in his epistle ad Felicem calls S. Peter the pillar on whom
of the foundation and Apostles of the church. And S. Basil the great in the
year 370 in c. 2. Esaiae; et in prohaemio de judicio dei; (...) in orat: 3. de
peccatis, et lib. 2. contra Eunomiu^ he calls Peter the prince of the Apostles
and foundation of the church; Cyrillus. Hierosol. in the year 370 calls Peter
the prince of the Apostles: ^^^echs: ^* and 11. he gives the reason in that
Math 17. wh^^ the ^^her Apostles were silent Peter confessed Thou a^t Christ
the son of the living God. S. Chrysostom: infers from thence whatsoever thou
shall bind on earth it shall be bound in heaven, that he is the foundation of
the church; and in his 83. homil, in Math. he inferrs the like ou^ of these
words I will build my church, and in the Psalm. ^0. he inferrs as much out of
these words Simon Simon S^^^a^ has sought.

194. And for the same primacie of Peter; the ^^^in Fathers are as plain,
Tertull: in the year 200. ^. 21. de pudici^ia on those words on thee I will
build my church; and to thee I will give my keys: he The Greek Fa^thers also
affime it.
inferres in that it is said whatsoever thou loosest and not whatsoever ye
loose that S. Peter was head. And s. Cyprian in the year 25^ lib. 1. epist. 8.
He says there is one God, one Christ, one church, one ehaire seated on S.
Peter by our saviors voice; And s. Cyprian lib. de vnitate Ecclesiae Cathol:
out of the words of S. Math. 16. Upon this roche etc. and of S. John the 21.
Feed my flock; and of S Joh. the 20. As my father sends me so I send you; He
shows there that S. Peter is the only foundation; and though the Apostles
were sent yet with a mission subordinate to S. Peter and to the virtue of his
chair. s. Ambrose in the year 370. out of these words, Mat 16. Upon this
rock I will build my church, he gathers that S. Peter is the rock. s. Hier. in
the year 380 ad. Ps 13 calls. S. Peter the head of the church et in ^. 16.
Mat. co^cording the rebuke of our Savior and the authority of S. Peter given
to him; he says that pre-eminence was only promised then, and after his
infirmity it was performed, et in his epist. 89. ad. Aug. c 2. he says S.
Peter was of such authority that S. Paul writes he came to ^ome to see S.
Peter. And S. Aug. in the year 400. in his book quaestionu^ veteris et novi
testam. q. 75. he inferrs that all the Apostles were contained in S. Peter's
firmness, that before you brought as an inference of great absurdity against
me; et in tract. 124. in Joh. he inferrs out of these words. Unto thee I give
the keys etc. et in sermon 5. in festo Petri et Pauli he inferrs from those
words, Unto thee I give the keys of the kingdom of heaven etc. That S. Peter
in the house of God is a stone to found, a pillar to sustain, and a ^^i to
govern and dispose.

195. And that the authority given S. Peter must be derived unto S. Peter's
surressors lawfully, elected, and governing at Rome I could prove by the
express authorities of all these Fathers cited, but That S. Petes authority
must be derived to his successors.
let reason it self suffice, for since our Savior did give the power of
^reaching, administering of sacraments, for the good of others to the ^ude of
the world. So Christ Jesus in instituting S. Peter the head would have that
pre-eminence derived to his lawful successors. Besides it was impossible that
Peter should govern all unto the end of the world, since the church was to
continue so long after, go. that authority was given to him, and to his
successors.

196. Here you dare me to bring in the arrow^s of the fathers, halberts of the
Counsels, bull^tts of schoolmen, and canons of ^^^onists in particular you
say you will answer them. Thrasonlike spoke. But I know for your refuge with
Theasoe you will take up your scand after the manipulum of dis^washers
expositions of these times for your safety, but all in vain. For no doubt so
many weapons will beat into Mammoks one already disagreeing from him self, and
whose chief points and arguments ar^ of themselves like (...) vnsocketed.

197. To these places of S. Ioh. 20, 21. S. Math. 28. 19. I answer the holy
Fathers have expounded in what sent these places are to be understood; and
except Mr. H. A. wili eat his word I must needs prefer their uniform
consent of so many worthy men before him, the like I answer to that of the Act
2. 17. 18. 1 Cor. 1. 17.

198. I answer to your seeming retorted reason taken out of the 1 Petri 5. 4
granting that S. Peter must feed his sheep only with the word of Christ
Jesus the chief; but here I say the word of God is either written, or
unwritten what have you then inferred.

199. But now to speak something of that false, malicious, and odious
blasphemy you have sprinkled through your treatise; All which applications if
tediousness, and respect of civilitie did not hinder me, I could nail those
marks and notes of the forcrunker of Antichrist to your forehead.

200 But it shall suffice to show in a word or two that the Pope The Pope is
not antichrist.
is not Antichrist.

201. First then if the Pope should be Antichrist it should follow for so many
hundred years that hell gates have prevailed against the church of God more
then against the Synagogne of the Jews contrary to the promised assistaunce of
the holy Ghost: And that most glorious Martyrs, learned Doctors of the church
as S. Cyprian 2 These. ^. 2. vide Iren^um lib. 5. c. ^ Hyppolit: in the year
2^^. in oratione de co^summatione mundi. D. Athams. in the year 340. quest. 29.
Cyrillus Hierosol: 300. cateches. 15. Greg. Kaz^ orat. 14. et 4^. D. Chrysostom.
orat 4. in 2. These 2 Cyrillus l. 3 in Ioh. c. 6. Divus Hier: q. 11. ad Algasi^.
S. Ambrose, S. Hier: S. Aug: S. Leo and all our forefathers should broile
eternally in hell fire in offering up homage to the beast.

202. 2. That the Pope is not Antichrist is proved; in that he shall be one
particular man, I came in my name and ye did not receive me; but another comes
in his name, and ye will receive him; where Christ Jesus opposes person to
person, place to place, kingdom to kingdom, sect to sect; but the Popes are
many successively; 2 These. 2. he is called the man of sin the son of
perdition.

203. 3. Antichrist shall be descended of the tribe of Dan Genes. Fuit Dan
coluber etc. 49. v. 17. Hier. 8. EDan audivimus vocem acutissimam equorum etc.

204. 4 Antichrist shall oppugn the mysceries of our Savior, Joh. 2. Who is a
liar but he that denies Jesus Christ. 2 These. 2. 2. He shall extol himself
above all that is said God.

205. 5. Those 7. mountaignes in the Apoca. are plainly said to be seven
kingdoms. None of which do agree with the Pope.

A^^ the ten horns are ten Kings: Cyrillus Alexand: oratione 7. in Danielem.

206. To answer every thing again that you repeat would but make me more
weary, and tire the reader. It is much that you grant the Popes primacie to
have been from the Council of Nyce, thereby to grant Antichrisme to have
reigned so long in Christendom. For the Popes loving of pre-eminence. As for
that of Diotrephes that you obj^ct is nothing to the purpose. And 1 Petri 5. 3.
Pre-eminence absolutely is not forbidden, but one secular pre-eminence with
example of life and humility. For Tit. 15. 16 It is said Haec doce, exhortare
et argue cum omni imperio.

207. My general reason you repeat thus. The Ecclesiastical Hierachie is no
worse governed they any temporal regiment For it is compared to a kingdom
governed by one King. Mat. 25. to a My general reason for the Popes primacie.
family well governed; Hebr:3: to a camp well ordered. Cant: 6. But in all well
ordered commonweals there is ever required some visible head or judge besides
the written law, since there must be a supreme to take notise of
controversies when they arise etc. there must be one to explicate the sense of
the lawe^ to pronounce sentence etc. and there must be one to compel those to
the due observation thereof.

208. Now since in the church there arises like difficults in the laws
explication etc. Therefore Peter's successor endued by the holy Ghost, with
gifts of grace in all difficults of moment is to be sought to for council, is
to be heard with obedience when he counsels, is to be obeyed when he
procedes with his powrefull jurisdiction.

209. Your answer is that this reason is faulty from the head to the foot.
Wherein you give the holy Ghost the lie that compare his church to the visible
government, and nothing so frequent in scriptures there is then by comparison
of terrestrial things to be instructed His answer refuted.
in caelestiall. But you must note that a similitude must not run on 4. feet
or agree in all, but in the primo analogato which you cannot infringe, 2. You
bring one falsehood to co^firm another. For though we say the Pope is to
explicate the law; yet he is not above the law in your sense; and all that
you cite proves only; that the scriptures are the partial explicators of
themselves Ezech. 44. 24 Deuteronomy. 17. 18. 20. ^ Cor. 2. 10. For as for outward
order in difficulties you grant that Pr^ists lips must preserve wi^dome or
knowledge.

211. You sat I miss proportion in making many commonweals, and but one
church: I understand one universal church which you grant one invisible. I
have proved one invisible, your proof is to small purpose. For in London then
we might infer there were as many churches as there he parishes, which would
be a fond or fruitless inference, except you understand material churches.

212. The third thing that you sat I am to prove: and the 7. They part.
and last that I am to prove here, is that the indeficient rule of our faith is
only to be found in the Catholic church; and not in private menssences and
illuminations, or motions of an unseen spirit; which See before a^n: 117. vsae
ad n. 135.
is against S. Joh. the 17. 11. Vt sint v^um St. et nos.

213. I prove this in that the Roman church is the only true and Catholic
church: this you sat if you should admit of, yet it proves nothing in that the
voice of the bridegroom and not of the bride is that you say we must believe,
Joh. 3. 29. 36. Ephesians. 2. 24. 4. 5 See before ^ 123.
16. As though that were false* of Christ, he that heared you hears me Luc.
10. 16. 18. Mat. 17. S. Joh. 14. 16. 26. Joh. 16. 19. 1 Tun. 3. 15 The church
of the living God is said to be the pillar and sir ^am^t See n. 123. By this
h^ would with Beza avoid the name Catholic which he cannot does if he grau^e
the article of belief I believe, the Catholic church.
of truth

214. I am gladd to hear you dente your self as in truth you are known to
be no Catholic. That you will not challenge your Mothers name shows your
degenerating spirit. For well might you be a Catholic member of a Catholic
church; but as others have been ashamed of that name, so also you; but the
truth is your church is not Catholic in that it has neither vniversallitie
of time, place or person.

215. That the whole world is replenished with our doctrine you slight over
with most impertinent places of scripture to infer the Pope to be Antichrist;
and you grant that the synagogue of the Jews in her flourishing ^ visibilitie
has excelled Christ's church, which is contrary to the predictions of the
Prophets and Apostles.

216. To the motives of evident credibilitie that may induce any man to
believe as the Roman church teaches, I proposed many motives, as her
antiquity, unity, vniversallitie, visibilitie: that See before n: 117. ad^ n.
135. Mr. H; A. snatchet^ but does not fasten on my motives. The Catholic
religion grounded nether on the spiritual or temporal profit or pleasure;
Not by the the policy of the clergy established No^ by the policy of the
temporal.
her doctrine was confirmed by the doctors; by the institution and institutors
of most holy orders, by the conversion of nations, by the power of miracles,
infinite number of Martyrs; All which notes and motives the ancient Doctors have
taken out of scripture to distinguish the true church; most of which you grant
we have; Only with your wrested places paralleld hereunto you se^k to confute
the^, but so lamely, that any man may see your answers are sudden snatches,
then true bitings, or wounds according to the nature of a madd dog, that
run headlonge and immediately snatcheth at any thing that opposes him.

217. That which you bring else where is to small purpose, or abundantly
satisfied elsewhere.

218. Now to conclude I prove by a common Argument in refuting your answer in
calling our motives carnal that we may bring to prove the Catholic church
the true church.

219. If our faith be so ancient as you confess, and allowed so long of all
sorts and conditions, if it be not from God it must be grounded on carnal
motives, viz. the profitt of the spiritual or temporal. But it smoothes
neither. And that it is not grounded on the inventio^ of the clergy for there
profitt, or pleasure is plain since they so strictly bind themselves to
chastity; vows, fasting, praying so long every day; and all these under
mortal sin, with all which burde^s they would not have laden themselves if
only policy had been their loadstone. Neither is it governed by the
policy of temporal Princes. For it cannot be immagined how ^o many
Empeperors, Kings, Queens; Princes would have teddered themselves under mortal
sin, as to confess their sins, to fast to restore etc. go. the religion
warranted by all the foresaid notes and so against the hair of humane
affection must needs be true that has (...) inviolable so long against so
many assaults of enemies, and heresies* For according to that before cited of
Gamaliel, if it be not of God it will be dissolved.

220. Thus having proved, and confirmed my doctrine, and refuted your grounds
and sacked the castle builded and raised by your own phancie and having
destroyed the golden caife of your self liking conceit to which you
sacrifize; I am to conclude admiring any The fearful resolution of their
religion.
one can be so fond as to follow you against the course of all times, the
records of History, consent of Fathers etc. And I bewail the fearful
resolution you shall make to Christ Jesus when he shall ask you why you believe
against the holy scriptures, explicated and warranted by all the motives, and
only because you persuade your self so.

221 Whereas our resolution at the eternal tribunal shall be full of
comfort; since we believe Gods word allowed by all those notes and warrants: ^
by the interpretation of the holy Fathers. Your plea shall not be like the
plea of that son that pretendes to be heir of all, saving of one penny* In
that his father made his His plea examplfied to be most ridiculus
brother haeredem ex ass, heir of one penie (as he interpretts.) When as the
grave tribunal, judge, learned Doctors, laws shows against him that to be
made haeredem ex ass is to be possessed, and invested in all; and not to have
one penie and no more.

222. So you say the sense of this or that parcel of scripture is as you
conceive though against the letter, as Hoc est corpus meum etc. and against all
Doctors and expositors, and records of time sh^wing the practice of the church.
As that Clients cause shall be full of fear; his plea ridiculous, the
sentence sure to pass against him with a hiss, and contempt of the whole
bench. So shall that irrevocable sentence of God pass against you in following
your own phancie against his word and the holy Catholic church the
expounder thereof: I pray God to averte his judgment and to wipe of the
scailes of your eyes that you may see and embrace the true church that with
the blasphemous breath of your nostrilles you have persecuted: From Justice
hall in Newgate the 13. of September siple veteri 1613.

3 Esdrae. 4. Magna est veritas et praevalet: Great is truth and prevails.
John Aynsworth.
Ad post script:

What I have said before, or hear have delivered, I have brought out of the
scriptures and their interpretation; and not against the scriptures (as you
object) except you would have that only to be scriptures that in sense fittes
the last of your own phancie. To conunence new disputes you know would be
endless; If you have nothing more to object, against this maine truth; begin
what you will and I shall answer: but only be advertised here that I make a
great impression of those words of S. John 2. x. 10. Si quis venit ad vos. et
hanc doctrinam non affert, nolite recipere eum in domum, nec Ave dixeritis.
Quie: dixerit illi Ave, communicate operibus ejus His style of salutation in the
fot^ front of his Pamphle^^
malignis: ercuse me then if in salutation or freindly complement of grace and
mercy (...). I do not comply with you: it proceeds not from the hatred of
your person whose conversion and salvation I desire, but of your heresies and
error, but to answer your grounds and Argum^^^^ I shall ever be ready.






The answer to I. A. his third large writing. To Mr John Aynsworth prisoner in
Justice hall in Newgate: grace and mercy from God, to find repentance unto
salvation.
TWo things (Mr. I. A.) I proposed to my self, when first I began to answer you
in these questions of religion: the defense of the truth, which God has
vouchsafed me mercy to witness; and 2. the saving of your soul from death by
turning you from your evil way unto Christ, if such were his pleasure. Now
although for this latter I have small hope left, seeing you so stiffly bent to
keep the religion ^ received by tradition of your fathers: yet for the first
respect I cannot be 1. Pet. 1. (...).
silent, for I have still what to answer in the behalf of God and of his
written word, against the reasons which you bring for the Pope and his
Traditions. The Lord guide my heart and hand, unto the mainteyning of his truth:
and if it may be, unto the gayning of your soul. You first profess S. 3. ^.
(...).
to have a reverend esteem of the scriptures, which you set down; and I like
well of. But somewhat you want: as That by the scriptures we come to believe in
Christ, and in believing may have life through his name. Ioh. 20. 31 That by
the^, the man of God may be made wise unto salvation, may be perfect, and
perfectly furnished unto every good work: 2 Timothy 3. 15. 16. 17. and therefore
that no man presume, above that which is written: 1 Cor. 4. 6. This if you
grant, (as you cannot with reason deny:) there will be no necessary or
profitable use of your unwritten traditions either for faith in Christ unto
life, for wisdom unto salvation, or for any good work. Whiles we therefore keep
us to this heavenly light of Gods written word so commended by your selves,
(though again you disclaym it as not sufficient without your Popes
traditions:) I may say with Moses. Deuteronomy* (...)* 31.
Their Rock is not as our Rock, even our enemies being judges.

You devide your treatise unto 7. parts.

The first thing which you promise, is to show that my reasons The 1. part of
your treatise.
(taken from the word of God,) do vanish of themselves. This you attempted
before, but were defeted: let us see now what your latter thoughts do bring
forth. For answer unto Deuteronomy. 5. 32. you ask, what S. 7. p. 99.
I can infer hence but that the law ought strictly to be kept, and that we
ought neither to add nor to take from the 10. commandments etc. I answer, you
strayten the words too much, in restreyning them to the 10. commandments: for
you may see before, (in Deuteronomy. 5. 4.-22.) that the people themselves did hear
the 10. commandments promulgated: and ^durst here no more, but prayed Moses
to go near and hear v. 25. 27.
the rest what God would say; and to declare all unto them. This he did, and
God told him v. 8. 31.
all the commandments ordinances and laws which they should do in Canaan:
whereupon he infers that general admonition, (v. 3^. 33.) touching all the
ways of God: and not the 10 commandments only. So your limitation being
weighed in the Lords balance, is found too light.

You proceed and ask, what this is to my purpose to prove that the written word
alone is sufficient to decide all controversies? I answer, I did express my
purpose was to prove this, That God only is to be the umpier and arbiter of
all controversies about religion: and whither it were by his word written or
unwritte^, I stood not upon that in this first point. This I told you plainly
before: and if your purpose were not wilfully to mistake and make needless
controversy; you would not (after warning) have done thus the second time.

Like fruitless labor you bestow to prove that the law of God should be
explicated by the Priests etc. A thing which I never doubted of: yea I hold
that the B. of Rome if he were as he ought to be, should spend all his days in
^. Tim. ^. 2.
explicating Gods laws to the people; and so should all Bishops in the world.
But Popes laws devises and traditions, should neither be explicated nor once
mentioned in the church without detestatio^.

You say, S. 8. p. 9^.
such addition is prohibited as is contrary to Gods law as appears Deuteronomy 4. 2.
3. where the idolatry with Beelphegor was punished for adding or diminishing as
the text implies. I answer, though you costreyn the text to seem to help you,
while you set that before which Moses setts after; yet to let that pass, I
grant that you say: if you understand it well. For seeing all additions to Gods
law is forbidden, whatsoever is added by others, is contrary to Gods law. Now
all addition is plainly forbidden Deuteronomy. 4. 2. and 12 32. Prove. 30. 5. Therefore
nothing can be added by your Pope or any, which is not contrary to the law of
God. Your Doctors whom you rely upon tell you the same: nothing is to be added
(says L. de p^radis. c. 12.
Ambrose) no though it seems to be good. That which has not authority from
the scriptures (says Comment. in Mat. 23. S. 9.
Hiero^) is as easily co^te^ned, as allowed. The answer you ^ give to Deuteronomy. 12.
32. is; what is here forbidden but an Hethen imitation, and immolation of their
children etc. Is here any pro hibition, of explicating the true sense of the
law? etc. I answer, you run into your former fault, abridging the scope of the
text. To imitate the hethens, was unlawful: but to divise things of their own
heads, yea and to imitate God otherwise then he commanded them, was wicked
also. Proof in Jeroboam, who made a feast not like the heathens, but like the
feast in Judah, 1 King. 12. 32. yet was it sinful, and the holy Ghost brandeth
him with forging the month out of his own heart, v. 33. Many of your Popes
idolatrous feasts, have nothing so good a color. And your devised worship of
Lord, Lady, Angels, Saints, Popes, Confessors etc. is not only an imitation
of the hethens; but an idolatry worse then many of theirs; as when we have
ended these questions in hand, I will undertake to prove unto you. As for
explicating the law; I before approved it.

Your former reason from the 4. commandment, you seek S. 10. p. 100.
to uphold with a staff of reed. For when God gives many commandments, why
will you make the keeping of one to be the keeping of all? In deed, if he had
given but one precept, and men had given the rest: it were somewhat that you
say. But they are all given by the same God, to be our Deuteronomy ^, 24. 25.
life and righteousness if we keep them. For man to add any thing to the 4 or to
any, or to all the commandments, is an odious syn. Mat. 15. 9.

Whereas against all additions to Gods word, I See page 55. 56.
alleged Prove. 30. 6. and Gal. 3. 15. to overthrow your fraudulent
distinction: you frame a reply S. 11. page 100.
to Gal. 1. 8. which place I produced not. In Gal. 3, 15. the Apostle shows
from the similitude of a man's Testament, that much more unto Gods, nothing may
be added. Against this, you having nothing justly to except: do choose to your
self an other place, more easy to pervert. What else does this bewray, but the
helplessnes of your cause? Now to follow your wa^dringes: What does Gal 1. 8.
say against that I set down? The word besides, means as you think, contrary
to, and not more then they had received: because he forbidds not any
explication or true gloss etc. I answer, you weary your self and others, to
prove that which none denies. Explications of Gods law by the mouth of his
ministers, are allowed of God, Nehem. 8. 8. these are not additions, such as
God forbiddes, Galat. 3. 15. Our question is of other or more laws or doctrines
then God has taught. And unto those which the Prophets had written, and Paul
with the other Apostles taught, none might be added. For he kept back nothing
that was profitable, but taught the whole counsel of God, Act. 20. 20. 27. so
then whatsoever men could add more or besides, was not profitable, neither any
of Gods counsel: therefore it was contrary, and so may be put among Popes
traditions. For their doctrines and traditions are as evidently contrary to
Gods word, as darkness is to light. Such be your image worship, contrary to Exo.
20. 4. your praying to creatures, contrary to Mat 4. 10. Romans 1. 25. service in
a barbarous unknown tongue, contrary to 1 Cor. 14. 11, 16. 28. robbing the
people of the chalice in the sacrament, contrary to Mat. 26. 27. justification
by men's works, contrary to Romans 3. 20. 22. 24. and 4. 2, 3, etc. and many other
idolatrous observations, as plainly contrary to Gods law, ever were the
abominations of the heathen. Finally Chrysostom, a Doctor whom you rely upon,
Chrysostom Gal. 1.
says that Paul prefers the scriptures, before Angels from heaven. Here
then (if you will believe him,) is no place at al for vnwritte^ traditions.
Whereas you S. ^^^.
bring Romans 16. 17. to show that para means contrary; no man denies it: but
that it signifies no more then contrary, in your sense, you prove not. In Romans
1. 25. you may see part ton ktisant^, means any thing ^^sides the creator
only. But our strife was not about para, or Gal. ^.

You S. 15.
(...), as the Prophets additions to Moses law, were Gods, so the churches
definitions are Gods, not man's. I deny your (...): the churches addition^,
which you call definitions are not Gods, as the Prophets writings, (...) were
added to Moses books: you are not far from blasphemy in making such a
comparison. If that were true, you might read and expound as authentic
scriptures, your churches additions and Popes traditions, as Christ read Esaias
the Prophet; and expounded hi^ in the synagogue, Luke 4. 1^. -- 21.

The proofs you would bring are, Luke 10. 16. he that hears you, hears me
etc. Mat. 18. 1^. 18. tell the church etc. Deuteronomy. ^9. 15. (or (...).) they shall
stand before the Lord, before the Priests etc. I answer, these scriptures show
not that they might add any thing to the word of God: but they prove the
contrary: For they were sent to preach the Gospel, Mark. 16. 15. and that was
Gods word, not any creatures: These 2, 2. 4. 13. So they were not additions not
definitions of their own: such as your church makes. Also the Priests were
bound to teach Gods laws, not their own, Ezekiel. 44. 24. And so the hearing of
them that teach Gods word, is the hearing of God himself in his ministers. But
the contrary: to hear the churches traditions is not to hear God: for they were
many against God, as you may see, Mark. ^ 3. 4. 9. 10. etc. For else behold what
strange doctrine you will bring in, viz. that every church, yea every priest
and minister, may make additions to Gods law; and the people must be bound so
to receive them as Gods word. Here to help your self, you retire to your old
skonce, saying S. 15.
it is true of particular churches, but so far as their doctrine accords
with the Somane catholic church. A mere fiction of your own head, what one
title of Gods word do you or can you bring for this stuffed? did Christin Luke
10. 16. speak to the church of Rome, more then to the Church of Corinch Ephesus
or any other? you make your Roman Church an idol, by putting her in Gods place,
Isa. 33. 22. Iam. 4. ^2.
to give laws, you make her a monster, whiles being a particular Church, you
proclaym her for the catholic, that is universal Church. And her doctrine, if
it accord not with Christ's, as it does not: is with her to be abhorred and
accursed. Gal. 1. 8. By this which has been said; let the prudent judge, how
soundly you have proved that any other word or doctrine, then Gods, may be
brought into the Church for a ground of our faith: which was the first thing in
controversy.

The 2. part that you are to prove (as you S. 18. p. 102.
say) is that the rule of our faith is not only the written word, but jointly
the unwritten 2. Part.
word of God, tradition, and the authority of the Church, councils, fathers is
the ultimate decider of all matters of controversy.

In this assertion you confasedly shuffle together for your advantage, the
church, councels, and fathers. By the Church you mean your Romish Church, which
is none of Christ's: and therefore can judge no Christian controversy. Councils
and fathers are named but for a show. For ^o^ regard nothing that Councils or
Fathers say, unless your Pope approve it. On the contrary I hold that Gods
written word is to be the rule of our faith, and by it all churches, Councils,
Fathers are to be tried, whether they be of God or no. But let us hea^ your
proof.

That which was say S. (...). p. 1^^.
you^ the total rule of our faith before the written word of God* man be well
the partial rule of our faith after, where the written word of God does not
sufficiently cru^^ss diverse mysteries of us to ve believed But tradition was a
sufficient and total rule of our faith till Moses time the first (...) of the
holy Ghost. Therefore tradition now together with the written word, is a
sufficient rule of our faith. The fir^ prop. you say (...) proved: the second
you ^a^ is granted by me* I answer, If the writings of God were as dark and
deceitful as is this your writing, it were woe with us all. In the first
proposition you say it may well be the partial rule of our faith: in the
conclusion you say, it to so. If I should say. It may w^ll be your argument is
deceytfull: and conclude therefore it is dece^tfull: would you grant the
conclusion? yet is it truer then yours, For that which was a rule before, may
be a rule still, if it please God so to continue it: this you need not labor
to prove. But that which was a r^^^ before, neither may nor can be a rule
still, when God has taken it away and put another in the sted. And this is the
very truth, if you would receive it. For before Gods law was written, it was
spoken, and by speech from the mouth of holy persons it was to be learned. But
now it is written, o^ Gods commandment, Exodus 34. 27. and so sufficiently
written, as Pa^th it is able to make us wise unto salvation, even perfect and
perfectly furnished unto every good work, 2. Tim. 3. 15. 17. away therefore with
your partial rule o^ unwritten traditions; they may not be, neither are they
any rule for our faith: for no^e must prefume above that which is written 1
Cor. 4. 6. But you ad a clawse to your proposition th^s; where the written word
does not sufficiently erpress diverse mysteries of us to be believed And where
is that trow we? I your assumption this clawse dares not show his face, for
there it would con^^nce you of falseshood. If you affirm it not, how frivolous
and deceytfull is your argumet? If you intend to assume it, though you express
it not, (for so elsewhere you blame me for not understanding your reasoning:)
then say ^ by your assumption you intend a lie against the truth, and a stander
against me. It is a ly against the truth to say, that the holy bible which we
have written, does not sufficiently express diverse mysteries of ^s to be
beleeve^: If have before disproved this by evident testimonies from heaven,
which you cannot withstand. Ioh. 20. 31 2 Timothy 3. 1^. 17. Romans 1^. 25. 26. 1
Cor. 15 3. 4. A^^ 26. 22 Ioh. 5. 39. It is aslander against me, when you say I
grant your Minor: for if this clause be there intended, I did and do dis^^aym
it.

Your conclusion can be no better then your premises: even false and
fraudulent. Which that you (or others at least) may the better espy, I will
show how you wrap up things in confusion and darkness. First Tradition, which
title you claym for your unwritten mysteries, is as well the word of God
written as unwritten, 2. These. 2. 15. but you do oppose it to the written
word. Secondly, holy Tradition or Doctrine by word of mouth, was delivered
always by holy persons: even as holy Tradition or doctrine by writing, was
delivered always by holy scriptures. The holy persons that spoke, were either
God himself, (as to Moses in the Mount; to Job Job. 38, 1. etc.
in the whirlwind:) or some Angel, (as to Ge. 22, 11. etc.
Abraham, Iaakob, etc.) or, some holy man of God, (as Peter 2 Pet. 1. 21
says,) Exo. 20. 21. ^2.
spoke being moved by the holy Ghost. So Abraham is Ge. 20. 7.
called a Prophet: and so was Genesis 49.
Iaakob and all the holy patriarchs from Adam to Moses. The manner of speaking
the word was also diverse, as Number. 12. 6. 8. Job. 4. 16 and 33, 14 15, 16. 2.
Sa^. 23, 2.
by visions, or by dreams, or by plain speech mouth to mouth, or by secret
motion of the holy Ghost. Now you show not which of these vvayes your
traditions come: only you give us a general paralogisme, which will serve
as well to maynteyn H. N. or Mahomet, with their new Gospel and Alkoran, as
the Pope with his new Canon law. For thus may Mahomet, or the Familist
reason: that which was a rule heretofore, may be a rule still: but the word
of God given by visions, revelations and instinct of the spirit, was a rule
heretofore: therefore it is so still; at least in part. Here is as good and
true an argument as yours: that your Logik will persuade as soon to
Mahometisme, or Familisine; as unto Popery. Now as for the persons, there vvil
be no disparagement. For Mahomet himself, or H. N. will as easily be proved
to be holy men of God, as Pope John the 23. who was judged by the Council
Sess. 11, and 12.
of Constance to be a divil incarnate; and as other your reprobate Popes that
were monsters among men, for their beastly life til their dying day, as your
own vvriters do record, and your self in this your vvriting deny it not, nor
defend them herein. And now I pray you tell me, why men may not be induced by
your manner of reasoning, as well to receive the Turks Alkoran, and H. N. his
Evangelium regni, as your Popish decretals. I find no more mention in Gods
book, that the Pope of Rome in the west churches, should be a divine person to
give heavenly traditions, then that Mahomet in the East, should be the man of
God. You find not so much as the Popes name, much less his provvd office spoken
of (for good) in the Bible. You tell us of the promise to Peter, Mat. 16. and
Mahomet tells us of the promise of the comforter, Ioh. 16 7. That the Pope is
head of the church, is as impossible for you to prove by Gods law; as it is
for the Turks to prove that Mahomet is that Comforter. You would have us take
the Popes own word for a vvarrant: the Turks would have us take Mahomets
word for a vvarrant. The truth is, these both with their new doctrines and
traditions, are the curse and scourge of God upon the world; because they
received not the love of the truth, therefore God has sent them strong
delusion to believe lies, as the Apostle prophesied: 2 These. 2. 10. 11.

You S. 10, p. ^02.
proceed, and for unwritten tradition cite some scriptures, Deu. 32 ^. Ps. 43.
1. and Ps. 77. Pro. 1. 8. Esa. 38. 19. Ier. 6. 16. Ecclus. 8. 11. 4. Esd. 14.
^. 2. These. 2. 15. 1. Tim. 6. 20 2. Tim. 2. 1 from all which you p. 10^.
infer, that Israelites and Christians were to be directed by the help of
traditios. I answer, your reasons from most of these and the like places, I
have taken away in my See page 25. 26. 72.
former writings. Here you repete the same scriptures again but answer not
what I said: you may thus do a 100. times, and weary men with your
tautologies Unto the things which heretofore I vvrote (and vvhereto I referr
you) I now add. All parents were bound to teach Gods law to their children;
and children to hear and obey their parents in the Lord. Deuteronomy. 6. 7. Ephesians. 6.
1. 4. If this serves for traditions, then unwritten verities from all parents
mouths, were to be received as oracles of God. If you hold thus, I pray you
tell it plainly: If not; then show which parents had the faculty to teach
traditions, and which had not.

2. The traditions which those scriptures speak of, being now written as in
Ps. 44. and 78. etc.
are a part of the canonical bible to be read and expounded in the church, as
being 2 Timothy 3. 1^
inspired of God, profitable to teach etc. if such be the traditions of your
fathers, Councils, Popes, which the world sees now written; then are they to
be acknowledged also scripture inspired of God, (as Paul speaks) and so to be
read and expounded in churches, as other books of the Prophets and Apostles.
For all Gods divine oracles and traditions, are of equal authority. If you
esteem your decretals of this vvorth, I pray you tell me in your next. If not,
then the scriptures by you cited, will justify your Popes traditions, no more
then the Pharisees, Mar. 7, 3 6. 7. 8 9. - 13.

That the Doctrines taught by the fathers in Psalm. (or as you reckon 43. and
77.)
44. and 78. were vvritte^ traditions, the particulars in the Psalms do
evince, against your too bold asseveratio^s. For the casting out of the
hethens, and planting Israel, spoken of in Ps. 44. was largely written in the
book of Joshua. The things rehearsed throughout Psa. 78. are written in Exo.
Number. Ios. Sam. etc. So the evident scriptures do co^vince you. The old and
good way, Ier. 6. 16 was the law taught by Moses and the Prophets, Psa. 103,
7. Deuteronomy. 8. 6. and 9. 12. and 11. 22. 28 and 31. 29. Judge. 2. 17. this law was
written, and to this did the Prophets call the people Isa. 8. 20. Mal. 4. 4.
and from the other ordinances of their fathers, Ezekiel. 20. 18. And this, with
the accomplishment of the promises upon them that vvalked therein, was the
truth which the fathers should tell their children, Isa. 38. 19. as appears
Deu. 6, 6, 7. Ioh. 17, 17. And the things which Solomon teaches as a father
Prove. 1. 8. etc. are written in that and other his books, Prove. 22. 20. Eccl.
12. 10. and of other things he wills us to take heed, Eccle. 12. 12. That
strange it is, any man reading the scriptures, should plead against them as
insufficient to teach us all doctrines needful for salvation.

Unto Ecclus. 8. 11. (I think you mean v. 8. 9.) I answer the book is not
authentik, and so proves nothing, yet if the author mean the Elders doctrine
agreeable to the law: his counsel is Mal. 4. 4. Isa. 8, 20.
good. If he mean other humane traditions of the Jews; then I answer, the
vvisdome of Jesus the soon of Sirach herein is proved to be foolishnes, by the
doctrine of Jesus the Son of God, Mark. 7. 7. 8. - 13.

Unto 4. Esdr. 14. 5. 6. I answer; the author is a fit man to bolster up popish
traditions, by 2 These. 2, 9
signs and lying wonders. He tells (as you S. 23. p. 104.
allege) of doctrines that Moses was not to teach but to hide. These then
apperteyned neither to law nor gospel, Deu. 32. 4. Rom 10, 5. 6. 8. I am
content therefore, that they go among the Popes decrees. He tells that Gods
law was 2 Esdr. 14. 21. 22. and chap. 4. 23.
burnt, and that he would write again all that had been done in the world
since the beginning. This lie is worthy to be put into your Legendaurie: But
what forgeries will not you bring to help your Pope withal. To this also you
may ad if you please, your tale fathered upon Dyonysius Areop. with the writer
thereof: as unlike that Dionyse in Act. 17. as Es^ras the 2. was to Ezra the
first.

Unto 2. These. 2 15. I answer, all Paul's traditions I will gladly admit of:
but not of the Popes therefore, any more then of Mahomets. Besides Paul taught
nothing but from the vvritte^ law, Act. 26. 22. yea that which he taught by
word to these Thessalonians, was from the scriptures, as you may see, Act. 17.
1. 2. 3.

Unto: 1 Timothy 6. 20 and 2. Tim. 2. 1. I answer as to the former: whatsoever
doctrine is Apostolik, is also authentical: and I embrace it. The thing
committed first from God to Paul, from Paul to Timothy, from Timothy to
others, was the sound doctrine of the Gospel, 1. Tim. 1. 11. ^. Tim. 1. 10.
11. All which is written in the bible, sufficient for faith, for all good
works, and for wisdom unto salvation, 2. Tim. 3. 15. 17. So that unwritten
traditions are needless for the gospel of life; though necessary I grant for
the stablishment of Popery. Besides you mark not, that this committing of the
word to Timothy, and by him to others: will carry the crown away from Peter's
feighned successor the Pope. That Timothies successors at Ephesus, have more ^o
show for themselves, the^ the Bishops of Rome, for authority of unwritten
traditions, if any there be.

Whereas you say S. 23.
S. Paul spoke the hidden mysteries in secret: I know not where you learned
this, unless by some secret tradition at Rome. For if they were the hidden
mysteries of the Gospel; Christ willed Mat. 10, 27
them to be preached openly; and Paul himself testifies that they were Ro^.
16. 25 26.
published among all nations, even to Colos. 1, 23.
every creature under heaven. and he vvrote his Epistles (which conteyn the
hidden Ephesians. 3, 4
mysteries of the wisdom of God) to whole churches to be read to 1 These. 5.
^7.
all the brethren* True it is he taught them orderly, first the rudiments of
religion or doctrines of the beginning of Christ, which he calls 1 Cor 3, 2.
Heb* 5, ^.
milli: then, the higher mysteries which he caleth strong meat. Which order of
his, all good Bishops and ministers of Christ should follow still, in feeding
their flocks. But that the mysteries of Christ should be spoken by him in
secret, so as the younger Christians might not freely hear or read them, as you
gather: is a tradition of your own. There is none of his Epistles, wherein you
may not find both milk and strong meat: and as he vvrote, so he spoke in his
sermons. It may be you have reference to 1 Cor. 2. 7. we speak the wisdom of
God in a mystery, even the hidden wisdom etc. If so, then you corrupt both
Paul's words and meaning. The mysteries were not hidden or conceled from any
Christian: but from the princes of the world, and natural man* as the words
following manifest 1 Cor. 3. 8. 14. and hidden, not as unlawful for them to
hear, but as impossible for them to understand Act. 28, 26 2^.
though they heard: because in their vvorldly wisdom, they despised God. 1
Cor. 1, 18, 20, 21. etc. Thus men may see into what strayts you are driven to
find out your traditions, which cannot be mainteyned but by wresting the texts.
The 3. Part.


The 3. thing which you undertake to show, is, that your reasons for all my
answers remayn in full force. you repete ^. 26, page 105.
your ^ reason thus.

That which is not known for Gods word, cannot be the rule of faith. But
scriptures by themselves are not known for Gods word: go. Scriptures by
themselves are not the rule of faith.

I answer, first by imitating your argument thus.
That which is not known for Gods word, cannot be the rule of faith.
But Popes traditions are not known for Gods word.
Therefore Popes traditions are not the rule of faith.
On the contrary I reason thus.
That which is known for Gods word, is to be the rule of faith.
The holy scripture is known for Gods word.
Therefore it is to be the rule of faith.
The first proposition is by your self here proved.
The second, was also by your self graunced S. 3. where you said of the
scriptures thus, we reverence them as Gods holy word, derived from the fulness
of truth etc.
The conclusion must follow of the premises: so the truth has won for the
book of God: and your error for unwritten traditions must give place: or else
your own mouth shall condemn you.

Secondly I answer, your argument is deceytfull as your former was. For (to
omit, that it is all of negatives, which in strict reasoning should not be,)
you add a term in the 2. proposition which was not in the first, viz, by
themselves, which also you put in the conclusion. This is no right nor
faithful way of reasoning. If (as your manner is) you would have me to
understand it in the first: I will so. Then it is thus: That which is not by
it self known for Gods word, cannot be the rule of faith. This now I deny: and
your proof is vvanting. The proof which you make for it as you had set it
down* I admit of concer^ing the word of God: only where you extend Gods
word, to the definitions of the church etc. I run not so far with you. But
require you to prove your churches, councils, fathers definitions, to be Gods
word: which you do not.

Your 2. proposition I deny: for the scriptures by themselves (without your
traditions) may as easily be known for Gods word; as the Sun in the firmament
may be known to give light, without a candle. This I will manifest hereafter.
Yo^ S. 2^*
seek to prove your a^^ertion by authority of men. That I refuse as
insufficient, by authority of Christ who theweth their religion to be vayn,
which teach for doctrines the precepts of men Mat. 15. 9. Secondly you allege
a reason. Since we do not see or hear God in his known Prophets to write or
speak the word etc. there must (you say) be one certain rule or depositum
fidei. As 1 Timothy 6. 20. 2. Tim. 1. 13. 14. have thou a form of sound of words
etc. whence you gather that Christians must keep acertain platform of words
delivered to them over and above Paul's epistles: amongst which you name for
one, Transsubstantiation. I answer, first God his vvisdome, power majesty,
truth etc. are to be seen as evidently in the vvritings of the Prophets and
Apostles; as his eternal power and Godhead are to be seen in the creatures of
the world, Romans 1. Ps. 19. although Atheists cannot see these in the one, nor
Papists in the other. Secondly as men do not hear God vocally in his Prophets:
so if they did hear him in them, or in Christ his son, yet could they not
believe, unless Gods spirit illuminated their hearts, John. 12. 37. 39. So your
reason is against Christ himself, as well as against the ^pture. Thirdly the
church (whereto you would send us,) when 1. ^ayth this is Gods word, how
shall men know it so to be, any more then they knew the words that Christ
spoke to be Gods? unless you lift up your church above Christ.

Fourthly, what church mean you; Greek, or Latin, or Ethiopian? and how
shall men know Christ's Church from Antichrists? And if the Latin church tell us
the fables of Tobit and Judith, are Gods canonical scripture; and the Greek
church say they are nor, but apocryphal; which of these shall we believe?
Thus you would draw us into a wilderness, wherein we may loose all stay of
faith, and fall either into despayr or atheism.

To those words of Paul I have answered before: and (to let pass your
mistaking as if he did inioyn a sound of words, as you write;) further I
would have you manifest if you can, who are Timothees successors and with
whom he left Paul's depositum, as you call it? And how a man may know your
kenophonie and monstrous word of Tra^substantiatio^, to be one of Paul's holsom
words, rather then the Lutherans Consubstantiation?

Your contending S. 29.
against the distinction which I gave of believing things necessary to
salvation, and other things not necessary, as, whither Peter were ever at Rome
or no, and the like: I leave to the judicious reader, seeing you cannot or will
not understand and rest in the truth.

Your marginall S. 30. p. 106.
argument, that The written word is not proved by an other written word;
therefore by tradition: I reject as false and inconsequent: so proved in my
former* See page ^7. 18. 59.
vvriting. You in reciting the scriptures which I brought, do maym the texts,
to ease your shoulders, In John 20. 30 31. you leave out these words, and that
in believing you might have life through his name. So in 2 Timothy 3. 16. 17. you
^. 31.
neither mention nor answer this, that by the scriptures the man of God may be
perfect and perfectly fitted unto every good work. Whereby ^ proved that faith
unto life, and every good work may be learned out of the scripture, as I
inferred. When you cannot answer, you call me the perverter of the holy Ghost.
Let the prudent judge.

Unto your answers S. 32. etc. p. 106.
made to my evident demonstrations by the book of God, that the scriptures and
spirit of God are sufficient to prove and approve themselves to every
conscience: I need not make any replye, but leave it unto judgment. But to help
you (if it may be) I will breefly note your oversights. 1. You allege my words
sundry S. 3^. 3^. 34.
times as if I had said, Gods spirit is in all people: which I never spoke nor
thought, but proved the contrary by Ioh. 14. 17. I said Gods spirit is in all
his people: which if you doubt of, see Rom 8. 9. 16. 1 Ioh. 2. 27. You barely
say (and prove not) that in actu 2. the scriptures need testimony of others,
besides God and his spirit, and themselves; meaning your Church and Pope: you
seem to say the like of Christ himself; as others of your side h^ve plainly
spoken. By which blasphemy, God must be beholding to men, Christ to the Pope,
that by their witness men may believe in Christ and his word. The contrary is
evident by Mat. 16. 17. flesh and blood (says Christ) has not reveled it unto
thee, but my father which is in heaven. See also Gal. 1. 16. 17. and 2. 6. 9.
3. You are often up again with your bastard phrase of the private spirit;
whereas al Gods children, have the public or catholic spirit (if you will
so call it) as I plainly proved in my former vvriting; and you have nothing to
say against it, but that the spirit S. 8^*
works otherwise in the head then in the foot: which is a manifest
tergiversation, whereof in due place.

4. You carry your self in this passage about the spirit of God, as a sish out
of the element; as having no relish or feeling of this heavenly grace, whereat
I much marvel not, though I am sorry for it. Enter into your self and see by
what spirit you do discern the Pope to be Christ's vicar (as you suppose) and
his traditions to be Christ's oracles. Will you not say it is by the spirit of
God? Now we are assured that Christ is more able to furnish us with the
spirit of God, then the Pope is to furnish you. That you perceive not Gods
spirit to be in us, but S. ^5.
reproach us, it is not strange: for the world (as Christ Ioh. 14. 17.
says) sees him not neither knows him. Your fathers also could not perceive
Gods spirit to be in Christ himself, but said he had an Mark. 3, 30
unclean spirit: and we his servants are not better then our Lord. 5. So for
the majesty of the scriptures shining as the sun in his strength; and by their
majesty, wisdom, harmony etc. proving and approving themselves and one an
other to the faithful conscience; you turn and vvind, because S. 36.
we cannot persuade the Arians etc. by conference of scriptures to believe
aright. It is not what we can persuade others, but our selves. For there are
many Arians and other heretik^ which you with your fathers, councils, Popes,
are not able to convert. Yet you think your Popes decrees are Gods word: and
we know that the holy scriptures are so indeed. And the more to convince you,
look to your Mr. (as you called him) Cardinal Bellarmine, and see a sound
argument of his, to prove the knowledge and assurance of the scriptures to be
of God, by the testimony of the scripture it self. Bellar. de verb. dei I. 1.
c. 2. argument 4.

6. You ask S. 37. p. 108.
a question thinking to entangle me, what the seal of the spirit is: and you
suppose diverse answers. Because you are so partial a judge of my spirit, I pray
ask your Pope, what the seal of his spirit is, and how he discerns scripture,
and whither he build without ground, as you say I do Look what he can well
answer for himself to satisfy your conscience; that think to be answered by me.
In the mean while, mind that the seal of the spirit is for my own assurance and
comfort: which concerns an other man nothing. 2 Cor. 1. 22. 1 Cor. 2. 11.

7. You having my answer already, do refuse S. 38.
it: saying it is most false that the scriptures are distinguished (from other
books) by themselves, as light from darkness For then (say you) every one that
had but natural perfection of the organ and free proposing of the object,
should distinguish this light. This (say I) is most true: for the law of God is
a light, Prove. 6. 23. which when it is by him free proposed, and the organ that
is the mind of man (which now is 1 Cor. 2. 14.
blinded) recovereth natural perfection, that is to say, is Ephesians. 1. 17. 18.
illuminated or renewed in knowledge Colos. 3. 10.
after the image of him that created it* every such man with his perfect organ,
sees the word of God to be in the scriptures, as every man that has a perfect
natural ey, sees the light of the sun: and can assure himself hereof, though
he go not to Rome to ask the Pope whither the sun gives light or no. But you
are as a man without sense, that though the sun shine at noon day, yet if the
Pope say it is midnight you will believe him: and so on the contrary. For you
S. 3.
profess to believe each part of scripture to be Gods holy word, derived from
the fulness of truth. Now this is because the Pope tells you so, and he tells
you also that the books of Tobit, Judith, Maccabees, etc. are scripture
canonical, although in them there be apparent lies, as you may see Tobit 12.
15. compared with Tob. 15. 18. Judith 9. 2. compared with Genesis 49* 5. 6. 1 Mac.
6 16. compared with 2. Mac. 1, 16. 2 Mac. 1. 19. compared with 2 King. 25. 1.
etc. so 2. Mac. 1. 20. 21. 22. 31. and many the like. Now though the Apostle
says, no lie is of the truth, 1 Ioh. 2. 21. yet you believe these lies are
derived from the fulness of truth; because the Pope will have it so to be. Thus
the blind lead the blind into the ditch.

So you do not by your private spirit, (as you S. 40.
say) distinguish heritiks from true believers, but by the definitions and
declarations of the church; that is (I trow) of the Pope. I showed you a better
way by the Apostle, 1 Ioh. 4. 1. 4. but you love darkness better then light. And
by your grounds, if you had lived in Christ's days on earth, you would have
distinguished Christ as an heretic from true believing Jews, by the
definitions of that Ioh. 9. 22.
church and Preisthood.

Unto Jews, you confess S. 41.
you must show other grounds, then your Popes authority: But if they retort
upon you your private spirit, as you do to me, either your mouth is stopped,
or your conscience in pleading against me as you do, is corrupted. Yea when
you are driven about the high Priests that condemned Christ, to say S. 43.
their ignorance was most vincible by their own law, (which was the
scriptures:) your own mouth gives sentence against you. For by the same law,
say I, the ignorance of your Romish Preisthood is most vincible also. Your own
traditions are of no more force against us, then the Jews Mar. 7. 5. etc.
were against Christ.

You charge me with S. 44. etc. to 54. p. 109.
racking many wrested places of scripture to prove the church of God invisible:
and you oppose many scriptures against it: I answer, either your care was
little, or your conscience was large, to write so untruly. The question was
whither the church erred or no: that I proved by See before, in p. 62. 63.
many examples and testimonies of scripture, (as is to be seen in my former
writing:) when your mouth is stopped her in, you pass by all that I alleged,
and turn to another matter wherein you seem to say somewhat, and answer S. 45.
46. 47. etc. p. 110.
unto scriptures which I mentioned not. I mean to hold to the point, and not to
follow your wanderings; which are in the moveable paths of that strange woman,
Pr^ 5. 6*

That which you answer S. 54. etc. p* 111.
to my demonstration of the Lab^ri^th of your religion, leading to the Pope
etc. I shall not bestow labor to reply upon, but leave it to judgment: and so
for S. 57. 58.
your answers to the scriptures by me alleged; for I will not strive to have
the last word. Whither I answered nothing (as you say S* 56.
) to your reason, let the reader page ^4. 2. Argument
see.

Your 2. Argument from the hardness of the scriptures you again ^. (...). p. 112.
repete and dilate. Seeing you make no other proof then was before, I vvil not
follow you to repete my answers, but referr to my former page (...)*
writings.

To prove. 8. 8. 9. you reply S. 66 p. 113.
it is to be understood either of general doctrine, or of precepts of manners
and good life. I answer, you ought not so to restrayn it. For wisdom there
says al her words are righteous, all are plain: will you say, nay? general
doctrines are plain, but not particular: precepts of manners, but not of faith.
Belike then the Prove. 9. 13
foolish woman, (that whore of Babylon, Apo. 17.) must explayn matters of
faith, and particular doctrines. Well, I shall content me with Wisdoms plain
words, and what she teaches not, I regard not to learn: if you will needs
go to the banquet of stolen Pro. 9. 17.
waters and hid bread, know that the ^. 18.
dead are there, if you will take warning.

Where I showed how your Popes determinations make Gods law more hard to simple
men, instancing the second commandment, corrupted by your glosses and
distinctions.

You take upon you to S. 67.
defend your image worship by the brazen Serpent and Cherubims. And might not
Jeroboam so have defended his golden calves? Gods law says Exodus 20.
Thou shall not make to thy self any similitudes: thou shall not bow down to
them nor worship them: you make many similitudes of God, Christ, Angels, men,
women, cross, etc. and ye bow down before them, whereas the similitudes
which God commanded were not to be vvorshiped, as you do the Cru^^m ^ ^am
ador^mus Domine.
cross: the brazen Serpent which you allege, shows it. Besides will your
Pope take upon him Gods place and power, and make what images he thinks good,
because God made such as pleased him? Why then if he had lived in Ieroboams
days, he might have made a Temple at Bethel, because God made one in
Jerusalem: and set up Priests, altars, sacrifices of his own head, because God
had appointed such in Judah. And now, let your Pope make new Churches, new
Sacraments, new Ministeries, yea and an other Testament, because Christ did so.
But for your idolatries, they perteyn to an other place then this* I leave it
to the judgment of every godly heart, vvhither your Popish glosses, decrees,
distinctions etc. be not more dark and intricate then the holy scriptures,
which are Psa. 119. 105.
a lamp to our feet and a light to our paths. And as for your Councils and
Fathers, to whom so often you flee for help, when holy scriptures fayl you:
they are so cross and intricate in themselves and one to another: that the Pope
with all his guard could never yet, neither ever will be able to reconcile
them. Your Mr. Cardinal Bellarmine uses them as men do Counters, that
sometime stand for pounds, sometime for half pence. So he sometime allows
the Doctors, sometime dismisseth them as erring from the truth. Yet you to
brave your cause muster their names, whose virtues you do not imitate.

You much S. 68, p. 114.
blame me as for wilful error in citing Card. Bellarmines vvritings as the
determinations of the Pope. Bear with me, I knew not that your Cardinal had a
private spirit differing from your Pope: and bear part of the blame with me
your self, that referred me in your former vvriting to answer Bellarmine your
master.

Unto my proof from 1 Cor. 4. 1. that the other Apostles were dispensers of
Gods mysteries as well as Peter: and so other Bishops now, as well as the
Bishop of Rome: you answer, S. 69. 70. 71.
they be all alike in power of order, but not of jurisdiction. This your
distinction I deny, and in my former See page 29. 30. 80. 81.
vvritings disproved it: and you bring not, neither can bring any word of God
to confirm it: and therefore as your manner in such exigents is, you flee to
humane authority. Now I grant that your Popes throne is from men; or from the
Dragon Rev. 13. 2.
if you will. But Gods word says, A man can receive nothing, unless it be
given him from heaven: John. 3. 27.

From this you S. 72. p. 115.
pass to Act. 15. (afterward you S. 80.
go back again to other things that in order were before.) I answered twice
your reasons from that scripture, showing how you constreyn it beyond all
reason: yet the 3. time you press it thus From v. 6. the Apostles and Ancients
assibled: you note it against us, that would (you say) have all men to give
their voice and be present in council. I answer, in v. 4. it is showed they
were received of the Church, and of the Apostles and ancients. In v. 12. it is
said, all the multitude kept silence. In v. 22. it is said, it seemed good to
the Apostles and ancients with the whole church to send etc. In v. 23. the
letters were thus written, The Apostles ancients and the brethren, unto the
brethren etc. and v. 25. It seemed good to us when we were come together
with one accord etc. All which do manifest that the people were present,
and not the Apostles and ancients only; as you from an usual figurative
Synechdoche.
speech in v. 6. mistaken would collect.

From v. 7. you S. 73.
gather, that when there was made a great disputation, Peter rising up and
speaking by his authority composed that great dispuration, that is settled the
height of their difference, which argues superiority. And eftsoons you* press
this word great disputation, for Peter's rising up was before proved to be but
a staff of reed for the Pope* I answer, you dally with the holy scriptures
unsufferably. The argument if it will help you should be this. Whosoever in a
Council when there is great disputation rises up and speaks, he is head of
that council; yea and of the universal church. But Peter in a council, when
there was great disputation rose up and spoke: therefore he was head. I deny
your first proposition: as strayned against scripture and light of reason. And
I would pray you in sooth to answer, vvhither in the many contentious Councils
which have been since the Apostles days, there have not been sundry men that
rose up and spoke when there was great disputation: and vvhither they were all
heads of the church therefore. That which you add, of Peter's composing the
great disputation by his authority; is not of the text, but a gloss of your
private spirit.

Your S. 74. 7^
extenuating of the Apostle James his authority, who spoke last, and gave
Krino.
judgment or sentence v. 19. shows how partial you are for S. Peter. But I
will cease from answering words of vvind. Let him that reads that scripture
judge, vvhither of the two had the chiefest place.

Your exception S. 76. p. 116.
that it is not said Peter spoke those words risen but when he was rising; (as
if you would put a cushion under him to sit down again:) is altogether
unworthy to be answered. For, (besides that the very same speech is used of
Gamaliel, as I told you, in Act. 5, 34.) you might even as well say, that Peter
went not to Ioppa risen, but when he was rising, Act. 9. 39. and that Peter
was sent to go Act. 10. 20.
to Cornelius, and Paul to go Act. 22. 10.
to Damascus, not when they were risen but when they were rising: seeing
there is one and the same Anastas.
word and phrase used in all these and sundry other like places. But such
traditionall expositions of holy scripture, is your church fayn to use for
want of better, to bolster up her preeminence.

Gamaliel (you S. 77. 78.
say) spoke rather as a friend then as a judge: as a Cardinal in the Popes
conclavi, rather then as a Pope. Be it so: yet he Act. 5. 34.
rose up I trow when he spoke: so then rising up to speak, is no proof of
superiority: and you might have spared this strife about your frivolous reason.

Yet from Act. 13. 16. you S. 79. p. 117.
would gather by Paul's rising up in the Synagogue, that he was chief
preacher. Well, let your argument from rising to speak, be laid up in the Popes
conclavi: for to prove his preeminence if need be, to speak in a church, as
Paul did in that synagogue.

You bethink you, and turn S. 80.
back to your other pervered place of 2. Pet. 1. 20. cited (as you pretend) by
you thus, No prophesy is made by private interpretation, which you say I call
and do not prove a bastard phrase. I answer you twice cited it, private
spirit interpretation, and had written it so this third time, but blotted out
the word spirit. Your own hand writing therefore convinces you of untruth,
not me of bad conscience as you charge me. I did and do call it a bastard
phrase; as being of your own or of the Popes begetting, for The Apostle Peter
neither spoke nor meant so. You add to his idias epiluseos.
words, and therefore are reproved of God, Prove. 30. 6. you swary from your
authentik Latin Propria interpretatione. Englished by Mr. I. A. private spirit
interpretation.
translation, and therefore are reproved by your own canon law.

I proved by the scriptures, Ephe. 4. 4. Romans 12. 4. etc. 1 Cor. 12. 4. 8. 9.
etc. that there is but one spirit which al Gods people have; though in diverse
mesures; as man's body has but one soul or spirit to quicken it. This you not
being able to deny, do vvind away, and except; S. 80.
though it be the same fowl, yet it works otherwise in the head, then in the
foot etc I answer, it is very true. You infer then, that so it belongs to the
head of the church and not to every craftsman, to interpret scriptures. Why:
are there no members in a man's body, between the head and the heels: that you
make such a leap? Is there no mean between the head and every craftsman? What
place then is there for your Cardinals, Bishops, Priests, Doctors, Jesuits etc.
they are not the head of the church: yet you think them higher then the feet.
But if this your answer be good, then though Peter were head (as you
erroneously think,) I hope the spirit wrought otherwise in him then it did in
that divil incarnate Pope John the 22. and in other your monstrous and wicked
Popes; as your own friends do witness against them. Then had those beasts a
private spirit; worse then any an honest craftsman: then it belonged not to
them to interpret scriptures. No nor to your Priests and Jesuits unless you
will make them heads? A little after, S. 82.
touching Pope Stephen, who repeled the decrees of his predecessor Pope
Formosus: you would have him to do this, not as the head of the church, but
out of the violencie of his private spirit. I like well of your answer, and
think the very same of all the Popes traditions: and therefore the private
spirit, which so often you entwite me with; I return into your own hands, to be
kept as the Popes Depositum.

You pretend, S. 83.
that for all the wickedness of some Popes, God has still preserved the unity
of faith in your church. And that never any Pope by his definitive sentence did
define heresy. I answer, if the Pope may be judge as with you he is, I
vvarrant you he will never condemn himself of heresy. But if Gods word be
judge, many heresies are easy to be found in your late council of Trent and in
many Popes decrees. Which will come to be scanned in particular doctrines,
after these general grounds are ended.

Your digression S 85.
to another writer, I omit: you may seek answer (if you please) of himself.

And your author ^o whom you S 88.
send me for satisfaction about your Popes power of dispensations, I shall read
when I have leisure thereto.

Your 3. Argument you S. 89. p. ^19.
set down now (upon your memory) otherweise 3. Arg.
then ever before, thus. That which has still been a rule to the^ that have
erred, cannot be a certain rule to direct all in faith. But the scripture
interpreted by the private spirit (as every one pretends given from God) has
led many into dangerous and horrible errors. go. the scriptures though directed
by the private spirits interpretation cannot be a rule of faith. I answer, your
conclusion I grant, (though your argument be naught:) for the private spirit,
we found whileare to be the violent spirit of the Pope, or his like. And
scripture directed (or rather perverted) by such a spirit, cannot in deed be a
rule of faith.

Against your 2. Proposition I except, it implies a fallacy putting that for
the cause* which is not the cause. The scriptures never led any into error:
but unlearned and unstable persons, pervert all scriptures (as the Apostle 2.
Pet. 3. 10.
says) unto their own destruction: the cause hereof is not the scriptures but
men's corruption. The Pharisees perverted the doctrines spoken by our Savior
Christ himself, yet I hope you will not deny but his heavenly words was a
certain rule to direct all in faith. So the proof of your minor, fails you.

Against your first proposition, (which you say is most certain) I except as
not plain, and so deceitful. That which is a rule to them that err,
(understanding, of it own nature and properly) cannot be a certain rule to
direct all in faith. But now to assume, that the scripture is such; were
blasphemy. Again, That which is a rule to them that err, (to weet a rule by
accident, through their ignorance or malice abusing it,) cannot be a certain
rule to direct al (Gods people) in faith: now I deny the proposition: and leave
you to give proof of these things, in your next. And whither before or now, you
have drie-beaten me, as you boast: let the lookers on, give verdict.

Your 4. argument you omit, through oversight I suppose, only wh^r I showed by
1. Cor. 11. 19. Act. 15. etc. that contentions were in the Apostles times, and
composed by the scriptures, not by setting up a supremejudge or Pope: You S.
91. page 120.
answer barely, they prove rather the^ must be one visible supreme judge to
decide controversies. We are th^n at a point. Let him that reads the sea p.
70.
scriptures and reasons which I there alleged: judge whither of the two, they
do rather prove.

Your 5. (which you 5. Arg. S. 92.
call your 4.) argument, is, that we believe many things, which are not reveled
in holy scripture etc. I told you and tell you again, that I do not
(howsoever you may) believe any thing needful for my salvation, which is not
reveled in the Holy scriptures: In those things that are plainly set do^n in
the scriptures al such things ar found as concern faith hope and charity:
Augustine de doct. Christ. l. 2, c. 9.
neither will I use other weapons against Arians, Anabaptists or any heretics
that acknowledge the scriptures to be of God. This therefore is no argument to
convince me at all. You insult for that I will not show my particular proofs
against those heresies. I told you this were to digress from our present
controversy. Propose you arguments and I will answer you for the cause in
hand: else multiply not words in vain.

You now plainly answer S. 94*
that Gods word as it is extrinsecal the word of God, and to be known of us,
depends of tradition and the authority of the church. This I reject as an
heresy. For when we read or hear the books of Moses or the Prophets, we
read that which is spoken to us of God, (Mark. 1^, 26. compared with Math.
22, 31.) that which the Spirit of God speaks to the churches Rev. 2, ^, 11.
now not to believe or rest upon this ground, but to rely upon man's record, is
to make the testimony or man greater extrinsecally to us, then the testimony
of God; contrary to 1. Ioh. 5, 9. and makes men liable to the curse, Ier. 17.
5.

You reply unto Act. 26, 22. that in tradition nothing is spoken besides, that
is, contrary, to the Apostles speeches. First this is untrue, many of your
church traditions are both besides and co^ntrary to the scriptures; as when we
examine the particulars will appear: and you dare not subject your church and
traditions, to the trial by the scriptures: but you will have men's faith
extrinsecally to depend upon your church. Secondly you wind away by terms of
your own: besides, that is contrary; whereas the Apostle says, nothing
without (or except) that which the Prophets and Moses said: none other thing.
Your allegation from 2. 2. These. 2. is answered in my former vvritings.

You further allege for traditions, Act. 15. 41. and 16. 4. I answer all
Apostolical decrees (such as are there mentioned) we do receiv: but yours
decreed by the Pope, are Apostaticall. Secondly you may see that those which
they delivered, were written before, Act. 15. 23.-25. 28. etc. You say they
are uncertayn: let the prudent judge. And if so they be, then are they not
necessary for salvation, for all such are written: Ioh. 20. 30. 31. 2. Tim. 3.
15. 17.

Here you interlace 2. other points comp^^ing the grounds that we The 4. and
5. parts after handled.
and that you do go upon: and you handle them largely in 55. sections. I
will first follow on with your 6. part, (at S. 153.) both because that was
the course of our former vvritings: and the examining of the things alleged for
your Pope, vvil give light touching these other points, which also I will
consider of after; in his place.

The second of your assertions (which now you make the 6. part of your
longsome pamphlet) was. That the Popes definitive sentence as he is head of
the church, is an indeficient rule in matters of faith. To this now (as a man
fearful of your cause,) you S. 153. etc page 134.
have added, the Popes definitive sentence at least with a general council.
And this you say, you are to show: and we (say I) are ready to behold your
shows. Here I find no argument by you set down to conclude your assertion; as
was in the former points: which is an other declaration of the weakness of
your cause. Heretofore to help the Pope, you fled to S. Peter's prerogatives:
which were they as great as you feign them to be, yet (as I told you,) there
is no more proved for the Bishop of Rome, then for the Bishop of Babylon, or
Patriarch of Constantinople Yet having no better grounds, you again flee to
them; and labor to repayr your shows of Peter's preeminence, which I by the
scriptures had pulled down.

And first you S. 157.
say, that out of the whole series of them, and the circumstances; and not,
only out of each particular, you draw an infallible argument. I answer, the
particulars I have proved to be by you wrested: so the whole series and rank
of them, can conclude not hing soundly for you.

Your 1 show was S. Peter's naming first. I told you this is usual, but not
always; and to help you (because you complayn^ cited not the (...) see Ioh. 1.
45. where Andrew is named before him; Gal. 2. 9. where James is named before
him, Mar 16. ^. where mention is made o^ the disciples and Peter: so 1 Cor. 9.
5. the Apostles, brethren of the Lord, and Cephas. Though if he had been
alvvayes first named, it proves him not to be the head of the church: more then
the first foundation, Rev. 21. 19. will prove Paul; as I showed you. Here you
S. 160.
boast that Exodus 28. 18. 19. confutes me: where the Jasper (you think) is the
sirt stone, and so not the 12. for Benjamin. I answer, an ill translation has
deceived you. For Moses there shows V. 20
that the stone Iaspeh (whereof the Greek Iaspis, Arabik Iasp, Latin Iaspis,
and English Jasper are naturally derived) was the ^2* and last in the
brestplate, and so for Benjamin, (who was the last born of the patriarchs,)
to be graved upon, Exodus 28. 9. 10. 21. This your own learned Linguists as
Arias Montanus and others do acknowledge, and so correct your translation. So
the best of the Jewish Rabbines, as Maimony, who says, Benjamin was written
on the Iaspeh: (Misn. lib. 8. Treat. of the vessels of the Sanctuary, chapt. 9
S. ^.) And thus Paul of Benjamin, has color to be the head of the church, as
well as Peter.

You S. 159.
press Mat 10. 2. the first Simon caled Peter: Andrew (as you think) was first
in years and first in caling: for proof you cite Ambrose on 2. Cor. 12. I
answer, first Ambroses humane ^uthority is no proof for Peter's pretended divine
headship. Secondly Ambrose says not that he was first in years, (put that
therefore among your own traditions:) but Homil* 5^* in Math.
Chrysosto^ (if you vvil rely upon men) makes Peter elder then Andrew. That
which Ambrose says is, Andrew followed our Sav: before Peter, this I hold true,
by Ioh. 1. 40. 41. but it is one thing to follow Christ as a disciple, and an
other thing to be chosen an Apostle; as reason teaches, and you may read* Mar.
3. 13. 14. 16. compared with Mar. 1. 16. Luke 6. 12. 13. 14. with Luke 5. 8.
10. That Andrew therefore was an Apostle before Peter, I deny by vvarrant of
scripture: and thus I wink not, (as you write:) but with Calvin I confess
Peter to be first of the Apostles.

You grant, S. (...) page 135.
by that I alleged, from 2. King. 2. Dan. 3. that such miracles as Peter's
walking on the water, prove no headship of the church: so then this also you
brought but for a show.

3: I corrected your error in translating him for it, in Mat. 16. 18.
restreyning that to Peter, which Christ promised to his whole church. You
stand to it S 162* 16^
still. But first against humane learning, for autes the feminine gender, cannot
accord with Petros the malculine: as it can and does with Ecclesias the
Church. You plead also against true religion: for I proved by Io^. ^0. 27. 28.
29. that all true Christians are invincible of h^l g^^^s, and not Peter only.
Here you burst out and cry, that if I understand it in the Calvinisticall sense
that one once justified can not be again the child of wrath, it is (you say) a
most horrible falsehood, and against the holy scriptures. Romans 11. 20. 21. Rev.
2. 5* I answer, I understand plainly as Christ says that his sheep shall never
p^rish, neither shall any pluck them out of his hand; but he will give them
ever ^al life, Ioh. 10. 28. that it is not possible the elect should be seduced
(...) Christ, Mat. 24* 24. for God puts his fear in their hearts that they
shall not depart from him: Ier. 32. 40, and Gods gifts and caling are without
repentance, Romans 11. 29. and they that are born of God cannot syn unto death 1
Ioh. 3. 9. And these things accord well with Romans 11. 20. 21. etc. for by
faith we stand: but all men have not faith, 2 These. 3. 2. there is a vain
faith, Iam. 2. 14. 17. 20. from that men fall: and there is the faith of Gods
elect, Tit. 1. 1. and this faith justifies, Romans 4. 3. 5. and 5. 1. and from
it men never fall finally. They may fall into syn by infirmity, but shall not
be cast off* for the Lord puts under his hand: Psalm. 37. 24. yea though they
fall seven times, yet they rise again: but the wicked fall into mischief Prove.
24. 16. This is my faith: and your contrary Popish heresies I abhor.

You deny not S. 164. pa. 13^.
but your Popes may be reprobates and damned in hell. I trow then hell gates do
prevayl against them, and so the promise in Mat. 16. 18. perteyns not unto
them. You except, the Divil prevayls not against the Pope as he is head of the
church, as he defines e^ cathedra. Yes doubtless, therein he most prevayls
against him, because he allures him into Christ's Colos. 1. 17. 18,
place, and so makes him Antichrist. And if you had the mind 1 Cor. 2. 16.
of Christ: you would no more regard what Rev. 9. 11.
Apolluon the P. of Rome, defines ex cathedra, (unless he could prove it by
the holy scriptures:) then what Apollo the D. of Delphos divined ex tripode.

4. Your fourth show from Peter's confirming his brethren, being confuted by
scriptures, Act. 14. 22. and 15. 41. 32. etc. you now say, the other Apostles
confirmed not S. 165.
as the supreme pastor, not S. 166.
as the head of the church by office. I answer, neither did Peter so: if you
add that to your wrested text, God will reprove you, Prove. 30. 6. and your
humane testimonies (which you abuse also) shall not save you.

You digress S. 165.
to entwite me with gross corruption of the text, for Englishing presbyteros an
Elder. I am loath to follow your outroades: only let me tell you, that you check
herein your authentik Latin translation which turns it 2 Ioh. 1. 1
Senior, and Act. 20. 17
Major nat^: and* in your divinity, Englishing both Cohen* Hiereus, a Priest,
and Zaken, Presbuteros a Priest, as if these were one you deceiv the simple
with a sophistical aequivocatio^. And you may as well say the Apostles were
idiots, because they are caled idiotai. Act. 4. 13. as say Christ's ministers
are Priests (understanding sacrificing Priests,) because they are caled
Presbyteri.

5. You daily again S. 167. pa. 137.
about Peter's feet first washed, as some suppose* I let you alone with your
fancy: let the reader judge whither it be a fit proof for his headship.

6. So for Peter's martyrdom, whence you conclude it was promised S. 168.
to Peter to be head of the church. It is a bold untruth: the text says no
such words, proves no such thing.

7. Your 7. show was gathered also from a false translation, restrayning, they
began, Act. 2. 4. to Peter as if he began: which being but a guess, you now
shrink S. 169.
from that, to the next passage in v. 14* etc. where from Peter's sermon you
would prove him head of the church. It is a world to see, what shifts you are
driven to: the very naming of them, is to all wise men ridiculous. But if Peter
for first preaching was head of the church: that Pope which first left
preaching, was the head of the Beast: and so all your unpreaching Popes (at
least) are Antichrists.

You grant again S. 170. page 138.
that the first miracle, which you uncertainly supposed S. Peter wrought, Act.
2. 11. does not solely convince what you would: and herein I believe you. But
I marvel at your discretion, that think a number of futilous and vvorthless
arguments being heaped together, would persuade any unto popery, unless they be
such as are spoken of Prove. 9. 16. who so is simple let him come hither. And
here you are too lavish of your tongue, in saying I cannot deny but our Savior
caleth Peter the rock, first washes his feet, that Peter booth the first
miracles etc. I denied the first, and you cannot prove the latter. Though were
they al granted for Peter, yet your applying them to your Pope, is altogether
groundless.

The first S. 171. 17^
excommunication by Peter, inferrs (you think) that he was head. Before you
urged the act: which being proved insufficient, now ye flee to the first doing
of the act. At the most this shows but primacie in order; (which I granted:)
seeing Paul and others did the like. But by your manner of reasoning, whosoever
does any thing first, shallbe head of the church. And why I pray you, by like
reason should not those Popes that first practiced Simony, sorcerie and
hypocrisy; be heads of the man of syn. You leav S. 174.
it for the reader to judge whither all these reasons together show not that
Peter was rock and head of the church. I also referr it to judgment. And if
your vayn shows for Peter be not sound proofs for your Pope: then he is left
naked, as the heath in the wilderness, Ier. 17. 6.

I proved by the scriptures Mat. 28. 18. 19. 20. Ioh. 20. 21. 22. 23. Act. 2.
4. that the other Apostles had equal office, charge and power, with Peter
himself: you answer S. 175.
the places prove nothing: and if ought, it is equality of order and not of
jurisdiction. Thus you resist the truth without reason: it were well if you
would add Prove. 16* 23.
doctrine to your lips. When all the Apostles are sent by the power of Christ,
with like words and authority: when the rest (as Paul) do whatsoever Peter
himself did* in word, prayer, Sacraments, censures, miracles etc. you barely
say, they were not equal in jurisdiction. You weary me with your own words,
and repetitions without proof. Seeing Gods word moves you not, let me try
what man's will do: The rest of the Apostles (says Cyp* de simpl. pr^l,
one of your Doctors) were verily the same that Peter was, endued with equal
participation of honor and of power. Being blamed for your making Peter head
and rock of the church, which are Christ's peculiar titles: You answer, he is
the ministerial and subordinat head to Christ: as Christ is the S. 177. pa. 139.
foundation, 1 Cor. 3. 11. and yet the Apostles are foundations, Ephesians 2. 20. I
answer, first Gods word no where caleth Peter the head: and why will you be
vviser then God? Secondly the Apostles, because they laid the foundation which
was Christ, as Paul shows, 1. Cor. 3 10. 11. therefore the Church is said to
be built upon their foundation, Ephesians. 2. 20. And in this they were equal: if
any excelled, it was Paul, who labored in laying the foundation more then the
rest, 2 Cor. 12. 11. 1 Cor. 15. 10. In this sense if you speak of ministerial
head, that by the ministry of the word Peter preached the head Christ, the
thing is true, but the phrase is not good: it was true in Paul also as much as
Peter, yea and in all the Apostles: Act. 1. 2. 3. 4. 8.
and thus all Christ's ministers at this day, minister and preach him the head,
which the Pope does not. But you feign a thing which never was, that Christ
should substitute Peter for head in his place and absence: no scripture tells
you this, but the contrary, for Christ being Mat. 28. 20.
present and Rev. 1. 13. and 2. 1.
vvalking with his churches, needs no vicar. And this title head, God in his
word gives only to Christ: Col. 1. 18. Yet you, leaving Gods word, fly to
your S. Basil for succor: that all men may see, your church and prelacy, is
built on the sands of men's traditions, not on the Rock of divine oracles.

You will not from it, S. 178.
but Peter signifies a rock: which I have disproved; and showed that Petros of
Petra the Rock, and Cephas of Ceph, is no more then to be a Christian of
Christ. Peter was a principal stone (yea the first if you will) laid upon
Christ the chief Ephesians. 2. 20.
corner stone, the 1 Cor. 10. 4.
Rock: all Christians are 1 Pet. 2. 5.
living stones laid on him also. Your racked allegations from Augustine and
other Doctors, I vvil not spend time to confute: for I build my religion upon
the Rock Christ, and not upon men.

Your S. 179.
reason why the gender was not changed in Christ's name as in Peter's, is for
that all which admitted of his doctrine would not deny him to be head of the
church. I see you love to say somewhat unto every thing. I also may say, all
which admit of the Popes doctrine, will not deny Peter to be head of the
church: so (by your argument) there was no need to change the gender for him
neither. And so the scripture has done something needless: or else your answer
is fruitless. How you save Optatus credit, and your self from blame, for
falsely interpreting Cephas a head, contrary to the holy Ghost, Ioh. 1. 43.
who interprets it a stone: I leave it for the learned to judge.

Your exception S. 180. page 140.
that Peter was not elected to be the mouth of the rest, was refelled in my
former vvriting, if you would rest: for Thomas, Philip, Jude, were not
elected any more then Peter to speak for the other disciples, Ioh. 14. 5. 8.
22. yet you will not have them heads.

So your distination of the Apostles equallity in power of order, not of S. 183.
jurisdiction; is a bare repetition of a thing never proved, but before refuted
And where you add, equal as they were Apostles but not as they were Bishops:
it is mere trifling, you might as well say, equal as they were men, but not as
they were living creatures. For they were no otherweise Bishops, then as they
were Apostles. And in Act. 1. you may see that Judas his Episcopee or Bishops
office, was no other then his Apostolee or Apostles office, Act. 1. v. 20.
compared with v. 17. 25. 26. Besides by 1. Cor. 12. 28. and Ephe. 4. 11. you
may see the Apostles were by office the first in the church: that if the other
were equal with Peter in the Apostleship (as you grant); they were equal
also in all power: that if you resist any longer, you will be condemned of your
self. Your succession grounded but upon men's report, I allow not of, for you
build on boggs.

Your understanding S. 184.
of that admonition Romans 11. 20. 22. etc. is partly true, and against your self
in that you vvrote before S. 162. partly it is frivolous, vvhiles you dream of
more previlege to the Sea of Room and Bishop there, then to others churches
and Bishops. You have no color for this in the testament of Christ: yet is it
the mayn thing that you should prove, if it were possible. No city in the
world remains so execrable by Gods word, as Rome for killing Christ of old,
by her power and policy: and for being Antichrists throne. Rev. 17. and 18.

It is worth the noting, that you S. 185. pa* 141.
do not hold the Pope is necessarily endued with Gods holy grace. And that in
matters of fact he maysyn (you say) as well as any other. Your Popes facts I am
sure prove this, if any shoud have the face to deny it. Hereupon I infer, that
your Popes are not members, and so not possibly heads of the catholic church of
God. It is high blasphemy to say the head of that church may want Gods holy
grace, Colos. 1, 18. etc. and 2, 19. How now do you know that the traditions
and definitions of your graceless Popes, are of God? If you try them not by
the scriptures, (which you dare not, because of the private spirit,) they may
deceive and damn your soul, as well as any other men. You say, you hold a
necessary assistance which the Pope has of the holy Ghost, as he defines ex
cathedra. And upon what ground hold you this? You find in Gods book no mention
either of your Pope, or of his Chayr, for good. The Apostle Peter directs us
to that which holy 2 Pet. 1. 21.
men of God spoke: not to that with Satan's slaves do teach: such as was P.
Silvester the 2. of whom Cardinal Benno Ben. in vita Hildebr.
vvriteth, that he came up out of the abyss (or bottomless deep) o^ divine
permission. And by the same answers of the Divils vvherby he had deceived many,
he was also deceived himself, and was intercepted with suddayn death, by the
judgment of God. And yet vvil you trust such a miscreant; that out of his chayr
he will tell you none but divine oracles. Never was there such a thing known
since the beginning of the world, that a graceless reprobate, should have
necessarily the assistance of the holy Ghost, so often as he sits him down on
his chayr, to define or determine the matters of God. No religion on earth (to
my knowledge) ever admitted such an unreasonable doctrine; for which you have
no proof, unless from the Popes own ungracious spirit: whereby he exalts
himself against all that is caled God, 2. These. 2 4.

Notvvithstanding you S. 186.
labor to justify your S. Leo that said the head (meaning I trow your
ministerial head at Rome,) infuseth grace to the whole church: and that God
took S. Peter into the fellowship of the individual unity. And do you, in
earnest, beleev these things of your reprobate Popes, as of S. Silvester the 2.
of that Divil incarnate S. John the 22. and their like? I perceive it is not
without cause that the scarlet colored beast, is said to be Rev. 17. 3
full of the names of blasphemy. And here you say I see your religion is no
upstart religion, that so many years ago was mainteyned. Yes, upstart it is,
but many years ago I grant: for the mystery of iniquity did work eve^
vvhiles Paul lived, 2 These. 2. 7. and he told how after his departure Act. 20.
29
grievous wolves should enter, not sparing the flock: under the name of wolves,
comprehending it may be 2 Timothy 4. 17 Ier. 50. 17.
Lions also and all other salvage beasts. Wherefore Antichrist is an old man,
though you mistake, as if he were yet scarce in his cradle. 2. You help S.
Leo, as meaning that which S. Peter said, of such as should be partakers of
the godly nature, I answer, first this is a very friendly interpretation, that
the fellowship of the individual unity, should be but participation of the
godly nature which al Christians are partakers of. A man may thus interpret the
Familists blasphemy, that they are H. N. Evan regni c. 1. S. 1.
Godded with God. But I will take S. Leo at the best. Secondly therefore I
answer, that this speech of Peter was to all the Saints, that fled the
corruption which is in the world through lust, 2. Pet. 1. 1. 4. so that S.
Peter's privilege, will get little hereby, much less the Popes. For these graces
have not appeared in many heads of your church, but the contrary, vvhiles your
Popes followed the corruption in the world through lust, (as your self deny
not:) so then such were not partakers of the divine, but of the Ioh. 8. 44.
Divils nature. And now consider what grace they have infused into your
church. But for this participation you say, S. Greg. the 7. prayed to S. Peter.
I think we shall have a Luke 11. 2.
God of him anon. You say, nay, but that he would be an intercessor. And
herein say I, you make him Christ: for there is, as the scripture tells us, 1 Timothy 2, 5.
one God, and one mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus. But if
this reason be good, the Pope may kneel and pray to you also: for if you be, as
you suppose, a true Christian* then have you that participation of the divine
nature, 2. Pet. 1. 4. and the prayer of the righteous one for another even in
this world Iam. 5. 16.
avayleth much as The Apostle tells us. Yet for all this, I think the Pope
will scarce pray unto you, as he does to S. Peter*

Whereas I said one of your Canonists caled him Cum inter. in gloss. extrav.
Io. 22.
our Lord God the Pope: you first S. 187.
charge me with untruth, as if I said your Canonists and so made it an
ordinary style of the canon law. I answer, you mistake my vvriting, wh^re you
may see it said, one of them. But had I written as you say, you need no more
blame me for untruth, then a paynim might cavil at the Evangelist, for flying
that the thieves reproched Christ, Mat. 27. 44. when it was but one of them
that did so, Luk, 23 39. 40. You say, S. 1^7.
in a written copy in the Vatican library, the word God is not found; but,
our Lord the Pope. I rest in your report: for the blasphemy was so gross, as
I think you are all ashamed of it. Yet that so it has been divulged by your
selves in other copies, you cannot deny. And I trow you are not ignorant that
your Pope is caled God oftener the^ once: for see what is also written,
Clement. in proem. in Gloss. and Council Lateran. Sess. 4. sub Leo. 10.
Therefore you would help it by script^re, alleging Ps. 81. 6. I have said you
are Gods etc. I am sorry that you set your self to justify all grossnes. Our
Lord God, is a peculiar phrase to the only true God; not to magistrates caled
Gods by office: much less to any Usurper. But if you will needs have it so,
let the Pope be caled God of the Papists. D. Stapleton saluteth In Epist. ant.
princip. doct.
Pope Gregory 13. as his supreme Numen (or God) on earth. He was not
therefore of the Prophets religion, who said, whom have I in heaven (but thee
oh Lord) and there is none on earth that I desire besides thee; Psalm. 73. 25.
Your self have written the Pope to be the Universal Pastor, Ioh. 10. and he
(as I told you) is one with the Father, Ioh. 10. 30. and you retract it not. I
know no reason, if you hold this still, why you may not say as the Apostle
Thomas said to the true Universal Pastor, Christ; My Lord and my God: Ioh. 20.
28. and pray to the Pope, as did that unclean mouth which said, Paul. (...)
myl. lib. ^^
o thou that take away the synns of the world have mercy upon us.

Your opinion about deposing Princes, I am not ignorant of, as you S. 190
suppose. Your Mr. the Cardinal Bellarm. tract. de Potest. S. pontif, in
temporal.
has lately written more then a good deal hereabouts. But I forbear to urge
this point, least you should think, I went about to ensnare you. I wish more
good unto you.

For a conclusion you S. 191.
repete your former scriptures together for S. Peter's preeminence. I referr
you, and al, to my former refutation of your shows. Only I will answer where
you add now somewhat more: as you say, The Angel directs Peter to go before
them as their Captayn, Mark. 16 17. This is a palpable perverting of the
scripture: for the Angel there speaks of Christ to the women; go tell his
disciples and page 142.
Peter, that he goes before you into Galil^e, there ye shall see him, This
which Christ had promised to do himself, Mark. 14. 28. and now performed it,
Mark. 16. 17. you falsely apply unto Peter: to prove him head and Captayn: and
so by Peter's feighned Captainship, to intrude your Pope as head and Captayn; so
thrusting out Christ. Did ever men offer such abuse to Gods word as you do?

No better is your next addition; S. Peter (you say) came first to the
monument. Ioh 20. 4. were this so, what sense is there to conclude him head of
the Church for it? Mary Magdalen was there before Peter, Ioh. 20. 1. why do
you not make her head? But you falsify the scripture: for it says they rann
both together, but the other disciple did outrun Peter, and came first to the
monument. That which the holy Ghost witnesses of John, the other disciple:
that do you ascribe to Peter. How unsufferably do you wrest the scripture?
What lies (may we think) will you not preach to your seduced people, which
may not read the scriptures: when you write thus to me? But any thing is good
enough, to help your Popes: like proof like prerogative.

Thirdly you add, S. Paul came to Jerusalem to see S. Peter, Gal. 1. 18. This
had had some show, if he had come to Rome to see S. Peter: now, if it could
prove S. Peter's preemine^cie, it might have some color for the Bishops of
Jerusalem: but for the Pope of Rome none at all. No more then as if one should
reason thus, Judas betrayed his master: therefore the Pope is Antichrist. I
think you vvil not grant the conclusion, though it be truer then yours. I
further answer, that Paul there proves his authority to be no way inferior
to Peter's, both by his caling, v. 1. and his behavior after his caling: for he
went not to Jerusalem to them which were Apostles before him, but (as he
says) unto Arabia, and turned again unto Damascus, v. 17. then after 3. years
he went to Jerusalem to see Peter, which being compared with his words and
deeds after, Gal 2. 6. 7. 8. 11. etc. argue rather Paul's Privilege, then
Peter's. For his going to Peter, vvil no more debase him, then the mother of our
Lord, who went into the hill country to Elizabet, with whom she tarried much
longer then Paul did with Peter, Luke 1. 39. 40 43. 56.

And now we have seen your plea for S. Peter: I vvil show how a man might plead
better for S. Paul, that he was the head of your Catholic Roman church as you
vainly call it. 1. S. Paul was caled to his office, not by S. Peter but by
Jesus Christ, Gal. 1. 1. 2. S. Paul received the doctrine which he preached,
not from S. Peter but by revelation from Jesus Christ, Gal. 1. 12. 3. S. Paul
labored in preaching the gospel, more then S. Peter did 1. Cor. 15. 10. 4. S.
Paul went and preached without so much as conferring with S. Peter or the
rest, Gal. 1. 16. 17. 5. The gospel over the uncircumcision (that is the
Gentiles among whom Rome was chief) was committed to S. Paul. Gal. 2. 7. 6. S.
Paul had upon him the care of all churches, 2 Cor. 11. 28. 7. S. Paul has
written, and opened clearly the great mysteries of Christ, in his Epistles,
more then S. Peter or any Apostle. 8. S. Paul's vvritings are by S. Peter
himself reckned among the holy scriptures, 2 Pet. 3. 15. 16. 9. S. Paul rather
then any other Apostle, was caled of God to preach at Rome: Act. 23. 11. 10.
In his voyage to Rome he was marvelously saved from shipwreck, and very
memorable accidents fell out besides in that journey, Act. 27. and 28. 11. S.
Paul preached the gospel and suffered persecution in Rome, and stood for the
truth, when no man there assisted him, Act. 28. 30. 31. 2 Timothy 4. 16. 12. S.
Paul preached at Antioch where the name Christians was first given Act. 11.
26. 13. S. Paul. withstood S. Peter to his face, and blamed him when he did
amyss, Gal 2. 11. etc. 14. S. Paul first casts out the Divil of divination,
Act. 16. 16. 15. He strikes Elymas the forcerer with blindness, Act. 13. 8.
11. 16. S. Paul in visions was taken up into the third heaven, into paradise,
2. Cor. 12. 2. 4. 17. S. Paul in nothing was inferior to the very chief
Apostles, 2 Cor. 12. 11. 18. He was of that tribe, whose precious stone is
the first foundation of the heavenly Jerusalem, Romans 11. 1. Rev. 21. 19. Exodus
2^. 10. 20. 21. Therefore for all those reasons S. Paul was head of the
Catholic Roman Church. Here I appele unto any unpartial reader, vvhither my
proofs for S. Paul, be not stronger then yours for S. Peter: and vvhither the
Pope was not overseen to choose S. Peter for his patron, whom he cannot prove
by any one title of Gods word, that ever he set foot in Rome gates: and to
leave S. Paul, who was caled of God to preach there, and did so a long time,
as the scriptures do confirm. Yet for all this, you vvil not grant that S.
Paul was head of the church: therefore say I, neither S. Peter: and as for
your Pope, he has no more ^ight to show for the same, then Mahomet.

We have seen your proofs from scripture: you add unto them, Doctors And here
as before you S. 192. 193. 194.
bring in your forgeries of Clemens, and Dio^ysius* etc, with other wrested
testimonies of the Fathers. Who al of them if they said as much as you would
have them, had no authority to make an head for the church. Secondly
whatsoever they said for Peter, it proves nothing for your Pope. He must
therefore show better evidence for his usurped prelacy; or else he must still be
reputed the adversary that exalts himself, 2 These. 2. 4.

You proceed, S. 195. page 144
and say that S. Peter's authority must be derived to his successors, lawfully
elected and governing at Rome. This is the mayn point, which I would fayn see
proved. You could prove it by express authority of all the fathers cited: but
let reason (you say) suffice me. Behold here, and let all that have eyes
behold, the desperatenes of your cause: who for the mayn ground of your
religion and church, whereof you so boast; cannot allege any one word or title
of holy scripture: but leave those true and ancient infallible records, and
betake you to the latter forged erroneous humane testimonies and traditions of
men. I deny that Peter left any such successor in his office as you dream of;
and for the Pope to chaleng it, is to follow the violencie of his private
spirit, as you S. 82*
said of Pope Stephen.

Now let us hear your reason. Christ gave the power of preaching etc. (you say)
for the good of others to the worlds end. This I grant. So Christ nstituting
S. Peter the head (you say) would have that prehemine^ce derived to his lawful
successors. All this I deny. 1. He made not Peter head, much less his
successors. ^. He appointed no such successors after Peter in his office. 3. If
Peter were to have successors, the Bishop of Rome, has no more to say for it,
by vvarrant from Christ, then all other Bishops in the world; who for
preaching, ministering sacraments, and governing their flocks, have, and ever
had, equal power with the Bishop of Rome, when he was at the best. Thus after
your long and tedious dispute, you conclude with a fair begging of the
question: not being able to produce one line of the bible, which speaks for
your Pope: nor any sufficient ground of reason. How soundly now you have proved
your sixth part, viz. That the Popes definitive sentence at least with a
general council ^t. is a sufficient groundwork of faith: let any indifferent
reasonable man give sentence.

Here I did not dare you (as you S. 196.
say) to bring in the arrows of the fathers etc: in an other place it was,
that I gave you leave to use their reasons if you pleased; but not to press me
with their bare names, as your manner is to do. And in all your long
discourse, let the reader mind, what any one scripture or reason you have had
by the help of Doctor, Father, Council or Pope, to prove your assertion that
the Popes definitive sentence is to be a ground of our faith.

You S. 197.
object (and that often) that unless I will eat my word, you must prefer the
uniform consent of the Fathers, before me. I answer to your often repetitions,
this. First I spoke of more, and others, then you account holy Fathers: yea I
included such, as I doubt not but you would burn for heretics. Secondly, I
spoke and again speak it unfeighnedly as is in my heart: being privy to my own
manifold ignorances and infirmities; and esteming of others better then of my
self. Thirdly therefore I say, believe not me, but believe the word of God
which I show unto you. If I speak of my self, tread it under your foot: but if
I speak the words of God, in despising the^ you despise the Lord, sinning
against your sowl. And if you depend on the sentences of Fathers, Councils,
Popes, not confirmed by the scriptures: you make idols of them, and heap up
wrath upon your head. Sanctoru^ patru^ authoritas, ad assentiendu^ ipso^u^
dictis nemine^ co^pellit nisi in divinis fundata fueritscripturis, aut divinae
innitatur revelationi Says Biel, Lect. 41. sub con. Mis.
Leave therefore your disdayning of me; and leave your extolling of other men:
for all flesh is grass, and all the glory of man is as the flower of grass,
which withers away: but the word of the Lord endures for ever: and that is
the word, which the Apostles preached to the churches. 1. Pet. 1. 24. 25.
Finally, you are far from an uniforme consent of the fathers to prove your
haeretical assertion. Though many of them were mistaken in some things: yet
were they not so senseless as to believe that graceless reprobate Popes, must
needs have such grace as to desine nothing but truth out of their chair. But
you that have abused the holy scriptures, as I have proved: what wrong will you
not do to the fathers.

You are S. 199.
moved I see, with my free applying of the scriptures that speak of Antichrist,
unto your Pope. I am content to bear your contempt: but I must call evil evil,
and faithfully witness what God has manifested: though men Rev. 16. 10.
gnaw their tongues for pain.

You go about S. 200.
to prove that the Pope is not Antichrist. First, S. 201 pa. ^45.
for then it should follow that hell gates have prevayld against Gods church many
100. years etc. I answer, nay: For it is prophesied the woman (the church)
should flee into the wilderness, where God should feed her 1260. days, Rev. 12.
6. which may be so many prophetical years, as Dan. 9. 24. though therefore the
church was persecuted into secret places, yet hell prevayled not against it. In
the old world, the church was but in that one family of Noah: Genesis 6. 1. Pet.
3. 20. And Christ likeneth these last days, unto those; Mat. 24. 37.

Again you except, how many martyrs, Doctors etc. in offering up homage to the
beast should broyl in hell. etc. I answer this is no proof if it were as you
infer. But howsoever it is true the sowl that synneth shall dye; yet in many
things we Iam. 3. 2
syn all: and the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us 1 Ioh. 1. 7.
from all syn (except the syn 1 Ioh. 5. 16
against the holy Ghost,) even from our Psa. 19. 1^.
secret synns. Although therefore many Doctors helped up Antichrist unawares:
yet doubt I not, but Gods mercy has superabounded above all their syn, and
saved them, for they did it ignorantly.

Your 2. reason S. 202.
is, Antichrist shall be one particular man as Ioh. 5. 43. another shall come in
his own name so he is opposed by Ioh. 5. 43.
Christ person to person etc. but the Popes are many successively. And 2 These.
2. he is caled the man of syn etc.] I answer, when Christ said Another shall
come, he meant not one person, but many of one kind successivly. My reasons
are, first because he said elsewhere, Mat. 24. (...)*
many shall come in my name, saying I am Christ: and there v. 2^.
shall arise false Christ's, and false Prophets. Secondly because Antichrist is
described as a Beast, Rev. 13. which beast in the Prophets signifies a
kingdom, and many persons of one sort, as is said in Dan. 7. 23. the fourth
beast shall be the fourth kingdom etc. So the Lion was for all the Kings of
Babylon, the Bear, for all the Kings of Persia etc. Dan. 7. 4. 5. and so by
proportion that deformed beast Rev. 1^. for all Popes. Thirdly because the word
[Allos] another, which Christ uses, often notes many particular men of one
kind; as in Ioh. 4. 37. one sows and another reapeth: which he expounds in
the next words, v. 38. other man labored, (meaning the Prophets) and ye (my
Apostles) enter into their labors. And thus the man of syn, though he be one
person at once, yet successively means many: as when Christ says, Ioh. 10.
10. the thief comes not but to steal: he restreyneth it not to one thief in
person always; but means every thief whenever he comes. Fourthly
Antichrist cannot be one singular man, as you think; because he must reign at
least 1000. years: as may be gathered by Rev. 20. 4. where the godly which
worshipped not the Beast, lived and reigned with Christ 1000. years during
which time the Beast persecuted and killed them: also by the vvomans lying hid
in the wilderness so many days, Rev. 12.

Your 3. reason is, S. 203.
Antichrist shall be of the tribe of Dan, as Genesis 49. 17. Dan shall be a serpent
etc. Ier. 8. 16. the neyghing of horses was heard from Dan. etc.] I answer,
first you show no reason that this is meant properly of Antichrist. And if
figuratively, it is nothing to the purpose: for Antiochus, Nabuchodonosor and
others figured him also. Secondly, Iakobsprophefie (which was a Ge^. 49. 2^.
blessing and not a curse as Antichrist is) was literally meant of Samson, a
man of that tribe, (caled therefore Bedan, 1 Samuel 12. 11.) who for his subtle
undermining of the Philistines, was likened to a serpent; Judge. 14. etc. And
thus the Chalde paraphrast on that place expounds it, saying: There shall be
a man which shall be chosen and rise out of the house of Dan, whose fear shall
fall upon the peoples, and he shall valiantly smite the Philistians as an adder,
as an asp he shall lie in wayt by the path, he shall s^ay the strong horsemen in
the host of the Philistians etc. That of (...). 8. is meant properly of wars
in those costs of Dan; in those times: not of Antichrist now, as the whole
scope of the scripture there manifests.

Your 4. reason is, S. 20^.
Antichrist shall oppugn the mysteries of our savior 1 Ioh. 2. 22. and extol
himself above all that is said God 2. These. 2] I answer, this is true in your
Popes: for they oppugn Christ in his office, of prophecy, preisthood and
kingdom; in their heretical doctrine of man's merits, mass sacrifice,
purgatory; etc. and in making laws for the church; in forbidding people the
holy scriptures in their mother tongue, and many the like. Though this is done,
under color of meeknes and holiness; for the beast has 2. horns like the
lamb, as if he were Christ's own vicar. Rev. 13. 11. If you rest not in the
scripture, let S. Bernard move you: who witnessed that Bern. Ep. 125.
the Beast in the Revelation which has a mouth speaking blasphemies, occupied
Peter's chayr.

Your 5 S. 205.
reason is, The 7. mountayns in Rev. 17. are said to be 7. Kings* none of
with agree with the Pope.] I answer; yes, the seventh agrees very well. For
the woman is the great city, Rome. Rev. 17. 18. the beast on which she rides,
has 7. heads, which are expounded there to be both 7. mountains and 7. Kings.
Rev. 17. 3. 9 The 7. mountayns ar famous through the world, as Palatinus,
Capitolinus, Aventinus, Esquilinus, Caelius, Viminalis, Quirinal^s: on which
mountayns Rome was builded. The 7. Kings are also the 7. goverments of Rome,
renoumed also in histories. As by Cornel. Tacitus l. 1
Kings, by Consuls, by Decemiviri, by Dictators, by Triumviri, by Caesar's, by
forreyn Emperors and Popes. Therefore when John vvrote, the five first were
fallen and removed, Rev. ^7. 10. and one (says he) is; namely the sixth, by the
Caesar's: and another is not yet come, which was the forrayn Emperors, (as
Trajan the Spanyard, and the like,) who when they came should continue but a
while, Constantine going to Bizantium, and the Empire being over^un by the
barbarous Goths etc. And the Beast (says he) v. 11.
is the eight, and is one of the seven: meaning the Popes, who by an
Ecclesiastical government differ from the civil Emperors, and so are an eight:
yet because they reign together with the Emperors, they make as it were one
regiment, and so the eight is one of the seven, as the scripture says. And
that the word King does signify a kingdom or regiment, appears by Dan. 7.
17. where the 4. beasts are said to be 4. kings meaning kingdoms, as is
explayned in v. 23. the fourth beast is the fourth kingdom. Likewise in Esa.
23. 15.
So this exposition is plain, and according to truth. And thus, notwithstanding
all that you have brought; the Pope remains Antichrist.

And think it not S. 206.
much that Antichrist is so ancient. The Jews look for Christ; and he is come
1600. years ago, but they know him not: You look for Antichrist, and he has
been 2 These. 2. 7
well nigh so many years in the world, and you are not aware. If you read the
book of the Revelation judicially, (God opening your heart,) you may discern
that mystery of Babylon which yet is hidden from your eyes. And for
preeminence forbidden to Christ's ministers, see Mat. 20. 25. 26. Luke 22. 25.
26. That which you allege of Tit. 2. 15. shows the power and authority of the
word duly preached and applied to men's consciences, and is not peculiar to the
head of the church the Pope, (for you see Titus there had it;) but it is common
to all Christ's ministers.

You turn back S. 20^. etc.
to your general argument, which I had confuted. How good a defense you have
brought, I am content to let the prudent reader judge. Only where you S. 209.
charge me with falsehood for saying the Pope with you is above the law; which
you deny in my sense: I answer, my sense is according to your own explication,
that S. 94.
extrinsecally and as it is to be known of us, Gods word depends on the
churches (that is the Popes) authority. He puts Apocryphal lying books in to
the holy canon: his interpretation (though absurd and heretical) must stand
for authentic: and a definition of his ex cathedra, you reverence as an
oracle. And he dispenses against Gods law. Is not he now above? yea he sits
as God in the Temple of God, as Paul prophesied, 2 These. 2. 4. The 3. of your
assertions The 7. part


The third thing which heretofore, (the seventh thing which now) you should
prove, is, that the indeficie^t rule of our faith is only to be found in the
[^^man] catholic church sentence, and not in private men's illuminatio^s etc. I
hold neither of these, as I told you before. You labor again to mainteyn the
former. First you prove this, S. 213.
in that the Roman church (you say) is the only true and catholic church. I
answer. You fayrly beg the question; and would prove it is so because it is so.
You speak untruly, in calling her the true church; proudly, in caling her the
only true church: absurdly, in caling her the catholic (that is, the
universal) church. None of all these, can you make any proof of you referr in
the margin to S. 123. and let men look what proof they can find there. I for
the present referr you and all, to your own Cardinal Baronius testimony of
your holy church as he found it in his ancient records, and put it in his
Chronicles thus. Tom. 10. Annal. an. 928. S. 8.
What was then the face of the holy Roman church? how filthy was it, when most
mighty and eke most filthy whores ruled at Rome? at whose pleasure, seats were
changed, Bishops were given, and which is horrible and vile to hear,
false-Popes their paramours were intruded into Peter's seat etc. Lo here the
bewty of that Catholic church, whose sentence you say is the indeficient rule
of your faith.

You are S. 214. pa. 147.
glad that I refuse the name Catholic: and I am glad of, and content me with
that ancient name of a Christian given of God, Act. 11, 26, keep you your new
fangled name of your own divising, to be called a catholic, that is, an
Universal. I envy you not.

You are very S. 216.
angry that I proved unto you the marks of your Roman church, by the word of
God; which you had set down without proof. You had cause rather to be
thankful. But now the reader may see, how having nothing soundly to reply, you
wilfully persist in your error, for which I am sorry. Your reproaches I bear with
patience.

Leaving your former reasons helpless: you S. 218. (...)*
conclude with a common argument for your church and religion; That seeing your
faith is confessed to be so ancient, if it be not from God, it must be grounded
on carnal motives, viz, the profit of the spiritual or the temporal. But it is
not (you say) for the profit or pleasure of the clergy, as appears by their
cha ^^ity, vows, fasting* praying etc. Nor of temporal Princes, for how should
so many Emperors, Kings etc. be brought to confess their syns; fast, etc. I
answer, first your religion in some points of it is ancient I co^fess, eve^ as
ancien^ as the Apostles days, when the mystery of iniquity began to work, 2.
These. 2. 7. and men loved preeminence, 3. John. 9. and many Antichrists went
abroad, 1 Ioh. 2. 18. which were foretunners of the great Antichrist
following. Who was to be reveled when he that the^ let, (viz. the heathen
Empire) was taken out of the way, 2. These. 2. 7. 8. But yet the truth of the
Gospel preached by the Apostles, was more ancient, 1 Ioh. 2. 24. which
therefore is to be our rule and stay: not humane doctrines that came up after.
Secondly I answer, the ambition, profit and pleasure of the Bishops and
Priests, were the motives unto this height of evil. For histories record the Sea Eusebius l. 8. histor. c. 1.
contentions that were in churches, and among Bishops, (especially of Rome and
of Constantinople,) who should be greatest. This made P. Gregory to say Greg.
l. 4. Epist. 38.
the King of pride is at haud and (quod dici quoque nefas est) an arwie of
Priests is ready for him. I wish you would believe this Popes tradition, here.
As for Profits and pleasures; who sees not, that Christ and his Apostles
being poor, Luke 8. 3. Ioh. 12. 6.
and Peter himself having neither silver nor gold to give a needy man, Act. 3.
6. Your clergy have gotten such patrimonies, falsely purloyned in S. Peter's
name, as they are of the richest in the world; their treasures infinite, their
palaces like Kings, Vehiculis insidentes, circu^specte vestiti, epulas curantes
profusas; adeo uteoru^ co^vivia regales superarint mensas: says Ammian.
Marcell. l. 27.
their apparel prince like, their Kitchins full of the finest fare; the
plesantest and fertilest lands in all countries being engrossed for the
clergy; and for church livings. Their doctrines of Purgatory and pardons,
being only to pick men's purfes. Their vows of chastity, being to desile
themselves in filthy Sodonne, adultery and fornication* vvitness the 6000.
childrens heads that were found murdered in P. Gregory's fishpond, which moved
him to reverse his own wicked decree that restreyned the Clergy from their
wives: besides infinite other testimonies of these evils, in other places.
Their fasting being a mere mockery, to absteyn superstitiously from the flesh
of beasts and fowls; and to fill them selves with the flesh of fishes, with
bread and wine and oil, and all such juncates. Their prayers being vayn
repetitions of their Paternosters, Avees, etc. upon beads in an unknown tongue.
Albeit many poor people in blind devotion, have (I grant) suffered many hard
things in their penance, such as Paul caleth things which have a show of
wisdom, in voluntary religion and humblenes of mind, and in not sparing the
body. Colos. 2. 23. So that in very deed, there never was a more carnal
pleasing religion in the world. As for the Kings and Princes, they have had
their necks under the Popes girdle, partly against their wills, by the Popes
frawd and tyranny treading them under his feet: partly by superstitious fear of
the Popes curse, and of purgatory fire and such like buggs, wherewith they were
kept in aw. As for the Popes, they were privileged by their own decrees, viz.
That neither the Emperor nor Kings, nor all the Clergy might judge the Pope;
as Pope Silvester Coranz. sum* council. in 16. f. 46. ^.
did enact. Because the Pope is subject to none but God, as said P. Symachus.
Cap. 9, q. 3. Aliorum. So it came to pass, as the scriptures foretold, that
Rev. 17. 1^
Kings gave their power and authority to the Beast; and Rev. 18. 9.
lived in pleasure with that whore; and Rev. 18 3
all nations were drunken with the wine of the wrath of her fornication: and
Rev. 13. 3. 4.
all the world wondered after the beast, worshipped him, and said, who is like
unto him? etc. And though the vialls Rev. 16.
of Gods words wrath are now already in great mesure powered out upon that
kingdom of syn, yet many will not believe that it shall fall, til in Re. 18. 10.
one how^ the judgment thereof come, when also they will bewayl it: but Re. 18,
20.
heavens, and the holy Apostles and Prophets will rejoice, when God has given
their judgment on it. These things I pray you seriously to consider of: and
the Lord give you understanding. The 4. and ^ parts.


And now, (having done with your replies to the former matters,) I will speak of
those interlaced paragraphes which you bring in S. 98. etc: of the vicious
circle as you call it, wherein you think we walk, proving (as you say) the
authority of the scripture by the private spirit, and our private spirit by
the authority of the scripture etc. But your Catholic opinion S. 114. etc p.
125. etc.
you say you will defend from such an idle proof and circular resolution of
your faith.

I answer; first you do me wrong to set down my assertion so: if you would
deal honestly and plainly, you should express an other man's meaning in his own
words. But you set down vanity, and spend many lines in framing objections and
answers of your own. I referr the reader therefore to that which I said in my
2 former vvritings, and shall more fully set down here.

Secondly, I told you heretofore, page ^5^
that if I had to do with a Turk or Pagan, that denied our scriptures, I
would give him other grounds: but dealing with you that profess to be a
Christian, and allow the scriptures to be of God; it is enough to confute you
by the scriptures. Yet now, as if you were about to turn Turk, you call for
proof that our scriptures are Gods word. And you regard not my former
convictions, nor your Mr. the Cardinals See p^. 57^
reprehensions of your errors, though you before referred me to him.

Thirdly, in going about to clear your selves of this idle proof as you call it,
(which yet you can never do) you go upon grounds wherewith Turks and Pagans
may be moved to give credit unto the scriptures: which was no part of the
controversy between you and me: and you lay down motives S. 11^. etc.
persuading to Christianity, which are nothing unto Popery, and Antichristian
traditions against which I dispute. For these causes I shall not follow you in
your raunging movable waves, but will set down first the things that we hold,
and reasons of them: secondly I will use some motives which may persuade any
reasonable man, Turk or hethen; to incline unto our religion, rather then to
yours.

1. We hold all the vv^itings of the Prophets and Apostles, to be of God, full
of heavenly vvisdome, inspired by his spirit: 2. Pet, 1. 21* and 3 16. 2 Timothy
3. 16.

2. That therefore they are of divine authority; and unfallible truth* wherein
the creature is bound to rest, as in the word of the creator: and sufficient
to make men wise unto salvation. Many reasons there be to persuade men, that
the scriptures are of God: some principal, which are from God himself: others
secondary, which are from men. God himself testifies the scriptures to be of
him two vvayes. Outwardly, whereby he prepares the heart unto faith, by
motives of credibility: and inwardly whereby be assures the heart of the
believer.

The outward motives are: which God gives us in the word it self.

First in the Holy scriptures there is a Majesty wisdom and grace of writing,
differing from al other writings in the world; which the mind of man (if it be
not blind) may see and discern to be of God; as the eye discerns the light
of the Sun, from the light of a torch or candle: For God has showed as great
wisdom in the Scriptures, as in the making of the world. Psalm. 19.

Secondly the doctrine it self or institution in the scriptures, excels al
humane doctrines and laws, as leading us from our selves, from this world, and
from Satan the prince of it; unto God, in faith, love, holiness, fear, humility
etc. And these things far passing the reach of any earthly creature naturally
to conceiv or comprehend fully, though he be taught: much less could they be by
men devised.

Thirdly the prophesies, which shine through all the scriptures, persuade this.
For as God convinces al heathens idols, and Gods, to be vayn, because they
could not prophecy; and proves his own sole deity by this foretelling of
things to come, and performing the^, Isa. 41. 22. 23. 24. 26. and 44. 7. 8. 26.
So the Holy scriptures, by the prophesies and true events of them, may be
discerned to be divine, and of God: from all other writings in the world.

Fourthly it appears by the consent and agreement of all the parts of the Holy
Bible, though written by several men at several times, even hundreds of years
one after an other, and that also after diverse manners, some histories, some
prophesies, some songs, some parables, some epistles etc. in all which
notwithstanding, there is an harmony; that no one writer in any place, crosses
or convinces an other of error or falsehood. The like whereof, is not possible
to be showed of half so many writers, that ever so agreed together in their
writings, since the world began.

Fifthly, the efficacy of the scriptures, and powrful working in the hearts of al
sorts of men, illumining the mind, changing the affections, sanctifying the
whole body, sowl and spirit of men, that have read and heard their words:
Whereby all other false religions have been confounded and abolished, and this
has been stablished against the forces of the divil, and of the princes and
powers of the world, and sense of the flesh, and natural mind of man: Al
which do manifest that these cannot but be of God.

The inward testification of God, is by his Holy 1 Cor. 2. 10 11. 12. and 14
37. 1. Ioh. 2. 20.
spirit, which illumineth the mind, to understand the things given us of God,
writes them in our hearts, and seals up the assurance of the promises that are
in them, unto the believing conscience.

The secondary testimony that the scriptures ar of God, is from men: as,

First the Universal consent of churches in all ages, of the Jews first, and
after of the Christians in all places, which have received, believed, and
obeyed the Holy scriptures, as the Oracles of God: yea even Antichristians
themselves acknowledge them to be from heaven.

Secondly the multitude of men that have given their lives, for defense of
these scriptures and doctrines taught in them, yea even the heretik^s
themselves, who thought their errors were confirmed by these scriptures and
therefore died in them, are not excluded from this motive; which is such, as the
like can not be showed of any book under the sun.

The first outward proofs, which God has engraved in the scriptures
themselves; are sufficient to convince al men, and make them without excuse.
For as the invisible things of God, that is, his eternal power and godhead,
are to be seen in his works the creatures; Romans 1. 20: so the invisible things
of Gods word, the powrfulnes, wisdom and alsufficiencie thereof unto man's
salvation, are to be seen in the Holy scriptures: which Psalm. 19. 7. etc.
they that believe not, will not be persuaded though one should rise again from
the dead: Luke 16. 31. And if God will damn the wicked, that do not by his
works discern him, and honor him as God: much more will he damn the profane,
that do not by his scriptures discern his holy will, and obey the same.

The inward testification by the spirit of God in the believers heart, is for
the comfort and assurance of every one that has it: not for any outward proof
to others, much less to the wicked which have it not, neither can perceive it.
In vayn therefore does Mr. I. A. and the papists, call for manifestation of that,
which they can not discern: and cavil against the spirit, as not a due outward
proof, when we allege it not for that end.

Now will I set down some motives which may draw any reasonable infidel (if God
shut not up his heart from understanding,) to come ^ather unto true
Christianity, with us the Reformed churches: then unto Catholikisme or Popery,
with the Romists.

First we allege for the trial of our faith and religion, the most ancient
records in the world, as Moses, and after him the Prophets: and the Apostles
and Evangelists, first founders of Christian religion through the earth. But
Papists dare not stand to these, but allege for the trial of their religion,
later new records of Doctors, Councills, Popes etc. Now in all reason, that
which is most ancient, should be most true, both as Gods Deu. 32. 17 Ier. 6.
16.
law shows, and as Tertullian also heretofore In lib. advers. Pra^. c. 2.
pleaded.

Secondly, we allow al men (by that common light and judgment which God has
graven in the heart of man, and which is the ground of al expositions,) to read,
hear, examine, and judge of our proofs, reasons, testimonies; and therefore ^o^
exhort al, to have the scriptures, Ioh. 5. 39.
and to peruse them: and to 1 Ioh. 4. 1.
try the spirits of al men. But Papists allow not their ignorant disciples* ^o
read or hear the scriptures in their mother tongue, nor to try their doctrines,
and spirits (which is Ioh. 3. 2^. 21.
a sign that they are not of God) but do captive al men's judgments unto the
definitive sentences of their Popes: which is as if men should put out their
own eyes, that the Pope might lead them blind.

Thirdly, the grounds which we build upon, namely the Prophets and Apostles
writings, are both Mal. 4. 4. Luke 16. 20. 31. 2 Pet. 1 19. and 3. 2.
commanded of God, and by Papists themselves, the scriptures are acknowledged
to be of God, authentik and canonical, so that we build upon the Rock, even our
adversaties being judges. But their traditions, and Popes decrees besides
scripture, are Deuteronomy. 12. ^2. Isa. 29. 13. Mar. 7. 6 7. 8.-13.
forbidden of God, and allowed of none save themselves, neither do we
acknowledge, or can they ever prove them to be of God, any otherwise then
Mahomet may vvarrant his Alkoran: or the Jews their Thalmud.

Fourthly, the writers of our grounds the Holy scriptures, were all 2 Pet. 1.
21 Rev. 18. 20. Luke 13. 28.
holy persons, governed by the spirit of God; and not any one of them was a
reprobate. But the writers and determiners of popish traditions, have been many
of them (and that by the papists own confession) most wicked and vile persons,
that sold themselves unto syn and Satan al days of their life, and got their
popedomes some by simonie and bribes; some by schism and sedition, and other
like evil means. Therefore in all reason, they are nothing so worthy to be
believed or rested upon, as the sacred vvriters on whom we depend.

Fifthly, the Holy Apostles and Prophets (to whose vvritings we cleave)
preached not Isa. 8. 20. 2 Cor. 4. 5. 1. Cor. 3. 57.
themselves, but Gods law and Christ: drew no 2 Cor. 1. 24.
man to subjection unto themselves but unto God: sought not in their doctrines
or vvritings their own wealth or vvorldly preferme^t, sold not the Gospel,
nor Act. 8. 18. 20. 2 Cor. 2 17.
made merchandise of it: Whereas Popes (on whose definitive sentences Papists
do rely) preach themselves; as, we declare, (says Extra. de Major et obed.
Vnum l^nct.
P. Boniface) we define, and pronounce, that it is altogether of necessity to
salvation, that every humane creature be under the Bishop of Rome. So other
their traditions and definitions, tend to the maintenauce of their own pomp,
dignity, vvorldly wealth and pleasures; for their Popes bulls, pardons, and
blessed reliks are set to sale for money; so are their Priests masses and
Trentals, as the world well knows: and therefore of all natural wise men
are justly to be suspected: and the holy Prophets to be preferred much before
them.

Sixthly, the holy vvriters whom we depend on; are all of such authority and
credit, as we admit of proof from any one of them because they all teach one
faith and obedience. Whereas Papists send men to Bishops, Doctors, Fathers,
Councils, which disagree one from another: so making great show of them to the
simple; whereas themselves as often as they list, refuse the judgment and
exposition of their fathers doctors etc. as is to be seen in Cardinal
Bellarmine and others, that often do refuse the sentences of the Fathers: and
conclude with the Council of Trent or definitive sentence of the Pope.

Seventhly, the scriptures that we build upon do all agree and are ^one
contrary one to another, but how ever there ^ay seem contradiction, yet they
are easily even by themselves reconciled if men vvil labor in them. But
Papists have also for their rules of faith, Apocryphal book and fables,
wherein are many open lies and unreconcilable contradictions against the
Prophets, as Tob. 12. 15. compared with Tob. 15. 18. 1. Maccab. 6. 16. with
2. Mac. 1. 16. 2. Macc. 1. 19. with 2. King. 25. Judith. 9. 2. 3. with Genesis
49. 5. 6. Esth. apopcryph. 12. 5. 6. with Esth. can. 6. 3. and 3. 2. Esth.
apoc. 11. 2. with Esth. can. 2. 16. besides their Popes determinations for
making and worshipping of similitudes or images, of silver and gold, wood and
stone, hethenlike: for having the worship of God and scriptures in a barbarous
tongue which the people understand not, and many the like; are expressly
contrary to the commandments of God; as any man of common judgment may
evidently preceive; yea and some of their Popes have repeled the decrees one of
another; as before has been manifested.

Eighthly, The sum of our faith learned from holy scriptures, is to trust on
God and Christ alone for mercy and salvation; not on creatures, as Angels, and
souls of men, nor on our selves or humane merits: whereby we resting on God,
Ioh. 10. 29 Romans 8. 38. 39. Luke 10 20. and 12. ^2. Heb. 10. 22.
have, and do profess to have full assurance of our salvation; and so have
peace of conscience, in life and death. But Popish faith learned by tradition,
teaches men not to trust on God and Christ alone, but on the intercession of
creatures, and Pardons of Popes, and on their own merits also for salvation:
whereby their consciences accusing them, they neither have nor profess to have
such peace, by full assurance that they are heirs of God unto salvation, as
we: nay they rage against this truth; as against an heresy.

Ninthly, The holy scriptures which we rest upon, are of such power and
authority that many thowsands in their ages have given their lives for the
defense of them, and of the things taught only in them; yea even heretics
have dyed for things which they have erroneously thought to be in the
scriptures reveled. But for Papists, they cannot show many (if any) that have
willingly given their lives for such doctrines as have only been taught by
men and by unwritten popish tradition* and not in their judgment by the
prophetical and Apostolical scriptures.

Tenthly, the Holy scriptures which are the rule of our faith, have prophesies
of things to come, and due accomplishments of the prophesies as they were
foretold: whereby we are confirmed of the truth and infallibility of those
vvritings. But the vvritings of Doctors, Councils, Popes, on which Papists
rely, are destitute of this confirmation, Neither does the Pope use to
prophecy; though it were necessary, if he would as Christ's vicar obtrude his
own decrees for divine oracles, seeing the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of
prophecy, as the Angel said Rev. 19. 10. Nay rather the prophesies of Rev. 13.
and 17. etc.
scripture plainly foreshew the Church of Rome to be the whore of Babylon, and
her Lord the Pope to be Antichrist. Which he fearing it will come to light,
forbids therefore his subjects, the reading of Gods book.

Eleventhly, Papists themselves are forced in disputing against Jews (which
were once Gods church, and from which they themselves with us received the
books of Moses and the Prophets:) to use only the holy scriptures and
prophesies to convince them: for their Romish church and traditions, the Jews
do not regard. With these scriptures the Papists do rightly Mr. I. A. sect.
41. 43.
think the Jews are sufficiently convicted. Even so do we much more* (having
the scriptures of the new Testament added to the old) rightly hold it
sufficient to convince the Papists by the written word which they acknowledge
to be of God* and they have no more reason to refuse this and draw us to their
Popes decretals, then the Jews have to refuse the Bible, and draw men to their
high priests, Rabbis and Thalmuds: or the Turks, to their Alkoran.

12. Finally, grace, wisdom, and divine majesty appears in the holy
scriptures, to all that read them (except they have a reprobate sense) even by
the confession of our adversaries. But no such wisdom grace or majesty
appears in Popes decretals, more then in other humane vvritings: yea they are
full of ignorance, grossnes, barbarism, error, favoring of the Popes private
spirit; as any of understanding (unless they be the Popes bondmen) vvil
confess: and no singular grace appears in them, more then in the books of H.
N. or Alkoran of Mahomet. For all which and sundry other like reasons which
might be alleged: every reasonable infidel whom God will save, will rather
incline to our grounds of ancient Christianity; then to the other, of late
Iesuitisme or Popery. Let him that reads consider, and give sentence.

By this which has been written, you may see (M. I. A.) that we fly not for
proof, to our private spirit, as you often slander us: but we say a Papist may
be couvinced by the wisdom and majesty of God shining in the scriptures (and
other arguments forementioned,) more easily then an Atheist can be convinced by
the wisdom and majesty of God shining in the creatures. And if this later were
sufficient (by The Apostles Romans 1. 20. etc.
testimony) to condemn the hethens: the former must needs be more sufficient to
condemn you: especially seeing you confess the scriptures to be of GOD: whereas
the Atheist will not confess* the world to be of God: and yet you dare not
abide the trial of your religion by this book of God, without your own
traditions and decrees also. Whereas if you grant a Turk to be tried by the
Bible and his Alkoran; or a Jew to be tried by the Prophets, and his Thalmud,
you will betray all Christianity.

And when one ask you a reason why you believe the scriptures or any doctrine
to be of God: you answer that S. 91. page ^21.
extrinsi^ally (that is outwardly) and in respect of your selves, it is because
your church (that is the Pope who is head of your church) tells you so, and
not by your own private spirit. Which is, as if one should ask, why you
believe* the sun to be the light of the world; and you should answer
extrinsecally, because the Pope tells you so; and not because of any private
sight or discerning in your own eyes. Ask you again, vvhither you know the Pope
to be a man of God, furnished with his grace and spirit, that he cannot
deceive you. You answer, S. 185. pa. 14^.
we hold not, that the Pope is necessarily endued with Gods holy grace: for in
matter of fa^t he may syn as well as any other. Ask you again, how then you
trust such vile ungracious Popes as many have been, (by your own men's
testimony?) you answer, Ibidem.
you hold, the Pope has a necessary assistance of the holy Ghost, as he
defines ex cathedra, (out of his chayr,) as the head of the church. Ask you a
proof of this paradox: and you cannot bring any one line of Gods holy
scriptures to confirm it; you can neyth^r find the Pope nor his chayr there
mentioned, any more then Mahom^t or the Alkoran. Then you flee to late humane
testimonies, of Doctors, Fathers, Councils, which also you wrest. Yet ask
you, vvhither those Doctors were necessarily endued with the spirit of God,
and could not e^r and deceiv you. You dare not say this, nay in deed you deny
it, whiles you refuse any doctrine or exposition give by Doctor, Father or
Council, which the Pope approves not of: and this is ordinary to be seen in
yourbooks. Follow you now still, upon what assurance you stay; and it is, your
Pope is Christ's vicar, and cannot err ex cathedra, because himself says so.
And this is to make him a God. For only God is the ground Romans 3. 4.
of truth, on whose word al creatures should rest. And so by this argument
alone, if there were no more, your Pope is proved to be that man of syn which
exalreth himself above all that is caled God: and you are of those upon whom
God has sent strong delusio^ to believe lies, as the Apostle prophesied. 2.
These. 2. 4. 11. Besides it is* against al reason to take a man's witness of
himself. The law of Isa. 44. 9.
God and Ion. ^. (...).
Christ is against it; the law of man co^demns it. Nemo in sua causa testis
esse, vel jus sibi dicere possit. l Generali. C. Ne quis. and 2. q. 1. C. de
manifesta.

Behold M. I. A. this third time I have written unto you, God by me warning
you of your fearful estate. Take heed, and despise not the mercy of the Lord,
calling you to repentance. Be not unsensible of your calamity and extreme
peril, as he that sleeps in the midds of the sea on the top of the mast, Pro
23. 34* 35.
and says, they have stricken me, but I was not sick; they have beaten me, but
I felt it not. To day Psalm. 95.
if ye vvil hear the voice of God, harden not your heart; least he swear in his
anger, that you shall never enter into his rest. My prayer shall be against your
evil: and that you may find mercy unto life, if such be the vvil of God, Amen.

From Amsterdam the 6. of November 1613. Your friend that wishes your
vvelfare, Henr. Ainsw.




I. A. his 4. and last writing to H. A. To his loving friend Mr Henry Aynsworth
these: At Amsterdam.
Mr H. Ainsworth
AS small hope have you in deed of the former, viz. the defense of the truth,
as you grant you have of the second ^^tendement of yours, viz. my conversion.
For trust me your* allegations, your prooses are so weak, though many in (...)
ber, that I wonder that he that professes himself to hunt after the Her name
was Har phastes if I well remember.
light only, should content himself so in the dark like Senecaes poor blind
woman who accounted all others to be blind, and that only she did see. But if
you would as well have taken pains but even to have summed my reasons and
proofs faithfully, as you vainly repeat so often your own: Mine and yours
indifferently paralleld would have manifested long ere this the truth. But you
conceal so my proofs, and so magnify your own, that it is no wonder your
se^tar^^s prifeth yours as things of worth, when in deed they are but ga^die
glass, and plain Bristowes stones in sted of Diamonds. And therefore as I
remit you for all your slight reply to my former answer in so many sheates of
paper delivered, so I remitt your auditorie, but to compare both for their
satisfaction and manifestation of the truth if they be intelligible. It being
a tedious thing to take so often such fruictless pain, as to plough (...) so
many sheets the barraine sands. A short answer especially being not compatible
to many vnjoincted and scattered citations, were not your vanity therein
sufficiently v^^asked in the former. And since you do confess to be tired, as
indeed I profess I am, but to read your slight stuff; I shall content my self
to poinct out how you have satisfied me in no one poinct, referring my self to
my former defense, which does, and shall stand in force for ought therein that
you can justly oppugn.

To the first of mine wherein as I show that your reasons vanish of
themselves, you keep a great pudder to no purpose; Naie you overthrow your
self granting the unwritten word of God to deepde controversies, and that the
law must be explicated by Priests. For as traditions, the unwritten word are
included and implied in the written word, or belong to the explication or
performance of the same; so also fasts, feasts, and ceremonies of the Church
are virtuallie included in those general precepts and prerogatives of the
Church as I expressed in my former. Now to add that which is gathered thence,
or to explicate that which is included is not contrary, as you do in your
reply not obscurely confess as I show in my 12. parag. as also the 16. and 17.
parag. is to answer. Where as you charge me that you have often answered that
which I object parag. 20. I referr to the indifferent reader; But verily I may
speak and not from my own judgment, that your writings deserve no answer.

I answer, Apostollicall traditions are to be taught as the word of God and to
be expounded. what then?

In answering my first reason feign you would re^ai^ we with a spllogisme of
your own* seeing that which is known for Gods word is the rule of faith* which
I deny not. But holy scriptures are known for Gods word, which in your sense
I deny* For they are not known by themselves but by tradition, and the
authority of the church; For many pa^^ells of scripture have been doubted of
by those that bragged of the spirit of God to discern scripture; And you
neither save your self from an infinite process in that kind, and if you could
do that, how can you prove the whole Bible to be canonical, as I have proked?

In my 32 parag: I fully satisfied your tortured places; and if I do leave
out some places it is in that they are virtuallie answered in other places
expounded; For if a man should examine each place you bring, we should never
have an end.

And if the scriptures be as clear as the Sun to be distinguished, it
follows that they must be known of all, if you say of all his, you do
petere principium, since every one will pretend to be his: I See 113.
proved also by the authority of S. Aug: that scriptures in Actu. 2 and to be
known to others, requires necessarily the authority of the Church, to which
as to very many places more, you never answer. See from par. 97, 98, to 113.
145. 150. 151, 152, 154.


You wrong your self, and not I you, since you give just occasion to me to
term the guide of your religion your private spirit; for the word ^p^ly befitts
your grounds as I prove effectually; and I do convince that our faith is not
subject to any such circular vagarie, I resolving my religion into no other
grounds then St. Cypr: did his, S. 55. And you might see if you would that the
Pope does not make what he will a matter of faith, but only does declare it,
parag: 69. See from the 113. to 153. left unanswered.


And to what end should I answer him, that never answered me as I did proceed;
but only by snatches which is not to answer me, but his own phancie and to
fight with his own shadow? that vilefies the holy Fathers as earth and
ashes? that allows of no rule of scripturs, but what his private spirit
preferrs? That condemns and contemnes the name which yet is found and believed
as an article of your belief.
Catholic as a new idle upstart phrase? What shall I deem of him but as one
that sittes in cathedra pestilentiae ready to avoid, or deny any thing, and
willing to pervert others?

As for your motives; to propose which only, is not to answer mine; I referr
my self to the judicial and indifferent reader to compare both together; see
par: 109 120. 121. 122. 153. where I show how See the pre-eminence given to S.
Paul by you, answered in C. Bellar: as also see those canonical. books
defended that you term Apocryph.
you build on sands and spyders webbes; and how we ground our selves one the
firm rock, and of those true notes of the ancient Fathers did defend
themselves from heretics, see from 115 to 135. etc. Therefore since there is
nothing in your present that is not abu^dantly cleared in my former: I desire
you if you will further proceed that some way my last answer and yours, may
be set down word for word: Or if you think not convenient, to avoid
prolixitie hereafter, I desire you set down all that shall be spoken or
answered in form only; which proceeding will clear more the question in one
quarter of an hour, and in a quarter of paper, then this kind of discourse and
dilating will do in a quarter of a year and in a quire of paper. And thus
having answered yours received about the beginning of June 1614 I end, desiring
God to give you true humility to embrace the truth no doubt in your
understanding seen.

June 18, 1614. Your well wishing friend John Aynsworth
And that many things to be believed are not taught expressly in the written
word* I have often instanced, as the Sab^oth on Sunday, the Apostles Creed,
the receiving fasting, kneeling and not sitting, eating of strang^ed meats,
see parag* 92.






The Conclusion. BEcause I am not vvilling to strive for the last word, I
cease further writing about these matters, having nothing of weight left for to
refute any more, seeing my opposite thus gives over. I am content, that not
only Mr. John Aynsworthes last answer (as he desires,) and mine, but also
that all the passages between us, be set down word for word, for any that
please, to see and compare. Am willing also to answer (as God shall give me
means) unto whatsoever Mr. Ioh. Aynsw. shall further set down in form only, as
he speaks: leaving the things that have passed between us, to the indifferent
censure of the judicious reader.

Henry Ainsworth




Faults escaped in the printing.
Page 5. line 3. for master spings, read, master springs.

Page 65. line 8. before the end, read Prove. 8. 8. 9.

Page 68. line 22. for or Christ's, read of Christ's.

Page 108. line 17 for in the same, read in the Sun.

Page 139. line 2. for if it be proved, read if it proved.

Page 142. line 4. before the end, for before their as there, read before them
as their.

Page 151. line 6. before the end, for law, ever; read law, as ever.

Page 181. line 6. for Gods words wrath, read Gods wrath.

The end.

