ANIMADVERSIONS upon M. Seldens HISTORY OF TITHES, AND HIS REVIEW THEREOF:
Before which (in lieu of the two first Chapters purposely pretermitted) is
premised a Catalogue of seventy two Authors, before the year 1215.

Maintaining the Ius diuinum of Tithes or more, to be paid to the Priesthood
under the Gospel: By RICHARD TILLESLEY Doctor in Divinity, and Archdeacon of
Rochester.

Fratres, non video qua front illi non offerimus Decimum, a quo accepimus
totum. Caesar. Arelat. hom. 14. LONDON, Printed by JOHN BILL. M.DC.XIX.

TO THE MOST HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE JAMES, BY THE GRACE OF GOD King of Great
Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
IF the duty of a Subject and servant, were not a most sufficient reason to
consecrate all labors and endeavors to the honor and protection of his Lord
and Master: yet to whom are Animaduersions more proper then to the Magistrate?
Or to whom should the defense of the doctrine of Tithes be dedicated, but to
the Defendour of the Faith? All these rights in your sacred Majesty are
supreme; and therefore have emboldened me your poor unworthy yet faithful
subject and servant, to implore your sacred patronage of these animaduersions
on the History of Tithes, that so the defense of faith may extend it self to
the maintenance of the preachers of the faith, and the temporal food of their
bodies may be established by divine and humane authority, who prepare, the
spiritual food of souls.

But more especially, that pious devotion and zealous affection, wherewith your
gracious Majesty embraces and vpholdeth the Ancient doctrine and discipline of
the true primitive Church, to whom, Beda in ho. Infra Octau. Ascens.
perfectum est vitae magisterium Ecclesiae primitiuae actus imitari, The
imitation of Reverend and sound antiquity, is the perfect schole of faith and
life, by which pattern your sacred pen and sword has suppressed all
schismatic and turbulent paritie, and confounded all Jdolatrous
superstition, and treasonable practices. This is that which has most
encouraged me, Conc. Carthag. 5. c. 9. and passim in Council.
postulare ab Imperatore defensorem, to implore your Royal and religious
patronage, who are the advocate and nursing father of Gods portion the Church,
and of the Churches portion, that is Tithes, due to God himself in
acknowledgement of his supreme right and dominion, and given by God himself,
to them that serve at his Altar. And so much the rather for that Kings as they
are in their power the Image of God, August in qu. ex V. Test. c. 106.
who said, The Tithe is mine: Leu. 27.30. 1. Sam. 8. v. 15.17.
so in the right of their sustentation have the proportion of God, Tenths:
which quantity in Tribute was so usual amongst the Grecians, Hesychius in
Verb. (...).
that (...) and (...) to tithe and pay Tribute, were as properly Synonymaes, as
(...) and (...) to tithe and consecrate, So that to assume the protection of
Gods challenged Tenth assigned to his ministers, is indeed to strengthen the
reason of that right of Tribute allowed to your self. And surely this number
Tenth, or Tithe, is sacred and very mystical; and communicated only to sacred
and consecrated persons that are Gods Vicars upon Earth, that is Kings and
Priests; decima Regis, and decima Sacerdotis, who both stand in Gods place and
receive this portion as Gods upon earth; and this number is so acceptable and
familiar to God, Lib. de congress. quaere^d. eruditionis causa.
as Philo speaks, that it does properly belong to him, and by his assignement
to those who resemble him.

It was the saying of an Ancient in S. Augustine: Epist. 20.
Quibus satis persuasum esset, vt nihil mallent se esse quam viros bonos, his
reliquam facilem esse doctrinam, To those, who only endeavor to be good men,
all other instruction is easy, and among them this doctrine of Tithes need no
enforcement nor defender. But covetousness has so blinded religion, and
custom so hardened conscience, and might so abetted sacrilege, that unless,
Isidor. sent. lib. 3. c. 51.
Quod non praeualet Sacerdos efficere per doctrinae sermonem, potestas hoc
imperet per disciplinae terrorem, The magistrate command what the Minister
cannot persuade, Religion must give way to sacrilege, and Christ to Mammon. It
was the complaint of Goffridus Abbot of Vendosme to Goffridus Bishop of
Chartres, Lib. 2. ep. 24
Quod seculares homines sua consuetudine sanctae Ecclesiae authoritatem
conantur adnullare, That secular men by custom would abrogate the Churches
authority, which is too true now. And it is the Church of Englands petition to
her foster-father, to her Sovereign, vt reddantur quae sunt Dei, Deo. And
since, Res Ecclesiasticae quia diuini iuris sunt, Iuo ep. 112.
in nullius bonis sunt, Church-goods because Gods right, are not to be
accounted any man's possessions; Non suntinter res mundi deputari credendae sed
Dei, Lib. de vita contemplat. lib. 1. cap. 16
as says Prosper: Why should men who may not covet their neighbors goods,
covet that which is Gods, and prescribe against divine right, making custom
and humane practice, and positive law, the basis, or mayor proposition of their
syllogism or conclusion, which they call conscience; that so they may lay
sacrilegious hands upon Gods portion, that is tithes, which surely must all be
void and unjust, as M. Seldom ingeniously confesses page 150. if tithes be due
by divine right unto the Ministers of the Gospel. Wherein although I hope the
Authors hearty submission has cleared his judgment concerning any derogation
intended by him against the divine right of Tithes, yet because I am afraid
this History of Tithes has affoorded premises to some, and to others great
surmises of religious practice of sacrilege, while they see, and hear, but
examine not) manifold quotations of Scriptures, heathen writers, Rabbines,
Fathers, Councels, Jmperiall Laws, private Chartularies, and many uncouth and
unusual marginall notes, whereby they hope, nay resolve their own desires are
unanswerably defended. Lib. 2. ad Monymum.
Yet, I hope, as Fulgentius says of Heretics and their Arguments, Nouum non
est vt Haeretici illis propositionibus se veritatem superaturos arbitrentur,
quibus facillime superantur, so in this Historian, his own authorities being
faithfully discovered, do easily overthrow the credit of all his consequences.

Lib. 5. ep. 6.
Saint Gregory said to Childebert, Esse Regem quia sunt and alij, non mirum; sed
esse Catholicum quod alij non merentur; hoc satis. Give me leave to apply it:
Your Majesty is a great King, and a mighty Monarch, whom God has crowned with
many Kingdoms above your Ancestors, and made you the uniter of Crowns: and
this is common to many others with your Majesty. Your Majesty is a true
Christian Catholic King, Defender of the true, Ancient, Catholic and
Apostolic faith, which is almost proper to your self; they that boast to be
called Christian and Catholic, may not compare with your Majesty in this
style. But J must add another word out of the same Saint Gregory: Regiam, Lib.
9. ep. 57
quod maioris laudis est, ornatis sapientia potestatem. This is your own
proper and peculiar, no King can share with you in this honor; you are a most
learned and judicious King, who with your great knowledge and admirable pen,
have, and do daily adorn your Regal power with your singular wisdom and
learning: Rex Theologorum, a King of many excellent and learned Divines, and
Rex Theologus, a King, a Divine, who are Antesignanus a leader among your great
Bishops and worthy writers: And which is happy for my Argument, a founder, a
restorer, and an endower of Bishoprics with Tithes, I beseech your sacred
Majesty, let me, and this poor work of mine, march under your Banner, it will
stand against all enemies if it may but carry your Majesty's name and
protection. And so I will end with the prayer of those Fathers of the 12.
Toletan Council, to God for their Prince, Can. 13.
Vt det amatori Christi Serenissimo Domino nostro atque amantissimo Iacobo
Principi, imperare cleme^ter, regnare foeliciter, habere de clementia fructum,
obtinere de iustitia praemium, de pietate Trophaeum, quo and hic inuictus
victor hostiu^ semper appareat, and post diuturna huius seculi curricula, ad
regnum aeternum cum suis omnibus coronandus perueniat: praestante Deo, and
Saluatore nostro Domino Jesus Christo, qui cum patre and sancto spiritu in
Trinitate, viuit and regnat Deus in secula seculorum. Amen.

Your Majesty's most humble servant and Chaplain, RICHARD TILLESLEY.

To the Reader.
COurteous Reader, M. Seldom has of late published a History of Tithes, a
Book much perused for the rareness of the argument, too much commended for
the variety of the language, and overmuch admired for the diligence of Antique
Collections: And to this History he has added a Reuiew, both to answer some
private objections against his book, and to offer some considerations, whereby
the wise and charitable intention of his History might be conceived. Yet since,
to the general prejudice of the Church, both in profit and learning, by
preiudicate Readers they are magnified; as if the Church hereby must be feign
to leave Gods interest, and rely on man's bounty; and yet (such is their
conceit) were not able to contradict the opposers: I could not but offer these
sudden Animaduersions, to thy judicious consideration, lest thou be led by
names and many strange quotations (which thou have not leisure or care to
examine) in the danger of thine own soul, to undo the mother of thy faith,
the Church.

By which Animaduersions when thou shall observe, how affection in this cause
has misled the judgment of this Historian in this by-Argument from his
profession, so that even herein (both in the Grammar sense of words and
phrases, wherein as a Critic he is judged curious; and in the relation of
ancient authorities, wherein as an Antiquary, he has been diligent, besides
the seuerals of his incoherent arguments) he is with purpose to deceive others,
himself deceived; Thou will not hazard thy conscience, upon the opinions of
private, though learned men, but, submitting thy understanding to the judgment
of Gods Church, relying upon Gods word, in obedient devotion wilt both do and
think as it teaches. I know the writings of us Clergy men upon this Theme
have usually prejudice with the Layety, as if our motions proceeded from
desiring theirs, rather then them, although we never so much protest with
Saint Augustine, Non quaerimus vestras opes, sed vestram iustiti^m; Or, Sermon.
de temp. 219. In Ps. 103 concion 3. de part secunda.
Non ideo dico vt ista fiant in me: We desire not your wealth but your
righteous dealing; Or, I speak not this in my own behalf: or, Lib. 1. ep. 36.
with P. Cluniacensis, Nec tam ad scribendum coegerunt lucra decimarum quam
damna animarum; Not so much the gain of Tithes, as the loss of souls have
enforced us to write. Yet howsoever, that duty which we owe unto the souls of
men, not to suffer the people of God to follow strange opinions, which either
may divert them from the true faith, or moral obedience of his word; as it
has provoked many, so has it also incited me, to the refutation of this
book; whereupon the Sacrilegious practice of these days may seem to ground
the denial of the right of God, and by such questioning of the Quota, would
deny the Tota: Whereas indeed the Totum of what they are, have, or hope for,
Ep. 28.
might bring them to that consideration of Gerbertus; Quid est quod das? aut
cui das? nempe ex multo m^dicum, and ei qui omne quod habet, gratis dedit: What
is that which thou give, O man? or to whom do thou give? To wit, little of
much, and that to him, who gave all that he had freely: Chrysol. ser. 103.
And so in expectation of a blessing: For, Certe si non damus, si non
accipimus, non queramur: Surely if we give not, let us not grumble if we
receive not; Let them prove obedient sons, for, Idem sermon. 10.
Reuera filium se nescit, visceribus caret, naturam negat, ingratus est patri,
qui authorem vitae suae non obsequijs placat, non deuincit cultu, muneribus non
honorat: He forgets himself to be a son, is vnaffectionate, unnatural,
ungrateful to his father, who does not please the Author of his life by
observance, does not endeare him by his service, does not honor him with
presents: And acknowledging aliquam partem offerendam esse, that some part is
to be offered, they should rather allow Gods claim, and the Churches challenge,
the Laws ordinance, reason and natures proportion, the Type of man's duty,
(and all this and more is true Tithes) then be contentious or scrupulous, under
the patronage of such a book; which how insufficient it is, to say no more, I
submit to thy censure, and with it my self.

Yet, lest any thing in the ensuing Animaduersio^s might either seem difficult
or procure prejudice, may it please thee to be advertised,

Where in the Book any thing is said to be confessed, or produced by the
Author, and some number of a page is added, the number has reference to his
book, not to mine.

When thou obseruest Quotations which he cites out of Benedictus Leuita, not
answered by that name, but by the name of Capitulars, the Fifth, Sixth, or
Seventh Book, Know, that they are all one, the three last Books being by him
collected, and the first four by Ansegisus: Which I admonish, lest thou, as my
self, may be deceived in name with what thou know in substance.

As also that,

Adreualdus de Miraculis Sancti Benedicti produced in the History of Charles
Martell, and

Aimoynus de vita S. Abbonis Abbatis, cited in the Reuiew, are in Bibliotheca
Floriacensi collected by Ioannes de Bosco.

Vitus Amerbachius his Epitome of Charles the Great his Constitutions, is
published after Hincmarus his Epistles, by Ioannes Busaeus.

And that many authorities in the Catalogue after produced, are out of the last
Edition at Colen of the Magna Bibliotheca Veterum Patrum.

And, that thou should not less esteem the cause I undertake; because I am
not so far transported with passion as to answer the Authors ill beseeming
language with the like: since yet in very many places he imposes, Lazy dull
Ignorance, peevish Jealousy, impudent coniecturing, patient idleness, base
detraction, malice, negligence, confidence, ridiculousnes, gross absurdities,
nothing but Title, beard, Habit, and infinite other such scornful
attributes, on all that shall oppose him; as if Solus saperet caeteris
volitantibus vmbris: And therefore is pleased in great opinion of his own
work, to add the exceeding commendations thereof by himself. But it is the
cause not the man whom I intend: yet withal I must tell him, that in no age,
could he have less fitly provoked the Clergy in this cause of God then now;
never more solid Judgment, exquisite diligence, various disquisition of all
hidden learning He must not look to lurk in the darkness of unknown
language, or private Chartularies, or unusual by-named Books. There are, that
can trace his footsteps, and add light to his Errors. That Ignauia fallax,
against which his Rubrike Title Page, is with his Motto of Defiance Sumsimus
Arma, is not so general as he would intend: For what am I, amongst the
thousands of riper years and abstruser knowledge, and yet upon confidence of
the cause, and weakness of his Book, have adventured in too short a time, the
Encounter of this Adversary, who for many years has unfortunately studied,
and now untimely produced this error of his Art? But since by his Submission
to that Honorable Court of High Commission, he has acknowledged his fault,
his person need not be opposed; which I rather manifest, because in many, the
Doctrinal consequences from his Book have bred Error, who have not understood
that the Author of the book has been sorry for the publishing of it: For
whose sake as I have undertook the answer, so for Truths sake I desire their
patience

ANIMADVERSIONS upon the Preface of M. Seldens History of Tithes.
IF ever any Preface deserved the impatience of the greatest moderation, and in
scorn and self-love did prejudice the Learning and Religion of an
incomparable Nation: what then may this Preface expect, but Satyricall and
furious contradiction? There being no part, but fraught with supercilious
contempt and full of the Rhetoric of a censorious ouerweener. But we have
not so learned Christ Jesus, that being reviled, we revile not again, through
good report, and evil report in the conscience of Gods blessings, we endeavor
to please him who has called us to a profession of peace: Without passion
therefore, I will select some passages out of his Preface, and there-against
oppose such Adversaries, Bernard. ep. 77.
or Animaduersions, whereby it may appear, Si verum nos sapimus; quod veritas
ei contradicat, non nos; that if my words be true, he is more opposed by Truth
then by me: And there I begin where the Author of the History, Protests,

This History was not written, to prove that Tithes are not due by the Law of
God.

confidence, ignorance, negligence, boldness, imperiousness, and such like,
does more dispute of it then becomes an impartial Historian.

Page 1.
Nothing that belonged to the Title is purposely omitted.

Catalogue, and in the censure, several pertinent confirmations of the Title
De iure Diuino, omitted; whereof, being in the same Books, Epistles, Pages, he
could not be ignorant, unless he were but Canis ad Nilum, and no constant
peruser.

No piece of it is stolen from any other man's notes:

Benignum etenim est, and plenum ingenui pudoris, fareri per quos profeceris,
Ad Vespasian.
says Pliny: whereas, Reprehensione dignum esset, maiorum tacere nomina, and
little sibi appropriare ingenia: He were worthy reproof who concealeth the
name, and does arrogate to himself the invention of the ancient. Yet in his
Epistle Dedicatory, a great part of it, is confessed, to be sent him by
another able Direction, so that he restores rather then gives it, he borrowed
help, and does offer only whatsoever is in this of his own also, They are
his words,

He intended not to teach any innovation by an imperfect pattern had from the
musty relics of former time. Page 2.


innovation, even by the perfectest pattern he might have, from the mustie
Relics (for so he calls the old writings) of former time, which if he had
performed, it might have much aduantaged the Church, whom new Customs have
much impaired.

His book has been approved by the censures of such, as are of the choicest
learning, ablest judgment, and truly Decumatissimi, as well in worth as Title.

any that has examined the quotations, and thoroughly perused the work, wherein,
such falsities, injurious censures of writers, contradictions, and many other
impertinences are too frequent. So that no ingenuous and learned Reader, but
will be backward to allow this for truth, which is only a compacture out of
the abuses and disobedience of religion and lawful government. Nimis perverse
se amat, August ep. 7.
qui and alios vult errare vt error suus lateat.

He accuses all writers of this Argument, Page 4.
of negligence and ignorance, in taking one from another, and not relating
toward what is fit to be known touching the payment of the Hebrews, etc.

negligence or ignorance, who undertaking to show the History of Tithes, (which
none do of purpose, but to infer the right) have not so largely related so
much of the payment of the Jews practice of the Gentiles, of former Christians,
of the humane positive laws, of the various opinions of past ages, besides the
course of settling Tithes in Monasteries, etc. by appropriations, or
consecrations, or the original of infeodations; or concerning exemptions; for
mine own part I know not; yet I am persuaded that they wrote though not all,
yet what was sufficient to the conclusion they intended. Why might not the
practice of the Jews be rather presupposed, then particularized, and only by
the passages of Scripture, and authorities of the ancient commoner Authors be
pointed at, then be expected from every Writer, who either has not the means
to come by the books, or the skill readily to understand the language,
especially of the latter barbarous Rabbis? If the only practice of the Jews,
not supposing the ground of divine precept, might enforce the continuance
amongst us, then more pains in these Rabbines had been necessary: But when
the precept alone being proved to belong to us, can command obedience without
their practice; Then for to spend good time only for ostentation of learning
in perusing and quoting Rabbis had been needless. I could only wish that the
abundant maintenance of the Jewish Priesthood, might but procure for the
Evangelical Priesthood even that lesser and rightful portion of Tithes
wherewith it would be contented. Yet herein, from more skillful Hebricians, the
Author must be advertised, that his Rabbine quotations are not all true, and
few of them of his own observation.

As for the practice of the Gentiles, who have not pointed at enough authorities
to free them from negligence and ignorance, although each good Writer has not
alike leisure from his profession, or delight in such studies? Though herein
the Authors diligence is commendable in the third Chapter. By which the
progress of that natural praecept, though depraved in the Idolatrous use,
does appear (and Idolatry is the Ape of Religion:) Whereout, if these
conclusions might be inferred, that therefore the consecration of a Tenth part
to God was natural, and that herein the Gentiles not having the law, Romans 2.
and doing by nature the things contained in the law, show the work of the law
written in their hearts; This were a pertinent consideration: for why should
they consecrate rather that part then another, unless as Hugo de S. Victore
speaks, Erudit. Theolog. lib. 1. p. 11. cap. 4.
They had been taught and instructed by God; Vnde enim, homo rerum suarum
decimam potius quam nonam vel octauam vel aliam quamque partem offerendam esse
scire potuisset, nisi a Deo doctus fuisset? are his words to that sense fully.

Concerning the practice of former Christians, those few whom I have read,
point at some, though not at all, as neither the Author does, which if these
days would follow, as there were no general Councels before Agobardus time
concerning them, Nulla enim compulit necessisitas feruente vbique religiosa
deuotione and amore illustrandi Ecclesias vltro aestuante: There was no
necessity, the Religious devotion of all, every where, and the desire of
bettering the Churches, freely abounding: So no Controversy or such History
would be needful.

As for Humane positive laws: some out of opinion, that they bind not
conscience; oth^^ out of consideration that the knowledge of the Secular laws
pertain to other professions; others seeing no regard to the most ancient of
them in the present practice, have perchance, if known them, omitted them, and
deserve not therefore such imputations of ignorance and negligence.

The various opinions of past ages, are in general by some disciphered, though
the authorities of the erroneous part be not so at large expressed, and
inclined unto, as by the Author; yet their reasons are iudiciously answered,
neither with negligence nor ignorance.

That none have so variously showed the settling of Tithes in Monasteries,
Corporations, Colleges; I think was out of a dislike of them, not meaning to
justify, but oppose either the appropriations (or as Master Seldom calls them,
Consecrations) of Tithes to such places, and not so much out of negligence or
ignorance: Though concerning Colleges there is great difference, they being
the Seminaries of the Clergy, and for the most part, must consist of such men
in Orders; as also, the Spiritual Corporations of Bishops, and Cathedral
Churches do.

Those which he calls Fables concerning the Original of infeodations, shall for
the substance be proved truths, especially in the History of Charles Martell.

Of exemptions, none can speak well that consider the true right; But if any
therein have distinguished the Hospitalers, and those Knights of Saint John's in
Jerusalem: or about exemptions have committed other most gross and ridiculous
absurdities (so eager and bitter it pleased our Historian to be) yet some of
his own slippes with more gentle language manifested, may for hereafter temper
his style, since he is a man, and may err: but that any writers have so erred,
is more then I know.

Page 5.
It is a common, but most deceiving Argument, affirmatively to conclude fact or
practice of Tything from what they see ordained by an old Canon of the Church.

the practice from the Ca^on, and that supposing or expressing the duty of the
Law of God, he might well do it; or else suppose an irreligious practice to be
generally embraced. The examples opposed of Reparations of Churches, Testaments
of the Clergy, are of things merely Ecclesiastical, not Divine, as Tithes
are: In which Tithes if the Laity have made alteration from the Canon, it was
because as Alcuin speaks, In Epistola ad Carolum Magnum citat. p. 70.
Auara men's hominum decimarum largitati non consentit, out of covetousness;
which yet for avoiding a public scandal, has been tolerated in practice, to
the prejudice, and at the peril of their souls, who knowing the truth, yet
would justify their actions from custom: What therefore National customs
have impaired in this right of Tything, might well have been omitted by the
honest Writer, who in charity hoped each man's practice would have answered the
precept of God published by the Church. The inference therefore of practice
from such Canons is fit in charity, though not certain to experience; since
the Canons for Tything are not in respect to infer practice, like the law of
Plato, or of L^cians men in the Moon, or of Aristophanes city of Cuckoes in
the clouds, as he (I may say) profanely makes the comparison: But such which
require obedience of necessity, upon the fearful peril of Canonical
censure, which is confirmed in heaven. But sure such an Argument is more
reasonable and less Sophistical, then against Canons, from concealment or
ignorance, of whole evidence, to infer a negative practice clearly allowed.

Page 8. Concerning tithes in London.
The Tithes of houses in London no otherwise have place here, then as they
occur in the Acts of Parliament under H. 8. The 52. farthings paid on
Sundaies, and the offerings paid on great Festival days, could not properly be
reputed among Tithes, neither in regard of their value; for they came to much
more: nor in respect of their nature.

London be not properly a Tithe, yet sure it is Nomine Decimae, which is all
one: which because of the inequality of men's estates, and the unwillingness
of men freely to confess their annual personal gain, from their several
trades; was appointed by the Commonwealth, to which (it may be to avoid
scandal) the Clergy agreed, to place it upon the Rents of houses: to the
knowledge of the value whereof, the Parsons might come, without urging them to
confess upon Oath the truth, which in covetous minds might often have
occasioned perjury.

Constitut. de Decimis cap. Sancta. Verb. Negotiatione.
And Lindwood judges the 52. farthings, if not in consideration of the prediall
Tithes of houses, yet to be as oblations, which through custom might be due
above the Tithes; and not (as the Author would have them) to withhold the
payment of personal Tithes, which were also paid, as in the next Animaduersion
may appear.

Page 9.
For the nature of these Tithes of houses, I here offer a discourse, titled, A
devise how the Curates of London may be provided for of sufficient livings.

Discourse seems to be a malicious Treatise, grounded upon that false
supposition, that only Praediall Tithes are due, Which the Author would seem
to countenance, as if in the Leuiticall law there were no mention of other
Tithes; which although it be true in the precept, in the last of Leuiticus, yet
elsewhere it is more generally said. Thou shall not defer to offer thy Tithes
and first fruits, Exodus 22. in the vulgar, and Deuteronomy. 12. Decimas and primitias
manuum tuarum, Inferte omnem Decimam. Mal. 3. Sanctifica Decimas tuas, -- Da
altissimo secundum donatum eius. Eccles. 35. The Pharisee Tithed Ex omnibus
quae possideo, Luc. 18. of all that he had. And because the School doctrine
is so much followed by the Author.

The conclusion of Alensis out of some of those is, Sum. p. 3. q. 5^. M. 4.
Art. 2.
Si ergo ex dono Dei possidentur omnia quae acquiruntur, iusto negotio vel
art, de illis decimae dandae erunt, If therefore the gain out of any honest
Trade or Art, be possessed by the gift of God, then of them Tithes must be
paid. And himself Page 163. following these Schoolmen, has thought such
scruples about the difference of personal and praediall Tithes, to have been
needlessely handled by some, because both are equally due: The Moral law
according to them not designing out real possessions, to be more subject then
personal profit.

Wherefore it is Absurd that the devise should infer, that therefore, by no
means else there is due any living to the Priest, but by the consents of the
people; and also auerring that the living which the Ministers have had in
London, has been by the consents of the people, which has long time given
them fourteen pence of every noble, rated by the rent of houses. In the time
of Roger Niger de Bileye Bishop of London, Circ. Annum 1235. Lib. Ms.
in the Statutes between the Rectors of London, and the Archdeacon there,
amongst other offenders, Detentores Decimarum, The detaynors of Tithes in the
city of London were excommunicated, Tithes therefore then were usually paid.

And after, Si contingat aliquem parochianum esse rebellem Ecclesiae suae vel
Capellano suo, -- non soluendo ijs parochijs oblationes debitas and consuetas
secundum facultates suas, nec alia quae ad eum pertinent soluere, etc. If it
shall happen that any parishioner shall deny unto their parish Church or the
Chaplain thereof, and not pay his due offerings and accustomed according to his
ability, or other things which he ought to pay, etc. And after, Tribus diebus
Dominicis post Natiuitatem Sancti Iohannis Baptistae, in omnibus Ecclesijs a
Capellanis annuatim public fiat inhibitio, ne quis praediorum sieve gardinorum
decimam fructuum asportet vel asportari faciat, nisi primo Ecclesiae parochiali
competenter inde fuerit satisfactum: Three Sundays before Midsommer day in
every Church yearly, let an inhibition be publicly made by the Chaplains,
that none carry away by himself or others, his praediall Tithes and of
gardens, unless first the parish Church be meetly satisfied. Tithes therefore
to be paid, and offerings were due not voluntary.

In eodem Ms.
And in the petitions of the Rectors of London (against the Dominicans and
Franciscans who much impaired their profit) to the Archbishop of Canterbury and
the rest of the Bishops then in a Synod; amongst many other complaints, this
is one: Item fratribus confessi, qui, de negotiationibus suis Ecclesiis
parochialibus iure Canonico solebant annuatim confer decimas; Vide simile
apud p. de Vineis lib. 1. ep. 37.
a tempore quo confessionibus fratrum se submittunt, modo debito, nec consueto
negotiationes suas decimare non curant: Also they that confess to the Friars
Mendicants, who before were wont yearly according to the Canon law to pay
Tithes of their trading to their Parish Churches; Now since they confess to
those Friars, they neglect in due and accustomed form to pay Tithe of their
trading. And so in many other complaints remembering tithes, besides in the next
complaint before this, the Rectors complain, how that their parishioners, who
Diebus Dominicis saltem and festiuis, tenentur visitare Ecclesias parochiales,
and in eisdem Sacramenta and Sacramentalia recipere, ac seruitium diuinum
deuote audire, nec non oblationes debitas and consuetas in Missis solennibus
offerre: Ad loca fratrum praedictorum se transferunt, and Ecclesias parochiales
suas spernunt and relinquunt desertas, and sic debita iura Ecclesiae quibus
antiquitus Ecclesiae sunt dotatae fratribus conferunt, At leastwise on Sundays
and Festiuals are bound to frequent their parish Churches, and to partake the
Sacraments and Sacramentals there, and to hear devoutly divine service, as
also to offer at solemn Masses due and accustomed oblations: Now they go to
the places of these Friars, and scorn and forsake their Parish Churches, and
so bestow the due Rights of Church wherewith the Churches were anciently
endowed upon these Friars. Out of both which together, I observe not only
personal Tithes to be paid; but also offerings, debitas and consuetas, upon
Sundays and Holy Days; for which and not the Tithes, the fifty two farthings,
according to Rent, it may be were paid; in that they are called due and
accustomed, and debita iura quibus antiquitus dotatae Ecclesiae, whereby
Lindwoods opinion cited by him, page 244. is confirmed, who either thought them
paid for the praediall Tithes of Houses, or for usual oblations. These
petitions of the Rectors, were as I suppose offered to Robert VVinchelsey
Archbishop until the year 1313. for the Sigle of the name is R. and the
constitution of Benedict the successor of Boniface the eighth, is called Noua
Constitutio, a new constitution; and the Canon at Vienna by Clement the
successor of Benedict is not urged against them.

When the fourteen pence out of every noble rent began to be paid I know not,
and because Lindwood does not remember it, I suppose it not to be so ancient,
though the proportion be greater then now is practiced.

But the devise reprehendeth the taking Casualties of Burials, Christnings, and
VVeddings, etc. Which if they had their true Tithe they would according to the
old Canons forgo. Yet now if they had not such helps, their infinite pains
and care would have the poorest reward, and the greatest quantity both of
persons and estate, must want the greatest blessing of discreet and learned
instruction, and pious peaceable devotion; which without a sufficient and
regular proportion of means, will never be encouraged to be fitted for, and
fastened to such populous congregations. But the Clergy of London are better
able to plead their own cause, having more experience and evidence then my few
years and books can afford.

Page 11.
The testimonies were chosen by weight not number, not took up at second hand.



And whether he took them up at second hand, or no, is not material to me, if
they prove true; though it deserve commendations for his diligence if he did
not. It is his happiness that he had the fountains, the ancient Historians
for his quotations, and therein I will trust upon his relation; and he shall
perceive by what I write; Leo sermon. 5. de Collectis.
Apud nos authoritatem patrum viuere eorumque doctrinam in nostra obedientia
permanere, That the authority and doctrine of the Fathers and antiquity is
obeyed and reverenced by me: Yet not contemning the later writers, whose
judgment I shall prefer before his, which by his leave, in this argument,
shall gain no strength of truth in me, Page 11.
from his name alone (which I wonder he should think of) but only from those
authorities which he has designed truly and pertinently out of several old
writings.

I never was so far engaged in this, Page 12.
to torture my brains, or venture my credit, to make or create premises for a
chosen conclusion that I rather would then could prove.

that he did not make or create premises for a chosen conclusion which he
rather would then could prove; And that his premises made what conclusions or
conjectures he has and were not bred by them. Against which again, I oppose
this protestation, that whereas he has proposed to himself the conclusion,
That arbitrary consecrations were an original right of the duty of Tiths and
in that consideration would bind men's conscience to abstain from profaning
them: August. ep. 28.
and, Licet nemo faciat optando vt verum sit quod verum non est, tamen si fieri
posset optaret vt haec sententia vera esset, as S. Augustine speaks of a truer
opinion; Although none by wishing can make that true, which is not, yet if it
could be, he would wish that opinion to be true: yet that by no weighty, or
substantial authority for the premisse; he has proved at any time in
Christianity, a lawful right of detayning Tithes before the duenesse of
paying; or, an Arbitrary free disposing thereof Canonically even in the
Translation to other places: without the first whereof, they are not properly
Consecrations; and without the second not Arbitrary.

Concerning infeodations, appropriations, inuestitures, etc. Whether his
premises infer the conclusion, or show the will of his weakness, shall in
the several passages be left to the judicious Reader. And by that I hope which
shall be proposed, the old way, which is the good way, the common and true
opinion, had better through patient idleness (as he calls it) have been
defended, then after a new course of disquisition to have come not so much as
to the base Court of Truths Sanctuary, but even to a toilesome maze of error:
It had been better to have been an Apodeictick then a Skeptic.

Page 13.
For the performance in the behalf of the Clergy, etc.

humane positive laws, for the payment of whole Tithes, is so far worthy
commendation; in that it shows the consent of so many wise assemblies, to the
claim of Gods right, which yet not from them, but from Gods precept we require
of the consciences of men; whom, if we cannot persuade them to be due by the
law of God, we must entreat the Supreme Magistrate, the authority and
executioner of laws, by the several penalties to restore the rightful
inheritance of God: And by customs, statutes, or civil disposition, not to
suffer the rights of Holy Church Gods assignee to be impeached since so many
humane positive laws have manifested and offered the divine right to obedient
performance.

I wish that as the laws themselves especially the more ancient do profess
the Ius diuinum in their constitution, so he had acknowledged it; then his
endeavors had been truly thanke-worthy of the Clergy, and the proposal of
such laws might not have seemed a Derogation from the divine right which is
claymed, nor this inferior and humane right of positive Title, have seemed to
prejudice the superior and celestial sun shine of divine interest. But since
his intention was otherwise, the thanks is only due to his pains, not
purpose of producing them, whereout some others may (though he would not)
ground the confirmation of the Truth indeed: which others wisely do, while
they talk of them as supposed due also by humane positive law of practice, not
thereupon grounding an Actio co^fessoria, but ex Condictione ex lege, Vide
Seldom. page 151.
vel Canone; which both may be requisite in the same cause, the one to demand
a right, the other to require a penalty.

The Dominican and Franciscan Friars, Page 14.
had they sufficiently thought of the Constitutions and practice of Christian
states, etc.

M. Seldom should say, the Dominican and Franciscan Friars should out of not
sufficient thinking of the right by humane laws, come to the heresy of
calling Tithes Alms; whereas it was out of the neglect, as he acknowledges
page 166. whereby we may observe, what issue the Title by humane laws, were
like to have amongst those, who are as covetous to retain, as they were greedy
to gain, quibus prae pecuniae charitate iustitia vilis est, Confess. l. 6. c.
8.
who for love of gain contemn godliness, as S. Augustine speaks. As for
Wiccliffe and Erasmus; the errors and gross living of the Times, made them
envy those that rich means (as they thought it) whereby not the search of
truth, but the prosecution of sensuality and error was maintained. But
although such considerations if they were all true, as, of the owners
conueyance, continuance of time, etc. might seem to infer a debitum
iustitiae, not only charitatis, yet that is but politic justice, not always
Christian, and signifies no more then as due by common law, which is a less
tie of conscience, then the due of charity. And therefore they might think it
no more then as Alms commanded by law, concerning which out of superfluity
many of the ancient have spoke no less of the duty: and have accounted them
at least wise unjust, who have detayned Alms; making charity the Author, but
Justice the reason of the giving, and have so interpreted that verse in the
Psalm, Psalm. 112. v. 9.
Dispersit and dedit pauperibus iustitia eius manet, etc.

Page 15.
What do they else when they confound Tithes and consecrated lands together.

right to both, err in my opinion, if any such be. Saint Ambrose knew well how
to distinguish between a Church, and other inheritance, O^ttion^ de Basilicis
tradend s.
Inter agros Ecclesiae and Basilicam; the like must we make between lands and
Tithes; nay and more, God having a right to Churches in that they are made his,
though nearer, by dedication; but in Tithes because they are the Retribution to
his providence, the tribute to his power, the reservation out of his
liberality, his own, challenged, due inheritance.

This History has by distempered malice, Ibid.
ignorance, or jealousy, been cried down in corners.

malice had more discreet temper, and their Ignorance more solid learning,
and their jealousy more discovered reason who cried down his book in
corners, then distempering self conceit will acknowledge: their malice, was
but the hate of falsehood, their ignorance but the modesty of not writing, and
their jealousy, but the prophecy of what is too true: but how ever they would
not I mean openly to cry out against it, if not cry it down, without
malice, though it may be more ignorantly then those whom his words may intend:
and not out of jealousy, but out of perfect knowledge of the ill consequence
of his book in the maintenance of the Clergy: although he compare his works
to Friar Bacons most noble studies, and Reuchlins and Budes, and Erasmus rare
labors, and think all blocks to learning, that shall not give a passing
approbation to his curious diligence.

What has a common Lawyer to do (so they murmr) with writing of Tithing?
Page 17.


History of Tithes, for my part I condemn him not, nor any other, if the
matter were seasonable, and true, and only a History, and were allowed; yet I
could have wished he had placed his pains upon some more pleasing argument,
whereout he might have had for malice, praise, for ignorance, admiration, and
no iealousies especially of the church to whom he owes his obedience, to attend
his endeavors. I will not define who is the proper agent upon this Subject. I
am sure, that Office, which I unworthily bear, might have best interest in all
respects, especially if the ancient duty be considered; which was, in the
custody, dispensation, jurisdiction of Tithes amongst other revenues, besides
the capablenesse of possession in himself, the induction of others into the
right of possession, and some other co^ueniences. And to that office both
Theology and the Canon law should be no strangers: and the embracements also of
Philologie, have not been denied that dignity, witness Petrus Blesensis,
Johannes Sarisburiensis; and before these, that honor of my poor dignity, his
Master, and the restorer of learning in my mother the University of Oxon, In
Chartul. Ecclesiae Roffens. Vodesis etiam Bernar. ep. 205.
the famous Robertus Pullus, or Pullenus, or Pullanus sometimes Archdeacon of
Rochester (as out of an Epistle written by Ascelinus Bishop there, against him,
to Eugenius the Third, by conference of other writings, I have certainly
collected) not to name the Historian Henry of Huntington, or Syluester Gyraldus
Cambrensis with others of our own country. Whence, howsoever an Archdeacon,
have not thought it fit to write the History, yet my self that have endeavored
to give answer to this, may have sufficient authority against any imputation of
my interposing in such an argument.

And thus from these verbal Adversaries, I pass to the more real
observations, and Animaduersions on his History, not as a most censorious
examiner, as he requires, nor yet as an yielding enemy as he expects, but
as a friendly admonisher to him, and a forward discouerer to others, of such
defects, nay faults, nay falsehoods of this confident and ill consequenced
Book. Greg. M. Indict. 2. ep. 78.
In causa in qua Deo placere cupio, homines non formido, In that cause wherein
I desire to please God, I fear not men.

Errata.
Page 6. lin. 12. percipientes lege Accipientes. p. 17. l. 21. Decimarum. l.
Decimarum dato. p. 26. 18. exhibitis l. exhibetis. p. 71. 11. apparently
annexed l. apparently that tithes were annexed. p. 86. 14. out of l. one of.
Ibid. 24. Agrippiensi l. Agrippinensi p. 100. 10. would, for I would for. p.
102. 2. that deleatur. p. 120. 33. Approbations l. Appropriations. p. 125. 4.
action l. actions. p. 158. 14. Exercendam l. Exercenda. p. 177. 34. as that
deleatur. p. 207. 6. Read thus, Right of arbitrarily disposing; the
jurisdiction which the common or secular law had formerly challenged and
exercised, in detayning the right of Tithes (between the Priests and
Parishioners) grew out of use.

ANIMADVERSIONS upon the HISTORY.
THe Authors first and second chapters, Of the testimonies of Scriptures and
practice of the Jews (whereon according to my Profession, I most intended to
have placed my Observations) have been learnedly censured, and the authorities
of Scripture which are there proposed, have been exactly pressed by that most
religious and most worthy Knight Sir James Sempil; whose love to the house of
God, shall be gracious both with God and good men: And the Treatises of the
Divine right of Tithes, promised by many, Hilarious de Sy. nodis.
must insist thereupon. I have therefore upon due respect (for to use S.
Hilaries phrase, Quid tantorum virorum doctrinis atque dictis, inserimus
torpentia ingenia, atque sensus hebetes, atque temerarios?) neither interposed
my censure, neither prevented their censuring: Yet whereas, according to the
wise judgment of Vincentius Lyrinensis, Ecclesiastical tradition after
Scripture, as an interpreter, is needful to convey the true sense of Gods Word
with more evidence to the peevish. What that noble Knight did purposely omit,
I have adventured, not bawking any help of M. Seldens, or other men's writings,
to propose a Catalogue of the ancient Fathers, and succeeding Writers, whereby
both his and our Churches judgment may be freed from the suspicion of
novelty, and the Author, and whosoever favor the opinion of his book, may
be brought to consideration, how many holy Fathers, whose lives and deaths,
God has made glorious by miracles, by whose learned and godly writings, both
Heresy was confounded, and the Truth conveyed unto us, are opposite to their
politic new found fancy: And yet so little reverence had their gray headed
authorities, that either they are passed with censure, or contempt. Aimoinus.
Aimoinus lib. 3. de gestis Francorum cap. 41. Relates that when Chilperick
would have proclaimed Sabellianisme and persuaded Gregorius Turonensis to it,
and yet in his reason confessed S. Hilarie and S. Augustine to be against him,
that holy Bishop replied; Cauendum est, Domine mi Rex, ne and ille irascatur
tibi, cuius illi fuerunt famuli, qui vt tu ipse fateris, in ista credulitate
sunt contrarij. I compare not the errors together, God forbid, yet the advice
of that great Bishop belongs to him; That since he acknowledges S. Ambrose,
and S. Augustine, and S. Gregory and others to be adversaries to his
intention, he would fear the anger of that God whose servants they were. And
following Vincentius Lyrinensis his wise admonition, Cap. 4. and 39.
Quicquid non vnus aut duo tantum, sed omnes pariter vno eodemque consensu,
aperte, frequenter, perseueranter, tenuisse, scripsisse, docuisse cognouerit,
id sibi quoque intelligat, absque vlla dubitatione credendum. Whatsoever the
unanimous consent of continuate antiquity, has constantly held, writ, taught;
that without doubting is to be believed: He would retract his new opinion, and
acknowledging his last error, he would return to the gracious favor of the
King and Church, whom if by disobedience he neglect, would show more
supercilious pride and youthful folly, then either would beseem subject or
Christian.

Before the authorities, let the Reader observe these three Propositions, which
may state both the question, and interpret the Ancient.

1 That the Doctrine concerning Tithes was ever that they were due De Iure
Diuino, as appears by the Fathers in time of persecution, when they could not
have them generally paid, as Irenaeus, Origin, Tertullian, Cyprian.

2 That as soon as persecution ceased they were receptae in moribus hominum,
before they were given to the Church by any Imperial or Ecclesiastical law,
as appears by those Fathers that lived in the flourishing time of the Church
in the next 300. years, as S. Chrysostom, Hierome, Augustine, Ambrose, and
many others.

3 That the laws Imperial and Ecclesiastical concerning Tithes, do declare
the right of Tithes, not give them nor the Right, and they do add Civil and
Ecclesiastical punishments on the Non-payers rather then decree the payment,
as in the Capitulars is manifest.

The Catalogue shall be disposed according to their several precedence in
antiquity, and only those at large insisted on, who directly, or by necessary
consequence, maintain the Divine right of Tithes or more: Which consequences
shall be only briefly deduced out of them, not to stay the more learned reader
in the English, nor yet defraud any of the inferences.

The first shall be Irenaeus, Floruit anno Domini 180.
Qui proximus fuit te^poribus Apostolorum, as S. Basil de S. Sto. cap. 25. He
lib. 4. cap. 20. says, Sacerdotes sunt omnes Domini Apostoli, qui neque agros,
neque domos haereditant hic, sed semper altari and Deo seruiunt; De quibus and
Moses, Non erit sacerdotibus Leuitis in tota tribu Leui pars, neque substa^tia
cum Israel, fructificationes Domini substantia eorum, manducabunt eas. Propter
hoc and Paulus, Non inquiro, inquit, datum, sed inquiro fructum. Discipulis
inquit Dominus, Leuiticam substantiam habentibus, etc. The Apostles are the
Priests that serve at the Altar: that must eat the Lords part: that must have
the substance of the Levites; not of gift, but right; Of them spoke Moses;
Therefore are tithes due to them by the Law of God. In the same book, cap. 27.
Et propter hoc Dominus pro eo quod est, Non moechaberis, non concupiscere
praecepit: and pro eo quod est, Non occides, neque irasci quidem, and pro eo
quod est Decimare, -- omnia quae sunt pauperibus diuidere, Haec omnia non
dissoluentis legem erant, sed extendentis and dilatantis in nobis, and cap. 31.
Quae autem naturalia, and liberalia, and communia omnium, auxit and dilatauit.
Therefore Decimare according to Irenaeus, is plainly natural. And cap. 34. of
the same book; Offerre igitur oportet Deo primitias eius creaturae, sicut and
Moses ait, Non apparebis vacuus in conspectu Domini Dei tui, vt in quibus
gratus extitit homo, in his gratus ei deputatus, eum qui est ab eo percipiat
honorem, -- Et propter hoc illi quidem decimas suorum habebant consecratas: Qui
autem perceperunt libertatem, omnia quae sunt ipsorum, ad dominicos decernunt
vsus hilariter ac libere dantes ea quae non sunt minora, vipote maiorem spem
habentes. To give Tithes or more is a sign of our hope of heaven. Therefore.

Anno, 226.
2. Origenes. Quem post Apostolos Ecclesiarum magistrum, nemo nisi imperitus
negat. as S. Hierome de nominibus Hebraicis, He Hom. 11. in Numeros. Decet enim
and vtile est, etiam Sacerdotibus Euangelij offerre primitias: Ita enim and
Dominus disposuit vt qui Euangelium annuntiant, de Euangelio viuant. Et sicut
hoc dignum est and decens, sic e contrario and indecens and indignum existimo
and impium vt is qui Deum colit, and ingreditur Ecclesiam Dei qui scit
Ministros and Sacerdotes assistere altari, and aut verbo Dei, aut ministerio
Ecclesiae deseruire; vt de fructibus terrae quos Deus dedit, solemn suum
producendo, and pluuias suas ministrando non offerat primitias suas
Sacerdotibus. Non mihi videtur huiusmodi anima habere memoriam Dei, nec
cogitare, nec credere, quia Deus dederit fructus quos coepit, quos ita
recondit, quasi alienos a Deo. Si enim a Deo sibi datos crederet, sciret vtique
munerando Sacerdotes, honorare Deum de datis and muneribus suis. Et adhuc vt
amplius haec obseruanda etiam secundum literam ipsius Dei vocibus doceantur,
addemus and haec: Dominus dicit in Euangelijs, Vae vobis Scribae and Pharisaei
hypocritae, qui decimatis mentham, hoc est, decimam datis menthae, and cymini,
and anethi, and praeteritis quae maiora sunt legis, Hypocritae, haec oportet
fieri, and illa non omitti; Vide ergo diligentius quomodo sermo Domini vult
fieri quidem omnimode quae maiora sunt legis, non tamen omitti and haec quae
secundu^ literam designantur. Quod si dicas, quia haec ad Pharisaeos dicebat,
non ad discipulos: Audi iterum dicentem ad discipulos, nisi abundauerit
iustitia vestra plusquam Pharisaeorum and Scribarum, non intrabitis in regnum
coelorum. Quod vult ergo fieri a Pharisaeis, multo magis and maiori cum
abunda^tia vult a discipulis impleri. Quod autem fieri a discipulis non vult,
nec Pharisaeis imperat faciendum. Quomodo ergo abundat iustitia nostra,
plusquam Scribarum and Pharisaeorum, si illi de fructibus terrae suae gustare
non audent, priusquam primitias Sacerdotibus offerant, and Leuitis decimae
separentur; Et ego nihil horum faciens, fructibus terrae ita abutar, vt
Sacerdos nesciat, Levites ignoret, diuinum altar non sentiat?

It is impious not to offer first fruits to the Priests of God, who gives
Sun and rain. He has no thought of God, nor believes that God gave the
fruits of the earth, who parts to God none of his own gifts and blessings.
We are taught by the word of God to offer them. Moreover, the Lord says in the
Gospel, concerning the Tithing of the Pharisees, these things ye ought not to
have omitted. But if any object, that he spoke to the Pharisees, and not to his
disciples, hear what he says to his disciples. Except your righteousness
exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees; What then the Pharisees
did, must be exceeded by the Disciples. And what he would not have his
disciples do, he would not command the Pharisees to do. This is the sum of
Origin; and his arguments are powerful to prove the Divine right of Tithes.

3. Cyprian, lib. de vnitate Ecclesiae. Anno, 250.
Domos tunc and fundos venundabant, and thesauros sibi in coelo reponentes,
distribuenda in vsus indigentium pretia Apostolis osserebant. At nunc de
patrimonio nec decimas damus, and cum vendere iubeat Dominus, emimus potius and
augemus. He reprehends the not equalling of the Jews in giving Tithes, since
we will not imitate the Apostles times to give all. But by the Law of God we
ought at least to equal the Jews. Therefore.

The same, lib. 1. ep. 9. Scriptum est, Nemo militans Deo, implicat se
molestijs secularibus, vt possit placere ei, cui se probauit: Quod cum de
omnibus dictum sit, quanto magis molestijs and laqueis secularibus obligari non
debent, qui diuinis rebus and spiritualibus occupati ab Ecclesia recedere, and
ad terrenos and seculares actus vacare non possunt? Cuius ordinationis and
religionis formam Leuitae prius in lege tenuerunt, vt cum terram diuiderent,
and possessiones partirentur vndecim tribus, Leuitica tribus, quae templo and
altari and ministerijs diuinis vacabat, nihil de illa diuisionis portione
perciperet sed alijs terram colentibus, illa tantum Deum coleret, and ad victum
atque alimentum suum, ab vndecim tribubus, de fructibus qui nascebantur decimas
perciperet. Quod totum fiebat de authoritate and dispositione diuina, vt qui
operationibus diuinis insistebant, in nulla re auocarentur, nec cogitare, aut
agere secularia cogerentur. Quae nunc ratio and forma in Clero tenetur, vt qui
in Ecclesia Domini, ad ordinationem clericalem promouentur, nullo modo ab
administratione diuina auocentur, ne molestijs and negotijs secularibus
alligentur, sed in honor sportulantium fratrum, tanquam decimas ex fructibus
percipientes, ab altari and sacrificijs non recedant, and die ac nocte
coelestibus rebus and spiritualibus seruiant. The same reason and form is
observed in the Gospel for the maintenance of the Clergy, which was first in
the Law, that he that goes in Gods warfare should not be entangled in worldly
affairs. Therefore, Tithes or more de Iure diuino.

Anno, 355.
4. S. Hilarie, in his book Explanationis in Matthew. can. 24. Quia ea quae in
decimis menthae and anethi lex praescribit, -- Quia decimatio illa oleris, quae
in praeformationem futurorum erat vtilis non debebat omitti. Tithing of herbs
not to be omitted, because profitable for the example of future times.
Therefore now by that precept due.

Anno, 370.
5. S. Gregory Nazianzene, Orat. 5. Christus appellatur Melchisedech, vt
accipiens decimas a summis illis Patriarchis. If Christ as receiving Tithes, be
called Melchisedech, then he received them, and if he, his priests.

Anno, 374.
6. S. Ambrose, Sermon. 34. in Feria 3. post Primam Dominicam Quadragesimae.
Quicunque recognoscit in se quod fideliter Decimas suas non dederit, modo
emendet quod minus fecit. Quid est fideliter Decimas dare, nisi vt nec peius
nec minus aliquid Deo offerat, aut de grano suo, aut de vino suo, aut de
fructibus arborum, aut de pecoribus, aut de hortis, aut de negotijs, aut de
ipsa venatione sua? Quia de omni substantia quam Deus homini donat, decimam
partem sibi seruauit; and ideo non licet homini retinere illud quod Deus sibi
reseruauit. Tibi dedit nouem parts; sibi vero reseruauit decimam partem: Et si
tu non dederis Deo Decimam partem, Deus tollet a te nouem parts. -- Nam qui
non vult Deo reddere Decimas quas retinuit, and homo non studet reddere quod
unjust ab eo abstulit, non timet adhuc Deum, and ignorant, quid sit vera
poenitentia, veraque confessio: God has reserved the Tenth part, He that
pays not the Tenth does not yet fear God, nor know what is true repentance
and confession. Therefore.

Idem, in Sermon in Die Ascensionis. Ille vere bonus Christianus, qui de
fructibus suis non gustat nisi prius ex ipsis aliquia Deo offerat, qui Decimas
Deo annis singulis pauperibus erogandas reddit. He is truly a good Christian
that pays his Tithes yearly to God. Therefore.

Idem, in Comment. in Luc. cap. 11. lib. 7. Comparat collationem Decimarum
etiam vilium fructuum, operibus: Iudicium vero and charitatem, fidei; Et inde
infert; Sed ne rursus fidei nos studiosos faciat operum negligentes,
perfectionem fidelis viri, breue concludit, vt de fide and operibus approbetur,
Dicens, Haec oportuit facere, and illa non omittere, Works are compared to
Tithing of small herbs, as faith to judgment and mercy. In the 11. of Luke;
But Works are de Iure diuino, though compared with faith. And therefore so
must Tithes be.

7. S. Hierome, upon the third of Malachie; Anno, 390.
Quod de decimis primitijsque diximus, quae olim dabantur a populo Sacerdotibus
and Leuitis, in Ecclesiae quoque populis intelligite, quibus praeceptum est,
non solum decimas and primitias dare, sed and vendere omnia quae habent and
dare pauperibus, and sequi Dominum Saluatorem; Quod si facere nolumus, saltem
Iudaeorum imitemur exordia, vt pauperibus partem demus ex toto, and
Sacerdotibus and Leuitis, honore^ debitum deferamus. Vnde dicit Apostolus;
Honora viduas, and presbyterum duplici honorem honorandum. Quod qui non
fecerit, Deum fraudare and Dominum supplantare conuincitur, and maledicitur ei
in penuria rerum, qui parce seuerit, parce and metat, and qui in benedictione
seminat, in benedictionibus fructus colligat abundanter. Christians are
commanded to give Tithes and first fruits: He that does not, spoileth and
deceives God. Therefore.

Anno, 398.
8. S. Chrysostom, Hom. 35. in Genes. Remunerauit Melchizedechum, and decimas
ei segregauit, de omnibus quae attulit; Hoc loco doctor fit omnibus, vt
declarantes gratitudinem, primitias eorum quae sibi a Deo concessae, offerant.
Abraham's example, teaches all in gratitude to offer First fruits or Tithes of
all things which God has given. Therefore due. And Hom. 18. in Acta Apost.
Parumne est oro torcular benedici? Parumne est Deum ex omnibus frugibus ac
decimis, prius partem ac decimas accipere? Ad pacem Agricolarum hoc vtile. The
giving of Tithes procures a blessing. Therefore due.

Idem, hom. 4. in 2. cap. ad Ephesians. Quid enim non fecerunt hac in re Iudaei?
Decimas ac rursus decimas, Orphanis, Viduis ac Proselytis contribuerunt. Nunc
vero admirando quempiam dicere solemus, decimas ille, vel iste dat, quanta
quaeso turpitudinis scatet, si quod apud Iudaeos, nullius erat admirationis,
aut celebritatis, apud Christianosiam sit, vnde debeat admirari? Si tunc
periculum erat Decimas negligere, perpende quanti nunc istud fuerit? Entending
to stir up the Peoples devotion he alleges the example of the Jews herein,
comparing their bounty with our backwardness; They did freely and willingly
pay Tithes of all to the Priest, and another Tenth also to the Poor. But we
Christians can scarce afford to pay our bare Tithes, and at length he concludes
with this consideration: If it were a danger then to the Jews not to pay their
Tithe; consider then, how great a danger it must needs be now if we neglect it.
Therefore.

Anno, 400.
9 S. Augustine, hom. 48 inter 50. Sermon. Maiores nostri ideo copiis abundabant,
quia Deo decimas dabant, and Caesaricensum reddebant, modo autem quia decessit
deuotio, accessit indictio fisci, noluimus partiri cum Deo decimas, modo autem
totum tollitur: hoc tollit fiscus, quod non accipit Christus. Our forefathers
did therefore abound with plenty, because they gave their Tithes to God, and
paid their tribute to Caesar, but now because devotion is decreased, exactions
have increased, we will not give the tenth part to God, and now all is taken
away, that which Christ cannot have, Caesar will.

Idem, in Psalm. 146. Exime aliquam partem reddituum tuorum, Decimas vis,
Decimas exime, quanquam parum sit; dictum est enim quia Pharisaei Decimas
dabant. -- Et quid ait Dominus, Nisi abundauerit iustitia vestra. -- Et ille
super quem debet abundare iustitia tua decimas dat, tu autem nec millesimam
das? In this duty we are commanded by Christ to exceed the Pharisees.
Therefore no less due de Iure diuino.

Idem, in Sermon. ad Fratres in Eremo. ser. 64. Et si aliquis est agricola qui
terram colat, de fructibus suis and ex ijs omnibus quae Dominus ei donat, in
decima Ecclesiam non defraudet, and de particula sua pauperibus dare non
negligat. Si negotiator est, and in hoc laborat, and ipse Deo non seruit de suo
labor, vel decimam reddere noluerit, and de sua particula pauperibus
ministrare non curauerit, ad nihilum ipse vna cum pecunia sua redigetur. Et
quacunque art Dominus alicui personae ingenium lucrandi donauerit, vnde se and
suos nutrire and vestire potuerit, and cum hoc superlucrari aliqua, post
decimam, ex ipsa sua particula quae sibi remanet, pro redemptione animae suae
ac suorum, pauperibus hilariter donet. If any one be a Husbandman that tilleth
the ground, let him not defraud the Church, in the Tithe of his fruit and of
all those things which God has given him, and let him not neglect to give of
his own part to the poor: If he be a Tradesman and bestows his pains
thereon, and he do not serve God of his labors, or will not pay his Tithe,
and takes no care to give of his own part to the poor; he himself together,
with his money shall be brought to naught. And by what occupation soever, the
Lord shall give wit to any person to thrive, by which he may be able to feed
and cloth himself and his, and with it over and above gain something, after
the Tithe, let him willingly give to the poor, of his own part which
remains to him, for the benefit of his soul.

Vide Sermonem de Tempore, 219. Which sermon is wholly for the payment of
Tithes; and is published in English by that worthy lover of Gods Church S.
Henry Spilman, after his religious Treatise, De non temerandis Ecclesus, in
which sermon are as many arguments, almost as sentences, to prove the divine
right.

Anno, 430.
10. Eusebius Emissenus, sine quis alius homil. in Dominic. vndecima post
Pentecosten super verba Pharisaei, Luc. 18. Pharisaeus stans haec apud se
orabat etc. Nihil horum reprehensibile est, Nam and Deo pro beneficijs gratias
agere, and bis in hebdomada ieiunare, and de omnibus decimas dare, bonum valde
est and laudabile. None of these things (which the Pharisee there did) is
reprooueable, for both to give thanks to God, and to fast twice a week, and
to pay Tithes of all things, is very good, and laudable.

Anno, 440.
11. Cassianus, Collatione 21. ( praeter ea quae citantur a Seldeno, page 47.)
cap. 25. dicit, Lege Mosaica, vniuerso populo generalis est promulgata
praeceptio; Decimas tuas and Primitias offeras Domino Deo tuo: Itaque qui
substantiarum, omniumque fructuum decimas offerre praecipimur, multo magis
necesse est vt ipsius quoque conuersationis nostrae, atque humani vsus,
operumque nostrorum Decimas offeramus, etc. Et cap. 33. Quicunque soluit
Decimas fructuum suorum, atque Primitias, aut partem pecuniarum, constrictus
legis antiquae sanctione distribuit. We are commanded by the general Law of
Moses: We are bound by the decree of the ancient Law, and what is that but the
moral which binds us, and by this Tithes are enjoined; Therefore due by the
Law of God.

Anno, 440.
12. Isidorus Pelusiota, lib. 1. epist. 317. Hermino Comiti; Praeclare Dominum
ornas cum nobis fructuum tuorum Primitias tribuis, decimamque partem ex
vbertate terrae tuae, ei a quo eam accipisti pendis; quam quidem tu in multa
tempora habiturus es; Nunc quidem eorum quae opus sunt, sufficientem vsum tibi
custodientem; post autem sempiternam voluptatem afferentem. It does much honor
the Lord: It procures preservation of temporal blessings, and brings
everlasting pleasure. Therefore.

Anno, 490.
13 Caesarius Arelatensis, de Eleemosyna, hom. 2. Et quia non solum Decima
nostrae non sunt, sed Ecclesiae deputatae, verum quicquid amplius quam nobis
opus est a Deo accepimus, pauperibus erogare debemus. Est etiam locus
notabilis, Sermon. 14. post initium: Vbi etiam multa ex Augustino. Idem, hom. 37.
Dominus dicit in Euangelio, Omnem decimationem vestram distribuite, Ipse per
Prophetam, Inferte omnem decimam etc. postea citat locum Augustini per totum.
The Lord in the Gospel and by the Prophet Malachie commands it. Therefore.

14. Eugippius in vita Sancti Seuerini, cap. 17. and 18. Anno, 510.
citatur page 47. Deuotissime frugum suarum Decimas pauperibus impendebant,
quod mandatum licet cunctis ex Lege notissimum sit, tamen quasi ex ore Angeli
praesentis grata deuotione seruabant. Et postea dicit Seuerinus, Si Decimas
obtulissetis pauperibus, non solum aeterna mercede frueremini, verum etiam
commodis possetis abundare praesentibus. It is Gods commandment; It brings
both eternal and temporal reward. Therefore.

15. Anastasius Sinaita, in quaest. 13. Anno, 544.
libri qui vocatur Dux vitae, Quaestio est; Quantam suorum bonorum mensuram
debet quispiam Deo offerre? In responsione ex Chrysostomo in Matthaeum, post
multa, sic ait; Si ergo is qui dat dimidium nihil operatur, quanti erit is, qui
ne Decimam quidem praebet? He that pays not, is not esteemed with God.
Therefore.

16 Concilium Matisconense secundum Can. 5. Anno, 586.
Citatur page 58. Leges diuinae consulentes sacerdotibus ac ministris
Ecclesiarum, pro haereditaria portione omni populo praeceperunt Decimas
fructuum suorum, locis sacris praestare, vt nullo labor impediti per res
illegitimas, spiritualibus possint vacare ministerijs, quas Leges,
Christianorum congeries longis temporibus custodiuit intemeratas. Vnde
statuimus vt Decimas Ecclesiasticas omnis populus inferat etc. The Laws of God
for the Priests inheritance have commanded all people to pay Tithes to the
Priests. Therefore.

17. Gregorius Mag. hom. 16. in Euang. citatur page 57. Anno, 600.
Vnde fratres charissimi, sicut offerre in Lege iubemini decimas rerum, ita ei
offerre contendite etiam decimas dicrum. Ye are commanded in the Law (speaking
to Christians.) Therefore.

Anno, 610.
18. Concilium Spalense sieve Spanense citatum page 61. Omnes primitias and
decimas, tam de pecoribus, quam frugibus, dives simul and pauper, Ecclesiis
suis recte offerant; -- Omnis rusticus and artifex quisquis de negotio iusto
decimationem faciat. -- Si quis autem haec omnia non decimauerit, praedo Dei
est, and fur and latro, and maledicta quae intulit Dominus ((...) Cain) non
recte diuidenti congeruntur. He is a robber, a thief, is cursed as Cain, that
pays not praediall and personal Tithes. Therefore.

Anno, 630.
19 Isidorus Hispalensis, in Glossa ordinaria super Genesis 16. At vero Patriarcha
magnus decimas omnes substantiae suae Melchisedech sacerdoti post benedictionem
dedit, sciens spiritualiter melius sacerdotium futurum in populo Gentium quam
Leuiticum, -- vnde and sacerdotes ex semine Abrahaenati, fratres suos
benedicebant, quibus illi decimas, secundum Legis mandatum dabant. Eadem citat
Rabanus lib. 2. cap. 16. in Genesin. Abraham paid to Melchisedech, considering
the Evangelical Priesthood. Therefore.

Anno, 630.
20. Antiochus, hom. 120. Quantum attinet ad Primitias, his exoluendis modis
omnibus obstringimur, ex his etiamnum quae sunt proprio quaesita labor, ex
corporis viribus, quas benign ipse suppeditat Dominus, quasque sua solius
prouidentia suggerit, dum nostri prouidam agat euram, iuxta Scripturae tenorem
dicentis, -- vbi multos subiungit Scripturae locos, Haec enim omnia propter
mandatum d^ altissimo, iuxta datum ipsius and multipliciter retribuet tibi. In
bono oculo glorifica Deum, and no imminuas decimas manuum tuarum. In omni dato,
hilarem fac vultum tuum, quia oblatio iusti impinguat altar, -- Itaque, ceu
dixi, homo omnis primitias ac decimas offerre debet Domino Deo: nec vllus est
qui praetexere possit, ac tueri se velamine paupertatis; Nemo n. illa vidua
pauperior vspiam inuenitur, quae duo minuta obtulit; caeteris alioqui omnibus,
ampliorem retulit gratiam: Praecipue autem Monachi offerre Deo debent primitias
ac decimas, nec eas modo quae in conspicuo sunt, ac propalam videntur, hoc est,
ex ijs quae aliorum rum munere distribuuntur, aut ex opere manuum resiliunt
commoda; sed and spirituales etc. Very many places of Scripture are produced,
and thence for the commandment sake, we offer Tithes to God. Therefore.

21. Exhortatio Ms. written about anno 700. Anno, 700.
citatur page 66. Ille bonus est Christianus qui ad Ecclesiam frequentius
venit, and de frugibus suis non gustat, nisi prius ex ipsis Domino aliquid
offerat, qui decimas annis singulis pauperilus reddit, qui sacerdotibus
honorem. He is a good Christian that does it. Therefore.

22. Missa Aethiopica, tom. 4. Biblioth. SS. Patrum, citatur page 66. Rogemus
pro ijs qui obtulerunt, munera sanctae vnicae quae est super omnes Ecclesiae,
sacrificium scilicet primarum decimarum gratiarum actionis signum and
monimentum. Tithes the gifts of the holy Church the signs of our
thanksgiving. Therefore.

23. Beda, Histor. Eccles. lib. 4. cap. 29. Anno, 720.
De Eadberto Lindisfarnensi Episcopo. Eleemosynarum operatione insignis, ita vt
iuxta Legem Mosis omnibus annis decimam non solum quadrupedum, verum etiam
frugum omnium and pomorum; nec non and vestimentorum partem pauperibus daret.
Et in Scintillis, cap. 29. Habet titulum de Decimis, Vbi textus Malachiae 3.
Pauli ad Hebraeos 7. de Filijs Leui Sacerdotium accipientes etc. and postea,
Augustini verba citat varia. Idem, cap. 36. quaest. super Exodum. In decimis
itaque Domino offerendis, denarius numerus perfectionem significat, quia vsque
ad ipsum numerus crescit; itaque sicut in primitijs, principia voluntatum, ita
in decimis consummationem nostrorum operum ad Deum refer praecipitur. Eadem
ipsa Isidorus cap. 36. Comment. in Exodum habet. The imitation of the Law is
commended; The Prophecy of Malachie produced; And the 7. of the Epistle to the
Hebrews applied: By Tithes perfection is signified, and in type it is
commanded that we offer in Tithes the perfection of our works. Therefore.

24. Synodus Angliae, Anno, 786.
anno 786 sub Legatis ab Adriano primo (ex Centuriatoribus tom. 8. cap. 9.
citatur page 199.) can. 17. Sicut in Lege scriptum est, Decimam partem ex
omnibus frugibus tuis seu primitijs deferas in domum Domini Dei ^ui: Rursum per
Prophetam, Adferte (inquit) omnem decimam in horreum meum, vt sit cibus in domo
mea, and probate me super hoc si non aperuero vobis cataractas coeli, -- Sicut
ait Sapiens, Nemo iustam Eleemosynam, de his quae possidet facere valet, nisi
prius separauerit Domino, quod a primordio ipse sibi reddere delegauit. Ac per
hoc plerunque contingit, vt qui decimam non tribuit, ad decimam reuertitur;
Vnde etiam cum obtestatione praecipimus, vt omnes studeant de omnibus quae
possident, decimas dare: quia speciale Domini Dei est, and de nouem partibus
sibi viuat, and Eleemosynas tribuat; Et magis eas in abscondito facere
suasimus, quia scriptum est, Cum facis Eleemosynam, noli tuba canere ante te.
It is commanded by the Law: By God in the Prophet Malachie: God from the
beginning has appointed them to be given him. Therefore.

Anno, 791.
25 Synodus Foroiuliensis, anno 791. citatur page 64. De decimis vero and
primitijs -- nihil melius puto dicere, quam quod scriptum est in Malachia
Propheta, dicente Domino, Inferte omnem decimam -- Quis non timeat vel
contremiscat illam maledictionem quam minatur nolentibus offerre? It is
inferred from the Prophet Malachie; the curse threatened is applied to
Christians. Therefore.

Anno, 800.
26 Capitulare Caroli Magni etc. lib. 6. cap. 29. Decimas tuas ac primitias non
tardabis offerre Domino, de filijs tuis primogenitis: De bobus quoque ac ouibus
similiter facies. -- and cap. 189. Annuntient Presbyteri plebi public, vt
primitias omnium frugum terrae ad benedicendum afferant, and sic postea inde
manducent; Et decimas ex omnibus fructibus, and pecoribus terrae, annis
singulis ad Ecclesias reddant, and de nouem partibus quae remanserint,
Eleemosynas faciant. The precept of the Law is urged, and thereupon payment
enjoined. Therefore.

Anno, 812.
27. Aponius in Cant. in verba, Et odor vestimentorum tuorum. Vestimenta
Ecclesiae eos opinor intelligi, qui in Dei omnipotentis honorem, decimas de
justice laboribus suis Ministris Ecclesiae praebent; sicut in Leuitico Dominus
fieri iubet. Ex summariolis Lucae Abbatis. They that pay Tithes as God
commanded in Leuiticus, are the garments of the Church in the Canticles.
Therefore.

28 Concilium Arelatense quartum, Anno, 813.
sub Carolo Magno, can. 9. Vt vnusquisque de proprijs laboribus Decimas and
Primitias Deo offerat, sicut scriptum est. Decimas and primitias tuas non
tardabis offerre Domino Deo tuo. As it is written, Let each man offer his
Tithes of his labors. Therefore.

29 Concilium Moguntinum 1. eodem anno, cap. 38. Anno, 813.
Admonemus and praecipimus, vt decimas Deo omnino dari non negligatur, quas
Deus ipse sibi dari constituit. God has appointed Tithes to be given him.
Therefore.

30 Paschasius Ratbertus, in Matthew. Lib. 10. Anno, 820.
Dixerat enim supra, quod nec vnus apex iotae praeteribita Lege, idcirco nec
nunc decimationem minimarum rerum relaxat, sed vt omnia integre compleantur;
mandauerat enim iudicium verum, and iustitiam seruare, misericordiam facere,
and habere fidem, propter gloriam nominis sui: Decimas autem offerre licet, and
ipsae ad honorem Dei datae pertineant, tamen propter vtilitatem Sacerdotum
dabantur, vt vsibus eorum deseruirent. Christ does not remit the Tithing of the
least things, because no jot of the Law must pass: To offer Tithes belongs
unto the honor of God. Anno, 828.


31 Agobardus, Lib. de dispensatione etc. Rei Ecclesiasticae contra sacrilegos.
page 266. Notum est cunctis Scripturam legentibus, ab initio humani generis
Sacerdotes fuisse, -- sed and decimas -- sacerdotibus redditas. Et page 277.
Sic nempe a Patribus intelligitur, quod dictum est; Reddite Caesari, quae sunt
Caesaris, id est, tributa and vectigalia; quae autem sunt Dei, Deo, id est,
decimas, primitias, caeteraque donaria, tam vota, quam spontanea, -- postea,
Commendat autem Deus haec facienda, vbi ait, Vae vobis Scribae and Pharisaei
hypocritae, qui decimatis etc. cum illico subiungit, Haec oportuit facere, and
illa non omittere. Oportet igitur, and semper oportebit quod Deus oportuisse
testatur, neque parui peudendum suit, aut erit vnquam quod Deus vel fieri
iussit, vel factum facientis deuotione commendauit. Totus Liber dignus qui
exscribatur.

Idem, in Libro contra insulsam vulgi opinionem de grandine and tonitruis page
155. Multi sunt qui sponte sacerdotibus decimam nunquam donant; Viduis and
Orphanis, caeterisque indigentibus Eleemosynas non tribuunt; quae illis
frequenter praedicantur, crebro leguntur, subinde ad haec exhortantur, and non
acquiescant etc. They were paid from the beginning of the world, Tithes are
reckoned among things that must be given to God, because they are his: God
commanded them to be given; These things ye ought to have done etc. That
therefore always shall be necessary to be done, what God says ought to have
been done; Neither must that be neglected, which God either commands to be
done, or commends the devotion of the doer: They are often preached, read,
exhorted to be paid. Therefore.

Anno, 837.
32 Concilium Aquense, cap. 18. Quod Melchisedech sacerdos Dei altissimi, typum
gesserit Christi, catholica sentit Ecclesia, quod ei Abraham decimas ex omnibus
dedit, ipsius Abrahae ingentia commendantur praeconia, Quem imitantur, qui
sacerdotibus Christi ob illius amorem and honorem decimas dant, and ab illius
merito sequestrantur, qui Deo oblatas decimas auferunt. Abraham is commended
for giving Tithes: They imitate him who give them for the honor and love of
God: and are separate from his merit who take them away. Therefore.

Anno, 849.
33. Druthmarus, in Matthew. cap. 56. Hoc oportuit facere, id est, iudicium and
misericordiam, and fidem and ea quae ad hoc pertinent, and illa non omittere
decimas accipere; Videant magistri Ecclesiarum, qui habent simile ministerium
in populis, and tenent praedia Ecclesiarum, ne similes illis fiant, si
tacuerint populis vitia sua. The possessions of the Church are such as Christ
commands not to omit to be paid. Therefore.

Anno, 849.
34. Walafridus Strabo, de Rebus Ecclesiasticis, cap. 27. Decimas Deo and
sacerdotibus dandas Abraham factis, Jacob promissis insinuat, deinde Lex
statuit, and omnes doctores sancti commemorant. Et profecto dignum erat, vt
Israelitae decimas frugum and pecorum and omnium pecuniarum Domino darent. --
Cum itaque Iudaicus populus praeceptum decimaerum, tantae diligentia
obseruaret, vt de minimis quibuscunque olusculis -- decimas darent; Cur non
maiori studio plebs euangelica eandem impleat iussionem; cui and mayor est
numerus sacerdotum, and sincerior cultus sacramentorum? Ideo ergo dandae sunt
decimae, vt hac deuotione Deus placatus largius praestet quae necessaria sunt
-- Ac vt sacerdotes and ministri Ecclesiae, cura and sollicitudine necessitatum
corporalium, quibus sine, haec vita transigi non potest releuati, liberiores
fiant ad meditationem diuinae Legis, and doctrinae administrationem, atque
spiritualis seruitij voluntariam expletionem etc. The fact of Abraham, the
promise of Iaacob, the Law, besides all the holy Fathers are urged: Christians
ought to fulfill that commandment more then the Jews; because now more number
of Priests, better service, that they may better discharge their duties.
Therefore.

35 Rabanus in Number. lib. 2. cap. 23. Anno 849.
Et in veteri and in nouo Testamento, ministris Altaris and seruitoribus
Templi, Domini mandatum est, de oblationum largitate, and decimarum,
nutrimentum habere. It is the Lords commandment, both in the old and new
Testament, that the Priests should have sustenance by Tithes. Therefore. Anno
860.


36 Anastasius Abbas Graecus, in lib. contra Iudaeos. Apud Canisium tom. 3.
Antiquar. Lectionum page 180. Ad hunc locum deuenit Paulus vt ostenderet
Sacerdotij nostri excellentiam, supra vetus, Quae quidem mayor excellentia, in
ipsis typis rerum designata suit, siquidem Abraham -- progenitor Leui, locum
Laici tenuit in Melchisedech, quandoquidem decimas ei dedit, vt dare solent
Laici Sacerdotibus: Et a Melchisedech benedictionem accepit, vt solent etiam
Laici a Sacerdotibus. The Priesthood of the Gospel, more excellent then that of
the Law, proved by paying of Tithes out of the Epistle to the Hebrews.
Therefore.

37 Hincmarus Rhenensis dialog. de statu Ecclesiae page 653. Anno 860.
Quid de vobis dicam, seculares, qui non solum Ecclesias, sed etiam ipsa
altaria possidere vultis? nunquid vos qui oblationes pauperum comeditis and
bibitis, ad offerendas Deo hostias, pro ipso populo accedetis? Vos horrea
frumento, and cellaria ex his quae Ecclesiae sunt, vino complebitis, and
sacerdotes eius fame affligetis? cur non pertimescitis iudicium Dei? Panes
propositionum non licet com^d^re, nisi mundis and purificatis sacerdotibus? and
vos cum vxoribus and ancillis vestris, and quod peius est, nonnulli cum scortis
decimas and oblationes fidelium marducabitis? Coram vobis ardebit candela, quae
Deoest oblata, and eius altar and sacrificium sine lumine erit? -- and postea.
page 660. Laymen in having Tithes break the Law of God, must therefore fear
the judgments of God. Therefore.

Anno 890.
38 Rhemigius Antissiodorensis, in Malach. 3. Quod de illorum decimis diximus,
de Ecclesiae populis possumus dicere, quibus praecipitur, vt non solum decimas
dent, sed vt etiam sua omnia pauperibus, and Ecclesiae ministris largiantur,
etc. ad sensum Hieronimi. Christians are commanded to pay Tithes and more.
Therefore.

Anno 890.
39 Concilium Metense, sub Arnulpho cap. 2. Dominus loquitur per Prophetam,
dicens, Adferte omnem decimam -- Ideo statu^mus, vt nemo seniorum de Ecclesia
sua accipiat de decimis aliquam porteonem, sed solummodo sacerdos, qui eo loci
seruit vbi antiquitus decimae fuerunt consecratae. The Lords commandment by
the Prophet Malachie, made the ground of a Canon for Tithes. Therefore.

Anno. 895.
40 Concilium Triburiense, sub eodem. Ibi citatur Augustinus vbi supra, and
epistola Gelafii cap. 27. St. Augustine sermon. 219. de tempore, is wholly to
prove it. Therefore.

Anno 948.
41 Concilium Ingilenhemense, cap. 9. Apud Canisium Antiquarum Lectionum. tom.
5. page 1060. Vt decimae quas Dominus praecepit in horreum suum deferri, si
Ecclesiis Dei non fuerunt redditae, sed nefaria cupiditate quae saeuior Aetnae
ignibus ardet, a secularibus fuerunt retentae, secularia super hoc non
exerceantur iudicia, nec in forensibus discutiatur causis etc. The Lord
commands them to be brought into his barn: To detain them is an ungodly
desire. Therefore.

42 Statuta Synodorum, Ms. being written 900. Anno 900.
years after Christ, citatur page 210. wherein for the right of Tithes, the
Mosaicall commandment, and a passage in S. Augustine is brought. Therefore.

43 Leges Athelstani, made about the year 930. Anno 930.
by the advice and consent of the Bishops of the Land, commanding a general
payment of all praediall Tithes, as they are cited page 213. Ego Athelstanus
Rex, Consilio Wulfhelmes Archiepiscopi mei, and aliorum Episcoporum meorum;
Mando Praepositis meis omnibus in toto regno meo, and praecipio (in nomine
Domini and Sanctorum omnium, and super amicitiam meam) vt inprimis de meo
proprio reddant Deo decimas; tam in viuente captali, quam mortuis frugibus
terrae; Et Episcopi mei similiter faciant de suo proprio, and Aldermanni mei,
and Praepositi mei. -- And after is added the example of Iaakob, with some
Texts of holy Scripture, and places of S. Augustine, to show upon what
authority they grounded their Law, even upon the Law of God.

44 Constitutiones sub Odone Archiepiscopo Cantuariensi, anno 940. The tenth
and last Chapter whereof, Anno 940.
are only for Tithes. Decimo Capitulo mandamus, and fideliter obsecramus de
decimis dandis, sicut in lege scriptum est, Decimam partem ex omnibus frugibus
tuis, seu primitijs deferas in domum Domini Dei tui. Ru^sum, per Prophetam,
Adferte, inquit, omnem decimam -- Vnde and cum obtestatione praecipimus, vt
omnes studeant de omnibus quae possid^nt dare decimas, quia speciale Domini Dei
est, and de nouem partibus sibi viuant, and eleemosynas tribuant. Citantur page
217. The Law is urged for it, And the Prophet^ Malachie: It is the peculiar
inheritance of the Lord God. Therefore.

45 Poenitentiale ex Burchardo, citatum page 124. Anno 1000.
Have thou at any time neglected to pay thy Tenths to God, which God himself
has ordained to be given him. Therefore.

46 Concilium sub Aethelredo, ann. 1010. citatum page 221. Anno 1010.
Wherein some Canons are for the just payment of Tithes, Ecclesiae antiquitus
constitutae, to the ancient Mother or Parish Church: and Tithes are there
reckoned among things due to God. Therefore.

Anno 1020.
47 Elias Cretensis in quintam orationem Greg. Nazianz. Abrahamus decimas
Melchisedecho dedit, videlicet omnium manubiarum quas secum ferebat, his
scilicet Melchisedecho secretis vicem ei rependit, eoque facto mortales omnes
docet, vt sese gratos erga Sacerdotes exhibeant, ijsque decimas omnium dent,
qua Deus ipse suppeditarit. Abraham's example teaches all thankfulness toward
the Priest, in giving the Tithes of all. Therefore.

Anno 1050.
48 Leges Edwardi Confessoris, citatae page 224. De omni annona decima garba Deo
debita est, and ideo reddenda: Et si quis gregem equarum habuerit, pullum
reddat decimum. Qui vnam vel duas habuerit, de singulis pullis, singulos
denarios: similiter qui vaccas plures habuerit, decimum vitulum. Qui vnam vel
duas, de vitulis singulis obolos singulos. Et qui caseum fecerit, det Deo
decimum; si vero non fecerit, lac decima die: similiter agnum decimum, vellus
decimum, caseum decimum, butirum decimum, porcellum decimum. De apibus
similiter, decima commedi. Quin and de bosco, de prato and aquis, and
molendinis, parcis, viuarijs, piscarijs, virgultis, and hortis, and
negotiationibus, and omnibus rebus quas dederit Dominus; Decima pars ei
reddenda est, qui nouem parts simul cum decima largitur, -- Haec enim
praedicauit B. Augustinus, and concessae sunt a Rege, Baronibus and populo. It
is due to God, and therefore to be paid.

Anno 1050.
49 Humbertus Cardinalis contra Graecorum calumnias; Denique, si vetera non
proficiendo, sed deficiendo transierunt, vnde vobis Templum, Altar, -- vnde
Primitiae ac Decimae? postremo vnde vobis dilectio Dei and proximi, ac reliqua
mandata Decalogi. Tithes and First fruits continue from the Law. Therefore.

Anno 1060.
50 Petrus Damianus Lib 1. Epist. 10. Inter omnia porro hic mala, illud excedit,
and diabolicam propemodo videtur aequare nequitiem, quia praedijs in militiam
prostigatis, omnique possessione terrarum, insuper etiam and decimae and plebes
adduntur in beneficium secularibus. Idem lib. 4. epist. 12. Sunt etiam qui
plebes secularibus tradunt, ij nimirum tanto grauius delinquunt quanto and
sacrilegium committere conuincantur, quia and sancta profanant. -- Quid est
enim decimas in vsum secularium vertere, nisi mortiferum ijs virus, quo pereant
exhibere? Idem, lib. 5. ep. 9. Nunquid coniugati, qui filios nutriunt, qui Deo
decimas ex ipsius authoritate persoluunt? The infeodation of Tithes is
deuilish, is sacrilege, is to profane holy things: They are paid by the
authority of God. Therefore. Anno 1070.


51 Concilium apud Windesoram, ex Ms. Excestrensi, held some years after the
Normane conquest; whereof one Canon is, Vt Laici Decimas reddant, sicut
scriptum est. It is written, is produced. Therefore.

52 Vrbanus 2. Anno 1085.
in Charta Monachis Cluniacensibus in Biblioth. Clun. page 1448. Quia vero
Decimae tam veteri quam noua Lege Ministris Ecclesiarum noscuntur esse
concessae. Tithes granted to the Clergy, both by the old and new Testament.
Therefore.

53 Iuo Carnotensis, Epist. 12. Anno 1088.
Multa inordinata video in domo Dei, quae me torquent; maxim quod apud nos,
qui altari non seruiunt, de altario viuant, a quo sacrilegio eum eos absterrere
velim -- Idem Epist. 192. Licet enim decimae and oblationes principaliter
Clericali debeantur militae, potest tamen Ecclesia omne quod habet, cum omnibus
pauperibus habere commune. Idem in Panormia, tit. de Decimis, citat Concilium
Rothomagense, cap. 3. Omnes Decimae terrae, sieve de frugibus, sieve de pomis
arborum, Domini sunt, and illi sanctificantur, boues, and cues, and caprae,
quae sub virga pastoris transeunt; Quicquid decimum venerit, sanctificabitur
Domino. (Concilium istud citatur in Synodo prouinciali apud Westmonasterium,
1174. Et ante ab Anselmo Lucensi in Collectaneis.) It is sacrilege for those
that live not at the Altar, to enjoy them: All Tithes are the Lords, and are
sanctified to him in the words of the Law. Therefore.

54 Zacharias Chrysopolitanus in libro vocato, Anno 1101.
Vnum ex quatuor. lib. 3. cap. 126. Caesaris sunt nummi, tributa, pecunia, Dei
vero sunt decimae, primitae, oblationes. Idem cap. 141. Scimus quidem Decimas
offerri Deo propter Sacerdotes, qui spiritualia debent ministrare populo: sed
adhuc body Sacerdotes, si populus Decimas non offerant, murmurant; si
peccantem populum videant, non murmurant. Tithes are Gods, as Matthew. 22. To him
they are offered for his Priests. Therefore.

Anno 1129.
55 Synodus sub Willihelmo Archiepiscopo, an. 1129. Decimas sicut Dei summi
Dominicas, ex integro reddi praecipimus. These are the Demesnes of the most hie
God. Therefore.

Anno 1130.
56 Hugo de sancto Victore, Erudit. Theol. de Sacramentis, libr. 1. part 12.
capite 4. Probabile tamen est, omnino hominem ad haec exercenda a principio a
Deo instructum and eruditum fuisse. Vnde enim homo rerum suarum decimam potius
quam nonam, vel octauam, vel aliam quamque partem offerendam esse scire
potuisset, nisi a Deo doctus fuisset? From the beginning were men taught by God
to pay Tithes. Therefore.

Idem de Sacramentis, libr. 2. part 9. cap. 10. Eiusmodi ergo sunt quae sancta
dicuntur, vel Sanctis sanctificata, quaecunque Ecclesia possidet in substantia
terrena, sieve in pecunia, sieve in terra, maxim in Decimis, quae ab initio ita
institutae sunt, vt nunquam a ministerio diuino sieve illorum qui deseruiunt,
and ministerio diuino deputati sunt, vsu, sine peccato abalienari potuissent.
Hae quidem in principio, ob formam Sacramenti, magis institutae videntur,
postea autem sub Lege scripta, and sub Lege Gratiae ad sustentationem
Ministrorum Dei, sunt reseruatae; Ita vt in ijs and deuotio offerentium
mereretur, and accipientium necessitas consolaretur. Hae igitur nullo modo ab
vsu Ecclesiae abalienari possunt, neque in possessionem laicam, sieve
commutatione, sieve donatione transire. Et postea; Decimas quoquo modo vsurpar^,
and retinere sine sacrilegij culpa non possunt, nisi soli ad quorum
sustentationem diuina institutione ordinatae sunt. Et postea; Ex quibus si quid
forte ad sustentationem eorum qui in Ecclesiasticis officijs non deseruiant,
sed tamen in secreta diuino seruitio mancipati sunt, accommodantur, indulgentia
est, non debitum; ita tamen vt hoc ipsum de portione sit pauperum, non de
sustentatione Clericorum. Idem part. 10. cap. 5. Decimae quae ab initio
institutae sunt ad eorum tantum sustentationem, qui Tabernaculo deseruiunt.
Tithes were from the beginning instituted, under the Law of Grace reserved,
ordered by Gods institution for the Clergy, and them alone. Therefore.

Idem in Annot. elucidator. in Geneseos cap. 4. Credimus Deum docuisse Adam
cultum diuinum, quo recuperaret eius beneuolentiam quam amiserat per peccatum
transgressionis, and ipse docuit filios suos dare scilicet Decimas and
primitias. God taught Adam, and he his children, to pay Tithes. Concerning
first fruits, see Athanasius in Sermon. Omnia mihi tradita sunt a Patre.

57 Hugo Pontiniacensis, Anno, 1130.
and Bernardus Claraeuallensis in Epist. ad Abbatem and Conuentum Maioris
Monasterij post Iuonis epistolas. page 545. Clericorum est Altari deseruire,
and de Altario viuere, -- Vos cum illis partimini beneficium, cum quibus non
exhibetis officium; Paulus clamat pro Clericis, immo ante ipsu^ Moses; Non
alligabis os boui trituranti. -- Quisquis plantat vineam -- Per totam circa
vsurpationem Monachorum in Decimis. Tithes denied to Monks by authority of
Scripture, 1. Cor. 9. Deuteronomy. 25. 1. Tim. 5. It is the whole intent of that
Epistle.

58 Petrus Comestor, Histor. Scholast. in Genesin. cap. 26. Anno, 1145.
Speaking of the Offerings of Cain and Abel, says: Creditur Adam in spiritu
docuisse filios, vt offerrent decimas Deo and primitias. The payment of Tithes
taught by Adam under the Law of Nature. Therefore.

59 Gratianus in Decretis passim. cause. 16. q. 1. and q. 7. and q 4. Anno, 1145.
c. placuit and alibi. Out of whom many testimonies might be excerpt, to make
up number; but thither I refer the ingenuous reader. Therefore:

60 Synodus Prouincialis apud Westmonast. anno. 1174. Anno, 1174.
There out of a Synod at Rosne, (quoted before by Iuo in his Panormia) is this
Canon cited and confirmed, Omnes decimae terrae, sieve de frugibus, sieve de
fructibus, Domini sunt and illi sanctificantur, sed quia multi modo inueniuntur
decimas dare nolentes, statuimus. -- The Law in the last of Leuiticus is the
ground of the Canon in that council. Therefore:

Anno, 1177.
61 Ioannes Sarisburiensis, de Nugis curialium. lib. 7. c. 21. citat. page 127.
Miror vt fidelium pace loquar, quodnam sit, quod decimas et iura aliena
vsurpare non erubescunt: Inquient forte religiosi sumus; plane decimas soluere
religionis pars est and postea. Exemptiones derogant constitutioni diuinae. To
pay Tithes is a part of religion. Exemptions from payment derogate from the Law
of God. Therefore.

Anno, 1178.
62 Alexander. 3. in Epist. ad Rhemensem Episcopum. Extr. de Decimis cap. 14.
and 15. Decimae non ab hominibus, sed ab ipso Deo institutae sunt. Idem ad
Cantuariensem in Council. Lateran. part. 4. cap. 2. Institutioni diuinae
manifestius obuiant, qui decimas Ecclesiis non persoluunt. Idem epist. 19.
(Edit. post Petrum Cellensem) Archiep. Vpsellensi, etc. Praeterea illud
adijciendum mandamus, quatenus populum regimini and gubernationi vestrae
commissum, decimas Ecclesiis fideliter and deuote persoluere, Sicut ab ipso
Domino noscitur institutum diligenter ac solicit moneatis -- Iuxta illud
Malachiae Prophetae. Ibi citat Concilia, Moguntinense and Rhothomagense, quae
antea adducta sunt. Tithes instituted not by man, but by God: They that pay
not, resist the ordinance of God. It is instituted by the Lord: The Prophet
Malachie is produced. Therefore.

Anno. 1178.
63 Fredericus Barbarossa. apud Goldast. Constitut. Imper. tom. 2. p. 50. citat.
p. 474 Scimus a Deo decimas and oblationes Sacerdotibus and Leuitis primitias
deputatas -- We know Tithes and Oblations appointed to the Priests by God
himself. The same words are referred to the Emperor Henry the 6. the son of
Frederick, by Arnoldus Lubecensis in Supplem. chron. Sclauorum lib. 3. c. 18.

Anno, 1178.
64 Richardus Cantuariensis, sieve Petrus Blesensis epist. 82. Contra priuilegium
Cisterciensium, Epistola notabilis. Et quae est haec iniurios^ immunitas, vt
exempti sitis a decimarum solutione, quibus obnoxiae terrae erant, antequam
vestrae essent, and quae solutae sunt hactenus, non personarum obtentu, sed
territorij ratione? Si in vestram possessionem terrae deuolutae sunt, quare in
hoc periclitatur alienum ius? nam ad vos terrae iuxta communem aequitatem, cum
suo onere transierunt. Vt quid in alienam iniuriam terras and nutrimenta vestra
priuilegiari facitis, vt auferatis quod alienum est? Nunquid Abel de
nutrimentis suis Dominum non respexit? nunquid iustiores estis primo omnium
iusto vt vos contra dei iustitiam erigatis? per Prophetam praecepit Dominus,
Decimas inferri in horreum suum, vos ab eius horreo iubetis auferri; Habet
iustitia diuinae legis, vt in Leuitarum sortem cedant decimae; vnde and
iustitiae diuinae manifest resistit, qui ministris Ecclesiae nititur ius
decimationis auferre. Sane and ex his and consimilibus satis liquet, quod si
virtus obedi^ntiae esset, in solutione decimarum, aut reddituum, aut
exhibitione iuris alieni, facile detrectaretis obedientiae iugum. Milites
Galliarum sibi ius decimationis vsurpant, nec vestris priuilegijs deferentes
eas a vobis potenter extorquent. Aduorsus eos debetis insurgere, non aduersus
Clericos, aut Ecclesias clericorum. Deberetis recolere vos quandoque fuisse
Clericos, atque Sacramenta salutis, in earum Ecclesiis percepisse. Sed
Christianae professionis vinculum, and deuotio filialis, affectus priuignales
induit, and sub religionis praetextu, transijt in contemptum. Non ponimus os
nostrum in coelum, nec de facto summi Pontificis disputamus. Sed si Dominus
Papa indulgentia speciali quandoque priuilegiauit vos, dum ordo vester in
paupertate gaudebat, dum in vsus egentium suae lenitatis viscera liberaliter
effundebat, potuit tolerari ad tempus, licet in communem redundauit iniuriam,
quod causa necessitatis fuerat introductum. Nunc autem quando vestrae
possessiones multiplicatae sunt, etiam in immensum, priuilegia haec potius
ambitionis quam religionis instrumenta censentur. Quicquid indulgeant
priuilegia Romanae Ecclesiae, vobis expedire non credo, contra conscientiam
vestram quod alienum est vsurpare. Quod si a se de illa publicum emanasset
edictum, quod vbicunque inueniretis Clericos, aut alterius habitus Monachos
equitantes, vobis liceret eos e suis euectionibus deijcere, and equos in vsus
proprios retinere. Quid interest equos rapiatis an decimas? Nisi quia decima
res spiritualis est, and ideo enormius sacrilegium in decimis co^mittitur quam
in equis. Cum Dominus praecipiat decimas solui, quis contra eius praeceptum
potuit dispensare? Vbi diuina and humana iussio sibi inuicem contradicunt,
obediendum est Deo, magis quam hominibus. Cum sint duae leges exterior and
interior, interior semper praeiudicat, quodque puritas conscientiae dictat
mihi, exteriori praecepto fortius est, and omnem indulgentiam alienae
despensationis euacuat. Si filij Israel de mandato Domini and in retributionem
longi obsequij, quod Aegyptijs impenderant, eis vasa argentea and aurea
o^tulerunt; non expedit vos haec ad consequentiam trahere nisi constet Dominum
haec mandasse; and vos nobis tanquam Aegyptijs longae seruitutis obs^quium
impendisse. Consultius ergo and modestius agentes, date operam, vt praedictae
ambitionis nota, quae ve^trae sanctitatis titulos dehonestat, abscindatur a
vobis, nec prorebus perituris, commune in vos scandalum excitetis. Vae illis
per quos scandalum venit. In restitutione rei alienae, non credatis conditionem
vestram in aliquo laedi: Nam si quid vtilitatibus vestris deperit hac in part,
deuotio populorum, quae nunc erga vos plurimum turbata est, totum hoc pleniore
munificentia restaurabit. Quod si pertinaces vos and inflexibiles exhibitis,
vinculo anathematis innodabimus vniuersos, qui aliquid vobis dederint, aut
vendiderint, vnde ius decimationis obueniat; and in coelum clamabimus, and ad
thronum summi iudicis appellabimus, ne quis huius vinculum excommunicationis
absoluat: Principum etiam fauorem in hac plenissime obtinebimus, vt gladio
spirituali, manus ciuilis assistat; Et quicquid contra principale or aculum
venditum aut donatum vobis fuerit, confiscatur. Autequam ergo res in deteriorem
vergat exitum, vestrae famae m^turius prouidentes, velitis assuescere solution,
decimarum, illarum maxim quas cum maiori omnium rancore and odio vsurpatis,
and quas Clerici, sieve Monachi hactenus perceperunt. Nam si de noualibus
tantum, sicut beatae recordationis Hadrianus Papa constituit, decimas
retinetis, nobis in ear damnum erit tolerabilius, cuius emolumenta non
sensimus. Verum iuxta Philosophi sententiam, Non sine dolor amittitur, quod
delectabiliter and commode possidetur. This I have cited at large, as being a
most notable and persuasiue Epistle, wherein to prove directly, the divine
right of Tithes, he says: The refusers set themselves against the justice of
God; so they that endeavor to take them away. The Prophet Malachie is produced.
It is the justice of Gods Law, that Tithes should be the Priests: To be
privileged is ambitious, not religious: It is against conscience to retain
them. It is worse then theft: Since God has commanded Tithes to be paid, who
can dispense? It is Gods commandment we must obey God therein. Therefore.

Vide Epist. 102. eiusdem Petri Blesensis, Where the Abbot of Reading being
scrupulous in conscience, about retaining Tithes, brings against himself the
words of the Psalmist; Sumite psalmum and date tympanum: Which words are
applied by many for the right of the Clergy.

65 Helmoldus Historiae Selauorum cap. 3. Anno 1180.
Ea conditio a Rege (id est Carole) proposita and ab ipsis (id est Saxonibus)
suscepta est, vt abiecto daemonum cultu, Christianae fidei sacramenta
susciperent, essentque tributarij and subiugales Domini Dei, Omnium iumentorum
suorum and fructuum culturae, scu nutriturae suae partem sacerdotibus legaliter
offerentes. ( Idem in ipso Caroli Priuilegio Krantz. Metrop. lib. 1. cap. 4.)
Et cap. 92. Viri Holsati -- deuoti quidem in Ecclesiarum constructione, and
hospitalitatis gratia, sed decimis iuxta diuinum praeceptum legaliter
persoluendis, rebels existebant. Caetera multa quae citantur page 472. To
offer Tithes is to be tributarie and subjects to God. They pay Tithes according
to the divine precept legally. Therefore.

66 Coelestinus 3. tit. de Decimis cap. 23. Ex transmisso. Anno 1191.
Fidelis homo de omnibus quae licite potest acquirere, decimas tenetur erogare.
Every faithful man is bound to pay them, Therefore, because a work of faith,
commanded.

67 Synodus Eboracensis sub Huberto, anno 1194. Anno 1194.
Citatur page 229. Cum Decimae sunt tributa egentium animarum, and ex
praecaepto Domini dari debeant, non est reddentis eas diminuere: Statuimus
itaque, vt de his quae renouantur per annum, cum omni integritate, decimae
debitae and consuetae conferantur; ita vt inprimis decimae, absque vlla
diminutione Ecclesiae, dentur, post modum de nouem partibus mercedes messorum
and aliorum seruientium pro arbitrio soluentis tribuantur. Tithes ought to be
given, as the Lord commanded. Therefore.

Anno 1200.
68 Synodus Westmonasterij sub eodem, anno 1200. Citatur page 230. Cum Deo and
Sacerdotibus Dei, Decimas dandas, Abraham factis, Jacob promissis innuerat, and
authoritas veteris and noui Testamenti; nec non and statuta sanctorum Patrum
declarent -- Ibi etiam citat Concilium Rothomagense. Abraham's fact, and Iaakobs
promise insinuate, and the authority of the old and new Testament, and the
statutes of the holy Fathers declare them to be paid. Out of the Council of
Rosne the Law in Leuiticus cited. Therefore.

Anno 1200.
69 Stephanus Tornacensis, Epist. 171. Tangit nos haec plaga communis pater,
quae tantum non inuitat, sed etiam inuitum trahit, vt and soluatis Decimas, and
exigatis. Successores Melchisedech filios Aaron non excusant, nec Leuitarum
immunitas portione sibi concessa gaudere permittitur, cum vniuersos fiscus
absorbeat. Idem epist. 74. Credo pater, quia Cistercienses sunt de numero
eorum, qui violenter diripiunt coelum; sed vtrum violenter illis terram rapere
licet, nondum legi. In receiving Tithes, Priests are the successors of
Melchisedech. Therefore.

Anno 1200.
70 Ioannes de Beleth in diuinorum officiorum explicatione, cap. 5. In veteri
Lege praeceptum est, vt ex omnibus bonis darent decimas, quod ex omnibus Deus
sibi decimam voluit, quam tribui Leui in celebratione sui officij appropriauit:
Sic nos vtique humiliter facere debemus. Quod si vero a Laicis unjust
possideantur, nihilo tamen minus, eas tenemur soluere. Nec sane licitum est cis
conniuere, aut de his dispensare, sed illas tantisper reddere, donec Deus
iniustam eorum possessionem in melius emendauerit. Proinde si quis decimas
retinere praesumpserit, certe ille transgressor and praeuaricator praecepti
diuini iam factus est, and mortaliter peccat. Atque etiam qui hoc non fecerit,
sciat se non solum decimam retinere, sed quod and nouem alias parts unjust
non dubitat possidere, tantum est non reddere, quod ad Deum pertinet. We must
pay Tithes as in the Law is commanded, God will have Tithes of all: There is no
indulgence, no dispensation in them: He that pays not, is a transgressour of
the Law of God; sins mortally: he unjustly possesses the rest of his
estate. Tithes belong to God.

71 Innocentius 3. In sermon. 3. de dedicatione Templi, Anno 1200.
citatur page 78. Grauiter ergo peccant, qui decimas and primitias non reddunt
Sacerdotibus, sed eas pro voluntate sua distribuunt indigentibus. Idem Extr. de
Decimis, c. tua, Quae diuina institutione debentur. Et cap. tua nobis. Quas
Deus in signum vniuersalis sui dominij, sibi reddi praecepit, sua esse decimas
and primitias asserens. -- post, Sacerdotibus ex mandato diuino debentur. They
sin grievously, that pay not Tithes to the Priests. Tithes are due by divine
institution. God has appointed them to be paid, in sign of his universal
dominion. Therefore.

72 Fredericus 2. Constitut. Sicularum, libr. 1. tit. 6. Anno 1212.
Attendentes quod solutio decimarum, quarum debitum ex vtriusque Testamenti
tabulis confirmatur, tanto in Ecclesiis Dei preciosior redditur, quanto
decimalis oblatio de bonis hominum, velut electum quoddam spirituale peculium a
Domino reputatur. The duty of payment of Tithes is confirmed out of the
Tables of both Testaments. The offering of Tithes is accounted by the Lord as a
choice spiritual peculiar profit.

ANd thus out of my few books and small reading, have I collected a
Septuaginta duo; not interpreters, but witnesses of the divine right of Tithes:
Whereof many are full of particulars, as Councels, and Statutes, and all before
the year MCCXV. To whom, if I should add the whole number of Canonistes,
(until Navarre and Couarruuias) and the old Schoolmen, who required either
this proportion, or a greater portion even de Iure diuino: And many other late
learned Divines, both Protestants and Papists, by others produced, besides the
Councels, Determinations, Ordinances of State, Bills of Parliament, both
Foreign and Domesticke by himself related, I might paginam. non causam
implere, write much, not more. For, aut hic testium satis est, aut nihil satis,
as Varius said either this is witness enough or nothing is enough. Now, since
these have applied the Scripture, expounded the sense, propounded their
sentences, added their reasons for the Ius diuinum of Tithes, Epist. 190.
what remains but obedience? unless we will be of Abelardus proud humor in
St. Bernard, Omnes sic, Ego autem non sic, All are of one mind, but I am of
another. Now neither the Schoole-tricke of exemplariter, non obligatiue: Nor
the Iesuite-tricke of Ius diuiaum for Ecclesiastic^m, I hope can prevail with
considerate Readers, who shall find in these, Tithes to be praeceptae,
institutae, mandatae, ordinatae, ^ssae, for the honor of God, manifestation of
our thankfulness, sustentation of the Clergy, expectation of a temporal or
eternal blessing, avoiding of the like curse, credit of the Evangelical
Priesthood in comparison of the Jewish, sign of Christianity, acknowledgement
of subjection to God, expressing reverence to the Scriptures: And more, that d
bentur, obstingimur, constricti sumus, requiruntur ex debito, transgressor
mortaliter peccat. And this Tithing to be a principio, a primordio, natural,
taught by Adam, and many such other Phrases.

Let therefore covetousness yield to conscience, customs give place to
canons, the private spirit submit to continuate tradition, these days hearken
to the former ages, and man's will be obedient to Gods word so interpreted by
the ancient. And seeing they are encompassed with such a cloud of witnesses,
Vincent. Lyrin. cap. 35.
(to which each man's reading can add many) De discant been, quod didicerunt
non been; Let them unlearn their former ill lesson: Petrus Blesens. Epist. 82.
For quicquid indulgeant priuilegia Romanae Ecclesiae (I may say iuris
Anglicani) illis expedire non credo contra conscientiam, quod alienum est
vsurpare. Whatsoever privilege either Romish superstition or Customary Law may
afford, yet I am certainly persuaded, that they ought not to usurp, what is
not their own, and those are Tithes: From payment whereof, he that exempteth
any thing increased by Gods blessing, being demanded by the Church, over that,
denies Gods jurisdiction in giving no Tribute for it, against the first
commandment, hinders Gods service in taking maintenance from it, against the
fourth, is plainly sacrilegicus in usurping what is not his own, against the
eighth; besides the dishonouring of spiritual Fathers, against the fifth; Tho.
Aquin. in Opusc. de 10. praecept. c. 18.
and so in one sin, directly breaks four commandments; Let St. Cyrill of
Alexandria upon that known passage of the third of Malachie, make the use of
all; Discimus hinc etiam nos magni criminis loco durendum, non offerre Deo,
quibus gratitudinem nostram ostendimus: and agrum quem ille victui ferendo
suff^cientem donauerit, ad gloriam Dei non refer. Hence we Christians also
learn, that it is to be accounted a great crime not to show our thankfulness
to God by Oblations, and not to afford out of that field, some part to the
glory of God, which he has made sufficient for our maintenance. And for to
answer the doctrine of Mr. Seldom touching an original of Tithes, not of duty
but by Arbitrarie consecrations; observe, how almost in every several
Country, some of these Authors have maintained the divine right before that
Mr. Seldom either has or can show such his consecrations, and many of them
also the practice, informing the duty, not bounty of such payment. And thus
much in lieu of Animaduersions upon the two first Chapters both of his History
and Reuiew.

Yet in the second Chapter I suppose Epiphanius and Saint Chrysostom are but
rashly censured by the Author: Page 19.
that Epiphantus lib. 1. haeres. 16. should not there sufficiently understand
what the Jews did in their Tithing; whereas himself confesses, that Fathers
meaning not easily to be apprehended: But why should Epiphanius so well
conversant in the Jewish Ceremonies, as to write a book d^ vest Sacerdotali
as S. Jerome testifies in Epitaphio ad Fabiolam, and another De mensuris and
ponderibus, which is extant; Nay who did write against the Heresies of their
customs; be thought not to understand them? Adu^rsus Baron. page 63. and 64.
This is to lay too great weakness upon so learned a Father. That worthy
Casaubon cited by the Author in this place is so far from fastening such
imputation, that he does most learnedly explicate his meaning in the place
quoted.

As also for St. Chrysostom, of whose words, since by his own
acknowledgement, some probable conjecture might be brought, as I conceive, the
censure of not sufficient understanding should not so easily have passed;
unless he that would abstain from probable coniecturing, had rather be a
Critic upon the Ancient.

ANIMADVERSIONS on the third Chapter.
IN this Chapter, as also in the third of his Reuiew, the Collections of the
Author concerning the Heathen practice, both Latin and Greek, are various and
pertinent, and some of them not usual. But the maine places; That, of Festus
for the Latin, Decima quaeque veteres dijs suis offerebant, And that, of
Harpocration for the Greek, (...), They used to Tithe the spoils of wars to
the Gods; and that, of Didymus an old Grammarian, (...): It was a Greek
custom to consecrate the Tithe of their abundance to the Gods: (From whence
both he and Suidas fetch the reason why (...), to Tithe, signifies also to
Consecrate:) These, have undergone too sharp a censure.

P. 28. and 29.
In the first, for the place of Festus; The Author acknowledging the learning of
him, his Epitomator Paulus Diaconus is charged with ignorance, bold
contracting this piece of untruth, and by the Testimony of Divine Scaliger
forsooth, (another infringer of the Divine right of Tithes) is accounted
barbarous, and by him amended, to put in Herculi for Dijs: But this also seems
not enough, nay false to our Historian: and the Critics not agreeing, were it
not best to trust Paulus Diaconus his honesty in relating learned Festus
Sense, who saw what they coniectured at? Great Scaliger, the Divine Scaliger
(such flattering Hyperboles proceed from ambitious love) is no doubt by the
more great and more divine himself, censured: And though He be divine, yet
he may err, or write insufficiently.

To the ingenuous Reader, the credit of neither (because parties) ought to
prejudice the impartial authority of that ancient Abbreuiator (above 800.
years ago) whose credit and learning was not then thought so barbarous and
false, he being a Secretis to Desiderius King of the Lombards, and after with
Charlemain, who employed him in reforming the Homiliaries of the Church, (as
appears by his Epistle before Alcuins Homilies) where it is said,
Inconsonantes omendare Solaecismos -- idque opus Paulo Diacono familiari
clientulo nostro elimandum iniunximus; To amend the vncohaerent Barbarismes in
those Homilies, and polish the same, we have imposed on our familiar servant
Paulus Diaconus.

What if in some other things he might be mistaken, page 457.
wherein he might be ignorant? must this Relation which is so plain, be so
also? Why not as well Festus, who relates it from Verrius Flaccus? and Verrius
Flaccus, who from some other, and so an error by Tradition be derived? May not
original Authors be deceived, as well as Abbreuiators be dishonest? Surely
rather, since Festus Works being then extant, might have shamed Paulus
Diaconus, if faulty; whereas Verrius Flaccus Relation though false, could not
be so soon condemned; since he speaks of Veteres, the ancient times, which
could not be recalled to testify against him.

I had always that opinion of Abbreuiators, that although by them both the
Style of the Author, and sometimes the circumstance of the Story were lost,
whereby posterity was defrauded both of their elegant Language, and the
obseruable manner of Atchieuements: yet that they were so careful, not to
feign, but fashion a sense, grande ferculum in vase breui. If I should turn
Critic, I should rather lay all imputations upon a transcribing either Monk
or Mercenarie, who either might mistake or misuse; or some false Printer, whose
haste or negligence can abuse the most careful Author, then impeach the
credit of an Ancient, especially in laying falsehood in relation to his charge:
For as for Ignorance, and that he was Ineptissimus, (though by Mr. Seldens
confession he were a man of great reading and knowledge for the Time he lived
in, page 457.
and many Testimonies might be collected) albeit in other passages it might
appear; yet how in this, the sentence might be so inuolued, as to enforce an
ordinary understanding to mistake; I yet conceive not. If the words were but
transcribed, then no fault; if some or many particulars were related, then the
indefinite words, Veteres Dijs (as those of Varro in Macrobius. Maiores
solitos Herculi decimam vouere; and Mos erat Herculi decimam prophanare, as
Cassius) were true consequence; and are even confirmed by many passages in
these Third Chapters of his book and Reuiew: And as for the word Quaeque,
since by his own collections, some of all their substance, some of money upon
sale, some of spoils of war, some of Sea Merchandise, some of gain, some of
all that should increase unto them, offered the Tithes to some one Deity or
other; may not that word and all the sentence, be as true as his Chapter,
which relates as much? But out of his Collections as out of that; the Natural
Law of Tithing may as much have proof since each man knows even the Law of
Nature, amongst the Heathen to have been depraved, and the practice thereafter
to have not only been disused, but contradicted. And yet cannot I conceive,
how this proportion in offerings should by any, especially so many, and those
so good, be embraced; unless the Natural Law representing it self to them
either absolutely, or in example of Abraham and the faithful, was approved.

page 459.
For our History writer, to expect any to prove such manner, either to be
continual or compulsorie is needless; The variety of their Gods could not
expect such a quantity for each, and for a Commonwealth to have compelled
Tithes rather for one God, then another, had showed partial obedience, and
that to their Deities; from the neglect of any of whom they might expect just
revenge in destruction. Quis enim laesos impune putaret, Esse Deos? Wherefore,
from his disquisition of this ancient Tithing amongst the Roman Gentiles, I
cannot but conclude, that either reason, the art of the Law of Nature; or
example of the faithful,, the practisers of that law, or precept; the ground
of both (not to admit chance in a service of Religion) were the true originals
of such use amongst them. Whereby the purposed proof of the right of Tithes by
the Law Natural may truly be inferred, and Paulus Diaconus admit any
construction to please the Critickes.

But for conclusion, I see no reason, why this Sentence should not be truly the
mind, if not syllables, of Festus; Sinoe Paulus Diaconus in his Epistle to
Charles before his Epitome, professing how he had quite took away some things
as superfluous, in the rest says, Quaedam abstrusa penitus stylo proprio
enucleans, nonnulla ita vt erant posita relinquens, he mended the style of some
abstruse sentences, leaving many as they were before; So that all in Paulus
Diaconus is either Festus his words, or sense; and so these Critic conjectures
should not prevail against such honest profession of so holy a man.

For the Grecian practice, amongst whom some Tithes were vowed, or otherwise
arbitrarily, or by some local custom paid to special Deities, And Cypselus
of Corinth when he vowed all the goods of the Citizens, if he could get the
City, had special regard to the tenth part as competent to a Deity: And
Craesus would not have the goods of the Lydians ransackt, because they were
necessarily to be tithed to Jupiter: and Pisistratus exacted Tithes for such
an end. I wonder therefore what should ingenerate such conceit in Cypselus of
the competencie of that proportion for a Deity; or necessitate in Cyrus or
Craesus the tithing of the Lydians; or cause the same to be exacted by
Pisistratus; unless some tradition of Nature had been received into the
usual practice of the highest understandings? Why should diverse Countries, to
so several Deities, concur in the same quantity, if the natural universal
Law of l ithing, did not regulate their practice? And so it seems amongst the
Graecians it did: for Harpocration and Didymus and Suidas all agree, in auowing
the common practice, and the two latter, thence infer the word (...), which
signifies to Tithe, to import also to Consecrate.

This inference of theirs our Author would cross, by assuming that
signification from a particular ceremony of Maids in Athens, initiated to
Diana at the Feast Brauronia; whom he calls Ten yeerelings; because if they
were not initiated and consecrated after five, and before ten years of age,
they might never have husbands; from the last year whereof, says he, they
were called (...), and so (...) did signify to consecrate not generally, but
to that purpose only. This particular ceremony of consecrated maids (who
might before that age of ten years be initiated) cannot seem so probable
and forcible to withstand the authority, and general reasons of Harpocration
and Didymus from so general customs amongst the Graecians in general, to
most particular Deities. For whereas to Diana alone were these Ten-yeereling
Maids (if not before) initiated, yet to Apollo, Jupiter Olympius, Neptunus
Isthmichus, Juno, Pallas, Priapus, and the Gods in general, by our Author
produced, were other Tithes consecrated, and that by diverse countries, and by
particular great men. From the general Custom then, and no such particular,
in all reason must the inference proceed, since in these last was truly
Tithing by separation from natural use, but in that no Tithe separated, no not
the (...), but even initiated to natural course: Suidas therefore and Didymus
illation, have greater propabilitie, especially in regard of the general
sentences from common practice.

But having perused the Authors themselves, Harpocration, and Hesychius and
Suidas, what I coniectured, I found true; namely, that the proper reason of the
like signification of (...) and (...) was from the general, and not such
particular custom, which in a Metaphorical and private sense of Lysias only
is but there intimated. The relation of the words of Harpocration, (who Suidas
follows almost ad verbum) will make it evident. In verbo (...). Didymus the
Grammarian writing a little book concerning this word (...), says that Lysias
in his Oration De Phrynichi filia, says (...) for (...) to consecrate to
Diana. But he says that (...) is said properly to consecrate, because it was
a Grecian custom to consecrate to the Gods the Tithes of all their increase
(not only abudance, as the Author does interpret) In like sort the Orator
Lysias said (...), because the Maids of Ten years old, were consecrate. The
proper signification therefore of the word is censured by the Author, and the
private only embraced; which his other Author also Hesychius does declare,
who in the word (...), according to his custom having proposed the most proper
significations as (...), To pay Tribute, to offer Tithes, he adds (...), But
some also have called, To consecrate to Diana to Tithe. Not therefore Suidas
and Dydimus are deceived but himself, even by the Testimony of his own
Authors: And herein he has plainly showed his desire to weaken the natural
both right and practice of Tything.

But foreseeing it may be such discovery of his Critical falsehood, now the
sayings of those two deceived must be interpreted, and their speech of
general Custom must be contracted to the particular use of some, so that the
sense is, Many men did so. If Paulus Diaconus might have had so favorable
Interpretation, he had escaped many hard words (and his words would have
borne it.) But to admit his Interpretation, still I must require some reason,
Why so many should so do, unless nature had instructed their religious
Idolatry?

Number. 5.
Concerning the Carthaginian and Arabian practice; I have only this passage to
observe, the Confession of the Historian, of their deriuing this use from the
Jews: The Arabians from the Jews as Neighbors, and the Carthaginians from
the Phoeniceans their Ancestors, who spoke the same language with the Jews,
and conuerst most with them: And besides; this conjecture for the general,
that it is not unlikely that the ancient and most known example of Abraham
gave the first ground both to them, and the Europaeans, so sometimes to dispose
their Tenth of the spoils of wars to holy uses. And from him sure or some
former law, their other Tything had original.

But why Abraham's example should lead them, unless Abraham's Reason, the law
of Nature (illightned by religion in him) had also possessed them, I know not.
I Will therefore conclude this Chapter with that of the Satyricke, Invent. Satyr.
14.
Nunquam aliud Natura, aliud Sapientia dictat. Nature and wisdom always
teach the same; And so leaving his quotations to be examined by those who have
such leisure and Books, contenting my self only with what his own Relation
has affoorded, and thereout my self collected, I pass unto his next Chapter,
in which and those that succeed, I shall endeavor more exactly to trace him,
though by way of Animaduersion; yet so, as no material passage shall be
omitted, but either have the due Commendation or Censure.

ANIMADVERSIONS on the fourth Chapter.
THe Method of the History is to show: P. 35. Number. 1.
first the practice, secondly the positive Laws, thirdly, the opinion of the
right of Tithes, according to the distinction of Ages; Every Chapter containing
the distance of 400. years; And in this Chapter the first 400. years from
Christ are treated of: Wherein by way of Preface, for the practice, this is his
assertion. Till toward the end of the first four hundred years no payment of
them can be proved to have been in use. As a Tenth not at all in use. P. 34.
P. 406.
In the Reuiew: It cannot be proved that any were paid.

practice from the Constitutions or Homiliarie persuasions of the powerful
primitive Fathers, (which yet with great probability I might, presupposing the
obedience of those first Christians to their godly Pastors:) nor to confess
the inconvenience of those days of persecution for so certain a maintenance:
But to insist upon Testimony; Origin (whose opinion is plain in the 18. Hom.
16. in Genes.
of Numb. for the right) says for the practice, Sed and in Nouo Testamento
similiter veneraebilis est Decas -- verum quia vnus author est omnium, and fons
and initium vnus est Christus: Idcirco and populus decimas qu^d m Ministris and
Sacerdotibus praestat; But also in the New Testament the Tenth is venerable, --
But because there is one Author of all, one fountain, one beginning, even one
Christ; therefore even the people pays Tithes to the Ministers and Priests.
Next, (to omit S. Cyprian, whose places are after misinterpreted) S. Augustine,
Hom. 48. Inter quinquaginta Hom.
who was borne anno 350. says, Maiores nostri decimas dabant: Our Ancestors
paid Tithes. Then, the imperfect work upon S. Matthew, either Chrysostomes or
Coaetaneous with him, (before S. Augustine) Quod si populus decimas non
attulerit, Hom 44.
murmurant omnes; If the people bring not Tithes, every Priest murmureth.
(These words are cited out of him by Zacharias Chrysopolitanus, Lib. 3. vnum ex
quatuor. c. 141.
circ. ann. 1101.) Besides the Council of Gangra, concerning First fruits
(which have the same reason, nay sense also, Cap. 16. qu. 1. In Canonibus.
as Gratian says) which against Eustathius, who would have challenged them
from the Church, made a Canon, and in the Preface says, Primitias quas
Institutio veterum Ecclesiis tribuit, First fruits which the Institution or
practice of the Ancient has given to the Church. Before the latter end
therefore of these first four hundred years Tithes proved to be paid. Nay,
that presently upon the leaving of the Apostolical community of living, Id
tunc vniuersis Sacerdotibus placuit, It was decreed by all the Priests then,
that Secular men, velut legalium decimarum necessitate compellerentur, should
be enforced of necessity to pay, as it were, legal Tithes: If therefore
compulsion, then sure payment. Thus says Cassian. Collat. 21. c. 30.


P. 36.
Entering the part of Practice, He proposes the unity and community of living
amongst them about Jerusalem. And the whole Church, both Lay and Clergy, lived
in common. But this kind of having all things in common scarce at all
continued, for we see not long after in the Church of Antiochia every one of
the Disciples had a special ability, Act. 11.29. So in Galatia and in
Corinth, where S. Paul ordained weekly offerings.

then embraced by any company of Christians, but at Jerusalem only, for whose
necessity (having no increasing profit from their land, because sold)
against the time of dearth prophesied by Agabus, both this contribution, Act.
11. and the weekly collections, Romans 15.1. Cor. 16.2. Cor. 10. were requested.
In other places each man had a several ability from the beginning: as for
proof even see his own Occam in loco citat. in opere 90. dierum, cap. 10.
where out of S. Augustine lib. 3. de Doctrina Christian, cap. 6. he proves,
Quod praeter Hierosolymitanam Ecclesiam, h^c non vllas Ecclesias gentium
fecisse scriptum est; That besides the Church of Jerusalem, no Church is
related to have done so. Yet after also amongst other Christians that
co^munitie of living was embraced until long after, as Tertullian. Apologet.
cap. 39.


The monthly offerings given by devout and able Christians, the Bishops or
officers appointed in the Church, received. Vide Synod. Gangrens. Can. 66. (it
should be Can. 7.)

Ab eo Constitutum; which I rather observe, because he calls them in the next
page, Elders appointed, as Oeconomi or Wardens: as if puritan Elders or
Churchwardens, then disposed the estate of the Church, whereas none, Cyprian.
lib. 2. Epist. 8. Cassianus Collat. 21. cap. 1.
but at the appointment of the Bishop might intermeddle: and he that did, was
called Diaconus Sanctae Administrationis, or Praesidens Diaconiae.

The monthly offerings called Stipes, as Tertullian Apolog. Page 37.
cap. 39. and videsis cap. 42.

Stipes were in lieu of Tithes or proportional in respect of the Clergy,
himself interpreting the place in St. Cyprian acknowledges, Page 39. Lib. 2.
pro Anathasio page 132.
and Lucifer Calaritanus may seem to infer by applying the Vae vobis Scribae
and Pharisaei qui decimatis, Woe to you Scribes and Pharisees that tithe etc.
to Constantius, says in comparison, Homo qui cum Stipem non modo rogatus, sed
and tribuens sis, nonnunquam sponte, tamen vt saepe dictum est, proscribas
Christianos, Thou art the man who although unasked, even willingly give a
Stipes, yet thou banishest Christians, etc. And they were in such quantity
that the covetous might grow rich by. Cyprian. lib. 2. epist. 7.


Some authority is, that about this time lands began also to be given to the
Church: If they were so.

Dialog. de statu Ecclesiae. page 657.
Epistle of Pope Pius the first (cited also by Hinemarus,) may be added, where
he says, praedia Diuinis vsibus tradita, possessions given to holy uses. And
his own interpretation after of St. Cyprians place de vnitate Ecclesiae, for
Tenthes of patrimonies given to the Church. Paulus Samosatenus Ecclesiae domo
abstinere noluit, Eusebius. Hist. lib. 7 cap. 29. Epist. 80. Asterio and Alypio.
would not leave the Churches house. And before the end of the first 400.
years, Gregory Nazianzen tells, per multos extitisse qui totas etiam domos
Ecclesus addici passi sunt; non defuisse etiam qui suapte sponte facultates
omnes suas obtulerint; That there have been very many, who have conveyed whole
houses to Churches; that there have not wanted some who voluntarily have
offered all their substance etc. And St. Ambrose he talks of Agri Ecclesiae
soluunt tributum, The lands of the Church pay tribute. Epist. 32. lib. 5.
To omit that Constantine the Great, praedia tribuere posse constituit, Gave
authority to convey lands, as in the Treatise de Munificentia Constantini:
Conciliorum Tom. 1. Editio Venere. page 472. Can. 24. and 25.
And the phrase fructus Agrorum, in Council. Antiocheno, The fruits of lands.

Those monthly pays, they called Mensurnas diuisiones. Cyprian. Ep. 27. and
34. and vide 36. Editione Pameliana.

Epistle; those other quotations therefore are unnecessary.

Cyprian speaking familiarly -- calls the Brethren that cast in their
monthly offerings fratres sportulantes lib. 1. Epist. 9. or, 66. Edit. Pamel.
understanding the offerings under the word Sportulae.

Author is deceived, for fratres sportulantes, are those, qui recipiebant,
says Pamelius, They who received; not they who cast in: which besides that it
is plain, to make a sense in St. Cyprian (whose place after shall be
examined.) Yet if he had but considered the very next words before his phrase,
mensurn as diuisiones in the 34. Epistle, Edit. Pamel. or lib. 4. Epist. 5.
veteris Edit. he could not have so erred. For there, St. Cyprian writing to his
Church of Carthage to entertain Aurelius and Celerinus Confessors, whom he had
already made Lectores, he adds, Caeterum presbyterij honorem designasse nos
illis iam sciatis, vt and Sportulis ijsdem cum presbyteris honorentur. But
understand that I have an intention to make them priests, that they may be
honored with the same sportulae, that is stipends as priests; Is not here an
evident interpretation of the phrase in honor Sportulantium fratrum to be no
other, then such, qui in Ecclesia Domini ad ordinationem Clericalem
promouentur, who in the Church of God are promoted to the order of Priests, as
in the words before in the Epistle? For whereas, those that were not in orders
were content only alimentis Ecclesiae and sumptibus parcioribus, Lib. 1. ep.
10.
with food and some small allowance, as the same Father: Yet those in orders
had besides honorable stipends, which were called Sportulae; So that here
Sportulae can not signify offerings, and so in both, the sense was mistaken.

Sportula, P. 38.
to denote the oblations given to make a Treasury for the Salaries, and
maintenance of the Ministers of the Church, for this primitive time: And to
this purpose was it also used in later times. Conc. Chalcedon. in libello
Samuelis, and aliorum contra Iban. Et Videsis Tom. 3. Council. fol. 231. c. 31.
Editionis Binnij, penultima.

Sportula did not signify any such oblations, is showed before: and the
quotations of the later times are much wronged, and in them the Clergy, whose
maintenance must arise out of Bribes, or be so, if his sense might stand. For
in both places Sportula signifies nothing but Bribes; the words of the first
are: Tertiodecimo, quia a Paganis incidentibus in peccatum sacrificiorum,
accipiens Dainel Episcopus Sportulam, relinquit crimen, negocians and hinc
sibimet lucrum. 13 Because Daniel the Bishop receiving of his country
dwellers, that fall into the sin of sacrificing to Idols, Sportulam, that
is, a bribe, leaves the fault unpunished, even thence raising gain to
himself. The words of the second, being in Concilio in Palatio Vernis sub
Pipino, Can. 25. Vt nullus Episcopus, nec Abbas, nec Laicus propter iustitiam
faciendam, Sportulas contradictas accipiat, quia vbi dona intercurrunt,
iustitia euacuatur: That no Bishop, Abbot, or Layman, receive Bribes, which are
forbidden; for where gifts are, there is no justice. I am sorry the Author
should allot such wicked maintenance for so holy a profession.

By Saint Cyprians authority Epist. 66. Edit. Pam. (or lib. 1. Ep. 9.) It is
manifest that no payment of Tithes was in his time in use, although some too
rashly would hence infer so much: those words, tanquam decimas accipientes,
plainly exclude them.

their living together, either at the Bishops Sees, or at some Monasteries at
the provision of the Bishop by his Officers as himself confesses the use, p.
81. and 255. Of which Officers they did not only receive alimenta, but also
Sportulas, as before. For then, unless he can prove no payment of Tithes to
the Bishop, who besides the Sportulae of the Clergy, was also to contribute to
the poor, his inference is nothing. And the phrase, In honor sportulantium
fratrum tanquam decimas ex fructibus accipientes, is such, by which he must
needs infer rather more then less; because he acknowledges that the
means of the Clergy being compared to the Leuiticall, was proportionable; and
yet besides, the poor were relieved here, as out of the Levites they were
not. But the Tanquam, was not for the proportion, which might be equal, but
for the kinds, they receiving in Sportulis, in money and food, what the
Levites did in kind; and therefore it is not said only Tanquam Decimas, but
it is added, ex fructibus, to express the relation of the comparison. But for
conclusion, that Tithes were paid there, besides the place next to be
observed, the passage of Saint Augustine before, Maiores nostri Decimas dabant,
being in the Province of Carthage, may well have respect to these times (Saint
Cyprians Martyrdom being not an 100. years before the birth of Saint
Augustine.) But in his Reuiew about this place, he contendeth not much, neither
more will I.

P. 39.
Out of the place of Cyprian, in his book De vnitate Ecclesiae, 23. in edit.
Pamel. You may gather that no usual payment was of them; And in his Reuiew,
not Tithes properly, but Tenths of Patrimonies are understood: The words are,
At nunc de Patrimonio nec Decimas damus.

P. 460.
the oblations were less, then usually before; and therefore that Saint
Cyprian expresses their neglect in these words, (no doubt of a Christian
duty) of paying Tenths at least, though according to Apostolical practice,
they would not sell all, and lay it at the Bishops feet. Now that these Tenths
were of Annual increase, not parts of patrimonies, besides the Legal word,
Decimas, so properly signifying; and the praeposition De, Page 37.
denoting emanation, not partition; the crossing of his doubting of the gift of
lands before pointed at, might well have procured the alteration of so new an
interpretation, especially since by the true sense, St. Cyyrians complaint may
have more latitude, because they were so far from selling houses and lands to
give, as in the Apostles time, unto the Church; that now, not so much as the
Jews did, they gave not the Tithes out of their patrimony: For otherwise to
have given the Tenth part of their patrimony, might in the sentence of
eloquent Saint Cyprian have made no disproportion, since he does not say,
before Domus tunc and fundos omnes, or vniuersos, venundabant, which should
have showed the difference from Tenth parts of patrimonies; and a great rich
man might have given Domus and fundos, and yet but the Tenth part of his
patrimony, and so have made the Father complain without cause; But lastly, if
of the most St. Cyprian did not receive Tenths, then he might seem to preach
without power to persuade practice. For all the confident speech therefore of
the Historian, that no Annual increase, or such Tenth is here to be
understood, I hope the contrary is manifest.

Christian Emperors, Gratian, Valentinian, and Theodosius, Number. 2. C. Tit. de
M^tallarijs l. 3. cunct. etc.
Anno 380. made laws for Tenths of Mines and Quarries for the Emperors, when
no Tithes of such things was thought of then.

Ambrose, who claymed and had even Tithes in those days as himself confesses
in the beginning of the next Chapter, who lived and conuersed with those
Emperors, and by them was highly honored; And as for that law, what need it
express any Ecclesiastical Tithes, being only an imposition on the Miners,
of paying a Tenth to the Emperors, and another to the Lord of the Soil, in
whose land by privilege they might dig for stones; not implying a denial of
a further duty to God both personal and mixed.

Page 40.
Oblations were Tithes, whence Ammianus Marcellinus says, lib. 27. Hierom. Ad
pammachium contra Errores Joan. Hierosolomynitani.
that the Bishop of Rome, Damasus, was enriched (nay envied, for as St. Hierome
speaks, Praetextatus, who composed the Schism between Damasus and Vrsicinus,
Solebat ludens Beato Papae Damaso dicere, facite me Romanae vrbis Episcopum,
and ero protinus Christianus; He was wont merrily to say to Pope Damasus, Make
me Bishop of Rome, and forthwith I will be a Christian;) Besides the Canon
made by him as Baronius relates concerning Tithes (whereof after) as also
Saint Hieromes Epistle to him of Tithes; the many passages of Saint Hierome
which sometimes was at Rome, might be sufficient testimony.

Chrysostomes time there were Tithes, amongst that for which the Clergy was
envied, may appear by that before, Ex opere imperfecto, and other passages in
the Catalogue.

Number. 3.
For Opinion, only Origin is produced, whose Greek I neither have nor could
ever learn it to have been published: In his conclusion Origin leaves out
Tithes. Thus the Author.

Origin; in reciting which, what he has omitted is in the Catalogue observed.
But for the first, since St. Hierome is the interpreter, and for the second,
since Origin does not only say, but even powerfully prove the Divine duty of
Tithes; those hidden exceptions may not blurre the truth of the authority, to
which what other Testimonies either before, or in that age I have observed, are
placed in the Catalogue.

P. 42. number. 4.
In the Constitutions of the Church. The Constitutions Apostolical by Clement
are judged supposititious, both in general: First, for that they are branded
for counterfeits in an Oecumenicall Council. Syn. 6. in Trullo. Can. 2. And
secondly, P. 463.
for that in them the five and twentieth day of December is affirmed there to
be the Feast of Christ's Nativity, whereas the learned know not until St.
Chrysostomes time, that day was not settled, but variously observed of the
Eastern Church, which should have had specially notice of the Apostolic
Canons, And St. Chrysostom then learned that time of the Western and Latin
Church, as Homilia de Natiuitate.

Clement, against which many others have produced most valide objections: yet
these reasons in respect of the Canon of Tithes are too weak. The Council at
Trullus rejected them; because Iam olim ab ijs qui a fide aliena sentiunt,
adulterina quaedam and a pietate aliena introducta sunt, quae diuinorum nobis
elegantem ac decoram speciem obscurarunt; Now a long time ago, Heretics have
foisted in many false and impious things, Can. 2.
which have obscured the elegant and seemly show of what in them is divine, as
in the Canon. So Gelasius. 1. also for the corruptions, judges them
Apocryphal. But can the Author prove these of Tithes to be corruptions?
what old heresy brought in these? what impiety is in the claim? what
improbabilitie is in the time, since the succeeding fathers challenge them? To
whose benefit, considering the exceeding liberality of the former days before
the Council of Trullo or Gelasius, could the ordinance only of a Tenth be?
Although therefore other parts be to be accounted Adulterate and Apocryphal,
yet if any be, this is surely Apostolical. August. de baptismo contra
Donatis^as, lib. 4. c. 23.
Quod vniuersatenet Ecclesia, nec concilijs institutum, sed semper retentum
est, non nisi Apostolica authoritate traditum rectissime credimus: What the
whole Church has always retained, not originally ordained by Councels, we
believe to be a Tradition by Apostolic authority.

exception is untrue, and answered by S. Chrysostom himself, who in the very
Sermon quoted, De Natiuitate, speaking against those (it seems of the province
of Jerusalem) Qui putant quod in Epiphanijs nascitur, That Christ was borne in
the Epiphanie, says for the confirmation of the Day now observed: Non sunt
nostra quae loquimur, maiorum sententia est, vniuersus mundus contra huius
prouinciae opinionem loquitur, What we speak, is not our own invention, it is
the opinion of the Ancient, the whole world speaks against the opinion of that
Province. Here is unity, antiquity, universality. He proceeds, Vobis qui
dixerunt? qui sunt in ista prouincia vtique Apostoli Petrus and Paulus, and
caeteri Apostoli? vos eiecistis, nos suscepimus; Petrus qui hic fuit cum
Ioanne, qui hic fuit cum Iacobo, nos in Occidente docuit: and vestri igitur and
nostri Apostoli Magistri sunt. -- Alibi pax erat, hic (i. at Jerusalem)
bellum, Magis itaque traditio ibi debuit seruari quam hic vbi discordia -- Hoc
totum dicimus quia nobis dicunt; Hic Apostoli fuerunt, hic Traditio fuit:
praedicationi nostrae creatura consentit, mundus ipse testis voci nostrae,
vsque ad hanc diem tenebrae crescunt. -- Simulque considerate inter Dominum and
Ioannem Baptistam sex menses sunt: Who told you? What did Peter and Paul and
the other Apostles that were in that Province? You excluded them, we received
them: Peter that was at Jerusalem, that was there with John, that was there
with James, has taught us in the West: In other places was peace, there was
war at Jerusalem: better therefore might the Tradition be preserved there,
then here where was discord. -- This wholly we say, because they object, Here
were the Apostles, here was the Tradition. To our words, the creatures consent,
the world is witness to our sentence, for unto this day be the days
shortened. Also consider, how between the Nativity of our Lord, and S. John
Baptist, were six months. Out of which, the falsehood of his collection is
evident, even made and answered by S. Chrysostom; The Eastern Church should
have had specially notice of the Apostolical Canons, so He: Hic Apostoli
fuerunt, hic Traditio fuit, so they. But for all this, S. Chrysostom defends
the Tradition from S. Peter, and shows the probability; not infringing the
authority of Peter's Tradition from this Constitution, as our Author does; but
confirming this Constitution to be S. Peter's, though the Eastern Church did
not practice it; And proves it, by the distance of six months from the
birth of John Baptist, whom to have been borne according to the Churches
account, he supposes the Eastern Church allowed.

Neither is that Argument of any weight; The Eastern Churches did otherwise
then is contained in these constitutions, therefore there were no such
constitutions, or not known to them, since the controversy about the
celebration of Easter in Polycrates and Victors time showed, that therein there
were diverse practices from diverse Traditions; as even in this Argument was
pretended: and the Tradition of S. Peter seems not to be unknown, but by
these not to be approved. I will not call this Argument gross, and
ridiculous, and deceiving, with many other bad names, as He calls the same
Argument, being but affirmatively proposed: And what difference in consequence
of Reason between praeceptum est, ergo factum; and non factum est ergo non
praeceptu^? and yet, this must serve his turn, though amongst them, who being
under diverse governments, have diverse Traditions; through the sides of Clement
to weaken the authority of the received custom of the observation of
Christmas day in the Churches of Christendom: And yet if we from a Canon of
the Church and Statute of a kingdom, and those grounded upon the Law of God,
do infer charitably, that therefore, at that time, in these governments,
such was the practice of that, which is now allowed in all these several
governments; yet such Arguments must be hist at.

So much in general; but in particular, first, the constitution for Tithes, is
judged fained and counterfeit: because, had it been the Apostles ordinance or
use of the Church in the Primitive times, Origin, Tertullian and Cyprian
(having such occasion to mention them) could not have been so silent of it: In
the next succeeding age, the Councels, who talk of the goods of the Church,
and offerings of the fruits, would have mentioned them.

Origin and Cyprian claim them, and name them as in use, as before and in the
Catalogue: Tertullian he excludes them not by his Stipes, which either in
respect of the paucitie of the Clergy affoorded a liberal maintenance, or
were over and above Tithes, which because before were paid to Idols service,
were not thought as a charge to any new converted; for Tertullian, even in the
same chapter where he names them Stipes remembers the excess of the feasts,
Herculanarum decimarum, of Hercules Tithes; and the custom of the
Carthaginians, under which government he lived may persuade it, whereof
before in the 3. Chapter. And yet further, Tertullian in the 42. chapter of the
same Apologeticke says, plus nostra misericordia insumit vicatim, quam vestra
religio templatim, our bounty bestows more alms in each village, then your
religion in your Churches: So that these Stipes were no such contemptible
portion.

The succeeding Councels what need they name Tenthes, since as Agobardus says,
Operum p. 276.
Nulla compulit necessitas, feruente vbique religiosa deuotione, and amore
illustrandi Ecclesias vltro aestuante, that is, They needed make no Canons to
claim them, for then they must have claimed them as Tithes, but only to
dispose them, and so the name of goods, or offerings, or fruits, or Redditus,
or such like were more proper: because not Tenths as Tenths were divided by the
Bishop, but an estate of them together with Rents and oblations were
Canonically dispensed. They were Tenths as from the Layetie, goods as in the
Clergy, or to respect both, offerings. When the Councels challenge them, they
are named as in the Canon of Pope Damasus afterward.

2. The constitutions of Clement for Tithes are thought forged, First, for
their pride, for in his Reuiew page 464. He says lib. 2. cap. 34. the
supremacy of all power is arrogated in the same to the Clergy, it being there
commanded, the priests to be honored as kings, and have tribute paid them as
kings, And that they are so bold as to apply that in Samuel, touching what a
king would do in taking from his Subjects to the power of Bishops as if they
should do so, 1. Sam. 8.
and they affirm it as much more reasonable, that Bishops should do so, and
constitute and ordain the same wholly -- for Bishops as for kings.

ingenuous Reader, that shall consider the purpose of that constitution, by way
of persuasion from the duty of the Fifth commandment in the sustentation of
Parents, either natural, as in the chapter before, or politic, as in that;
to require maintenance for the fathers and rulers of the souls, shall easily
perceive such imputations of arrogant claim to be unjustly laid upon that
constitution: and therein, that the Author has discovered more will to oppose,
then he had reason, only, (I may doubt) to make odious the cause of the
Church or Clergy, for whom yet there is only claimed quae sunt ei a Deo
constituta ad alendum eum and Clericos eius, what God has appointed for the
sustenance of him and his Clergy.

exception, where he says that the Authors reckoning up the Ten
Commandments, make the Tenth to be, Thou shall not appear empty before the
priests; whereas, there the Authors reckon other moral duties which are not
immediately praecepts of the Commandments, though this as those in the sense
required is a like moral, And if by chance it happened to be the Tenth, it
needed not such a flout.

constitution of St. Matthe^ lib. 8. cap. 30. Page 462.
other then what is always after commanded that the Revenues of the Church
should by the Clergy be disposed, besides their own necessities to relieve
the poor: And in that division of Primitiae to the Priests and Deacons, and
Decima to the rest of the Clergy, it is but a Canon of order, that the best
should have the best, and those were the Primitiae. But this also was Gods
praecept in the Law, Numb. 18. whereupon Eucherius says, In quaesi. sup. Leuit.
Primitiae frugum caeterarumque rerum Sacerdotibus, Decimae vero Leuitis
deputabantur, The First fruits of corn and other things were appointed to the
Priests, but Tithes to the Leuite.

Lib. de Iudaicis superstitionibus, page 81.
But howsoever, what by the censure of Gelasius, and the Council of Trullo, and
the saying of Agobardus. Licet ijdem libri iudicentur Apocryphi, plaeraque
tamen ex his testimonia inueniuntur a Doctoribus vsurpata, Although the same
books are judged Apocryphal, yet out of them many testimonies are found used
by the Doctors: and by the concession of our Author since they were written
1000. P. 464.
years ago: they are good authority for the Antiquity of claim, if not of
constitution, and therein may also countenance The counterfeit Canons of the
Apostles.

P. 43.
Against which, in the next place, he opposes his censure thus. The Can. 3. and
4. only are indeed of First fruits, although touching them by that name,
certainly no Law was made under the Apostles; but no words of Tenths.

Canons of the Apostles though for the whole number of 85. they have small
authority with the learned, both Protestants and Papists, to be Apostolical;
yet the first Fifty have had defenders both Protestants and Papists, though
few are practiced by either: But His exception is even petitio principij,
certainly no Law made under them for First fruits; to oppose this Law made. I
leave the defense of all the first fifty Canons to Frigiuillaeus Gautius. In
palma Christiana, lib. 4. cap. 34.


And for this particular, let the Author consider whether this may not seem
Apostolical, since Iraeneus says, Offerre oportet Deo Primitias, Hom. 11. in
Number.
we must offer First fruits to God. And Origin, Decet, and vtile est etiam
Sacerdotibus Euangelij offerre primitias, It is decent and profitable to offer
first fruits to the Priests of the Gospel. And the Council of Gangra Anno 324.
Primitias quas veterum institutio Ecclesiis tribuit, In praefat.
First fruits which the institution of the Elders have given to the Church:
besides the later authority of Gregory Nazianzene, Epist. 80. Astetio and
Alypio.
where he begins. Que madmodum areae and torcularis Primitias, and filiorum
eos qui vere filios amant Deo consecrare iustum ac pium est, quoniam ab ipso
and nos ipsi and nostra omnia sunt, As it is right and religious to consecrate
to God, the first fruits both of the floor and winepresse, so of their
children if they truly love them, because from him both we our selves and ours
are. And St. Chrysostom, and St. Hierome might be added. Besides the practice
even in the Greek Church, Hom. 35. in genesis In 3. Malach.
(though after) as Theodoret does relate of Theodosius the Monk, who there
speaking of the labor of the old Religious, says, Religios. Hist. cap. 10.
Est enim absurdum vt ij quidem qui aluntur in vita seculari, se affligentes
and laborantes ala^t filios and vxores, and propterea and tributu^ conferant,
and ab ijs exigantur vectigalia, and Deo offerant primitias, and mendicorum pro
viribus medeantur inopiae; Nos autem non quaeramus ex laboribus etc.

For it is absurd that Lay men should afflict themselves, and labor to keep
wives and children, and besides pay Tribute, and answer customs, and offer
First fruits to God, and for their ability relieve the poor, And we Monks
do not labor, etc. To which, many more authorities might be added. Whether
then, this Canon may not be thought Apostolical, since it was so immediately
after the Apostles taught, and no other Canon before can be produced to command
it, let the Reader judge? And here though our Author deride it page 464. The
version of Ioannes Quintinus in Zonaras his Comment on the Canon, renders it
by Decimas as well as Primitias, and so also in the Interpretation of Zonaras;
and so in defending the Canon for first fruits, we have light on Tithes, which
yet he says are not mentioned.

The Canon also of a Council about the year 380. Page 43.
under Pope Damasus, related by Baronius ad annum 382. to be in the Legend of
this Pope, which was used to be read in the Church, is confidently affirmed to
be supposititious, and page 134. a fained one, because taken out of a Legend,
never received as Canonical in the Church; not the eldest Code of the Church
of Rome remembers them: whereas some Decrees of this Pope are dispersed in the
Compilers, and c. 10. q. 1. c. Hanc consuetudinem, one especially -- being made
only for the disposition of such things as were given to the Church* speaks
only of oblations. Neither before Binius his Edition had any volume of
Councels received them.

Baronius authority with me have no great credit, yet with the Author, me
thinks it should; since even against the testimony of indeed very ancient
Authors (as in the Reuiew he confesses) that great and most learned Cardinal
Baronius, Page 465.
Page 52.
(as he styles him) must be preferred: yet his reasons are too weak against
it.

For the name of Legend, though (through the shameless and impudent relations
of lying Monks in the late Legenda Aurea) it be ill conceipted of; yet this in
those purer times, and many others which were used to be read in the Church,
must have better construction, or else we must imagine that those holy Fathers
would admit falsities to be publicly proclaimed for trueths; who yet in the
Council of Laodicea, as they were very careful that nothing were read but
Scripture; Can. 12.
so in the 3. at Carthage, only added, Liccat etiam legi passiones Martyrum,
cum Anniuersarij dies eorum celebrentur: Let the passions of Martyrs be read on
their Anniuersaries: yet made a Canon in the Mileuitan and African Councels,
Can. 70.
Vt preces and orationes, nisi probatae fuerint in Concilio, non dicantur, etc.
ne forte aliquid contra fidem, vel per ignorantiam, vel perstudium sit
compositum: That no prayers or orisons be, unless they be allowed by a
Council, l^st through ignorance, or of purpose, any thing might be composed
against the Faith, Operum p. 387.
as Agobardus cites it; though in the Canons themselves are also praefationes
and commendationes. How then shall we mistrust this, because then a Legend,
though after indeed they were stuffed with lies?

And since they were in a Legend, which was used to be read in the Churches,
sure they were received as Canonical, that is, true; though not into the Code
of Canons by the ancient Compilers, to whose knowledge, although the other
Council, and some Epistles and Decrees might come, yet this Council being in
a Legend (no likely place for Canons) and the reading thereof having been
disused, or not in those places, might well escape the most diligent inquiry of
the Compilers.

C. 10. q. 1. Hanc consuetudinem.
And in that they cite one Canon of him, which being made only for the
disposition of such things that were given to the Church, yet speaks only of
oblations, not naming Tithes, or first fruits; yet out of that Canon I conceive
the probability both of this Canon, and Saint Hieromes Epistle to him. That
Canon is against a wicked custom of Lay men, which then increased against the
holy Catholic Church, Qui oblationes quae intra sauctam Ecclesiam offeruntur,
sub dominio detinebant; who did retain in possession the oblations offered in
the Church, whom he does Anathemaize. Now that in these Oblations, more then
the voluntary offerings were meant; observe how he says, Si quis contra hanc
regulam nostram, and contra sanctorum 318. Patrum, qui in Nicaeno Concilio hoc
constituerunt, temerarius praesumptor fuerit, and vlterius oblationes de sacris
Ecclesijs auferre molitus est, etc. If any, against this rule of ours and of
the 318. Nicene Fathers, who there ordained it, shall be a rash praesumer, and
henceforth offer to take oblations out of holy Churches, etc. But this can
have reference to no Council, but that of Gangra (indeed composed of the
Nicene Fathers) Can. 7. Si quis oblationes Ecclesiae extra Ecclesiam accipere,
veldare voluerit, etc. Anathema: where that Primitiae (and Decimae also, as c.
16. q. 1. In Canonibus) are understood the diverse translations, but especially
the Praeface does manifest; where amongst the errors of Eustathius, against
whom that Council was, this was one, Primitias quoque fructuum and oblationes
eorum, quas veterum Institutio Ecclesijs tribuit, sibimet vindicasse, etc. If
therefore by the general name of oblations, some more special maintenance may
be understood: why might not Damasus in some Council make such a Canon, vt
Decimae and primitiae a fidelibus darentur, and qui detrectarent, Anathemate
ferirentur, That Tithes and first fruits might be offered by the faithful, and
the withholders might be excommunicated?

And why might not both these have been published upon the determination of
St. Hierome (who was the Oracle to Damasus) in that Epistle? If therefore the
first Canon be truly his, this Canon and Epistle have great probability and
occasion to have been, though not until Binnius time out of Baronius
observation, these were set forth amongst the Counsels. Oblations detained by
the Laity, why not then a Canon to forbid it? and why may not a question of
the right be resolved in an Epistle? But to take away that which might seem
to be color for this Canon:

The Epistle of Saint Hierome as written to that Pope upon that Question, vtrum
vsus Decimarum and oblationum secularibus peruenire possit, related c. 16. q.
1. c. quoniam, is judged counterfeit: neither tastes it of him, or of any near
that age: nor has it ever been received amongst that most learned fathers
works, says he.

Epistle for that part which is in c. 16. q. 1. c. quoniam, albeit it resemble
not the swelling style of that eloquent Father, and contain doctrine even
contrary to his, in his Epistle to Heliodorus where he says, Alia Monachorum
est causa, alia Clericorum, Clerici pascunt oues, ego pascor, Illi de Altario
viuunt, mihi quasi infructuosae arbori securis ponitur ad radicem, si munus ad
Altar non defero, There is one condition of Monks another of Clerks, The
Clergy feed, I am fed, They live of the Altar, but the axe is at the root of
me as an unfruitful tree, if I offer not at the Altar: Whereas this Epistle
resolves, that Monks may have Tithes and so viuere de altari, live of the
altar, not only attendendo paupertatem, in regard of need, but attendendo
religionem in regard of order in religion.

Yet for all the reasons of our Author it may seem probable to be his. If it
taste not of him or that age, for the doctrine of Tithes due; that is
manifested in the Catalogue both out of himself and others of his time, not to
be inconvenient. If for the occasion of the determination of such a question,
that is manifest before out of the Canon, c. 10. q. 1. Hanc consuetudinem,
which from St. Hieromes resolution in this Epistle had the Counsel, as to him
that reads the Chapter next save one before c. quia Sacerdotes, it may
plainly appear. Grant therefore, that may be of Damasus, and this may be S.
Hieromes, or of his age. If it taste not of him for the style, though it may
not be S. Hieromes, yet in that age every one wrote not so eloquently as he.
And that this was not received into his works, perhaps was, for that some
fragments only remain, and not the whole Epistle. But this to be S. Hieromes
surely Innocent the third thought, Extr. de his quae fiunt a praelat. c. cum
Apostolica.
or else he would not have suffered the authority out of this Epistle to be
urged against a plain sentence of Leo his predecessor, and have striued to
reconcile them. But this is enough against the Author, who makes weak
exceptions, and the last is his own Marginall quotation.

ANIMADVERSIONS on the fifth Chapter.
IN this Chapter proceeding according to his proposed Method. Page 46. Number. 1.
He first enquireth after the payment of Tithes, in the next 400. years, and
therein granting the use at Millain and Hippo, he produces a saying of S.
Hierome in his Epistle ad Nepotianum; the words are spoken in the person of a
Clergy man: Si ego pars Domini sum and funiculus haereditatis eius, nec
accipio partem inter caeteras tribus, sed quasi Leuita and Sacerdos viuo de
decimis and altari seruiens altaris oblatione sustentor: habens victum and
v^stitum his contentus ero, and nudam crucem nudus sequar: If I be the Lords
portion, and the lot of his inheritance, neither have any part amongst the
other Tribes, but as a Leuite and Priest live of the Tithes, and serving at the
Altaram maintained by the Altar, having food and raiment I will be content
therewith, and will even naked follow the naked cross. This place he
diuerteth, as if de decimis there, were but a continuance of the comparison
made by quasi Leuita, as if he had said, but live like a Leuite, that lived of
the Tithes, and serving at the Altar, am maintained by the offerings at the
Altar.

Clergy man did design thereby no certain living, for that the latter seems
to be more figurative then the first: If therefore to live of Tithes continue
the comparison with the Levites, then, 1. Cor. 9.
to live of the oblation of the Altar is much more: (the same phrase in the
Apostle having reference thereto.) But howsoever, if in comparison, yet equal;
As the Leuite by Tithes, so I. But herein also observe a fraud in the
pointing, the Distinction being put after Vestitum, Raiment; as if to have
meat and clothing, were the Tithe; whereas it should be after Sustentor, am
maintained by the Altar: This it may be was the Printers fault, but yet
perilous.

Page 47. Cassian. Collat. 21. cap. 1. and. 2.
Next, In Egypt some holy Abbots had Tithes of all fruits offered them; where,
it appears that this Abbot received them as a treasurer for the poor. And in
his Reuiew p. 465. was not of the ministering Clergy properly taken, but like
those in Palladius his Lausiaca Historia.

John the Abbot in Cassian received Tithes, not as Abbot, but quia praesidebat
Diaconiae, Videsis locum citatum. Lib. 6. cap. 29.
to which place for desert he was chosen, and therefore says, Cuius
dispensatio mihi credita est; And indeed as Sozomen relates, was properly of
the ministering Clergy, for he was a Priest, Piammon and Ioannes --
exquisitissime Sacerdotio (Presbyteri enim erant) and summa cum reuerentia
perfungebantur. They exactly executed their priesthood and with great
reverence, for they were Priests. Which might also have been well collected
out of Cassian in the same chapter, for that it follows Eis coepit, secundum
Apostolum Spiritualia seminare, quorum metebat dona carnalia, He began
according to the Apostle to sow to them spiritual things, whose carnal
things he reaped; whereas Monachus plangentis non docentis habet officium, The
office of a Monk is to mourn, Aduers. vigilantium.
not teach, as St. Jerome. And the poor, for whose use he received Tithes,
were principally his Caenobitae, of whom some might be Priests and Deacons, as
the Law of God so often urged in his Sermon may import; as also for that in the
Lausiaca Historia by Palladius, I have observed many Deacons and Priests in
such companies, and so was Cassian himself though a Monk. But that the Tithes
and Revenues of the Church, above the necessity of maintenance, were also by
the dispensation of the Clergy, ex debito Charitatis to be communicated to the
poor, must for the ancient times be granted: But observe those Tithes were
annually paid Diaconiae to that office as appears cap. 8. of the same
Collation, where speaking of Theonas, that after succeeded this John, Cum
Decimas frugum suarum solitus esset Diaconiae annis singulis dependere. When he
yearly paid his Tithe fruit to that storehouse.

The like may be answered for those who offered Tithes to St. Seuerine as
Eugyppius in vita, and by him to the poor; Cap 17. and 18.
which is his next authority:

Ma^datum ex Lege notissimum, The notable commandment in the Law, now that
must needs aim at the Clergy, for whom only the commandment in the Law was
notable, and he confesses it to hold in the Gospel. But searching the
quotation, it appears to be poor Captives, yet, that they might have them,
even almost in the next words, he adds, pro decimis autem, vt diximus dandis
quibus pauperes alerentur, Norici quoque Presbyteros missis exhortabatur
Epistolis. To give these Tithes to feed the poor, he wrote to persuade the
Pannonian Priests. Whence, of duty it appears how they belonged to the
Priests, but by their permission were disposed to the poor. This if He had
not concealed, might have marred his cause.

The practice remembered in the Council of Mascon shall be considered after. P.
48.


Leo the great was Pope from 440. to 460. has diverse Sermons De ieiunio decimi
Mensis, and eleemosynis, wherein he is earnest and large in stirring up every
man's devotion, in offering to his Parish Church, part of his received fruit,
but speaks not a word of a any certain quantity.

to stir up any man's devotion to offer to his Parish Church: I am sorry, I
have cause to doubt, that He took this at the second hand, or else he would
never have published such an untruth, to make at the best, but a Negative
argument for his error. Indeed Leo in his Sermons de Collectis, entreats,
that per omnes Regionum vestrarum Ecclesias, In all your Churches there might
be Spontantae Collectae, Sermon 3 and 4.
Free gatherings, Voluntariae El^emosynarum oblatione, voluntary offerings of
Alms for the poor not the Parish Church: But in the other Sermons quoted De
ieiunio decimi mensis, Sermon. 2.
etc. no mention of Contributions either for, or in the Parish Churches. This
is a great oversight, but in the next is as great a weakness.

Saint Chrysostom has Homilies touching the Church maintenance, in which you
might wonder that Tithes were omitted, if either devotion or doctrine
especially in those Eastern parts had made payment of them of any common use;
the Homilies are, In Epistolam ad Philippenses, and Sermon. 103. Tom. 6. Edit.
Sauil.

Chrysostom in those Homilies does not remember Tithes; therefore no Tithes
paid then, and there: Hom. 4^.
But what if in the imperfect work upon Matthew he say it, as before? and in
the 18. Homily upon the Acts, in the 4. Hom. upon the Ephesians, as in the
Catalogue is cited; shall his Negative, against which are so plain exceptions,
prevail? No wonder he there omitted them, where, by particularizing he might
have procured more envy, (for one of the Sermons is against the Enuiers of the
Churches estate) yet elsewhere required them by name, when there was no such
occasion: But what was the Doctrine and practice of those times, see the
Catalogue.

P. 49. Number. 2.
A perpetual Right of Tithes was consecrated to some Churches, by grant or
assignement, out of such and such Lands, at the Owners pleasure.

Paradoxe of his whole book, his New opinion of Arbitrary Consecrations, not
pointed at by any before, as in the Reuiew, page 470. But he cannot prove,
that any such endowment was at the Owners pleasure, without the authority of
the Bishop, consenting and granting: As for his quotations, nothing proouing
the Consecration at the Owners pleasure, (of the 4. Council of Arles, Can. 9.
anno. 813
Vt Ecclesiae antiquitus constitutae, nec Decimis, nec vlla possessione
priuentur, That Churches anciently endowed, may neither be deprived of Tithes,
or other possessions and that other in the Capitulars; Ecclesiae autiquitus
constitutae, nec Decimis, L. 2. c. 36, etc.
nec alijs possessionibus priuentur, ita vt nouis oratorijs tribuantur, Let not
Churches anciently endowed, either be deprived of Tithes or other possessions,
to be given to other new Oratories) I desire the Reader to take notice of,
against he shall deny in the history of Charles Martel, about 60. years
before, that no Tithes were generally annexed to Churches, to which time no
doubt, the word Antiquitus, may very well extend, and further too; Antiquum
ante aeuum, not suo seculo proximum.

But for a preamble against the device of Arbitrary Consecrations, this I
suppose should be requisite, that he should not only show how Patrons by
Charters conveyed Tithes, but expressly prove, that no Bishops had necessary
consent to such conueyance, and to assign or collate them, because then the
Canons, and the Temporal and National Laws, did not suffer any thing in
Ecclesiastical reuenew, to be done without the Bishops, and supponitur pro
iure, donec probetur contrarium; so that although in many conueiances the
Bishops Charters are not extant, or concealed, yet they must be praesupposed,
and are almost in every one of those proposed by him, by circumstance to be
deduced.

But to prove such assignements of Consecrated Tithes at the owners pleasure,
there are brought, first, Page 49.
the Donation of Pipin to S. Monons Church for so he understands these words
in Molanus de Sanctis Belgij in 18 Octobris in the life of S. Monon, Beato viro
ob Titulum Christianitatis Mactato, Pipin^s rex Regaliter decimas obtulit, quas
habet inter Letiam and Vrtam, To that holy man slain for the Title of
Christianity, King Pipin gave royally the Tithes he had between Lesche and
Ourt.

Pipin, sure was of infeodate Tithes taken away by his Father, which the phrase
quas habet, does insinuate, but if other Tithes, especially since they were
bestowed upon a Cathedral Church, why should any misdoubt the consent of the
Bishop for the benefit of his said Church? The next Donation produced, being
many years before, expresses the consent of Vindicianus a Bishop to the gift
of Theodorick, and for the time of Charlemain the son of this Pipin: Observe
what Luithprandus Ticinensis or some Author rather before his time, in the life
of Adrian the first says, Carolus in loco Osbrugge vocato, Episcopatum
constituere and decimis nouiter ad fide^ conuersorum -- Papa ita dictante and
priuilegijs suis confirmante dotare deuouit. Charles did vow to erect a
Bishopric and endow it with the Tithes of the new Conuerts, the Pope allowing
and confirming it with privileges. But in the life of Adrian the second, It is
said that he gave to the Church of Hersfeilt Anno 860. certain Tithes in
Frissoneuelt and Hassega adjoining to the Diocese of Halberstadt, Quas
Stephanus Papa in Basilica B. Petri die Sancto paschae, sua authoritate and
Imperatoris subscriptione, and Hildegrino Halberstadensi Episcopo praesente,
confirmauit. Carolus quippe omnes decimas in Saxonia constituerat ad Regale
seruitium and eas Rex dare potuit quo voluit. Those Pope Stephen by his
authority, in the presence of the Diocesan confirmed, Though Charles had taken
all the Tithes of Saxony then by him conquered and converted to his own use
to give whither he would, since therefore before and after it was so, he must
prove the Negative, that now it was not, or else not enforce Arbitrarie
consecration from this Donation.

The next Donation is of a Decimancula in Curte Rodulfi to the Church of Arras
out of the Chronicon. Cameracense and Attrebatens. lib. 1. cap. 15.

the Bishop in the place quoted, and confirmed by Theodorick the King.
Secondly, That it is called Decimancula a small Tithe, which must needs be in
comparison of greater usually offered; though now translated by Vindicianus the
Bishop his authority, and confirmed then by Pope John the fifth even in a
Synod. All this is in the same Chapter; wherein are many other circumstances
to persuade the Truth of this.

Another, is of Pipins confirmations to the Abbey of Fulda of whatsoever it had
or should have (among other things) in decimis fidelium.

Boniface the founder thereof had procured and ordered? The Ms. Register I see
not to extract other answer: but in that it is a confirmation at the
foundation of the Abbey of Fulda Anno 742. and there Decimae are contra-diuided
to Donis and oblationibus decimisque fidelium, I observe the Tithes were not
Dona aut oblationes gifts or oblations, therefore not of bounty: and because
they are called Tithes, were due before such Translation to the Abbey: And that
this was but two years, after the time of Charles Martell.

Next, is a negative argument out of Marculphus his exact formulae, and
precedents of all such Donations and Cessions to Churches, where Tithes amongst
other things specified are not named, and therefore as he supposes were not.



NExt is the History of Charles Martells sacrilege, wherein (because it is of
so great consequence) I will examine all his Reasons, Number. 3.
both in this Chapter, and the Reuiew by him produced; which while I do,
gentle Reader, afford thy patience.

Since this Story, if true, were great authority both for general payment,
and special endowment at those times of great antiquity and fair proof, as
himself confesses, page 51. And would greatly oppose the original of
Inseodations by him defended, page 112. And in general his whole discourse of
Arbitrarie consecrations, which save some few are all since his time. He says
it can never be justified, page 51. and that they that refer Infeodations
unto his time, or any age near him, are in gross error, neither is there
mention of them for above 300. years after him. page 112. and 403. that it is
a common error -- obstinate ignorance to defend it, in the Reuiew, page 465.
And for proof adds many reasons.

M. Seldens Arguments.
First, That by no old Author of credit he is mentioned to have meddled with
Tithes.

Secondly, The vision of Eucherius B shop of Orleans, who saw him damned for
it, and that by search (accord ng as an Angel admonished in his Tomb) it was
also confirmed for truth, there being found in it, no relic of him, but
only a dreadful serpent: This altogether false.

Thirdly, Tithes in his time were not so universally annexed to Churches, as
that they could be the maine object of such a sacrilege.

Fourthly, nor are they reckoned so among those Ancients that largely speak of
Laymens oppressions, by defacing whole Monasteries and Bishoprics in the
times that succeeded. In the Reuiew page 465. Constieut. Imp. Tom. 3 p. 177.


Fifthly, In the Laws of Restitution by Caroloman and Pipin, as Goldastus in a
better copy relates: They are called Pecuniae not Decimae: neither the Nonae
and Decimae restored were any thing, but as Rent of land, and the twelve pence
only of every Casata. Whence the Argument is thus; That, was restored which
was taken away; but Tithes were not restored, therefore Tithes were not taken
away.

Yet for all these fair shows, Animad.
I hope out of that small reading, and few books I have, to make it most
plain, and thoroughly to refute all his reasons.

That he was a notabl^ Church-robber; that he died miserably, is confessed;
that his sacrilege was in Tithes shall thus be proved.

Agobardus who was very learned and of great judgment, To the first Argument.
as himself truly styles him, page 65. He says it, in his Excellent book
de Dispensatione, Ministerio and ordine totius rei Ecclesiasticae contra
Sacrilegos sieve Simoniacos, Circa ann. 821.
written in the time of Jews the son of Charlemaine the Grandchild of
Martell: For there, admonishing a Counselor to the Emperor, of the disorder
In rebus Ecclesiasticis quas contra vetitum, and contra Canone, tractant, and
in vsus proprios expendunt homines Laici; In Church-goods, which against Law
and Canons Laymen use and spend to their own occasions: After in the next
page 259. he obiecteth, Sed quoniam quod de sacris rebus in Laicales vsus
illicite translatis dicimus, non fecit iste Dominus Imp. Sed praedecessores
eius, and propterea isti impossible est omnia emendare, quae antecedentes male
vsurpata dimiserunt; But because what we speak of holy things unlawfully
translated to Lay-vse, this now-Emperour did it not, but his predecessors; and
therefore it is impossible for him to amend all, which those that went before
did wrongfully usurping, put away. Now who can here be signified by
praedecessores, and those that went before, but Charles Martell; Caroloman and
Pipin and Charlemain being Restorers of what by Charles Martell was taken away?
Now that amongst these things which the predecessors of Jews, Male vsurpata
dimiserunt, wrongfully usurping did put away; that Tithes were, besides
Agobardus his proouing of them, in the same process, to be due to the Clergy
by the Law of God (as by the places cited in the Catalogue may appear out of
the page 277.) In the page 283. he concludes, Tali itaque vt dictum est, nobis
cordis deuotione Primitiae vel Decimae considerandae sunt, tanta veneratione
intactae seruandae, and cum huiusmodi confessionis puritate offerendae. --
aliunde subministrandum est Canibus and Cauallis, caeteraque tam hominum quam
animantium ministris, quae vel ad delicias, vel ad pompas turpesque iocos a
diuitibus possidentur. with such devotion of heart therefore ought Tithes and
First fruits be considered, with such Reverence they ought to be kept
inviolate, and with such purity of confession to be offered: -- from other
means must dogs and horses and other men and beasts, kept by rich men for
state and pleasure, have maintenance. If this be not a full proof, both for
the Sacrilege of Charles Martell in Tithes, for the proof of infeodations
then; I leave to the indifferent Reader: Nay before, the same Author page 269.
says, Nunc non solum possessiones Ecclesiae, sed ipsae etiam Ecclesiae cum
possessionibus venundantur etc. Now not only the Church possessions, but the
Churches with them are sold: Like to which is the Praecept of the same Lewis
before spoken of, and Lotharius his son in Flodoard; Lib. 2. cap. 19. page
143.
Quaedam praedia quae eidem Sanctae sedi quondam ablata fuerant, deuota mente
restituimus, id est, in Suburbanis ipsius Ecclesiae Titulum Sancti Sixti, nec
non and Titulum Sancti Martini cum appenditijs -- in Castro Vonzensi, Titulum
Baptismalem, and Titulum in eadem parochia iterum Baptismalem cum suis
appenditijs etc. Certain possessions which heretofore were taken from that
Sea, we devoutly have restored, that is the Suburbs of the Church, the Title
of St. Sixtus, also the Title of St. Martins with the appurtenances --. In
Castro Vonzensi the parish Church, and another parish Church there, with the
appurtenances etc. Who cannot see what praedia Charles Martell took away, even
parish Churches?

Other authorities shall occur in the answer to the following reasons,
Martinus Polonus therefore not the first relator.

Ad. 2.
The second reason, is the fiction or Hobgoblin story, as he calls it, of
Eucherius of Orleans his vision about the Damnation of Charles Martell. St.
Cyprian has a saying to one, lib. 4. Epist. 9. Quanquam sciam omnia ridicula
and visiones ineptas quibusdam videri, sed vtique illis qui malunt contra
Sacerdotes credere quam Sacerdoti, It seems true in our Author concerning
this. Who acknowledging Reuiew, page 465. that there are indeed very ancient
Authors to justify it, as Adreualdus in Ludouicus Pius his time, in his first
book, De Miraculis Sancti Benedicti, cap. 14. And Flodoardus Remensis
Historiae lib. 2. cap. 12. who lived Anno 960. Who (let me add) more
especially concerning this vision, says, De quo, patrum scripta relatione
traditur, etc. Of whom is delivered by the written relation of our forefathers,
that St. Eu^herius returning from banishment etc. And the Capitularie exhibited
to Jews 2. Anno 858. Post Canonem 59. c. 10. q. 1.
To which Iuo might be added in his Chronicle (though in a wrong place, for
he places the Narration under the Story of Carolus Simplex the son of
Ludouicus Balbus, but it must be referred to this Charles Martell) for the
words are, Hic Tutudi quod Martellus dicitur a suis dictus est, and quia in
Regno suo vix aut raro pacem habuit, ideo res Ecclesiarum suis militibus in
Stipendium contulit maximae ex part. Qui mortuus in Ecclesia B. Dionisii
Martyris sepultus a sinistra part Altaris maioris, visus est noctu in specie
Draconis effracto sepulchro per vitreum Ecclesiae cum magno terrore exijsse;
This Tutudi, who by his people was called Martellus, because seldom he had
peace in his kingdom, therefore he gave for the most part the Church estate
for wages to his soldiers: who being dead, and buried in St. Denis Church on
the left side of the great Altar, he was seen by night in shape of a Dragon
breaking the sepulcher, to go out of the glass windows with great terror.
Yet, to fasten some show of falsehood upon the story, that by discrediting it
in this part, in the rest it may not have credit, Baronius forsooth shall be
followed: But if such Authors shall not prevail, In historia Apum, lib. 3. p.
8. c. 26.
sure Thomas Cantipratensis shall little have credit, in the vision of the young
man that died and revived, whom the devils accused, Quia decimas de bonis and
agris suis Sacerdoti substraxerat, Because he with held the Tithes of his
fields and goods from the Priest. Or how shall Trithemius relation of a vision
of one Adelbertus 406. In Chronico Sponhemensi ad annum 1212.
years ago, who dying also and reviving, Cum aliquando in decimando fruges in
agro suo, debitum ordinem non seruasset, haec aiebat; O si scirent homines
agricolae and vinitores, a quanta districtione, and horrendissimis poenis
puniatur dolosa decimatio? when he had not righly tithed his corn, thus he
said, O that husbandmen, and Vineyard keepers knew, with what strict and
horrible punishment fraudulent Tithing is punished, etc. how shall this have
any regard? But this reason makes nothing directly to the argument, but might
have had occasion as well from his other Sacrilege as that in Tithes; neither
do I uphold visions against truth, but Antiquity against Baronius; Relatoris
fide, non Authoris praesumptione in Vincent. Lyr. phrase, not as a bold Author,
but as a faithful Relator. And for further credit both of the vision, and for
the time of Eucherius death, I will refer the Reader to peruse the Annalls of
the Church of Orleans, Number. 21. and deinceps.
written by Carolus Sausscyus Deane there, who in his fifth book in the life of
Eucherius does fully answer Baronius and this Author out of Baronius

Ad. 3.
And now succeed the reasons of importance. Tithes in Charles Martells time were
not universally annexed to Churches. They were. First, it is confessed by
himself, page 65. where speaking even of the time of the second Council at
Mascon, he says; Yet withal, no doubt can be made, but that in most
Churches in this time, amongst the offerings of those of the deuouter sort,
Tenths or greater parts of the Annual increase were given according to the
doctrine of those Fathers before mentioned, and these other testimonies:
whereto you may add, that complaint of Boniface Archbishop of Mentz about 750.
( who lived in Charles Martells time) Lac and Ianas, ouium Christi oblationibus
quotidianis ac decimis fidelium accipiunt, and curam gregis Domini deponunt:
They receive the milk and the wool from the sheep of Christ, in daily
oblations and Tithes, and neglect the Lords flock. There also he adds a
passage of a Ms. Exhortation written about 900. years ago; where it is showed
to be the propriety of a good Christian to pay Tithes. And himself does
relate them, as consecrated to the Church of Vtrecht by his father and
himself. page 73. etc. And the phrase Ecclesiae constitutae in Decimis non
priuentur; Churches endowed with Tithes, not to be deprived, in the 4. Council
at Arles, and capitul. libr. 2. cap. 3. etc. even expounded by himself of
these times, shows it, page 49. And indeed that Canon of that Council of Arles
must be of an unanswerable proof, if according to Anselmus Lucensis, In his
Collectanies.
Boniface the Archbishop of Mentz was President therein, who died Anno 755. but
twelve years after Charles Martell; and that also by the authority of Pope
Zachary, who died almost four years before Boniface; so that it must seem
very near his time.

Secondly, suppose they were not universally annexed to Parish Churches, yet to
the Bishop, as to the public Treasurer of the Diocese, they were of duty
paid. And were they not principally Bishoprics which he infeodated?
Episcopales seeds traditae sunt Lai^is cupidis ad possidendum. Bishops Sees
were given in poss ssion to covetous Laymen, So Bonifacius in Epistola ad
Zachariam; Non solum Rhemensem, In Editione Veneta Concilioris Tom. 3.
sed etiam alios Episcopatus regni Francorum, Laicis hominibus and comitibus
dedit, ita vt Episcopis nihil potestatis in rebus Ecclesiae permitteret He gave
not only the Archbishopric of Rhemes, but other Bishoprics also of France,
to lay men and his companions, so that the Bishops had no power left to do any
thing in Church affairs, So out of Flodoardus Pap. In A^nal. in vita Dagoberti.
Massonius; Episcopia Laicis Donata, Bishoprics were given to Lay men, So
Hincmarus. Ep. 6. cap. 19.


And thirdly, it being apparent that they then were due to be paid to the
Clergy, as by the Council at Mascon appears, Nay before that, which is most
remarkable, in the time of S. Remigius, who baptized the first king
Clodouaeus; amongst other revenue of his Church, that Bishop of Rhemes, by his
will, ordered Tithes of certain villages to be employed above what were, for
the relief of certain poor widows of the same Church: His will is perfect
in Flodoardus, Hist. Rhemens. lib. 1. c. 18.
wherein are these words, Viduis 40. in porticu E^clesiae alimoniam
praestolantibus quibus de Decimis villarum Calmisciaco, Tessiaco, Noua villa
stipendia ministrabantur, superaddo de villa Huldriciaca, etc. France no sooner
converted, but Tything followed, And the revenue of this Church of Rhemes, was
a chief part of Charles Martells sacrilege.

Vide proemium Helgaudi Floriacensis, ad Epit. vitae Roberti Regis. In Chron.
Casin. 796. in Edit. paeris.
It is related also how Abbot Leodebodus about the year 620. gave Tithes of
certain villages, in some Parishes to the Abbey at Floriack. It also
appears, how Pope Zachary in the first year of his Papacy, gave a
privilege to the Monastery in Monte Casino and to all the Cells thereof, vt
Nullus Episcopus -- Decimas tollat, That no Bishop might take away their
Tithes, Implying, that else they might, as belonging to the reuenew of the
Church, and their jurisdiction, howsoever they might obtain it. A remarkable
authority; As in the privilege of Pope John the third Anno 562. Quercetan. in
Not. in p. Abelard. p. 1168.
the Tithes given to the Monastery of S. Medard were privileged. Furthermore
Agobardus in his book, written in the very beginning of Lewis his reign,
Contra insulsam vulgi opinionem de grandine and Tonitruo. page 155. Multi sunt
qui sponte Sacerdotibus decimam nunquam donant, viduis and Orphanis caeterisque
indigentibus Eleemosynas non tribuunt, quae illis frequenter praedicantur,
crebro leguntur, subinde ad haec exhortantur and non acquiescunt, Many there
are who never willingly give Tithes to the Priests, nor alms to Widows and
Orphans and other poor, which are daily preached unto them, and read often,
and continually are urged unto them. And Hincmarus (who though he be something
later) says, Lib. 55. capitul. cap. 1.
Ausoldus compresbyter noster, praecepit vt in ipsa Capella Missa non
celebraretur antequam homines villae ipsius suam decimam Presbytero suo
secundum antiquam consuetudinem darent, Observe there antiquam consuetudinem,
Ausoldus our fellow Bishop, commanded that they should say no Mass in that
Chapel, before the men of that village paid their Tyth to the Priest,
according to the ancient custom. Cap. 35.
After, De Ecclesiarum datione quae etiam non amplius quam dotem suam -- habent
cum decima fidelium, praemia requirebas, Thou requiredst rewards for the gift
of Churches, which had nothing but the Glebe -- and Tithes of the faithful.
And elsewhere, Ep. 7. c. 35.
Vnde necesse est vt per singulos annos ministri Episcoporu^ inquirant, quid
parcat in singulis Ecclesiis de part decimae quae iuxta Sacros Canones
Ecclesiae competit, Whence it is necessary, that every year the servants of
the Bishops shall inquire what part of the Tithes may be spared in every
Church, which according to the Canons belongs unto the Church. It is
therefore manifest that they were due, which also Alcuin, Walafridus Strabo,
Rabanus Maurus, etc. do in the times ensuing testify, as appears in the
Catalogue. And most apparently annexed, in an Epistle amongst those of Boniface
Mogunt, Ep. 107.
where a poor Curate that had agreed for to serve the Cure for a Priest for
half the Tithes, complains to Jews the Emperor, which also is quoted by
himself. Then how might not these Ecclesiastical profits be, as indeed they
were, a great subject of the sacrilege, since they were so universally annexed?

And against the next reason were so reckoned, Ad 4.
among those Ancients that largely speak of Laymens oppression by the
defacing whole Monasteries and Bishoprics in the times that next succeeded.
For so did Agobardus, as before; so did Hincmarus in his book entitled De
statu Ecclesiae, whose words are, Inter opus. page 653.
Quid de vobis dicam, Seculares, qui non folum Ecclesias, sed etiam ipsa
Altaria possidere vultis? numquid vos, qui oblationes pauperum comeditis and
bibitis ad offerendas Deo hostias pro ipso populo accedetis? Vos horrea
frumento, and Cellaria ex his quae Ecclesiae sunt vino complebitis, and
Sacerdotes eius fame affligetis? Cur non pertimescitis iudicium Dei? panes
propositionum non licet comedere nisi mundis and purificatis Sacerdotibus, and
vos cum vxoribus and ancillis vestris, and quod peius est, nonnulli cum
scortis, Decimas and oblationes fidelium manducabitis? etc. What shall I say of
you Lay men, who not only will possess the Churches, but the Altars also?
Will ye that eat and drink the offerings of the poor, approach to offer
sacrifice for the people? Will ye fill your barnes with corn, and your cellars
with wine, and shall the Priest starve? Why fear ye not the Judgment of God?
It was not lawful for any to eat the Shewbread, but the clean and purified
Priests; and will you with your wives and wenches, nay which is worse, with
your harlots, eat the Tithes and oblations of the faithful? etc. Let the
owners of Appropriations hear this, and then as the party with whom this
Author expostulates, it may be hoped that they will say, Quod si ita est, immo
quia ita est, cogor iudicare amicos meos quae sibi unjust conlata sunt, just
retinere non posse; If it be so, nay because it is so, I am enforced to judge
that my friends cannot justly retain that, which unjustly was given them. And
so also did the many Synods under Charlemaine: which may appear in the next
reason.

Ad 5.
The last reason, and that of some consequence, if true, is, that it cannot
appear that they were restored by Carloman and Pipin; for the Decimae restored
were as Rents of land, and the twelve pence out of every Casata.

First then he acknowledges Decimae to be restored: And then the only
question is about the interpretation. Wherefore I much wonder that he should
be so injurious unto the Centurie writers, for relating the Canons of the
Synod under Carloman in these words, Decimas occupatas a prophanis
restituimus; As to add such a marginall note concerning them: Veteris huiusce
aeui sermonis ignari hallucinati sunt. In ipsa Synodo ita legerant, Page 53.
fundatas pecunias Ecclesiarum Ecclesiis restituimus -- pecunias autem Decimas
significasse opinabantur, sed perperam and ridiculo: They being ignorant of the
old language of this age, were deceived: In the Synod they read, we restored
Fundatas pecunias Ecclesiarum, but they thought, (though falsely and
ridiculously) that pecuniae signified Tithes. Would not he retract his censure
against the credit of those painful collectors? Page 466.
Must now it be acknowledged they had it out of corrupted copies? and that
Decimae and Pecuniae is all one in the sense, and yet they have no amends for
so peremptory a censure; when if they related not the word, yet they did the
sense? And yet which is strange, they quoted what they said, and that truly
out of Auentine. And here also because the Author boasts, page 466. of a
better copy of that Synod published by Goldastus in his 3. volume, edit. anno
1610. yet in a latter Edition of another book of Constitutions anno 1613. he
has retained the word Decimas: so that it may seem his last thoughts are
against our Historian.

Now therefore that of those Nonae and Decimae which were restored, that in the
Decimae a true Tithe was meant, and not in Rent out of lands received, shall by
the Capitularies of Charlemain and Jews be manifest.

But first let me take his own confession, page 123. The Ninth and Tenth both
there spoken of, were only the Rent due from the Tenants of Church-land, by
the ordinary reservation of the Tenth, as of what was held by many, of it
self due to the Clergy, and of the Ninth, as of the Rent and consideration to
be given to them as Lessors for the received profits. In the time therefore of
the making such Laws, there was an opinion of many, concerning the duty of
such Tenths of themselves due to the Clergy. These Tenths therefore being
such Tenths, and restored, show that true Tithes, and not Rents reserved, were
signified thereby. That the Nonae were paid only for the land, observe,
Capit. lib. 5. cap. 147. De his qui agros Dominicatos propterea neglexerunt
excolere, vt Nonas exinde non persoluant, does show: (for, Agri Dominicati are
not the Churches but the Kings Demesnes) Concerning those who neglected to till
the Kings demesne land, Vide Glossarium Legum Antiquarum, and Chronic. Camera.
and Attrebatens.
that they may not pay the Nonae; and yet for them, the defrauding of the Ninth
for Rent is censured by Law: whence evidently appears the Nonae to signify a
plain Rent, such as in secular conueyances were reserved.

But the Capitularie makes it most plain, Lib. 5. cap. 145.
and does interpret the like, The words are, De his qui Nonas and Decimas iam
per multos annos, aut ex part, aut ex toto dare neglexerunt, volumus vt per
missos nostros constringantur, vt secundum Capitularem priorem soluant Nonas
and Decimas cum sua lege, and insuper bannum nostrum. Et hoc ijs denuncietur,
quod quicunque hanc negligentiam iterauerit, beneficium vnde haec Nona and
Decima persolui debuit amissurum se sciat. Ita enim continetur in Capitulari
bonae Memoriae genitoris nostri, in lib. 1. cap. 163. Quicunque Decimam
abstrahit de Ecclesia, ad quam per iustitiam dari debet, and eaem
praesumptuose, vel propter munera, aut amicitiam, vel aliam quamlibet
occasionem ad alteram Ecclesiam dederit, a Comite vel a misso nostro
distringatur, vt eiusdem decimae quantitatem cum sua lege restituat. Concerning
those who for many years have neglected to pay the Ninths and Tenths, we
will, that by our officers they be compelled, according to the former
Capitular, to pay the Ninthes and Tenthes with the forfeiture, beside our
Bannum. And let it be made known to them, that whosoever shall do so the
second time, shall loose the Benefice whence they ought to be paid, for so it
is contained in the Capitularie of our famous Father, in the first book cap.
163. Whosoever shall take away the Tithe from that Church, to which of right it
ought to be paid, and praesumptuously shall pay it to another Church, either
for gifts, or friendship, or other occasions, let him be compelled by our
Shrieue or other officer, to restore the Tenth with the forfeiture.

This I have repeated all, because the last part is acknowledged by Himself
to signify parochial Tithe properly, page 72. the former part therefore must
signify the same, as being but the explication of this. But there is another
in the First book: (...).
Vt qui Ecclesiarum beneficia habent, Nonam and Decimam ex ijs Ecclesiae cuius
res sunt, donent, and qui tale beneficium habent vnde ad medietatem laborent,
de eorum portione proprio Presbytero Decimas donent, That they who have
Benefices of Churches, pay the Ninth and Tenth to the true Churches, and they
who have them to halfes, of their part, let them pay to their own Priest.
Where note, in lands tilled to halfes, Tithes of the same kind, of the one
half given to the Church from whom they held the Benefice, as of the other to
their own Priest, which must needs be parochial Tithes. Besides these and
many others, why is so often in the Capitularies a help for Incumbents, non
Redimere Decimas, not to redeem Tithes, (which must be understood of True
Tithes) unless the True Tithes had been both taken away from the Clergy the
first possessors, and were restored of right by the meaning of the Capitulars?

The conclusion therefore is, that Charles Martell took away Tithes, truly so
called, because that which was restored by his Successors was a true Tithe.
And so both the reading and sense of the Centurie writers in their relation may
have truth, and the word pecunia Ecclesialis in the Council not be wrong
interpreted by Decimae, as a general, by a special: and the original of
infeodations not be else where sought then in Charles Martell: From whom the
Annals derive it, Metrop. lib. 1. cap. 2. Epist. 82.
as Krantzius cites, and P. Blesensis may seem to aim at, where it is said,
Milites Galliarum sibi ius decimationis vsurpant, The Soldiers of France
usurp the right of Tithing: Now to his soldiers did he convey them: Not to
recite the Canonists and later Historians which were infinite.

Charles seems to be made, namely, Page 52.
that this giving by him, was no Infeodations, but only leases for lives were
made by Churchmen, to such as the Prince appointed, of great part of their
possessions, whereupon certain small Rents were reserved. Those leases were
sometimes, upon the Princes request, renewed, but upon death of the Lessee, the
estate and possession reuerted to the Church.

Carolomans time, who restoring some Church revenue wholly, for the maintenance
of his wars, still retained some upon these better conditions. The Council
under Carloman is, Capitul. lib. 5. cap. 3. And the words are, Statuimus quoque
cum consilio seruorum Dei and populi Christiani, propter imminentia bella and
persecutiones multarum gentium quae in circuitu nostro sunt, vt sub precario
and censualiquam partem Ecclestalis pecuniae in adiutorium exercitus nostri cum
indulgentia Dei retineamus; Ea condition, vt Aanis singulis de vnaquaque
quaque Casata solidus, id est, duodecim denarij ad Ecclesiam vel Monasterium
reddantur, eo modo, vt si moriatur ille cui pecunia commendata fuit, Ecclesia
cum propria pecunia reuestita sit. Et iterum si necessitas cogat, aut princeps
iubeat, precarium renouetur, and rescribatur nouum, and omnino obseruetur, vt
Ecclesiae vel Monasteria penuriam and paupertatem non patiantur, quorum pecunia
in precario praestita sit; sed si paupertas cogat, Ecclesiae and domus Dei
reddatur integra possessio: We ordeine by the counsel of the Clergy and
people, in regard of the imminent wars and many invasions, which are round
about us, that under the favor of God, we may retain some part of the Church
estate in Lease, for the help of our army, upon that condition, that yearly a
shilling be paid out of every Casata to the Church or Monastery; in such
sort, that if he die on whom the Benefice is bestowed, it shall reuert unto
the Church. And again, if necessity enforce, or the Prince command, the Lease
may be renewed, and another made: But chiefly let care be taken, that the
Church or Monastery be not in penury, whose estate is leased: for if need
be, let the Church have the full or whole possession. This I have repeated,
that not only the Authors select passages to expose the Church reuenew to be
the bait for the State, may be seen, but even the occasion, and the gracious
conditions may be observed: And withal, which is to the quaestion, to declare
the falsehood and crafty shufling of the state of the time, from Charles
Martell the Sacrilegious, to Carloman the Religious, and Pipin the Pious the
restorers of the Church; this being upon a new grace of the then Princes;
nothing being received before, because infeodated: Which Pope Zachary upon
Boniface his relation of the Canons of that Council, does insinuate; Inter
Concilia edit. Venet. tom. 3. p. 432.
De censu vero expetendo, eo quod impetrare a Francis ad reddendum Ecclesiis
vel Monasterijs non potuisti aliud, quam vt vertente anno, ab vnoquoque
coniugio seruorum, 12. denarij reddantur, and hoc gratias Deo, quod impetrare
potuisti: Concerning the demand of maintenance, since thou could obtain of
the French to be restored to the Church nothing but 12 d. of each coniugium
seruorum, thanks be to God, that thou could obtain it. Whence appears
that it was a new concession and use in Carolomans time. And in the Capitularie
exhibited to Lewis the 2. it is said, Whereas Charles Martell, primus inter
omnes Francorum Reges and Principes res Ecclesiarum ab ijs separauit, and
diuisit: First, of all the French Kings he separated and divided from the
Churches the goods thereof: Now Pipin being not able to restore all, precarias
fieri ab Episcopis exinde petijt, and Nonas ac Decimas, etc. Exinde, from
thence therefore, not before, he procured Leases of the Bishops, and Ninths
and Tenths, etc.

Goldastus third Tome of Imperial Constitutions, page 648. there is a Decree
under Theodoricke the fourth King of France, and Charles Martell Maire of the
Palace their names, which if true, does cross this: The words are, Res
Ecclesiarum, vt subueniatur necessitatibus publicis, and solatijs militum, pro
Dei Ecclesia, and bono statu Reipub. and vnius cuiusque propria pace
pugnantium, Statuimus, cum consensu Episcoporum, and placito Procerum regni,
and adhortatione totius populi, vt necessitate exigente, liceat aliquantos ab
ijs separari, atque inter dignos and been meritos diuidi, precarias tamen fieri
ab Episcopis exinde volumus, and Nonas ac Decimas ad restaurationes terrarum,
and de vnaquaque Casata duodecim denarios ad Ecclesiam, vnde res erant
beneficiatae, dari constituimus: We ordeine by the consent of our Bishops, and
the pleasure of our Nobles, and the request of all the people, that for the
public necessity, and comfort of those soldiers, which fight for the good of
the Commonwealth, and the peace of each man, that it shall be lawful to
separate some of the goods of the Churches from them, and to divide them
amongst the worthiest: Yet from henceforth we will, that Leases be made by
Bishops, and we ordeine, that the Ninths and Tenths for the reparations of the
land, and xii.d. out of every Casata, should be given to the Church, from whom
they have the Benefice.

Pipin and Caroloman restored nothing, for they did as much. But himself in
the Reuiew, page 467. in desire to discredit the Capitularie exhibited to Lewis
the 2. has afforded a reason to deny this; his words are, I somewhat doubt
them, because the most known and certain Laws of Martells time, speak only
of xij.d. to be served out of every Casata, but the Nonae and Decimae grew not
elsewhere into use, till after the beginning of the French Empire. This
therefore is no known and certain law of Martells time, wherein the Nona and
Decimae are expressed: But if the other be certain, as they are, then
infeodations were, and no leases only in that time. Yet that in Pipins time,
though not in Charles Martells, the Nonae and Decimae were by name restored,
Lewis his decree in Flodoard makes it plain, Lib. 2. cap. 19. p. 142.
where he says, Et sicut decretum est a piae Recordationis Domino and auo
nostro Pipino Decimas and Non as eidem Ecclesiae -- persoluant; And as it was
decreed by our religious Lord and Grandfather Pipin that the Ninths and Tenths
should be paid: Besides the Testimonies before.

So that hence, besides from other later examples, that his assertion. page
112. is most false, That there was no mention of Infeodations, P. 116.
for above 300. years after him. Whereas yet to cross this, himself cites
about the year. 900. an Infeodation of Tithes, from Charles the Bald (or
Charles the simple, as Douza would have it, to Thierry the first Earl of
Holland) which I am persuaded is pointed at in Concilio Meldensi. Cap. 75.
Anno 845. under Carolus Caluus, not Carolus Simplex, or else it is some other
such like, and is to this purpose worthy the reading: Others more might be
found within that time as by the Testimonies of Agobardus and others might be
inferred.

So then in the whole story, I suppose His assertio^s and weak reasons, may
not prevail against the substantial truth thereof: but that it, and the
consequences thereout may be of fair proof, against his opinion, of the Non
payment then; the denying the original of Infeodations thence; the
consecrations of new created Tithes sithence; besides of the truth of the
Story.

Yet because in this Story, the old word Casata occurring has made him to
vary his opinion, as whereas page 53. he did interpret it, a quantity of
land; yet in the Reuiew p. 467. He supposes it, a house only. Although I
profess my self no Critic, yet this I would only offer to his knowledge or
remembrance, that Pope Zachary did interpret it, by Coniugium Seruorum, in
the place before quoted: and that in the Council at Agatha, Can 7.
there are these words Casellas vel Mancipiola.

And thus much for this Story, Reuiew p. 466.
wherein I hope so much has been unfolded, that now upon his promise he may
change his mind; And seeing some Syllables left in the writings of near his
age concerning his Sacrilege in Tithes, as we here inquire after: and
something that has reference to the common payment of them, though not found
in the laws under him; (whereof I know none, but that uncertain one) though
immediately after him; he will not remain confident in what he had
admonished, nor think that every man of an impartial judgment should be of
his mind.

COncerning the Opinion, which he acknowledges p. 46. Number. 4.
was great, of their being due; after S. Ambrose his authority here allowed,
the Hom. of S. Augustine in Sermon. de Tempore. 219. is for the authority
weakened, Thus,

Although some doubt, whether it be his or no, and albeit, Page 54.
the words are in a supposititious Treatise attributed to S. Augustine, named,
De Rectitudine Catholicae conuersationis, says he;

De scriptor. Eccle.
for that Caesarius Arelatensis (who as Bellarmine proves against Tritthemius
lived within few years after that father, for he was president in the 3.
Council at Arles which was Anno 454. whereas S. Augustine died Anno 433)
having used some of the words of that Homily in his 14. Homily, does in the
37. Homily, cite him by name; Dixit Augustinus, Augustine says, In
Scintillis. cap. 29.
and then repeateth a great deal of this Sermon. Beda also who lived 900.
years ago, cites it, So Statuta Synodorum a book cited by himself, Page
210. Can. 13.
Circ, Annum 900. Concilium Triburiense Anno 895. Walafridus Strabo; And all
these besides Gratian and many others, under the name of S. Augustine.

Secondly, the phrase does so well agree with his Mr. Saint Ambrose, as by
conference may appear.

Thirdly in the book De Rectitudine Catholicae conuersationis, (which whether
it be supposititious or no, Bellarmine doubts) although our Author say,
Ipsissima huius vocabula haebentur in this book, as if either all the Homily,
or all his quotation, were there; yet the passage in that place concerning
Tithes is but very short, and ipsissimis verbis, in express words, not
fourelines: which rather does confirm, then weaken the authority of this
Homily, whereout to other writings, though later, if not S. Augustines, such
portions are translated: Neither can it be, that from so small a passage so
large an Homily should have original, but rather the smaller from the greater
to have been selected.

Page 160.
And because page 160. he aiming at this Homily, and that of S. Ambrose to
lessen their authority, says, Remember that those Fathers affirm it not in
Disputation, but only in Exhortation to the people, which is specially
obseruable to those who know the course of their writing.

doctrinally oppose Tithes to procure Disputation, but only some covetous
people were backward that needed Exhortation, will not expect other publishing
of it. And yet of both sorts of writing (though neither to be suspected) the
doctrine of their Homilies is the more plain truth, and the truth of
Disputation but only ad oppositum: In the one, powerfully persuading truth;
in the other, punctually refuting error. To discredit them therefore, because
Homilies is a profane censure, as if they did publish other then Truth in
Sermons, and would impose any thing upon the consciences or credulities of
their hearers, which in Disputation they durst not defend.

S. Hieromes authority ad cap. 3. Malachiae, Page 55.
is said to be about the neglect of payment only, not the right of them. And
he adds, Who hence thinks that his opinion agrees with S. Augustine and S
Ambrose concerning the duenesse, may as well infer, that all men were still
bound to sell all they had: he speaks only, as admonishing Christians to give
their Alms to the poor, and double honor to the Priest, leaving the
quantity to a Christian liberty.

Quod de Decimis Primitijsque diximus, quae olim dabantur a populo Sacerdotibus
ac Leuitis, in Ecclesiae quoque populis intelligite, quibus praeceptum est non
solum Decimas dare and Primitias, sed and vendere omnia quae habent, and dare
pauperibus, and sequi Dominum Saluatorem: quod si facere nolumus saltem
Iudaeorum imitemur exempla, vt pauperibus partem demus ex toto, and
Sacerdotibus and Leuitis honorem debitum deferamus: What we have spoken of
Tithes and First Fruits, which heretofore were given by the people to the
Priests; understand the same in the people of the Church, who are commanded not
only to give Tithes and First Fruits, but also to sell and give unto the
poor: which if we will not do, at leastwise, let us imitate the example of
the Jews, that we give some part of the whole to the poor, and we impart due
honor to the Priests and Levites. Here our Author stays. And secondly for his
inference see, First, how cross he is unto himself, who said, that this
passage was about the neglect of payment of Tithes, and yet now they are no
Tithes. Then, how fraudulent, in the Translation of Debitum honorem (for double
honor to have reference to the Apostle) whereas this word debitum has
reference to Tithes and First Fruits before. Thirdly his falsehood, in equalling
alike the precept of Tything to the Priest, with that of selling all, and
giving to the poor; whereas S. Hierome by way of favor remits therein totum
pro part, but requires for the Priest debitum; which before he said was
Tithes and First fruits. Nay chiefly his falsehood, in omitting the words
following, Quod qui non fecerit Deum fraudare and supplantare conuincitur,
Which he that does not, is convinced to defraud and cozen God. lib. 1. de
clericis cap. 26.
Upon which let Him hear Bellarmine our adversary in this cause also, (whose
authority twice he names) Etsi B. Hieronymus dicat esse praeceptum vendere
omnia and dare pauperibus, intelligit esse praeceptum, non absolute sicut de
soluendis decimis, sed si quis perfectus esse velit. Nam de isto subdit, quod
si facere nolumus etc. De decimis autem dicit, Quod qui non fecerit Deum
fraudare and supplantare conuincitur. Although St. Hierome say, it is a
praecept to sell all and give to the poor, yet he understands not the
praecept so absolutely, as that of Tithe paying, but upon supposall of desire
of perfection. For of that he says, which if we will not do etc. But of
Tithes he says, that he that does not that, is convinced to defraud and cozen
God. But for conclusion of St. Hierome, is it not strange, that his non solum,
his praecept of not Tithes only but all; should be used, to infer that not
Tithes at all are commanded?

St. Hieromes authority therefore is certain: and if we conceive how he was
the interpreter of Origens former Testimony, we may better believe his
opinion for the duenesse.

Page 56.
The authority of St. Chrysostom Hom. 43. Epist. 1. ad Corinthios, is diuerted
by the same shift, in that he speaks not determinately for the Quota.

duty for more, but leaves no liberty for a lower proportion? I fear they
will not follow his persuasion for the greater portion to be given, who will
not admit his opinion for the less, but rather would take away all. Collat.
21. cap. 29.
But let Cassians Abbot determine this, Non ab ijs decimarum exiguitas
mutilatur, quia omnia sua pariter Domino obtulerunt; The small proportion of
Tithes is not paired by those who give all.

The authority of St. Gregory the Great, though admitted, Page 57. Reuiew
page 467.
in the book, for the right of Tithes; yet in the Reuiew, his comparison of
the Tithe of Days in Lent is counted slight, and nothing to the purpose: which
He proves, not only by the abused liberty of calculation of, but also by
the various custom of both East and West Churches in the times of fasting,
some more, some less: and thereupon the Canonists are reprehended.

Holy Abbot John in Cassian, Collat. 21. Cap. 25.27, 28. Can. 9. In doctrina 15.
where he is even curious in answering His objections both of the Calculation
and diverse use; And the 8. Toletan Council. And before these, St. Dorotheus
Abbas, and others before the Canonists; yet in this I define nothing, but only
point out Cassians Abbot, to answer his reasons.

Concerning Positive Laws, first Pontificiall and Synodal, although he
acknowledges but one Council, and that the 2. at Mascon, Can. 5. P. 57. etc.
which Council (says he) has no small testimony, as well of ancient practice
in paying of Tithes, as great opinion of their being due: Yet he excepteth
against it, as being supposititious: First, because not received into any old
Code of the Canons in any of the ancient Compilers, though in Isidore, which is
the full st, some other Synods of the Continent of France are, as of Orleans,
of Arles, of Agatha. Secondly, P. 58. P. 65.
because Friar Crabb was the first publisher. Thirdly, as page 65. because
Agobaddus says, I am vero de donandis rebus, and ordinandis Ecclesiis, nihil
vnquam in Synodis constitutum est, nihil a sanctis Patribus public
praedicatum: Now concerning the giving of goods, and ordering or endowing
Churches, nothing has been decreed in Councels, nothing has been promulgated
by the holy Fathers.

The first reason is very peremptory, and at once infringeth many worthy French
Councels, which yet are not in Isidors Code of Councels, to repeat them all,
were needless; they are obuious to every one that turns over the Councels.
But observe my conjecture, why they were not compiled by Isidore: It was, as I
suppose, for the novelty of them; this last of Mascon being even in his time,
but two years before he was Bishop of Civil: And therefore as yet, having not
got authority to be received into public esteem, especially in other
kingdoms, and that other was not long before. Now since they happened not
before the time of that most diligent Father Isidore, none after (that I know)
ever collected the whole bodies, until that laborious Friar Peter Crabb
endeavored it. The rest, as Burchard, Gratian, Iuo, contented themselves with
scattered Canons out of them, which they distributed into several heads. No
reason therefore, that the negative exception should be allowed; which,
although in none but the book of God, and that in things necessary to
salvation, can have a necessary consequence, yet in this has no probability.
And the first publishing of it by Peter Crabb, needs not take away from the
authority thereof. Read Binnius his notes upon this Council, where by other
authority he proves this to be authenticke.

As for Agobardus words, they are unadvisedly, if not craftily mistaken. That
learned writer speaking there only of General Councels, such as that of
Mascon, is not, and those even in opposition to the Canones Gallicani, (as he
calls them in the former page) of which sort that of Mascon is: Which also
may appear directly by the whole passage before in that Author; where having
proved the unlawfulness of Lay men's deteining Church Revenues, and out of the
Canons having expressed the manner of division of them, and to whom the right of
custody did belong, He adds; De quare, si quis diligentius vult agnoscere,
quid vel in quibus Conciliis dicatur, legendo, and reuoluendo cognoscat: Verum
quia sunt, qui Gallicanos Canones, aut aliarum regionum, putent non
recipiendos, eo quod Legati Romani, seu Imperatoris, in eorum constitutione non
interfuerint: Concerning which, he that desires more exactly to understand, by
reading he may know what is written, and in what Councels: But because there
are some, who think the Councels of France, and of other countries, are not to
be received, because the Popes or Emperors Legate was not present at the
making of them; Councels therefore there were that might inform, if they would
take Canones Gallicanos, aut aliarum regionum; whose authority can be no more
be excepted against, says he, then the authority of Cyprian, Athanasius, etc.
whose works were written without the presence of the Legates, either of Pope
or Emperor: Proceeding therefore in defense of Provincial Councels, which were
commanded both by Popes of Rome, and by magna Concilia every year to be
celebrated, his counsel is, Rectius profecto facere videtur, qui vbicunque
magnarum Synodorum Statuta deficiunt propter insuetas emergentes causas,
Antiquorum Statuta, quae merito reprehendenda non sunt, sequenda deliberat;
quam qui ea quae ipse sentit -- eorum sensibus anteponit. He seems more to
be in the right opinion, who, where the Statutes of Great Counsels fail,
upon several unusual cases which happen; determines to follow the Statutes
of the ancient, which are not worthy to be reprehended: then he who prefers
his own sense, before their judgment. And then resolving, that all the
fathers in provincial Counsels, in what time or place soever they decreed,
any thing De rebus Ecclesiasticis tractandis conseruandisque, did study to
agree with the authority of Scripture, and the Statutes of their
predecessors: Then follow the words cited; Iam vero de donandis rebus and
ordinandis Ecclesiis nihil vnquam in Synodis constitutum est, nihil a Sanctis
patribus public praedicatum. Nulla enim compulit necessitas, feruente vbique
religiosa deuotione, and amore illustrandi Ecclesias vltro astuante. But now
concerning the giving of goods, and endowing Churches, nothing ever has been
decreed in Counsels, nothing publicly promulgate by the holy Fathers. For no
necessity required it, the religious devotion, and love of beautifying the
Churches every where abounding of their own accord. All which being
considered, I appeal, even to the conscience of the Author, or any other,
whether those words may be a just exception against the truth of the Mascon
Council, which was comprehended inter Gallicanos Canones, and Antiquorum
Statuta. And here by the way, let him also look back upon his protestation,
In his Preface.
whether he has purposely omitted nothing that belonged unto the Title, since
even in the next page. 277. are such quotations omitted, which in the Catalogue
are comprehended, for the right, De Iure Diuino.

P. 59.
Iuo is reformed by a Ms. howsoever his words are acknowledged to be Leo the
fourths, not much out of this second 400. years.

P. 60.
Iuo is again corrected for naming Tithes in the first Council at Orleans.
Can. 13. whereas Iuo in his Manuscript cites it not, from any council of
Orleans, but some out of Toledo, whereof yet none expressly mentions Tithes.

Toletan Council cap. 32. and there he shall find the word Decimas, as both
Carranza and the Venice Edition read it, besides Binnius. Yet himself, to
other purpose, cites that same addition of Iuo to this Canon. page 82. under
the name of the first of Orleans. Can. 13. But before Iuo, Biblioth. Vet.
patrum, Edit. ^lt. Tom. 11.
Anselmus Lucensis in his Collectanies, receives the same words, and
refers them to a council at Toledo, and there cites also a Canon ex
Concilio Agrippiensi relating the same of Toledo, which yet has reference to
former Councels, iuxta Priorum authoritatem conciliorum. According to the
authority of former Counsels.

P. 61.
The Council Spalense Anno 610. rejected: The exception is, because the
Council of the same year and place has no such Canon, and is whole in diverse
Editions, as it was certified by eight Bishops. And the beginning of this Canon
is nothing but the syllables of one of Charlemaines laws; Vnicuique Ecclesiae
mansus integer absque vllo seruitio attribuatur.

peremptory, since thereby many other Canons cited by Gratian, Burchard, and
Iuo. would want both time and place to be excerpted out of this Council at
Siuil, as are by Garsias in Binnius collected. Garsias supposes the former
Council of that year 590. which is extant, to be only an Epistle to Pegasius
Bishop of Astigitanus, and that the Council wholly is not extant: Then why may
not this and the rest, be Fragments thereof, since so collected by Iuo? For as
for the second Exception, himself has next before observed, how Iuo had
joined together Canons of diverse times, as of Gelasius and Leo the 4. And so in
this it is likely, that that Preface out of the Laws of Charlemain, might be
annexed to the true Canon of that Council Spalense; there being little
dependence of the Canon, on that Law of Charles. Here I can but conjecture to
free Iuo and the Council.

Iuo and Burchard out of the first Council at Orleans, Page 63.
and the 9. at Toledo. Gratian in c. 16. q. 1. cap. 5. in Canonibus, out of the
Council of Gangra. The Council at Tribur. cap. 13. and 14. out of Gelasius
Decree, cap. 29. and the Council of Chalcedon, Can. 17. They apply the
several Canons to Tithes, as if these former Councels at first were made
specially and by name for them, whereas the matter is plainly otherwise: what
was ordained in them about Oblations, is out of them by these (Tithes and
Oblations being then supposed of equal right) expressly extended to Tithes.

Zonaras seems to confess Tithes to be meant in the Council of Gangra, and
the 4. Toletan. oan. 32. and that at Paris, ann. 829. having reference to
former Councels, though naming Tithes, must have the like blame with them.

The Provincial Council at Friuli anno 791. Page 74.
is put off by a trick, It is rather a declaration by doctrine, then a
constitution by precept, says he.

Constitution, which is more; since a constitution is but a declaration of man's
will, whereas this is the declaration of the will of the Council in the word
of God?

But rejecting these as Provincial, he insulteth, that there was no general
Council, Page 64.
and therefore cites Agobardus to prove it in the place before insisted on
(whose reason for the want of general Councels, if he had as well considered,
as he does his authority of their want, he needed not expect them) for says
Agobardus, Nulla enim compulit necessitas feruente vbique religiosa deuotione,
and amore illustrandi Ecclesias vltro aestuante, there was no need.

Page 66.
Next he does infer, that therefore to Baptismall and Episcopal Churches
they were received as indefinite offerings; the quantity whereof was wholly
Arbitrarie, in respect of any Constitution or general Law in use.

Oblationes fructuum vel Primitias Ecclesiae debitas; The offerings and
First Fruits due unto the Church, as Council. Gangrens. Can. 7. which is so
understood in Sexta Synodo Romana sub Symmacho: De fructuum oblationibus quae
Ministris Ecclesiae debentur, Of offerings of fruit which are due to the
Ministers of the Church. Greg. M. Moral. l. 22. c. 23.
Ministeria debita -- a subditis exigenda; Due maintenance, to be exacted of
the Subjects: and considered in the Capitularies which were through the Empire,
Ecclesiae antiquitus constitutae decimis non priuentur; implying upon
Constitutae Ecclesiae, soluendae decimae, how should he say, they were wholly
Arbitrarie for the quantity, and that to a less proportion?

Photius his Nomo-Canon. Tit. 5. and Cod. De Episcopis and Cler. leg. 39. are
cited, wherein says the Author, He that offered not at all was compellable,
but not he that offered a less quantity, and compulsion was taken from the
Churches authority in the Patriarchate of Constantinople.

Photius, Titulo 6. (for in 5. there is nothing) there, such Bishops and
Clergy that should excommunicate or detain the administration of Sacraments
from those that brought not their fruits, aut Angarias non praestent, or do
not their Service, or pay not their Taxes, although consuetudine id inualuerit,
should forfeit ten pounds, besides deprivation; So that rather he should have
said, the authority of compulsion had been taken from the Church, then that
the compulsion was taken from the Churches authority.

But why in that Canon should the quantity be designed? since other first
fruits besides Tithes being due, might be comprised in the word fructus, by
which they well understood what more specially was signified. Moreover, this
compulsion, being so unlawful, might be for some other imposed or voluntary
offerings of fruit, for which, to suffer excommunication to be published,
might prove scandalous, for so by the joining of Angarias praestent, it may
seem. For, that in the time of Photius, circa Annum 858. Vet. Pat. vlt. Edit.
tom. 8. page 333.
a Tenth was usually paid, Anastasius Abbas who lived circa Annum 840. does
testify, in his book contra Iudaeos, saying of Abraham his Tything to
Melchizedech; Decimas ei dedit, vt dare solent Laici Sacerdotibus, He gave
Tithes to him, as Laymen use to do to the Priests: and that constitution of
compulsion was only restrained to that Patriarchate, as the Canon imports.

Codex, there is no such matter, a needless quotation.

The old Ethiopian Mass is also produced to show it was a special bounty to
offer so much as the Tenth, No need of the Critike Forte in the Margent for so
it is read Bibl. SS. Patrum Edit. 2. tom. 6. page 95.
where a distinct prayer is for those, Qui obtulerunt munera Sanctae, vnicae,
quae est super omnes, Ecclesiae sacrificium scilicet primitiarum, decimarum,
gratiarum actionis signum and monumentum, Who have offered the gift of the
holy, only universal Church, that is, the Sacrifice of First fruits and
Tithes, in sign and token of their thanksgiving.

bounty, not duty of paying Tithes, whereas in that it was a prayer of the
Church, nay called Canon vniuersalis, it was for a common service, and so
proves a general duty and payment: and because it is but gratiarum actionis
signum and monumentum, it shows the true end of paying Tithes, which might
not be neglected, namely, our thanksgiving to God, and therein a common
practice for the common prayer. For I cannot be persuaded, that in any public
Liturgy, any distinct prayer either was or should be, for a particular sort of
men, for doing that whereunto they are not bound. And I think it a necessary
conclusion, that since they are an argument of thanksgiving, they are due De
Iure Diuino. And yet farther, if the Mass had judged it a special bounty,
there should have been added some Epithete of excess to their gratitude, since
every less offering would deserve as much, as to be accounted barely a
Testimony of thanksgiving.

But I pray thee, Reader, attend the words of the prayer, Rogemus Omnipotentem
Deum Patrem -- pro ijs qui obtulerunt munera Sanctae, Vnicae, quae est super
omnes Ecclesiae, Sacrificium sc. primitiarum, decimarum, gratiarum actionis
signum and monumentum: Seu autemquis multum obtulerit seu parum, aut secreto
seu palam, seu volens and non habens, omnium amplectatur voluntatem qui
Coelestem Spiritum donat; Let us beseech Almighty God the Father -- for those
who have offered the gifts of the holy, only, universal Church, to wit, the
Sacrifice of First Fruits, Tithes, as a sign and token of their
thanksgiving: Whether any has offered more or less, or secretly or openly,
or in will, though he have not; accept all their good wills, thou that give
the heavenly spirit. Observe, First, that Tithes are called Munera Sanctae,
Vnicae, quae super omnes Ecclesiae, the gifts of the universal Church. Tithes
therefore universally given. Secondly, how they are called Sacrificium, a
Sacrifice, a religious duty to God. Thirdly, how the words multum or parum,
secreto or palam, volens and non habens, must probably by cohaerence with the
former, have reference to Tithes, which may be more or less, or nothing,
according to the ability of the persons. These observations I have added,
since I perused the mass it self: By all which is plain, how the Author
could not have produced a more important authority against himself.

But lastly, the 2. Council at Braccara, P. 67.
cap. 6. and Tolet an. 9. cap. 1. are alleged to prove Tithes, so far
arbitrary consecrations, as that by the practice of some places (which agree
enough with the right challenged in the succeeding ages touching inuestiture
and arbitrary consecrations) the offerings were so in the Patrons disposition,
that he might assign a certainty to the Minister of his Church, and employ
the rest at his pleasure.



Placuit, si quis Basilicam non pro deuotione Fidei, sed pro quaestus
cupiditate aedificat, vt quicquid de oblatione populi colligitur, medium cum
Clericis diuidat; eo quod Basilica in terra sua quaestus causa condiderit,
(quod in aliquibus locis vsque modo dicitur fieri.) Hoc ergo de caetero
obseruari debet, vt nullus Episcoporum tam abominabili voto consentiat, nec
Basilicam, quae non pro Sanctorum patrocinio, sed magis sub tributaria
condition est condita, audeat consecrare: We are pleased, that if any build a
Church more for gain then godliness, that he may divide with the Priest the
oblations of the people, because it is built in his land; which is said to be
practiced in some places at this time: From henceforth be it observed, that no
Bishop consent to so abominable a wish, nor dare to consecrate such a Church,
which is not built to obtain the patronage of the Saints, but to be under a
tributary condition.

The Authors interpretation hereof is false, for the Patrons portion was by
composition with the Bishop, who consecrated the Church upon that condition;
and therein did consent, and was forbidden thenceforth to consecrate: so that
it was assigned to the Patron, and not by him, as also Tit. de iure. Patron. c.
praeterea. Institutum ab Episcopo.

Secondly, the fault of the Patron was even abominable, not to be defended nor
followed.

Thirdly, hence appears the contrary to his intention: he would prove there,
offerings arbitrary in the quantity: But the Patron here, who built the
Church, quaestus cupiditate, for desire of gain, sure could not think so, or
else might well have been deceived in his covetous desire: For suppose, they
had not paid any set Tithe, but each had offered two mites, like the poor
widow, it would have proved no gain to build Churches, and that for half
benefit; especially, if but ten households which may make a Parish, (as c. 10.
q. 3. c. vnio. out of the 16. Edit. Venet. Council. tom. 3. page 385.
Council of Toledo) may be supposed. Let him weigh this consideration; where
also may be considered, how a great proportion of oblations must needs be
paid, since out of half the Priest must have a competencie, which by all
opinion and Law was allowed him.

Can. 37. and 40. Council. Gangrens. cap. 7. and 8. Antiochen. can. 24. and 25.
Damasus. cap. 10. qu. 1. Hanc consuetudinem, Council. 3. and 6. sub Symmacho.
Agathense Can. 48. Aurelianense 1. Can. 16. besides other, have Anathematized
them, who besides a Bishop and his officer, would dispose them: Which faintly
he seems to acknowledge, saying; that in this age also some Canons subjected
all new built Churches to the Bishops government, but were little obeyed; and
so he cites but only one, Aurel. 1. Can. 13.

one Council, and that in opposition to the rest, had said it. But may it
please the Reader to search these quotations, jointly confessing the same
truth, Council. Arausicanum, Anno 441. Can. 10. Ilerdense, An. 525. Can. 3.
Aurelianens. 4. Anno 547. Can. 7. Toletanum 3. Anno 589. Can. 19. Toletanum 4.
Anno 643. Can. 32. and 34. and all these in the same 400. years: And then the
disobedience should be a terror, and not an example of the like attempting,
since so many holy Fathers have accursed the Lay intermedlers in the goods or
fabric, in the Churches of their Diocesses.

ANIMADVERSIONS on the sixth Chapter.
TO begin the Treatise of the third 400. years, he confesses it to have
been the general opinion of the Church, that they are due, De Iure Diuino:
but would have this general opinion interpreted warily, by the general
practice, clearly allowed by the Clergy.

wickedly, for that practice as himself confesses, was disobedient both to
the Canons of the Church page 67. and 71. and to the Laws of the Empire page
70. and 136. and therefore not allowed clearly as he boasts.

After the granting of ordinary payment, not only out of devotion but duty
from the beginning of these 400. years, Page 72.
He proceeds to prove Arbitrarie Consecrations, at which he says, certain
phrases in Counsels do point: as Decimationum prouentus priori Ecclesiae
assignatus, The profit of Tything assigned to other Churches, as Council Mogunt.
c. 16. q. 1. cap. 24. Locus vbi Decimae fuerant antiquitus consecratae, The
place where Tithes were anciently paid. Council. Metens. Circ. Ann. 890. cap. 2.
Decimae quae singulis dantur Ecclesiis. Mogunt. Circ. Ann. 846. cap. 10. Tithes
which are given to each Church.

Arbitrarie Consecrations, and secondly, the phrases do not aim at them.

The first Canon is, Si quis Laicus, vel Clericus, vel vtriusque sexus persona,
proprietatis suae bona, vel res alicubi dare delegauerit, Decimationum
prouentum priori Ecclesiae legitime assignatum, inde abstrahere nullam habeat
potestatem, If any Lay or Clergy man, or of either sex any, intend to give
his proper estate or goods to any place, let him have no power to take away the
profit of Tything anciently assigned to other Churchs: So, he might not give
his Tithes, though he might his land, by reason of Parochial right. And for
the phrase that this legitime assignatum was by the Bishop not Patron, observe
both reason and authority, even for the phrase.

1. If the Bishop might only dispose of Church revenue as before is proved; and
specially of Tithes, as in Concilio Ticinens. Ad Annum 855. In Sacris Canonibus
praefixum est, vt Decimae iuxta Episcopi dispensationem distribuantur: Quidam
autem Laici qui vel in proprijs vel in Beneficijs suas habent Basilicas,
contempta Episcopi dispositione, non ad Ecclesias vbi Baptismum, and
praedicationem, and manus impositionem, and alia Christi Sacramenta percipiunt,
decimas dant; Sed vel proprijs Basilicis, vel suis Clericis pro suo libitu
tribuunt, Quod omnimodis Diuinae legi and sacris Canonibus constat esse
contrarium. It is determined in the holy Canons, that Tithes should be
distributed according to the dispensation of the Bishop: But some Lay men, who
either in their own lands or Benefices have Churches of their own, neglecting
the ordination of the Bishop, pay not Tithes to the Churches, where they are
baptized, taught, confirmed, and have other Sacraments, but pay them at their
own pleasure to their own Churches or Clerks: which manifestly is altogether
against the law of God and the Canons. Nay the Council of Agatha An. 506. c.
22. says, Rem Ecclesiae sicut permiseru^t Episcopi teneant Ciuitatenses sieve
Dioecesani presbyteri vel Clerici, Let the city or Diocesan Clergy have the
estate of the Church, as the Bishops have granted or suffered: No lawful
assignation then, but by the Bishop.

2. The Bishop was interessed in a third or fourth part of Tithes in special,
as Council. Toletan. 4. Can. 32. Iuxta priorum authoritatem conciliorum, tam de
oblationibus quam Decimis -- tertiam consequantur, According to the authority
of former Councels, both of Oblations and Tithes, let the Bishops have the
Thirds: And Council. Parisiens. ann. 829. lib. 1. cap. 31. Quanquam Canonica
authoritas doceat, vt quarta pars decimarum -- in vsus Episcoporum cedat,
Although Canonical authority teaches, that the fourth part of Tithes -- must
belong to the Bishops. Nay these had right to all Tithes not assigned, as
Addit. ad Council. Lateran. part. vltim. cap. 40. How then might any Translation
be without him?

3. Since the limits of Parishes were assigned by Bishops, Ecclesiastica
ordinatione Statuti, as Vrbanus the third, Tit. de Parochijs, cap. super eo.
why not the assignation of Tithes? Videsis Great. c. 13. q. 1.

But the very phrase is in Gratian. C. 16. q. 1. cap. plures baptismales, Ius
ergo Ecclesiarum ita interpretandum est, vt nisi Episcopo disponente alijs
Ecclesiis fuerit assignatum, etc. The right of Churches therefore is so to be
understood, that unless by the disposition of the Bishop it be assigned to
other Churches, etc. Where the assignation in the Translation is. And Alexand.
3. Addit. ad Council. Lateranen. par. vlt. cap. 40. To the Bishop of Brixia,
Decimas retentas si infra certam alicuius Parochiam fuerint^, eidem Ecclesiae
facias assignari, Cause those Tithes which are withhelde, if they be within a
certain Parish, to be assigned to that Church. And from the beginning, the
Bishop, who as the common Treasurer, parted with the custody of such Revenue
due to his Episcopal office, at the consecration of each Church, both received
the Dowry from the Patron, and assigned the several circuit for the offering
of oblations, and the having Church service.

Meaulx: The words are, cap. 2. Ideo statuimus vt deinceps nemo Seniorum de
Ecclesia sua accipiat de decimis aliquam portionem, sed solummodo Sacerdos qui
ibi loci seruit, vbi antiquitus decimae fuerint consecratae, Therefore we
decree, that from henceforth no Seigneur take any part of Tithes, but only
the Priest that serves there where the Tithes were anciently consecrated. Here
is no right of Translation by the Patron, much less of Consecration: But here
indeed it is no more then anciently paid, Antiquitus consecratae, Ecclesiis
antiquitus constitutis, as in the 4. In Council. in Palatio Vern sub Pipin. ann.
755. and Capit. lib. 5. cap. 230. and lib. 6. c. 105.
Council of Arles the Churches are called: It being therefore in the Bishops
power and not in the Patrons, to allow Baptismall Churches which had the right
of Tithes. No arbitrarie consecration therefore can be inferred, which is
opposed by the Canon, but only forbidding of sacrilege, to take away what did
anciently belong to such Churches.

Mentz under Rabanus the Archbishop, where the words are, Volumus vt Decimae
quae singulis dantur Ecclesiis, per consulta Episcoporum a Presbyteris ad vsus
Ecclesiae and pauperum summa diligentia dispensentur: We will that the Tithes
which are given to each Church, by the advice of the Bishop, be disposed by the
Priests with great diligence, to the use of the Church and the poor: which is
also before in Council. Turonens. 3. anno 813. Can. 16. But that this giving was
not voluntary but necessary, the precedent Laws both Spiritual and Temporal,
may infer; whereof one in this page says, Per iustitiam debentur, They are
due of right: And that the Bishop had an interest in them, appears in the next
Canon of the same Council. And as for the necessary duty, he confesses it
in the next words out of the Canon of Leo the 4. c. 16. q. 1. De Monachis, cap.
45, etc. 56. and saepe in Capitularibus. To which may be added the Council
Meldens. c. 48. vt vici and Ecclesiae Baptismales authoritatem and priuilegia
debita retineant; That the Parishes and Baptismal Churches may retain their
authority and due privileges: Nay, Tithes in special were so due, as no
Tithes, Hinemarus in oper. 55. capit. cap. 1. Lib. 1. cap. 7.
no Service, and that secundum antiquam consuetudinem. Nay the Capitul. of
Charlemain in the Edition of Vitus in his eleventh year, having the same
phrase, yet inioyneth a necessity, De Decimis vt dentur and dare nolentes --
exigantur, Of Tithes that may be given, and they that will not give -- may be
enforced. Ad Cathol. Ecclesiam lib. 1.
The words of Saluianus Massiliensis, are here fit; Si deuotus, da quasi tuum,
si non deuotus, read quasi non tuum -- Ad opus Sanctu^ and hortatione
inuitaris, and exactione constringeris, Da si vis, Read si non vis; If thou be
devout, give as if it were thine own, if not devout, restore as if not thine
own. To a holy work thou art both exhorted and enforced; If thou art willing,
then give, if unwilling, then restore.

But that such consecrations of Tithes, Page 72.
not established by a Civil Tithe made to the Church of another parish, were
practiced, and were in force, at the lay-owners choice, He proves plainly
(as he says) by a law (but not put in execution) for punishment of such
consecrations: And the law is, leg. Longobard. lib. 3. Tit. 3. c. 7. and in
Addit. 4. ad capit. cap. 173. The words are, Quicunque decimam abstrahit de
Ecclesia, ad quam per Iustitiam dari debet, and eam praesumptuose, vel propter
munera, aut amicitiam, vel aliam quamlibet occasionem, ad aliam Ecclesiam
dederit; a Comite vel a Misso nostro distringatur, vel eiusdem decimae
quantitatem cum sua lege restituat; Whosoever takes away Tithe from the Church
to which of right it is due, and praesumptuously, either for reward, or love,
or other occasion shall give them to another Church, let him be distrained by
our officer, or restore the Tithe with the forfeiture.

Decima by the Capit. lib. 5. cap. 145. cited before in the answer of the fifth
Reason in Charles Martels Story: where he shall find this Decimae, though a
true Clergy Tithe (yet of Benefices and Infeodations alone) which were per
iustitiam debitae; And that such Translations of them were not in force, the
word praesumptuose me thinks does infer. Neither could such Benefices have
had much practice of such translations, since they were even so lately
practiced in Pipins Time, the Father of this Charles, whose Capitularie this
is, for it is not Lotharius his, as the former Capitularie can testify.

Page 73.
He further would infer it out of another prohibition against Parsons, who
under pain of deprivation. capit. lib 7 cap. 141. were commanded not to
persuade parishioners to come to their Churches, and to give them their Tithes.
And the like is in Synodo Ticinensi, c. 16. q. 1. c. in Sacris Canonibus,
against such that used to give away their Tithes, alijs Ecclesiis pro libitu.

Theodulphus Aurelianensis in his Epistle number. 14. does declare, which is
published with Hincmarus his Epistles by Busaeus.)

Concerning which, observe the Law of Lambert the Emperor decreed in Concilio
Mutinae, De Regno Italiae lib. 6.
Anno 898. as Sigonius does relate. Si quis Sanctorum Patrum regulas
contempserit, and gloriosissimorum Imperatorum Caroli, and Ludouici, atque
Lotharij, and Ludouici filij eius de decimis in eorum Capitularibus statuta and
sancita non obseruauerit, easque alibi nisi in Baptismalibus Ecclesiis absque
consensu Episcopi dare temptauerit, vel retinere praesumpserit, and qui dat
ijs, and qui recipit eisdem co^stitutis percellatur; If any shall despise the
rules of holy Fathers, and not observe the ordinance and statutes of the
glorious Emperors, Charles, and Lewis, and Lotharius, and Lewis his son
concerning Tithes in their Capitularies, and shall dare to pay them to any, but
to the Baptismall Churches without consent of the Bishop, or shall praesume to
retain them, both he that gives, and he that receives them, shall undergo
the same penalty. Although therefore it might be a practice, yet sure not of
many, since the reason was so bad, and not in force, because so condemned.

But yet in the First, that is the Capitular, Parochial payment is
praesupposed and proved; so that there can be no consecration, though
translation: for it seems by this, they thought, that as Tithes in general
were due by distributive justice, so in special, to this or that place, they
must be paid by commutatatiue justice, and therefore principally they forbade
the solicitation to come to their Church, because from the partaking of their
service, the performing of their Tithing to them would follow: which was
prohibited, for that it proceeded out of a covetous and injurious mind to
gain by others loss. As also in Council. Cabilon. sub Carolo Magno, Can. 6.
and 7. Those Priests are condemned, who out of covetousness, would persuade
Lay men, Vt abrenunciantes seculo -- res suas Ecclesiae conferant: That they
would forsake the world, and give their estate to the Church. This Canon
therefore, as some other constitutions, forbade the admitting of them to their
Church. The Capitularie, libr. 1. cap. 143. Not to admit any but their own
Parishioners, unless iourneying, or following suits of Law. And in the same
book, cap. 154. That none shall sing Mass before, or receive Tithes of a
stranger. Nay, in Concilio Nannetensi, C 1. to enquire if any stranger be in
the Church at Service, and cast him out. By which I am persuaded, their care
was to prevent the straggling humor of some then Puritan conceit, (whose
persons and contributions are not at their own Churches) that so thereby the
Parochial profit or credit might not be diminished. Ne occasio tribuatur
euagandi, and Diuina extra Parrochiam audiendi, say the Canonists: Lest
occasion might be afforded of wandering or hearing Service out of their own
Parish.

Pauie, The Canon is repeated ad page 72.
it appears manifestly, that the Bishops disposition of them was before,
though contemned by such irregular ungodly people. And they were but Quidam
whom the Council censureth so sharply, and desires the secular Magistrate to
correct them. Small force therefore in such gifts, which were so condemned.

But next, he proceeds to examples of such consecrations out of Manuscript
Chartularies in Thesauro Cottoniano; and first out of those of Vtrecht, in the
time of the elder Pipin, Charles Martell, Carloman.

De iure, but indeed voluntarily vouchsafed, namely a Tenth of the Kings
Custom in Slaves, in Lands, in Tolles, in Merchandise, or any such things;
Vndecunque ad partem Regiam, fiscus Teloneum exigere, aut accipere videatur:
From whatsoever the Kings Exchequer, for his part may seem to receive or exact
tollage. If this be not the sense, I profess my ignorance; but otherwise, sure
it had allowance to the Bishop, who might give authority, and would, for the
benefit of his Church, to translate them; or if Christianity there then
began, to receive the profit of them.

The next consecration in the same Chartularie, is in the promise made to the
Bishop by one Gutha, to endow a Church which he gave to Vtrecht, with the
Tithes of diverse Mannours; In Beuorhem tradidit Gutha Ecclesiam needum
consecratam in ius and Dominium Sti. Martini, (To that Saint was the Church of
Vtrecht consecrated,) ea videlicet ratione, vt post consecrationem eiusdem
Ecclesiae, Decimae darentur ad supra nominatam Ecclesiam de vill^ his nominibus
vocitatis, Beuorhem, Gisleshem, Hegginghem, Schupildhem: In Beuorhem Gutha
delivered a Church not yet consecrated, into the possession of Saint Martins,
on that condition, that after the consecration thereof, such Tithes of such
villages might be given to the foresaid Church, etc.

him but the Bishop, to assign several Tithings to each Church. For he gives
the Church, Ea videlicet ratione, upon that condition, vt darentur, That there
might be given, not by him, but by the Bishop, such Tithing, to countenance
his gifts: But if any should understand it otherwise, yet hence observe, upon
consecration an endowment of Tithes does follow; and that it was to a Bishop
in his own Diocese, who no doubt consented.

The Canons of this age were, that neither Patrons might give, nor Monasteries
receive any such Tithes, without the consent of the Bishop, So Mogunt. Conc.
sub Rabano, Can. 11. an. 834.
Ecclesiae antiquitus constitutae nec decimis nec alijs possessionibus pro
nouis Oratorijs sine consensu and Consilio Episcopali priuentur. Churches
anciently endowed, let them not be deprived of Tithes and other possessions,
without the consent or advice of the Bishop. And the same Council Can. 14.
Nullus Monachorum parochias Ecclesiarum recipere praesumat sine consensu
Episcopi, Let no Monk dare to receive Parish Churches, without consent of the
Bishop: Cap. 9. Addit. ad Conc. Later. sub Ale^. 3. part. 13. c. 14.
As after in the Council of Lateran under Alexander 3. And in Gratian: and
such was the condition of Iuo, concerning the Monks their receiving of them;
And the Titles whereby they enjoyed them, were vel proprij Episcopi licentia,
vel Apostolicae sedis authoritate, as Paschal. 2. C. 16 q. 1. Plures
Baptismales, Epist. 192.
16. q. 1. c. peruenit. And so Gregory the 7. Vt nullus Abbas Decimas and
primitias and reliqua quae secundum Statuta Canonum ad Episcopos pertinent,
detineat, sine authoritate Romans Pontificis vel Episcopi in cuius Dioecesi
habitat, Apostolica authoritate firmamus, We command by Apostolic authority;
That no Abbot detain Tithes or first Fruits and such things, which by the
Canons belong to the ordering of the Bishop, without the authority of the Pope
or Bishop of the Diocese.

two consecrations of Tithes in Banno villae Anno 852. and 946. to Monasteries
may be known not to be Arbitratie, but by the consent of the Bishop (which by
the use of the times I only conjecture, because I see not the Chartularies)
and not of newly consecrated, but infeodate Tithes, because the words are
Decimis quas habemus -- quas habeo, showing a former enjoying: and observe it
is not de Terris quas habeo, The Tithes which I have out of my lands in such a
place, but simply: as after in the year 1120. Lewis king of France, gave a
Church to the Church of S. Dennis, in these words, Ecclesias de Cergiaco sicut
libere possidebamus cum Decimis and omnibus ad Ecclesiam pertinentibus
Ecclesiae restituendo ipsis Sanctis Martyribus contulimus, We gave that Church
which we did freely possess, restoring it to the Church, Quercetan in Abelard.
page 1165. And to give consent, that Bishops were much inclineable, nay in the
third Toletan Council, It was permitted. Can. 3. and 4. That maintenance from
the Church, might be allowed to Monasteries: Yet so, Quod vtilitatem non
grauet Ecclesiae, That it may not be burdensome, to the profit of the Church:
And even, that a parish Church might be granted to make a Monastery.

P. 75.
But what I coniectured of the two former, is expressed in the next, which may
show the manner of such gifts. Lewis the fourth, Anno 939. granting to the
Monks of Clugny Tithes, Decimas indominicatas, etc.

Agapetus the second, and after from Lucius the second, in whose time Adhemar
the Bishop of Xantoigne, did by the words Damus and Concedimus, we give and
grant, confirm the same; and challenged an authority to command, that none
should within the precinct of that Abbey conueigh their Tithes to other
Churches. But that is most sufficient, that in that very Charter of Lewis the
fourth, in the very next words, There is concerning Churches and Tithes, this
added. Sicut per priuilegium Romanorum, and per scripta Episcoporum
acquisierunt, teneant and possideant: As by the privilege of the Popes and
writings of Bishops they have purchased, let them hold and enjoy. These show
this grant to be only a confirmation, and not a prime Donation: The original
conueyance being from Popes and Bishops: which also the venerable Abbot of that
order, Lib. 1. Ep. 28. circamedium.
Peter, says, Ecclesias and earum vniuersa bona, ab Episcopis, absque
vaenalitate nobis collata libere, just, Canonice possidemus: (An obseruable
example of justification of the right of their enjoying) Churches and all the
goods thereof, we do freely, justly, and Canonically hold collated to us by
Bishops without Simonie.

The next is in the Abbey of Vendosme, of the Tithe of Saltpits; the like
whereof the Abbey had out of the same lands of the Bishop of Xantoigne, which
although for 60. years they had enjoyed, yet the Bishop upon the opinion, that
no Church lands were to pay Tithes to any Church would have withheld; but the
Abbot Goffridus Vindocinensis pleads Parochial right; and his words are
confessed to show a general practice of such payment.

Dilemma: Either the Bishop gave them, and so consented, which was the
Canonical dispensation; or did not consent, and so Parochial right expected
not a Donors consecration? Both which, cross his opinion: And yet for these,
besides that of Callixtus, the privilege of Urban is produced; as also those
of the Bishops predecessors who gave them.

Another consecration he alleges, Anno 1124. Page 77.
And in stead of all others, which no doubt were most frequent, Epist. lib. 2.
p. 435.
a confirmation of several Tithes in Innocent the 3. with reference to many
other quotations.

Innocent speaks c. Dudum Extr. de Decimis, speaking of Tithes, Donatores non
confer potuerunt alijs quae ipsi de iure no^ poterant possidere, The Donors
could not bestow on others what they themselves could not lawfully enjoy.

But Innocent the 3. in Sermon. 3. de Dedicat. Templi. Tom 1. Page 78.
p. 83. says it, where he does reprehend such consecrations, which were very
common and allowed in fact by the Pope and Ordinaries, as says the Author.

Innocent the 3. he will needs interpret Indigentibus, to signify in that
place Monks; as if Innocent had pointed at the custom of consecration to
Monasteries. The words are, Grauiter peccant qui Decimas and Primitias non
reddunt Sacerdotibus, sed eas pro voluntate sua distribuunt indigentibus: They
grievously sin, who render not Tithes and First Fruits to the Priests, but
distribute them as they list to the poor.

Now, that this word must signify, not the Monks (though sometimes they were
called pauperes) is evident, both by the circumstance of the place, which each
man that reads may perceive: And by the phrases in this sentence, both where
he says, Grauiter peccant, which because such consecrations were not yet in
the Council restrained by him, he could not well have said: and again, the
word distribuunt does not savor of consecrations, but of voluntary, though
sacrilegious bestowing of it. Again, the occasion of such reprehension surely
was the same with that of his Decretall Epistle, cited page 144. Tom. 2.
Episto. larum. lib. 2. ^ag. 483.
of the Archbishopricke of Matera, where the lay-occupiers did use to divide
their Tithes at their pleasure, and arbitrarily, one part to the Church, part
to the poor, part to their kindred; where poor cannot signify Monks: Or with
that other, where the complaint is, that some, Extr. de Detimis. c. Tuanobis.
De portione Fructuum -- partem decimae separantes, eam Capellis suis, aut
alijs Clericis, aut etiam pauperibus conferunt, vel in vsus alios pro sua
voluntate conuertunt, Of the portion of their Fruits, seuering part of the
Tithes, they bestow it upon their Chapels, or their Clerks, or on the poor,
or at their pleasure convert them to others use: And these poor are not
Monks, why then the other? But lastly, since Monks could not receive Tithes at
laymens hand at the pleasure of them without consent of the Bishop, how can
they be thought grievously to offend in giving that to Monks, which Monks
could not receive; as elsewhere out of the Canons is showed? And by the way,
he that here would have Indigentes to signify, not the lay-poore, but
Monks; before, page 46. in the Testimony of John the Abbot in Cassian, will
have pauperes only to signify, the lay-poore: Whereas Monks, of whom some
were in Orders, are there principally understood, which besides the quotation
of the Law of Moses, the very condition of his office, that he was an Abbot,
might insinuate.

But He proceeds and inferres, that from the opinion of these arbitrarie
consecrations, such conceit was of praescription thence, and that amongst
great men of the Clergy, That Tithes of increase long paid by a family were
due, whither soever it was transplanted, as if the continual payment, had so
for ever bound it, that it might not pay them otherwise. This was the opinion
of some Bishops in the Patriarchate of Grado as we may see by the same Pope
Innocent his reprehension of them. Decretal. Ep. lib. 1. page 83. and of others
elsewhere also Extr. De paroch. cap. 5. significauit.

First, you see how He would prove a right from what was reprehended, and that
in the opinion of the time.

And, Secondly, in the first quotation only personal Tithes were claimed, not
Tithes of praediall increase.

Thirdly, the Antiquity of their claim even to Proaui, no newly created
Tithes then.

And Fourthly, not out of bounty but duty, for how else would they
extorquere: All which He would willingly deny.

But the words are plain, Quia Patres eorum and Aui and Proaui decimas ipsis
aliquando persoluerunt, Because their Fathers and Grandfathers and
Great-grandfathers sometimes paid them Tithes: Which phrase is after repeated;
Now persoluere does praesuppose debitum not datum, a necessary payment, not
arbitrarie consecration; whereupon they did ground their praescription, upon
which they so violently required and would have extorted Tithes.

Extr. de Paroch. c. 5. significauit, is wholly mistook, being for
Jurisdiction, not Tithes.

Next, Page 79. Capit. lib. 5 cap. 49. Council. Mogunt. c. 16. q. 7. c. 7. Leg.
Longob. lib. 3. Tit. 3 cap. 8.
He proves the practice of Arbitrarie consecrations, by the power they took
of selling them, as by the phrase Redimere Decimas in diverse Capitulars and
Synods, de Decimis quas populus dare non vult, nisi quolibet modo aut munere ab
ijs redimantur, Concerning Tithes, which the people will not give, unless by
some means or gift they may be redeemed of them.

First, is a plain reprehension, nay in all the quotations, besides the
censure of the Church, and distress of the Magistrate, the appearing before
the Emperor, was enjoined upon contumacie; whereas yet for the Parson by
consent of the Bishops for to sell them was lawful, as lib. 7. cap. 152.

And Secondly, these Tithes were Infeodations, and therefore being letten might
be expected to be redeemed, as after he confesses the phrase Redimere, P. 3.
q. 51. M. 6. Art. 4.
to signify in Alensis, and as in the Justification of Charles Martels
History I have showed.

And Thirdly, hey must needs be usurpations, praesupposing still a former
possession in the Clergy, for so is the sense of redimere, not only to
purchase, but to redeem what was lost or left: Epict. 12.
so in Iuo the phrase is used Redimere -- altaria, when laymen upon the death
of the Parson who demised Tithes unto them, were feign Redimere altaria, To
purchase the Church Revenue again: whereby the Chimera of arbitrarie
consecration of Tithes, not already consecrated, which hereby, and from the
former he would infer, is annihilated.

But that they were before consecrated, every authority proves, as we have
observed in the particulars.

Number. 3. Of Appropriations. Page 80.
Proceeding to show how lay-patrons did not only arbitrarily consecrate Tithes,
which were not before consecrated, but even, in those that were, exercised a
power of disposing by appropriation: He first proposes, the original of
parish Churches.

And first, how Metropoliticke Sees, Patriarchats, Exarchats (in the Eastern
Church) and Bishoprics were limited, wherein his conjectures are in my
understanding true; as also in that he says, that Bishoprics were anciently
called Parochiae, which term was after confined to what our common language
restraines: The Curates of which were appointed and sent by the Bishop, and
received in their several Parishes the offerings of devout Christians, which
were disposed of by the the Oeconomi Deacons, or other Officers thereto
appointed under the Bishop (but by the Bishop) wherein at first, they had no
such particular interest, but that either a quadripartite division, as in the
Roman Diocese, To the Clergy, Poor, Reparation of Churches and Bishop: or
tripartite or other division, as elsewhere, was made; which Curates were
protected by some appointed by the State for (...) and Defensores: So far it
seems to me not improbable.

But when he talks of Churches erected only upon the lands wherewith
Bishoprics were endowed, P. 81.
because he cannot deny that the Bishop did then alone ordain Incumbents in
every of them, and that for space of five hundred years, as if there were no
Lay foundations:

Cap. 10. Can. 4. Videsis Sidon. Apollin. de Simplicio, lib. 7. ep. 9.
nay by the Council Arausicanum Anno 441. is proved false, Quod si etiam
secularium quicunque aedificauerit Ecclesiam, But if also any Layman shall
build a Church, etc. and Council. Chalcedon. So that no question, Parish
Oratories and Churches of Lay foundations were before that time, and might be
understood by Pope Denis the first his Decretall: Although both in that time,
and long after, the only Collation of such parish Churches, and election of the
Incumbents wholly belonged to the Diocesan Bishops; at least wise their
approbation:

Neither at any time the Patron might collate as the Bishop had done, which
next He proposes.

The Council of Laodicea says it, Can. 15.
Non permittendum populo eligere: The people may not be suffered to elect. The
forenamed Concilium Arausicanum is very direct against all, Can. 10.
be he Bishop or Lay that builds a Church, the Chapleine to be allowed by the
Bishop of the Diocese; And after the 500. years, Concilium Aurelian. 4. Ann.
547. Vt in Oratorij, Can. 7.
Domini praediorum minime contra votum Episcopi ad quem Territorij ipsius
priuilegium noscitur pertinere, peregrinos Clericos intromittant, nisi forsitan
quos probatos, ibidem districtio Pontificis obseruare praeceperat: That in
their Oratories the Lords of the Mannours bring not in thither strange Clerks,
against the mind of the Bishop, to whom the privilege of that Territory is
known to belong, but such as the Bishop upon examination, has commanded to
serve there, Can. 25. and 26.
Toletanum 3. They enjoin Presbyteris in Parochiis ordinandis, vt habeant
libellum officialem, and faciant professionem Episcopo: Priests to to be
admitted to Parishes, that they have a book to direct them in discharging
their office, and that they do make profession to the Bishop. But after, in
Council. Toletan. 9. for the Bishops pride, Can. 2.
or negligence, in suffering the ruins of the Parish Churches, it was then
permitted to the founders, for their life time, Vt Rectore^ idoneos ijdem ipsi
offerant Episcopis ordinandos: Quod si tales forte non inueniantur ab ijs, tunc
quos Episcopus loci probauerit, Deo placitos sacris cultibus instituat, cum
eorum conniuentia seruituros: That they offer fit Rectors to be instituted by
the Bishops: but if such be not found by them, then let the Bishop institute
those who are worthy to serve there, by the consent of the Patron. Long before
this was that Constitution by Justinian; Nouel. 123.
Si quis Oratorium exstruxerit, volueritque in eo promoueri Clericos, vel ipse,
vel haeredes eius, si sumptus ipsi Clericis subministrent, and dignos
nominauerint, nominati ordinantor; Sivero qui ab ipsis electi sunt, eos tanquam
indignos ordinari sacri prohibebunt Canones, tunc locorum sacratissimus
Episcopus eos quos praestantiores putauerit, promouers curam agito: If any
build an Oratorie, and he or hls heirs would praeferre Clerks thereto, if he
will maintain them, and present to the Bishop those which are worthy, let them
be admitted: But if they that are chosen, are Canonically unworthy, let then
the Bishop of that place take care to prefer them whom he shall judge to be
more worthy. To these more might be added, which for the after-confutation, I
reserve; whereby the right of Inuestitures by Patrons in Parish Churches in
those days, is denied, and the institution of the Bishop as upon presentation
is proved.

Page 83.
But he does confess, that the Canons did ordeine, that every Church, and the
profits thereof should be subject to the Bishops disposition, as to the only
immediate Superior; and does infer, that the Patron should be utterly
excluded from all interest, which is most true: Yet he tells us of diverse Lay
Patrons in those elder times, which had, or at least challenged in the
oblations received from Christian devotion, an interest like to what the
Bishops more anciently had in the offerings made at Churches, wherein he only
placed the Ministers. And for this he cites the second Council at Braccara.

consent and composition of a Bishop, indeed to an abominable desire:
concerning which, see before, Ad page 67.

the Epistle of Damasus, c. 10. q. 1. c. 15. where he calls it a custom of
the ancient times. But there Damasus speaks of Sacrilegious Lay men, not in
particular of Patrons, not as challenging by foundations, which is his
intention, but by strong hand.

After, he cites to prove this, the 9. Council of Toledo, P. 84.
Can. 1. (where he has dealt fraudulently, in the citing of the words which
make no such sense) for says he, And in the ninth Council of Toledo about the
year 660. Lay patrons are forbidden to use Iuris proprij potestatem in Church
goods or lands, as if great pretense in those times had bin of their right in
the disposition of them.

Metropolitan, and if in case he do the like, to the King; Ipsis tamen
haeredibus in eisdem rebus non liceat quasi iuris proprij potestatem praeferre,
etc. Yet let it not be lawful for the heirs to pretend as it were any right
of propriety, etc.

If the Quasi had not been concealed, and the new liberty of their
intermedling at all had bin considered, no great pretense in those times to
have bin of the right of Lay patrons in disposition of them would have
appeared. For they are not forbidden to use, but even to pretend as it were any
right, whereas before this they could have no pretense, so much as to
intermeddle.

Then, in general he names, Imperial Capitularies, but cites none wherein
he acknowledges, that diverse times provision was made against such Lay men,
as thought it had been their right only, to dispose of the endowments and
offerings of such Churches, as they were patrons of, and that the Bishop should
be wholly excluded.

no Capitular being against any such challenge of offerings, though for the
Endowment, the Dos, the Glebe, some patrons indeed might seem to have
challenged it, as the Capitulars lib. 7. cap. 213. which he cites also, and
368. do infer: where such challenge, Et in praeterito displicet, and in
futuro prohibetur, Both for the present discontenteth us, and for the future we
forbid. And many Canons of that time have the like, Valentinum Galliae. c. 9.
Wormatiens. c. 6. Coloniens. An. 887. c. 4. Mogunt. 888. c. 4.

So that all his quotations in respect of Tithes are false. In the first, no
challenge of right, but composition. In the se^ond, no challenge of patron, but
of any other Sacrilegious. In the third, no challenge of Tithes or offerings,
but of Temporalties.

P. 85.
But although this challenge of offerings was abstained from, as the plainest
part of Sacrilege, yet the interest of patronage, and a right of disposition
of the Temporal Endowments, which the Lay founders challenged in their new
erected Churches, which was a right of Collation and Inuestiture, whereby the
Incumbent might receive full possession without aid of Bishop or other Church
man, could not be so easily gotten from them; although some Imperialls were
provided against it, and of them he cites only the Capitular. lib. 7. cap.
213.

Can. 5.
as in the second Council of Braccara it appears, where the words are,
Placuit vt quoties ab aliquo fidelium ad consecrandas Ecclesias Episcopi
inuitantur, vnusquisque Episcoporum meminerit, vt non prius dedicet Ecclesiam,
nisi ante dotem Basilicae and obsequium ipsius per donationem Chartulae
accipiat; It is our will, that as often as Bishops are invited by any to
consecrate Churches, that every Bishop remember that he do not consecrate the
Church, before that he receive by Charter of the Founder, the dowry and the
subjection thereof; whereof also S. Gregory speaks, and Council. Aurelian. 4.
Epist. lib. 12. cap. 10. Can. 33.
with others. Why then should they intermeddle in the disposition of them? well
therefore did the Capitularies cited by him provide against it, citing an old
Constitution: nor they only, but the Counsels before cited of that time. But
as for patronage (which he would confound with the disposition of Temporal
Endowment) it being a right of nomination and presentation, not only to the
Temporal Endowment here spoken of, namely, the Dos Ecclesiae given by the
Founder, the colonica Vestita cum tribus Mancipijs, as Concilium Valentinum sub
Lothario Imperat. called it; Cap. 9.
But even to the Tithes and Oblations also which he would not distinguish)
this was not by way of Inuestiture and Collation either challenged or allowed:
But they usually presented their Clerks to the Bishop, as in the Council and
Novel fore cited, Ad page 82. they are commanded, and the contrary offenders
were severally censured. Which may also appear by the Capitularie, Lib. 5.
cap. 178.
De Clericis Laicorum vnde nonnulli eorum conqueri videntur, eo quod quidam
Episcopi ad eorum preces, nolint in Ecclesiis suis eos, cum vtiles sint,
ordinare, visum nobis fuit, vt in vtrisque partibus pax and concordia seruetur,
and cum charitate. and ratione vtiles, and idonei eligantur; Et si Laicus
Idoneum vtilemque Clericum obtulerit, nulla qualibet occasion ab Episcopo sine
certa ratione repellatur, and si reijciendus est propter scandalum vitandum,
euidenti ratione manifestetur: Concerning the Clerks of Lay-Patrons, many of
them seem to complain, that some Bishops at their entreaty, would not admit
them, though worthy, into their own Churches: It seems good therefore to us,
that on both parts peace may be kept, and with love and reason the profitable
and fit may be chosen: And if the Lay-patron present a worthy Clerk, he may
not be repelled without good reason; and if he be to be repelled, for avoiding
scandal, let the reason be evidently manifested: Lib. 1. cap. 22.
which is related in the Council at Paris, an. 829. Is not this ordination the
now-Institution, not the Lay-Inuestiture? Which they that did not observe, were
censured in Rescript of Charlemain in Vitus Edition: Page 311.
Praesumptio non modica, ita vt Presbyteros, nequissima temeritate praesentari
Episcopo denegetis, insuper and aliorum Clericos vsurpare non pertimescitis;
and absque consensu Episcopi in vestras Ecclesias mittere audoatis: It is no
small presumption, that ye deny through most ungodly rashness, to present your
Priests to the Bishops, and that you farther fear not to take others Clerks,
and to dare to put them into your Churches: as also, in Council. Arelatens. sub
Carolo Mag. c. 4. Turonens. 3. sub eodem, c. 15. Cabilonens. sub eodem, c. 42.
Moguntin. sub eodem, cap. 29. Meldens. c. 51. and 52. Wormatiens. cap. 8. and
some others before mentioned, wherein diverse censures are threatened against
such usurpations: besides, the Act of Vlrique after shows the use of these
Times.

Page 85.
The Patron did take upon him the Advocates and Defensors office of the
Church-title: So he.

Defensores Ecclesiarum ab Imperatore fuerunt postulati: The Emperors were
requested to grant Advocates for Bishoprics; as in many Councels; so at that
time it appears, that the Bishop did not confirm only, but commend the
Aduocateship of the Church to the Patron: For so in the words of that Anonymus
writer in the life of Saint Vlrique Bishop of Auspurg, Cap. 7. Page 86.
where (as the Author cites) he says, Consecratione peracta, doteque
contradita, comprobato illic Presbytero, Altar is procurationem commendauit,
and Ecclesiae aduocationem firmiter legitimo haeredi panno imposito
commendauit: The consecration being ended, and the Dowry delivered up to the
Priest, whom he had there approved, he committed the charge of the Altar, and
conferred the Aduocation of the Church firmly on the lawful heir, by putting
on him a robe. An excellent pattern of the use of these times, by which all
the fabric of this new Historians invention of challenges is destroyed. If
the Bishop gave the Dowry delivered to him by the Patron, as before; then why a
challenge of the Patrons disposing of that in the Church, which the Church had
not by him? If he approved the Priest, and committed the care of the Altar to
him, then why a challenge of Inuestitures? And if the Bishop gave the
aduocation of the Church, why a challenge of taking it as without him? Hear
Hincmarus, In Dialog. de Statu Ecclesiae p. 651.
Sancta Ecclesia per sanctos Sacerdotes elegit sibi in singulis Ecclesiis,
Vicedominos, Aduocatos, Defensores, and caeteros adiutores, etc. Holy Church by
holy Bishops has chosen her self in each Church, Vidames, Advocates,
Defenders, and other helpers.

But that they used such Collation and Inuestiture ( Inuestiture being only
the giving of Seisin and Possession, Page 86.
as Iuo is cited for Epist. 41. and passim) with these words, Accipe Ecclesiam,
Take the Church, or such like, as P. Damianus lib. 1. epist. 13. Whereby
without Institution, the Incumbent, as really, as fully, and as immediately
received the body of his Church, his Glebe, and Tithes, in point of Interest
from the Patrons hands, as a Lessee for life receives his lands by the Lessors
livery: this next He intends to prove.

Ep. 60. and alibi.
for neither that quotation of Iuo is true, though elsewhere in deed, he grant
Inuestiture to be a granting. Quae concessio sieve fiat manu sieve nutu, sieve
lingua, sieve virga, quid refert cum reges nihil se spirituale dare intendant,
sed tantu^ aut votis petentium annuere, villas Ecclesiasticas, aut alia bona
exteriora, (quae de Munifice^tia aut Regum obtinent Ecclesiae ipsis Electis
concedere.) Which gra^ting, whether it be by hand, or beck, or tongue, or rod,
what difference, since Kings intend not to give that which is spiritual, but
only either consent to others petitions or grant to those that are chosen,
Church-Farmes, or other possession which the Church has by the bounty of
Kings. Nay in another place says, Ep. 95.
Leges nequaquam appellant inuestituram concessionis, sed possessionis, The
Laws do not call it an Inuestiture of Concession, but of possession, which is
less. But this Inuestiture is not such as He would claim; In this, the
election being granted to the Clergy; but he without institution, nay
allowance of the Bishop, would have this Inuestiture of parish Churches; these
therefore are not alike. Neither was that great quaestion (in which, Scissum
Regnum and Sacerdotium, Iuo Ep. 214.
quibus tanquam principalibus and fortioribus paxillis Tabernaculi Dei status
firmiter figebatur, The Kingdom and Priesthood were rent, upon which as two
principal props, the State of the Tabernacle was fixed) other then at first
about the Inuestiture of Bishoprics and Abbeyes. Wherein, what through the
challenge, Iure Maiestatis and publicae defensionis, By the praerogatiue of
Majesty and public defense: or, Iure populi repraesentati in Rege, the right
of the people repraesented in the King, which people formerly had interest in
the choice of their spiritual Governor: or, ex concessione Paparum Leonis 3.
and Adriani 1. by the grant of Pope Leo 3. and Adrian 1. the Emperors claymed
a right in the promotion and concession of such places, whereunto the Devotion
of their Ancestors had annexed great Temporal endowments: which, how mainely
by the Popes it was opposed, and by most Writers (since forsooth for their
labor Saincted) railed upon and contradicted, the Stories are too full. Yet,
how some others wisely praeferring the peace of the Church before the
privilege, willingly received the honors; and some even publicly defended
the right; the History of that time may testify. But after, the contention
grew concerning the Collation of parish Churches; especially in this kingdom,
as the Epistles in the third book, amongst those of Anselmes, of his own and
of others can witness, and many of Ioannes Sarisburiensis.

Parenthesis, as the quotation of Iuo was false, so that of P. Damianus for the
quotation is true. Yet in the same Epistle says that author, Licet unjust
aliquo modo Ecclesias futuris rectoribus tradunt, Although unjustly in a sort
they give the Churches to the Rectors that shall be, speaking of Lay Princes:
whereby both the right in his opinion, by the word Unjust, unjustly; and the
denying of his Aduerbe, that the Incumbent did fully receive the in^erest, is
contradicted by aliquo modo, in some sort; because Ordination must follow upon
such title: In which the approbation of the Bishop was so necessary, that upon
Canonical exceptions, he might hinder the capablenesse of such Lay
Inuestiture; C. Monast. 16. q. 7.
for therefore it must be, cum consensu Episcopi, ne malus existat, with
consent of the Bishop, lest he be naught.

But whereas he compares the conueiance, as from a Lessour, to a Lessee for
life, by livery: P. 87.


Incumbent in his Cure, to be a Fee simple, and not like an estate by Lease,
which usually (I think) has covenants, whereby upon default, either the
demise, or some penalty may reuert to the Lessor. But howsoever, the Gloss of
the Canon Law has made the comparison otherwise, even in the C. Monasterium
before cited, (and after by him) where it says, Episcopus inuito Patrono, non
potest de Ecclesia facere Monasterium -- sic nec Dominus rei potest vsum rei
immutare etiam in melius, inuito vsufructuario: The Bishop cannot make a Church
to be a Monastery against the Patrons will, as a Landlord cannot change the
propriety of any thing though for the better, without consent of the Lessee.
Where the Patron is compared to a Lessee.

To proceed, the use of such Collations and Liueries, he strives to prove by
the phrase Commendare, in some Capitulars, and in that former, Cap. Monasterium.

Libr. 5. cap. 83. The words are, Vt Laici omnino muner a unjust non exigant a
Presbyteris, propter commendationem Ecclesiae cuique Presbytero: That Lay men
do not at all unjustly exact reward of Priests, for the commendation of the
Church to any Priest. But he that shall conceive the very next Capitul.
before, cannot suppose his sense, Lib. 5. c. 84.
Vt Laici Presbyteros non eijciant de Ecclesiis, neque constituant sine
consensu Episcoporum suorum: That Lay men eiect not Priests out of the
Churches, nor appoint any there without consent of their Bishops, where
approbation and consent of the Bishop is required, and that very likely upon
praesentation of the person unto him, as before out of another Capitul. in the
same book, C. 178.
and our of the Council of Paris is noted: for being praesented to the Bishop,
Institution without Canonical exception must ensue.

Add. 4. ad Capit. cap. 37. is a needless quotation, not having so much as the
word Commendare; and the Capitular does fully cross his opinion. Multi contra
Canonum constituta, sic Ecclesias quas aedificarunt, postulant cons^crari, vt
dotem quam ei Ecclesiae contulerint, censeant ad Episcopi ordinationem non
pertinere, sed ea secundum constitutionem antiquam ad Episcopi ordinationem and
potestatem pertineant: Many against the Decrees of Canons, do in such sort
desire the Churches they built, to be cosecrated; that the dowry which they
have bestowed on the Church, they suppose does not belong to the ordering of
the Bishop: But according to an old Constitution, let them belong to the
ordering and power of the Bishop.

Monaster. c. 16. q. 7. is against his opinion, Liceat illi Presbytero cui
voluerit, pro sacro officio illius Dioecesis, cum consensu Episcopi, ne malus
existat, commendare: Let him commend it to any Priest whom he will, with
consent of the Bishop, In vita Leonis. 4.
lest he be naught: and as the Author, De vitis Pontificum, attributed to
Luithprandus, adds to the Canon, Ita vt ad placitam and iustam reuerentiam
illius Episcopi obedienter Sacerdos recurrat: So that he may obey his Ordinary.
Where observe, that although he be Presbyter and Sacerdos, yet the consent of
the Bishop is necessary.

nothing to do, Page 88.
but only to order the Incumbent: For, says he; A Priest being first ordered,
might after be placed at the Patrons pleasure, to whom as to a Tenant he
resigned: For which are cited, Capit. lib. 6. c. 197. and lib. 7. c. 173.

And yet he relates the old ceremony of Ordination, wherein special
expression was made of the Title of the Church, to which he was then to be
promoted, and in which that he always would remain, he made promise before
his Ordination, as appears by the Capitularie, Libr. 5. c. 108. Presbyteri qui
in Titulis consecrantur secundum Canones, antequam ordinentur, promissionem
stabilitatis loci illius faciant: Priests that are preferred to Titles,
according to the Canons, before they be ordered, let them make promise of
continuance in that place; which they that did not perform but went to other
Churches, were excommunicate until they returned; and if another were
instituted there before, he that had left his Church, Sacerdotij vacabat
dignitate, was degraded, until his Successor died, as the second quotation
cap. lib. 7. c. 173. does declare. This being so heavy a censure, it is not
likely there was any use to the contrary. It was so odious a thing then, to
leave his first Church, that as Papirius Masonius attributes all that
unchristian usage toward Pope Formosus by his successor, Lib. De Episcop.
vrbis in vita.
only for that he first against the Canons, did leave the Bishopric of
Portua for the Popedom, as in the life of Formosus: So to any that should be
a forsaker of his first Church, diverse censures were very grievous, whereof
although the Lay men might be careless, yet the Clerks neither durst nor
were; none being received to other Diocesses, sine literis commendatitijs,
without letters dimissory, and in the same Diocese such were not suffered. And
against them were the other Capitulars mentioned lib. 5. cap. 26.43.82. to
which an infinite number of Canons (whereof some before are quoted) might be
added, Page 89.
which that they were little obeyed, shows little religious reverence, and
small authority, to countenance so strange an opinion concerning those times.

But secondly, P. 89.
he endeavors to prove the use of Collation in lay Patrons, for that the
aduouson of the Church, descending in Coparcenerie the Church had as many
Incumbents as Patrons, Singulae Parts singulos habebant Presbyteros, Each part
had a special Priest, each giving interest in a part, as in all other
inheritance descended unto them. For this Addit. 3. ad capit. c. 25. and
Council. Lateran. sub. Alex. 3. cap. 17. and Appendix ad Idem Council. p. 15. c.
7. are quoted.

Charlemaines reign, in Vitus Edition. p. 323. inter Leges Longobard. lib. 3.
tit. 1. cap. 44. may give some light, De Ecclesiis quae inter haeredes diuisae
sunt, consideratum est, quatenus si secundum prouidentiam and admonitionem
Episcopi, ipsi cohaeredes eas voluerint tenere and honorare, faciant. Sin autem
haec contradixerint, vt Episcopus potestatem teneat vtrum eas ita consistere
permittat aut reliquias inde auferat, Concerning Churches which are divided
amongst heirs, it is decreed, that if the coheires after the counsel and
admonition of the Bishop will hold and honor it, let them do it: But if they
deny it, let the Bishop choose, whether he will permit it, or by taking away
the relics, unhallow the Church: which I understand, if they will not present
one, let it be at the Bishops choice, etc. But the Council at Tribure better
expresses the case c. 32. Quaecunque Ecclesia a compluribus cohaeredibus sit
obsessa, concordi vnanimitate vndique procuretur, ne propter aliquas
disceptationes seruitium Dei minuatur, and cura populi inreligiose agatur: Si
vero contingat pro ea comparticipes dissidere, and sub vno Presbytero nolle eam
procurare, and propterea iurgia and contentiones tam inter ipsos qua^ inter
Clericos incipiant frequentare; -- Episcopus tollat inde reliquias -- atque
eiusdem Ecclesiae claudat Ostia, and sub sigillo consignet ea, vt Sacrum
ministerium nullus celebret in ea, antequam concordi vnanimitate vnum omnes
eligant Presbyterum, qui seruiens scit Sacro-Sanctum locum procurare, and
populo Dei vtiliter praeesse. Hanc autem habeant authoritatem Episcopi, vt in
nullis Ecclesiis nec constituantur Presbyteri, nec expellantur illis
inconsultis and non consentientibus. What Church soever is encumbered by many
coheires, by all means in peace and concord, let it be ordered, that for any
such debates the service of God be not diminished, and the care of the people
be not irreligiously performed. If it happen the Copartners to disagree, and
that they will not put one in it, and thereout brawles and contentions both
between themselves and their Clerks begin to increase: Let the Bishop take
away the relics, and shut up the door of the Church and seal it, that none
say service in it, before they be agreed jointly to choose one, who may
discharge the service, and profitably be over the people of God. But let the
Bishops have that authority, that in no Churches, neither Priests be admitted,
or from them be expelled, without the advice and consent of the Bishop, etc.
Out of which appears, the case to be tumultuarie, wherein the providence and
admonition of the Bishop, was to be used to bring in one Priest Canonically,
and that was by his approbation, as before: or his authority to unhallow the
Church, and seal up the doors, whereby all the Patrons right might be
euacuate for the present.

c. 17. Lateran. sub Alex. 3. does express the several presentations to the
Bishop, Cum vna Ecclesia vnius debeat esse Rectoris pro sua defensione plurimos
repraesentent, Whereas one Church should have but one Incumbent, by reason of
their Patronage they present many: Whereby his argument of Inuestiture is
fallified, against which the whole Council is most opposite.

part. 15. cap. 7. says, Episcopus inuestiuit, The Bishop did inuest them, at
the presentment of an Earl of Hereford: and that is not a case of
Coparceuerie, but such as for case, A. marrying B. has by B. the Patronage of
the Church C. which Church by the Bishops consent is given to a Monastery, B.
being divorced from A. is married to D. D. and B. would deuest the Monastery,
and interest the Parson without consent; nay D. dying, B. married to E. and
would maintain the Parsons right, and so upon change of the Patrons, change
the possessour. This case is not like, yet neither the Monastery nor Parson
were interessed by Lay inuestiture.

Droicts Honorisiques des Seigneurs es Esglises, as precedences, seats, etc.
did proceed, as he seems to express them page 394. or from the old
infeodations.

Page 90.
But he says, from Inuestiture came the custom remaining in diverse places,
especially in France, whereby the Incumbent has not for himself above a small
part of the Tithes, a Canonica portio, at the arbitrarie disposition of some
spiritual Patron, who take the rest to his own use, and for this cites Extr.
Tit. de praebendis, c. 30. and de Iure patronatus cap. 25. and Sext. Tit. de
Praebendis, c. 1. suscepti.

spiritual Patron; But in the first, Extr. de Praebendis c. 30. Extirpandae,
from the reason of the Apostle, he disprooues the custom, saying,
Consuetudine qualibet Episcopi, vel Patroni, vel cuiuslibet alterius non
obstante, Any custom of Bishop or Patron, or of any other notwithstanding.
Where Episcopus and Patronus are distinguished. And in the 2. Extr. de Iure
patronatus cap. 23. praeterea. That is absolutely of Lay-patrons or Advocates,
or Vidames, or Gardians, who are commanded, vt nihil in ipsis Ecclesiis praeter
antiquos and moderatos redditus a locorum Episcopis institutos exigerent: That
they should not exact from the Church any thing but the ancient moderate
revenue, instituted by the Ordinaries. Where observe, that not by the
patronage, but by allowance and ordination of the Ordinary they had any right;
with what confidence therefore are falsities produced?

But in deed in sexto Tit. de Praeb. c. suscepti: There, some exempt Religious
in their Approbations, which they had not pleno iure, but were presentable by
them, what by the negligence of the Bishop, not requiring the assignation of a
competencie at the Institution of the Clerk; as also through the covetousness
of themselves, did assign too insufficient means to their Curates. Wherefore
Clement the 3. conceiving, how by this means no worthy persons would accept
such Cures to the damage of souls; he does strictly decree and command, that
neither their Exemption, nor any custom of any other religious Patrons
notwithstanding, the Bishop should interpose his authority, to enforce the
assignation of a competencie. This custom therefore, as condemned upon such
reason, did likely cease. But observe, this to be in Appropriations, for as
such the Religious had them; so that they were more then Patrons.

But, this he made his transition to deny the Bishops authority to dispose of
all Tithes in these middle times, as some falsely say (although many Canons did)
but the practice of the time was contrary, says he.

de Noualibus, of new Improuements by culture not assigned, may appear, P.
vlt. c. 40.
Addition. ad Council. Later. and himself confesses, for the practice, that
they did belong to the Bishop; and no more did any Canons require for the
absolute interest of the Bishop: but for the jurisdiction and necessary
consent in any voluntary conueyance of them by any, the Canons were in
general as the practice: and the particular of the Archbishop of Saltzburg
was of Tithes, which were not Parochially settled, Page 102.
as himself afterward proves, out of Greg. 7. Regist. lib. 2. epist. 77. So
that therein he had authority to allot what part he would as Ordinary, not as
Patron.

Concerning Inuestiture, he adds, that it was, Page 91.
not only in bestowing parish Churches, but in Monasteries and Bishoprics the
like was: but the increasing power of the Clergy took it away wholly in
lesser Churches (saving, that in Collation of free Chapels, Prebends, or other
Benefices, without parochial Cure, according to the Droict de Regale of the
Kings of England and France especially) and altered it in Bishoprics.

Challenge of Inuestiture was in Bishoprics and Monasteries, as well as
parish Churches, is true, nay first and chiefly; for in those times wherein was
no Inuestitures of parish Churches, the Popedom and Patriarchates by the
consent of the Emperor were disposed; Nay in St. Gregory's time (until
Constantinus Pogonatus remitted it to Pope Agatho) there was money paid for
the ordination of the Pope to the Emperors. Papyrius Masson. in Agathone. Page
312. Page 417. Ep. ^. and 4. and 8. and 21. and 91.
And as for Bishoprics; in France, in the time of Agobardus, who points at
it, and Florus added to his works, where they both reprehend the use.

But Fulbertus he acknowledges it, St. Wulstans Inuestiture by Edward the
Confessor in England, is miraculous in Matthew. Paris: And this custom, without
alteration that may impair the praerogatiue of the King, even still
continues: There praeceded a Conge de Estire, Ep. 282.
whereof St. Bernard speaks before Election: Ep. 52.
and Thomas Becket amongst Joan. Sarisburiensis his Epistles, commands the
Chapter, Honesta Legatione de Collegio vestro transmissa, and praeces ei
deuotione debita porrigentes, vt Canonice eligendi vobis pastorem, libertatem
concedat. By some worthy messengers of your company to send, and in all due
reverence to entreat, that the King would grant you Canonically a liberty to
Elect your Pastor. And, in the Election, potissimas and potentissimas habet
parts, he has the chief stroke, Ep. 66.
as P. Blesensis: And after the Election, his Royal assent, Ep. 292.295.297.
Lib. 1. ep. 29.
as Sarisburiensis, is required; and after that, the restoring of the
Temporalties, which P. Cluniacensis does thus express, Rex Franciae Electum
Lingonensem, (quem quantum in ipso erat confirmari Canonici rogaueru^t) de
Regalibus sicut fieri solet manu propria solemniter inuestiuit, The King of
France did solemnly, as the manner is, with his own hand restore the
Temporalties to the Elect of Lions, whom the Canons of that Church did desire
to be confirmed, what lay in them. And St. Bernard (I think concerning the
same action) Electus Lugdunensis petijt, Ep. 164.
and obtinuit a Rege Regalium Inuestituram, The Elect of Lions desired, and
obtained of the King the Inuestiture of the Royalties. And all these remain
yet unaltered; no more being ever anciently required in a regular course. The
Inuestiture principally being accounted the last action by several ceremonies,
Sermon. 1. de coena Domini.
as St. Bernard distinguishes them, Inuestitur Canonicus per librum, Ablas per
Annulum, Episcopus per Baculum and Annulum simul. A Canon is Invested by a
book, An Abbot by a Ring, a Bishop, by a Staff and Ring together. As for Free
Chapels, Praehends, and Benefices without cure, I have read nothing, only P.
Blesensis says, concerning the Deanrie of Vulrehanitin, Now Woluerhampton. Ep.
152.
Quem Decanatum semper de consuetudine Reges Angliae donauere: Which Deanrie
always of custom the Kings of England have given. But to leave this
digression,

The Author says, The substance of these Inuestitures was forbidden in the 8.
General Council.

Iuo well understanding the nature of Inuestiture, says, Octaua Synodus solum
prohibet eos interesse electioni, Ep. 65.
non concessioni: The 8. Council only forbids their interest in the election,
not in the concession; which concession was the substance of Inuestiture, as he
there says: and so also does he expound the meaning of the Council, Ep. 102.
But Gregory 7. and his successors denied this also, as the history does
manifest. And besides the Inuestiture of Parochial Churches, (which upon the
pretense of being Advocates, many Patrons did then challenge after the year
1000. for before I read of none) was denied by him and his successors, as in
the Councels cited under Gregor. 7. Callixtus 2. and Innocent 3.

Yet this challenge may seem but rarely made, P. 92.
for lack of Priests without titles, and the want of opportunity of
Resignations into their hand.

Ad. p. 87.
the notice of the Bishop, as before I have showed, etc. And the Council
Nannetens. proposes the case, c. 1.6.
Vt si quilibet Presbyterorum -- defunctus fuerit, vicinus Presbyter apud
secularem Seniorem nulla precatione vel aliquo xenio Ecclesiam illam obtineat,
Forte cui.
quia titulus per se antea constans extitit, sed neque Capellam sine consultu
Episcopi: Quod si fecerit, definitam sententiam sibi prolatam suscipiat, sicuti
de Episcopo Canonica decreuit authoritas, vt si per ambitionem maiorem
ciuitatem appetierit, and illam perdat quam tenuit, and illam nequ^quam
obtineat, quam vsurpare tentauit: That if any Priest dying, his neighbor
Priest do by any gift or entreatie obtain that Church of a secular Lord, who
before had a settled Cure; but not so much as a Chapel without consent of the
Bishop: which if he do, let him undergo the same censure, which the Canons
have decreed for a Bishop, that through ambition desires a greater See, that
he lose what he had, neither obtain that Diocese, which he assaied to
usurp. It is likely therefore, that not much practice of such Inuestiture was
until the end of these 400. years; wherein that controversy grew very
pernicious to the Empire, and France, and this our kingdom, while the
quaestion, An inuestitura sit haeresis, whether Inuestiture were an heresy?
troubled some of the learned, as in Iuo his Epistles, and others of Goffridus
Vindocinensis, is evident: And others, whether Inuestitures were lawful? as
Walthram, the Clergy of Liege, Sigebertus, etc. and their adversaries.

P. 93.
But to follow him, he says, Not until about the end of these 400. years,
Institutions upon Praesentations were not before commonly practiced, especially
in the case of Lay Patrons, for which he cites, Council. Lat. sub. Alex. 3. c.
9. and. 14. Extr. De iure Patronatus, c. 4.10.21. and Tit. de Institut. c. 3.
and Tit. de praebend. cap. 3. In Lateranensi: which he says, makes that
appear.

Capitul. before cited, Ad p. 83.
cannot think, that Institutions by the Bishop for the substance, to wit, the
notice and approbation of the party upon praesentation to be so new, neither do
those Canons make it otherwise appear, but rather judge the contrary practice
of any to be indeed vsurpatious upon the regular and lawful course, which was
by institution; and they are censured in his own quotations to be, Tantae
audaciae, of such boldness, Tit. De Iure patr. c. praeterea; and the action,
De quibus paenitentia ducti ipsi patroni, which the Patrons repented of Ibidem
c. cum Laici; and they are styled, praesumentes, presumptuous. c. Relatum. the
Action Nulla, void: the custom iniqua consuetudo, an unjust perverse custom.
Tit. de Institut. cap. Ex fide: And the rest of the quotations, show them but
irregularities, and therefore not commonly practiced.

He proceeds to say, that in Appropriations, P. 94.
there did pass not only the Title, but all Endowments, the Glebe and Tithe,
but were made parochial, by grant, foundation, or custom.



And again in that he says, In some Appropriations by provision of the
Patron, or at their own pleasure they might present or not. This cannot be
showed without that exemption by the Bishop, to whom alone it belonged to give
a Church to be enjoyed Pleno Iure, as afterward.

In this passage, He presupposes in Appropriations, the only authority of
the Patron; But that he cannot prove.

The maintenance of the Vicar, P. 95.
was at the bounty of the Monasteries allowance.



In those that were conveyed Pleno Iure, the Monastery had institution and
destitution, and the profit.

pleno iure, and non pleno iure, I leave to the Canonists, it being nothing
belonging to my profession; which yet in regard it cannot be proved, but that
all Appropriations were by consent and authority of the Pope or Bishop, does
nothing make for his intention, But of that hereafter; Only add this out of
Lindwood, Religiosi non possunt habere potestatem inst^tuendi and suspendendi
authorizabili^er, sed vt vicem gerentes Episcopi, Monks cannot have power of
institution and suspension with authority, but as the Bishops Vicegerents.
Tit. de locat. and conduct. cap. licet Bonae. V. Asserunt non ligare. And so
this privilege to have it pleno iure can be only from the Bishop.

P. 98.
That some Patrons gave the profits and reserved the patronage, may be true.

That the Church Glebe, and Tithe passed equally by way of interest to the
Monasteries, is true, so that they might officiate them themselves by some
Monks received into orders, as some did.

P. 99.
That Tithes were given, the Church still remaining presentable, is most true
and most frequent.

Innocent confirm that Charter cited to Saint Germans in Auxerres, salua
Diocesani Canonica iustitia, The Canonical right being reserved to the
Diocesan.

But now he comes to that which must answer all he can say, to prove that
the confirmations of Popes and Bishops did add no validity in secular or
common Law then practiced, but were gotten by Monks to satisfy the Canons.

in secular and common Law, where as yet he has showed, even no practice of
common Law to deny it.

Page 100. 101. 102, etc.
That the Bishops of Germany, and some more Northern, had from the beginning
of Christianity, the right of all Tything through their Diocesses, and
therefore might appropriate what they list, is true.

voluntary in the Original, and at the dispose namely of the Patrons, only
upon the foundation of a Church; whereas now he confesses, they were all due
to the Bishop from whom, without his consent, how could any thing be restrained
to a particular place? And further, since these first were in the Bishops, who
were the true and immediate Parochial ministering Rectors (as he phraseth it)
all Donations by them to Monasteries, cannot be adjudged in those Monasteries
to be newly created Tithes; which yet he does often intimate.

For conclusion of Inuestitures and Appropriations (wherein his error is in the
authority of conueying Tithes) now he would by the practice of the time
deuest the Clergy of the sole right of claim to them; for, Page 106.
says he) The Tithes of LX. or LXXX. or more Parishes, were by those courses
annexed sometime to one Monastery, which the Head and Covent possessed, not as
any part, or pretending themselves to be any part of that Clergy which made up
the Evangelical Priesthood; or deserved them by ministering Divine service and
Sacraments to the owners. These, to be given to aliens, was complained of in
Edward the 3. time: And other particulur Orders were blamed therefore as in
that of the Cluniacenses, as P. Cluniac. lib. 1. epist. 28. and Johan.
Sarisburiensis, de Nugis Curial. lib. 7. cap. 21.

Hugo Pontiniacensis, and S. Bernard in an Epistle after those of Iuo, and by
Stephanus Tornacensis, P. Blesensis, Epist. 74. Epist 82. Epist. 102. Epist.
192.
and in the person of the Abbot of Redding: besides those scrupulous Monks in
Iuo; by Petrus de Alliaco, though a Cardinal and a Schooleman, in his book De
Reformatione Ecclesiae, cap. De Reformatione Religionum and Religiosorum.

no due, but charity: for so in Iuo in the Epistle last quoted, Lege
charitatis, By the law of charity; and, Vt charitatiue sustententur, that they
may be charitably relieved, as P. Cluniacensis in the Epist. quoted, De
Sacramentis, lib. 2. part. 9. cap. 10.
and indulgentia, non debitum, favor, no due, as Hugo de Sanct. Victor. may
import.

Alexander, In Addit. ad Council. Later. p. 13. c. 3. Ibid, cap. 9. cap. 10. P.
3. q. 5. M. 6. Art. 2.
and Gregory, and Paschal the 2. and pretended that right, for so does
Alensis even in the Resolution, Cum Religiosi in Leuitarum ordine and munere
computentur, Decimas recipere possunt, sed quae sibi concessae sunt; Whereas
Monks are reputed in the order and number of Levites, they may receive Tithes,
but such as are granted them by authority of the Church. Nay does not P.
Cluniacensis in the Epistle cited by him say, Nam sitribui Leui -- recte eadem
Monachis conceduntur, etc. For if to the Tribe of Leui they were granted, then
rightly to the Monks.

Competens beneficium, A competent maintenance to Curates, (for, Si ista non
fecerint raptores sunt, and Decimas retinent unjust, If they do not so, they
are robbers, and unjustly detain Tithes, says Alensis in the place before) if
they did not officiate them themselves, which yet was irregular, as Stephanus
Tornacensis (the first Commenter of Gratian) does say: Epist. 200.
and so Edictum Tassilonis, legum Antiquar. p. 439.

Ex superabundanti, of what might be spared, as the same de Ales; Ex portione
pauperum, not sustentatione Clericorum, Of the portion of the poor, not the
sustentation of the Clergy, as Hugo de Sancto Victore, De Sacram. l. 2. p. 9.
c. 10.
with that condition, Vt terminos non transgrediantur antiquos: i. Si stipendia
Presbyterorum antiquitus instituta non minorent ac sibi vsurpent. That they
pass not the ancient bounds; that is, that they lessen not the ancient
allowances of the Priest, and usurp them to themselves: and, Quod Ecclesia cum
omnibus pauperibus potest habere commune, as Iuo, Epist. 192. Cap. 3.
Quod Ecclesiam non grauet, as Toletan. 3. what is not burdensome to the
Church.

Bishops might renew them, Aurelian. 5. can. 15. and Titulo de Decimis c.
dudum; And for the Parson that he might, read Adrians Epistle in Addit. ad
Council, Later. part. 13. c. 11. which I am persuaded was the intent of that
time: For else, what need of such successiue confirmations? And if they might
not infeodate for longer, why might they quite give away? But that they did
infeodate or make leases, but only for their time, besides the Testimony of
Iuo, Epistola 12. the observations of Franciscus Iuretus upon him make it
manifest. Leg. Longob. lib. 3. tit. 10. cap. 2. and 4. Page 656. and 663. 10.
q. 2. de praecariis quae a.
And before the quotations there, the Laws of Hlotharius may testify, upon
which grant the praescription of forty years incurring, did make a
perpetuity, videsis Hincmarum in Dialog. de statu Ecclesiae, and Gratian out
of a Council of Carthage.

not the right, but the Tithe it self, was conferred on them, for which only
they could plead, not from the gift of the Patron, but concession of the Bishop
and Patron, who must also concur to justify the Title of their enjoying, as
after out of the Chartularies of Rochester shall appear; These reasons besides
those other pretenses of prayers and other exercises of Devotion, may seem to
reason the charity (though we may call it superstitious prodigality) of
those ages in the Collation of Tithes to Monks: though they might not
misconceiue of the Divine right of payment (which after is inferred) nor
praeiudice the Clergy in the right in the possession of them.

As for the pretense of hospitality, why they had Tithes, Page 108.
P. Damianus is cited, lib. 2. Ep. 14. The words are, Enimuero vt copiosiora in
pauperes alimenta proficiant, dantur in Monasterijs and Eremicis decimae
quorumque prouentuum, and non modo pecorum, sed and ornicum pariter and ouorum;
For that there might be better fare for the Poor, There are given in
Monasteries and Hermitages, Tenths of all provision, not only of Cattle, but
of Foul and Eggs.

P. Damianus I well understand not, yet I suppose by this, no gift of others to
Monasteries, but the Tenth of the Revenues of all things in Monasteries, are to
increase the provision for the Poor. The words before and after are not unlike
to that in Concilio Aquisgranensi sub Ludouico Pio, where, the Council
commanding some place to be provided for the poor, where they may be together,
it decrees, vt de rebus Ecclesiae tantum ibidem deputent, vnde sumptus
necessarios habere valiant, exceptis decimis, quae de Ecclesiae villis ibidem
conferuntur, That of the Church estate they would appoint so much there, whence
the poor may have necessary expense, excepting the Tithes of those Villages
which are bestowed.

Lambertus Schaffnaburgensis etc. both show the Episcopal and Parochial right
claimed, and the irreligiousnesse of the Turingians to take all occasions to
defraud God.

Page 111.
Yet for that the Author citing him, Anno 1073. ends his quotation with this,
Gaudentibus Thuringis, quod occasionem inuenissent, vt traditas sibi a Patribus
leges manu militari tuerentur, The Thuringians rejoicing that they had got
occasion to defraud by hostility the lands of their Fathers, as if their
traditae a Patribus Leges, The Laws of the Ancestors were against Tything.
Add therefore the next words, Et dolente Rege, quod dum decimis immoderatius
inhiaret, pene regnum cum vita amisisset, The King grieuing that while he gaped
after Tithes, he had almost lost his life and kingdom; and every one then may
plainly see, they meant Subjection, not Tything. Besides Lambertus was adverse
to the Emperor, and a Monk of Hersfeldt, for which Monastery was the war,
it was their own case.

Infeodation by him does signify the conueyance of perpetual right of Tithes
into Lay hands, Now that such were, Damianus is alleged, Lib. 1. ep. 10. and
lib. 4. ep. 12.
Insuper and decimae and plebes adduntur in beneficium secularibus, Besides,
Tithes and parish Churches are infeodate to Laymen.

let from the Church: and if beneficium may signify an infeodation, as in
Damianus he does interpret it, then that which next follows, namely,

That they that refer them to Charles Martells time, 112.
or any age near him, are in great error, is a great error: For besides the
times of Charles Martell, whereof before, in the times next succeeding, besides
the testimony of those there cited; in the Glossarie, Leg. antiq, verbo,
Beneficium, there out of the life of Saint Gothard Episcop. Hildesemensis, it
is related, how in the contention of Lewis the first with his sons, the
possessions of the Monastery Altahense, pro voluntate eorum, qui sic
debacchabantur, Beneficij, immo Maleficij nominie, adtribuebantur: At their
pleasure, who were so outrageous, they were bestowed as a Benefice, nay rather
as a Malefice. But I Will refer the Reader to that story of C. Martell.

And here Krantzius, libr. 4. (it should be libr. 1. Page 112.
) Metrop. cap. 2. in the Margin, has this scorn laid upon him, Mandrabuli ad
morem, coniecturas de hac re infoeliciter adfert. And P. 117. he says, He
ignorantly coniectureth;

original of infeodations from Charles Martell, is true; and his conjecture,
that the Clergy did, Cum non satis fiderent, sua iura a Laicis Principibus
tueri, partem Decimarum Principibus in manum dare per speciem feudi and
beneficij, malentes amittere dimidium, quam totum, When they doubted the
defense of their rights, by Lay Princes, that they infeodated part of their
Tithes to Princes, willing rather to lose something then all, is not so
improbable to him, who shall read the Decree of Pope Eugenius 2. in Concilio
Rhemensi, circa annum 826. Authoritate Apostolic a prohibemus, vt nullus
Aduocatus, praeter ius, and Beneficium antiquitus, aliquid sibi accipere, vel
vsurpare praesumat: We forbid by Apostolic authority, that no Advocate,
besides his ancient right and fee, should not presume to take or usurp any
thing to himself: Where Beneficium antiquitus, seems to be given to the
Aduocatus, or Defensor, or Vicedominus,) who, Lib. 5. cap. 3. and lib. 7. c.
338.
as the Capitularies say, was to be procured from the Emperor:) and shall
further conceive under pretense thereof, what interest these Advocates usurped,
as Johannes Sarisburiensis, Epist. 125. relates; which for a while the Church
tolerated, as Alexander 3. in Council. Lateran. page 1. cap. 17. But Frederick
Barbarossa, Apud Goldast. Constitut. Imperial. tom. 2. page 5. as in Reuiew,
page 466.
(or Henry 6. his son, as Arnoldus Lubecensis in supplem. hist. Sclauorum)
approoues it to be true: the words are; Sed cum tempore Christianitatis, ab
aduersarijs infestarentur Ecclesiae, easdem Decimas praepotentes, and Nobiles
viri ab Ecclesiis in Beneficio stabili acceperunt, vt ipsi defensores
Ecclesiarum fierent, quae per se obtinere non valerent: But when in
Christianity, the Churches were disturbed by the adversaries, Great men took
Infeodations from the Churches, that they might be Advocates for the Churches,
in what they could not by themselves obtain.

To confute Stephen Pasquier his opinion, that Infeodations began in the holy
wars, between 1090. and 1100. he truly produces P. Damian. in the place
before, and the Council of Lateran, held 1078. Decimas quas in vsu^ pietatis
concessas esse Canonica authoritas demonstrat, a Laicis possideri Apostolica
authoritate prohibemus: Sieve enim ab Episcopis vel Regibus, vel quibus libet
personis, eas acceperint, nisi Ecclesiae reddiderint, sciant se sacrilegij
crimen incurrere: Tithes which the Canons manifest to have been granted for the
use of piety, by Apostolic authority, we forbid Lay men to possess, whether
they have received them from Kings, or Bishops, or others; unless they restore
them to the Church, they undergo the censure of Sacrilege. This is iterated
in the same syllables, in the general Council at Lateran, 1139. under
Innocent 2.

But yet out of the Council he makes inference, as if only Lay men did make
these Infeodations;

ab Episcopis, might have remembered him of Bishops, as well as P. Damianus, upon
whose complaint of the abuse of that time, this Council might take occasion,
it being very few years after his death: And the word therein, Regibus, from
Kings, might have made him think of Charles Martell: and the word,
reddiderint, they restore, make him acknowledge what after he will deny, both
that all Infeodations were from the Church, and that the true reading of a
Canon of the Lateran Council under Alexander the 3. to the same purpose, is to
be reddiderit, not tradiderit.

Which two last errors, the Canon, prohibemus, P. 114.
in the Council of Lateran, under Alexander the third, p. 1. cap. 14. is
interpreted to maintain: though brought to prove, that then, and not before
the use of such new infeodations as stayed, not that any annullation of the old
was intended.

The words are, prohibemus ne Laici Decimas cum animarum suarum periculo
detinentes, in alios Laicos possint aliquo modo transfer: Si quis vero
receperit and Ecclesiae non reddiderit Christiana sepultura priuetur, We
forbid that Lay men detayning Tithes with peril of their souls, may not by
any means pass them to other Lay men, but if any shall receive them and shall
not restore them to the Church, let him want Christian burial.

Ignorance is imposed upon the later Canonists, that oppose this Canon, against
the right of all feodall Tithes, ancienter then the Council: And Innocentius
the fourth, and Hostiensis, Bernardus, and Bowhic are opposed to them: whose
authorities may be truly cited, yet not interpreted of Infeodations, but De
Decimis male detentis, as in the page 156. he quoteth out of Innocent the
fourth, and so his opinion of the prohibition of future infeodations have no
proof from thence, nor opposition therein to the elder Canonists. But me
thinks, he that considers the aim of those times, only to get them from
Lay men, Nec multum refert quae Ecclesia habeat dummodo extirpentur a Laico, It
is no matter what Church has them, so they may be gotten from the Laity, as
Panormitan cited by him, page 156. And considers also, how they decreed, that
not so much as the Patronage should be passed by succession, but to the
Clergy Addit. Council. Lateran par. 15. cap. 6. nor so much as be sold, cap.
16. and 17. Quia Spirituali annexum: see Epist. Paschal. 2. inter Epistolas
Anselmi lib. 3. Epist. 45. might well imagine the intention to reduce the thing
it self, Infeodations present, not future: Especially conceiving it to have
been decreed against, by Gregory the seventh, Urban the second, and Innocent
the second, which are even quoted by himself. And may any suppose that Pope
Alexander the third would have had less stomach, Vide etiam in Gratian. c. 10
q. 7. in Pr^fat.
and would not claim the Tithes? I will not be persuaded; especially he
using the same word Reddiderit, as a badge of their intention, and his own.
Nay himself par. 4. cap. 1. decrees an infeodation even from an Abbot into
Lay hands to be void, quonia^ Sanctuarium Dei iure haereditario possideri non
debet, Gods Sanctuary must not be held by inheritance, which is the same in
effect. Who then would not trust, rather Innocentius the third, who
interprets it of Tithes formerly infeodate (and was next successor to
Alexander the third) as in Tit. de His quae a Prelatis. c. cum Apostol. or the
other Canonists, who understand it by Judicial application as he confesses p.
139. then only rely on his conjecture?

But besides, by the very sense of the words, cum Animarum periculo
detinentes, detaining them in the peril of their souls, who will think that
any man might by law seem to have right to pass those Tithes to another,
wherein himself had no right? the conueyance it self was irrita, void: Sure
therefore they claimed a right; and how, but by infeodation? by which Title
(though it was against conscience for any to detain Tithes) yet some show of
Civil Title might countenance that Action, which is here forbidden. But be
it as it will, let the Canonists decide it.

That which follows is more pertinent to this business. He says, surely it
is an error, which is commonly supposed, that all ancient feodall Tithes were
at first Spiritual and transferred from Churchmen, at the request of Princes
(he might have added or Tyranny) into Lay hands, and since wrongfully
detained, Neither is there any ancient warrant sufficient for it.

Charles Martell before, does make the contrary plain; and the Catalogue of
Authors, show both the Divine due, and payment long before.

But yet he is of opinion, that many of these Infeodations were doubtless
created by laymens Grants, as Rents-charge, Estouers, Turbaries, and the like
are: Who can doubt of it, says he, that observes but alone this Canon
Prohibemus? Page 115.
Whence also may be strongly inferred, that the greater number of infeodations
were by Grants made by Lay men to Laymen: for what is there, only forbidden
by the Council may be thought the greatest and most prejudicial practice of
the times against the profit of the Clergy; neither is any provision there
made against the other kinds of Infeodations which pass Tithes from Church
men. I have more largely repeated this, because though he made no doubt of it,
the ground is false.

can never prove; yet because it is said, In alios Laicos possint transfer,
he would needs infer the original of Infeodations; whereas it can be only
the after-deriuation, for else then he must presuppose in this Canon, that even
until that Council (for it denies not Infeodations before, says he) some
Tithes had not been consecrated to the Church: whereas the very word
detinentes, implies a right in the Church; and the word reddiderit, does
plainly show the ancient possession.

But he has found a new Edition, Page 115.
which because it makes against the Church, is the truer reading; Tradiderit,
not Reddiderit.

Reddiderit in the Canon, and in the body of the Counsel in Roger Houeden; and
he might have added in Neubrigensis; and, Lib. 3. cap. 3. Q. ^1. Memb. 6. Art.
1.
in all the Commentaries upon the Decretalls both old and new, in Alensis:
Besides the Councels to the same purpose before cited, which read Reddiderit:
And yet the new Roman Edition of the Councels, with some other of less
authority, shall sway the reading to what he will.

That Patrons in the Vacancies might infeodate, as by the Common Law the Patron
and the Bishop may: (sure the Common Law nor common lawful practice, never
left out the Bishop in such disposition) because the Patron had the only
disposition, as he says he has proved (but I know not where) yet says he,
Patrons granted whole Churches, and therefore cites Flodoard in many passages,
and Damian before, and the Council under Innocent. 2.

Innocent the 2. of restoring it to the Bishops disposition, shows from whence
it came; and P. Damianus his authority is plain, that the Bishops made them;
and as for Flodoard, he has nothing to the contrary.

Charles the Balde, or Charles the Simple, (though the very like act done by
him in Council. Meldensi, cap. 75. make me think it Charles the Balde) plainly
shows it; where it is, Ecclesiam cum omnibus ad eam iure pertinentibus, The
Church, with all the lawful appurtenances. But in that it had both
consecration, or else not Ecclesia; and Dotation, or no pertinentia; and
Tithes, or else not omnia: therefore it came from the Church. How then can he
conclude out of these no premises, the original of infeodations from such
Grants, whereas the Churches right, at first, either by consent, or Tyranny of
Princes parted with, is always precedent? Nay himself next, says, that
Princes sometimes joined with the Bishop to bring in the payment of Tithes,
that they might have beneficial infeodations from the Church, not make them
themselves.

And yet in the next words he says, But as Princes made infeodations out of
their own demesnes, or their own Churches, so other private Lay persons did.



He shows next how the Clergy did infeodate.

Page 117.
of those quoted out of Innocentius the 3. page 447. the first was resigned;
the second, page 482. by sentence was repealed, and the rest proposed are by
his own Author discommended.

In the next Section he speaks of Exemptions, Page 118.
but begins, as if he had proved, that Laymen had enjoyed a liberty in
not subiecting themselves to the payment of Tithes according to the Laws of
the Church, but bestowing or retaining them at their wills, in most places, even
from the beginning of Christianity, until about the year 1200.

the conclusion which he wholly intends; and the liberty of Exemption
praesupposeth even that which he would deny, parochial payment.

The Canon pointed at by Burchard, Iuo, and Gratian, Page 119.
in the Councels at Chalons or Mentz, is in Cabilonense, sub Carolo M. Cap. 19.

Pascalis the second, Page 120.
to discharge all Religious persons from Tything to others: was not
contradicted by Goffridus of Vendosme and Petrus Cluniacensis, because
Goffridus does interpret it to be of Tithes in their own parishes where they
dwelt, as also Hugo de Sancto Victore, Tom. 2. de Claustro animae lib. 2. c. 5.
who lived then, does also understand; where instructing his Monks what they
might possess, says, Decimas non recipiant nisi de illis quos incolunt agris,
Let them not receive Tyths, but out of those lands they dwell upon. And as for
P. Cluniacensis, he does only say, Patrum temporibus Decimas non tantum Laici,
sed Ecclesiae Ecclesus, and Monasteria Monasterijs, and de Rusticorum operibus,
and de proprijs laboribus persoluunt. Which custom for the benefit of his
Church, he wished might have been continued; And so without contradiction to
Paschal 2. In the days of our Fathers, says he, not only Laymen paid Tithes
to Churches, but Churches to Churches, and Monasteries to Monasteries, both of
their own labors and of their servants.

general exemptions of all Clergy, the restraint to the four Orders by
Adrian 4. the particular of every several Order, is too true: And the
restraint of Innocent 3. was too late: the prodigality of consecrations, and
exemptions, had exhausted the liuelyhood and learning of the parish Churches;
and the misery that St. Bernard spoke of, Ep. 240.
was, Basilicae sine plebibus, plebes sine Sacerdotibus, Sacerdotes sine debita
reuerentia sunt, and sine Christo denique Christiani, Churches without people,
people without Priests, Priests without due reverence, and lastly even
Christians without Christ. The complaint of Richard Archbishop of Canterbury,
against these exemptions of the Cistercians. P. Blesensis. ep. 82.
(for which and for another Epistle against the exemption of Abbeyes from
Episcopal Jurisdiction, though both by Papal dispensation, I am persuaded he
is wronged by the writing Monks) is most earnest and material, Hae
dispensationes dissipationes. And therefore (which is strange) The Monks of
Clugny renounced such privilege, P. Cluniacens. lib. 1. ep. 33.
to avoid scandal.

Templars was partly, as of the other Monks before: and more, they had Tithes
of the Church nomine stipendij, for, Nemo militat suis sumptibus, No man
warreth at his own charges. Since therefore, the Churches proper means was
Tithes, out of them, she did reward her Defenders; and as the Defensores and
Aduocati of their Title, had by ordination of the Bishop a certain allotted
revenue, so these devoted Soldiers who by vow defended Christendom, might
well have some share of maintenance in Tithes, though no immediate and
original right unto them.

Page 122. NB.
The next Section is touching the opinion concerning Tithes: The opinion of the
Councels generally was, that they were due by Divine ordinance.

Page 124.
No denial, but by Leutardus, who principally for denying this, was adjudged an
Heretic, as Rodulphus Glaber Hist. 2. c. 11. and this in him was judged, non
magis turpe quam damnabile, not more foul then damnable: wherein because he
could not prevail to retain ambitiously the people to follow him, he drowned
himself.

This opinion is opposed by the practice in the disposition of them in
perpetual right to Monks, Nuns, Page 125.
the poor in Hospitalls, the Religious Orders of Knights. To this sense he.

might dispense in the Law of God, as in vows, marriage, fidelity; Vid. gloss
ad c. 25. q. 1. Sunt quidam.
and the inclination of Popes, both to deny themselves no authority which
their ancestors took, and to do what they could for the houses of their
education, and the pillars of their proud and superstitious Tenets; we may
think by these Graunts, they did not undervalue the Divine right, since as in
the place of Iuo next quoted and abused, they passed them but Lege charitatis,
and as cum pauperibus poterant habere commune: By the Law of charity, and of
what might be communicate to the poor.

And here Iuo his authority in Ep. 192. P. 124.
being falsely related, alters the sense:

custom, the right of Lay men to convey Tithes, and citing Iuo in that
Epistle, and adding, But this might not be done as they would have it, by the
Lay owner alone; for he well adds, that nevertheless no Monastery might
lawfully by the Canons receive a conueyance of Tithes, illis ad quos non
pertinet* i. a Laicis, from those to whom it does not belong, that is, from
Lay men. As if Iuo only denied the right of gift, not of enjoying, whereas the
words are, ad quos non pertinent, to whom Tithes do not belong, etc. thereby
absolutely denying both.

The answer of this objection, P. 126.
whereby he would pervert the meaning of the writers and Councels (as before)
or else lay upon them for confirming them, even the imputation of fearful
Sacrilege, is thus:

reuocable right: only herein they offended, if upon complaint or need the
Bishops did not revoke them in time: For by the Canons after 40. years, there
was no remoouing, and that, propter generale scandalum of that time, wherein a
Schism might have been feared, as in the Council at St. Denis, In vita
Abnis, c. 9.
as Aimoinus does testify, a great outrage was committed: In generali
scandalo non sequitur correctio, vel delinquentis, vel aliorum, ideo propter
generale scandalum suspendenda est repetitio Decimarum, quod sequeretur, si
vniuersaliter amilitibus (by the same reason a Monachis) fieret repetitio: In a
general scandal there follows no amendment either of the delinquents or
others; therefore for such general scandal, the requiring of Tithes is to be
forborne, for that would follow if they should generally be exacted of the
soldiers, P. 3. q. 51. M. 6. Art. 1.
(he might as well have said of the Monks) says Alensis. So far was he
from accounting it Sacrilege, to tolerate Infeodations, which are more unjust
then appropriations, though he held Tithes to be due by the Moral Law of God,
quoad aliquotam, or indeterminatam quantitatem.

P. 126.
But he adds, that it appears, it was most expressly held against the Divine
law, to convey Tithes to any other Church, then where the Owner used most
commonly to receive his souls food; and therefore the confirmers and Donors
could not think them due de iure diuino: and for this he cites Concilium
Ticmense, related C. 16. qu. 1. c. in Canonibus.

pro libitu, contempta Episcopi dispositione, is judged against the Law of God,
and Canons; for that consilio, and consensu Episcopi, they might, Videsis ante
ad page 72.

P. 127.
There were Exemptions, therefore no such opinion.

Exemptions was unjust and substantially complained of though by the Monks of
Clugny, who lost by it: Epist. 82.
yet by Richard the Archbishop of Canterbury in Blesensis, and Johannes
Sarisburiensis, who lost nothing by it (which is his scoff) but had compassion
upon the poorer Clergy, spoiled by the Sacrilegious dispensations of the Pope,
which in this Argument are by P. Blesensis and Johannes Sarisburiensis
specified and refuted; The Epistle of P. Blesensis was more worthy to be read,
then to have been quoted out of Bochellus at the second hand.

There were Infeodations from Churchmen, P. 128.
therefore no such opinion.

Infeodations, De potest Reg. and Pap. c. 2. ad Arg. 38. 22. q. 57. Art. 3. in
Corp. In quest. citat. M. 8. Art. 1.
are justly to blame, although they let not Ius perceptionis, which is annexum
Spirituali but ips^s fructus, as Johannes de Parisiis does distinguish and
Aquinas, and Alensis, because the true end was diuerted, the maintenance of the
Clergy, though they reserved the right, for in their right the Fiefe, might
duly demand them; Whereby, they might save themselves from committing
Sacrilege: Though their opinion was, the right of Tything did belong to the
Clergy, De Iure Diuino; Yet even their Acts, were annullate, as besides the
Authors cited, Alex. 3. in Council. Turonensi. Anno 1163. In Neubrig. l. 2. c.
5.. Quamuis Nimis.
(where the action is censured, and the Authors degraded) does testify.

And next, by the way he obtrudeth his new improbable error of Tithes by
their first creation infeodate to Laymen, but it seems now, he would
interpret himself, that he means not Church Tithes, but such as Rents
charge upon land, under pretense whereof, he will presuppose, that they would
shift paying of Tithes to the Church, because they would not pay double Tithes.

Infeodators are supposed Sacrilegiously fraudulent; and the Church men so
seely, as having laws both Ecclesiastical and Secular to abett them, would
admit of such simple excuses, and never complain in those former times, that
their redress might have been recorded: Let him show the use, and then let him
urge it. Concerning an example of Clergy men in the Archbishopricke of Matera
after shall be spoken.

The Laws are next produced, but says he, soon disobeyed: Page 132.
they had little or no practice in behalf of the Clergy. The greater fault,
the more pity.

But here Hector Boethius relating the Laws in Scotland of Tithes, by King
Congallus Anno 570. is excepted against, Page 130.
nay reviled: the exception; The Author for this is called a faining Hector,
and his assertion bold, or deceived by them from whom he took it, it is to
be judged fabulous, and proceeding out of that common mistaking of ancient
passages of Church Revenues, and confident, but ignorant application of them to
Tithes; And in the Margin; Buchanan says, Sacerdotes praedijs alijsque
prouentibus ditauit, (...) Decimis, adijcere vir doctissimus non ausus est, He
enriched the Priests with possessions and other profits, but that learned man
durst not add the word Tithes.

gain any strength of truth from his name alone, when Hector Boethius for all
his good language and great pains, shall not only not have credit with him as
page 133. but be taunted by so young a writer: but he may hear Saint Hieromes
censure (to as good a man as He, even S. Augustine) puerilis est iactantiae
accusando Illustres viros suo nomini famam quaerere: Inter Aug. Ep. 13.
especially since through Hectors sides, others perchance truer Trojans may be
wronged of whom he received it; who by the prejudice of him that knows not,
shall be censured for confident and ignorant mistaking one thing for another.
As for the Marginall reason, the omission by Buchanan of the word Tithes, which
Hector puts in, is but to poize their credits, whether a lying and
schismatic Buchanan, who was a prime Author in the taking away of Tithes
from the Clergy, and therefore might well take it from his writing; nay who
might even take that relation from Hector, mincing it to his phrase and fancy;
or a fayning Hector, perchance receiving it from other, it may be the very
Records of the Kingdom, be to be preferred in this Relation. Hector Boethius
says before of the same Congallus, Mira sunt quae de huius Principis Religione
memoriae sunt prodita, They are strange things which are related concerning the
piety of this Prince. What therefore he writes he had from others: But our
Author strikes the next.

In the next place the Pontificiall Canons are examined.

P. 134.
Of which he cites, besides that of P. Damasus, that also of Pope Nicholas the
second, Anno 1059. Praecipimus vt Decimae and primitiae seu oblationes Viuorum
and Mortuorum, Ecclesiis Dei fideliter reddantur a Laicis, and vt in
dispositione Episcoporum sint, quas qui retinuerint a Sanctae Ecclesiae
communione separentur, We command that Tithes, or first fruits, or offerings
both of quick and dead, be faithfully paid to the Churches, and be in the
disposition of Bishops; which they that retain, Vide Luithprandu^ in vita
Leonis 4. vbi authoritate Ap^stolica praecipitur, sub poena excommunicat.
let them be excommunicate: which very words are his Successors Alexand. 2. And
that of Leo the 4. c. 16. q. 1. c. De Decimis, (which forsooth must be a
declaration, not a constitution) all which with the passages of the Fathers,
were for general Canon Law in Gratians decrees confirmed by Eugenius the 3.
Nay the Council at Cleremont by Urban the 2. and that of Gregory. 7. in
Council. Romans c. 16. q. 7. c. 1. To which he might have added that Canon of
Gregory cited by Alexander 3. Epist. 19.
joined with those of Peter Cellensis: Presbyter si Ecclesiam per pecuniam
obtinuerit, non solum Ecclesia priuetur, sed honor Sacerdotij spolietur, quia
Altar, Decimas, and Spiritum Sanctum emere, vel vendere, Simoniacam haeresim
esse nullus fidelium ignorant: If a Priest get a Church by money, let him not
only be deprived of it, but also be degraded; because each Christian knows,
that to buy Altar, Tithes, etc. is a Simoniacall heresy: And that at Lateran.
1119. and another 1130. having the same words as that of Greg. 7. Quas de iure
Sacerdotum esse sancimus, Which we decree to be the Priests due: And the 11.
general Council under Alexand. 3. 1180. (where only infeodations, says he,
and arbitrary consecrations without consent of the Bishop, are forbidden; yet
the reason is, the supposition of Parochial right:) But let me add in the
same Council, cap. 23. In the provision for leprous people, are not Tithes
supposed as a duty of common right, when (providing for the right of the
Parish Church) they are permitted to have a separate Priest and Church, and are
privileged of their orchard and feeding of cattle, that Tithes should not be
exacted: By this particular privilege, is not the common right supposed? Nay
so often he having quoted the Capitulars, whereof the last three books were
confirmed by Apostolic authority, Capit. lib. 7. c. 377. Yet he says, There
was not any Canon of a general Council, that commanded the payment of Tithes;
or any that expressly supposed them a duty of common right, before that of
Lateran, held under Pope Innocent the 3.



Page 136.
In this passage he cites an Epistle of Gregory the 7. wherein he admonishes
and persuades some Princes of Spain, after the expurgation of Christianity
from the Gothicke corruption, to pay and command the payment of Tithes by the
people: where, because he does persuade, and not command, he infers, that
he had no power to command.

spirit of Hildebrand challenged power, S. Hilarie.
where he had no right: but now, Fides suadenda, non cogenda, Faith is to be
persuaded, not enforced; and Alcuins ground was his direction. But let us see
how his successor Alexander the 3. writes to those Goths in the Epistle 19.
Vide etiam Ep. 21. Archiepiscopo Vpsellensi and Suffraganeis.
whereof part is quoted before, Praeterea illud adijciendo mandamus, quatenus
populum regimini and gubernationi vestrae commissum, Decimas Ecclesiis
fideliter and deuote persoluere, sicut ab ipso Domino noscitur institutum,
diligenter ac solicit moneatis, and si necesse fuerit, sub districtione
Anathematis, etc. Moreover, this we command, that you diligently and carefully
admonish the people committed to your charge, that they pay Tithes to the
Churches, faithfully and devoutly, as it is known to be ordained by the Lord,
and that if need be, under the censure of excommunication.

Page 138.
But out of that strange conclusion, he would justify the saying amongst the
Common Lawyers, in his sense, That before the Council of Lateran, every man
might have given his Tithes to what Church he would.

from his own Parish Church to a Monastery, because the easy consenting of
the Bishops usually hindered not, then it is most true; but understanding by
giving, a new creation, that each man might give to what Church he would; that
is newly create, a Tithe, which before he might detain, and did never pay;
this is absurd, and praesupposeth that no Tithe before that time, by any man
was certainly paid; whereas Parsons did before that time implead their
parishioners for not paying; as here in England himself does produce, in King
Stephens, and Henry the seconds time, p. 414. etc. To which more shall be added.

But this cannot stand, unless he may have his will upon the Canon
prohibemus, in the Council of Lateran, under Alexander the third, and make it
to signify, new created Tithes.

de Decimis male detentis, of Tithes wrongfully detained: or Innocent 3. and
those that follow him, of former Infeodations; they cannot understand new
created Tithes, even by the very words, as before. And in that Council is
something to deny it. For if Alexander 3. supposed new created Tithes, why then
part. 4. does he command the excommunication of the changers, lessenors,
detractors of the wages out of Tithes, Nay, in the body of that Council why
does he privilege the leprous people from paying some Tithes, if they were not
due to be paid if he supposed them not due, and paid? But howsoever, I leave
him to what before was said, against which he has nothing but conjecture.

But yet, good Reader, thou must still doubt, Page 139.
that the Historical understanding of that Canon, is to be had out of
Arbitrarie consecrations before practiced.

Reader, now thou may see, how he means to pin thee on his sleeue, the
judicial application of the Canonists must be neglected who agree in a truth,
and yet at his bidding, thou must doubt. And as he reprehends the rabble of
Canonists (such is his term) going away clear with this of Innocent, because
he said so, so must thou follow him, and doubt because he bids thee.

Yet for confirmation of his assertion, He says, it was equal to ordain
that Lay men should not arbi^rarily consecrate; and that they should not
without the asse^t of the Bishop, Every Bishop being praesupposed to induce
parochial right, and general payment, which was the intention of the Canons.

p. 15. cap. 2. but this without consent, being forbidden. And the reason is
equal, That so the Bishop might provide for the parish, and yet in charity,
de superabundanti, of what might be spared, give way to such Donations, which
as then were not to the Churches prejudice, and to the abridging of the ancient
maintenance of the secular Clerks, as part. 13. c. 1. of that Council.

ANIMADVERSIONS on the seventh Chapter.
He says, Tithes were subject to Customs.

Page 140.
That Tithes were subject to customs, it was propter vitandum scandalum, and not
for want of a true right in conscience to require the payment.

Concerning Parochial right, First he says, Page 142.
it is sufficiently manifested that the Laity did usually convey their Tithes
by consecrations and appropriations to what Church they would, or in
Infeodations to Laymen.



But he proceeds to produce Canons, and after many, those of Innocent 3. in
whose time, at first, he would persuade us, that Arbitrarie consecrations
without consent of the Bishop were void.

Alexander the third, Addit. ad Council. Lateran. p. 15. cap. 1.2.3.6.9. shall
find there the like.

Yet that Parochial right was not before claimed for Tithes, He proves,
First, P. 144.
by the practice of certain Religious, who would usually take covenants from
their Tenants, to pay them their Tithes, and so defraud the Parson,; which if
by Parochial right had been due, such a covenant could not have prevented the
Parson. This is related in the Council of Lateran, under Innocent 3. Cap. 56.
and Extr. de pactis c. plerique, and Videsis Appendicem, p. 13. c. 6.

exemption of Clerks in their own lands, even renewed by Paschall the 2. not
long before, might make these covenants lawful, until Innocent restrained
them, as proceeding from a covetous desire, extending that to Personal Tithes,
and duties of Sepulture, which was meant of the land: this needed
interpretation, before such Covenants might be annullate.

in Cap. 11. of that Part, an excellent case of covenants concerning Tithes, is
specified, whereby indeed exemptions are bard, but not Parochial right. A
Parson complains how an Abbot and Monks, Decimas vniuersas quas de terris
cultis a prima fundatione eadem Ecclesia semper percipere consue uit, infra hoc
qudriennium sibi and Ecclesiae substraxerunt, All the Tithes, whose tillage
from the first foundation, this Church has usually received, within these
four years they had held from him and his Church, by virtue of an Exemption,
where fifteen years ago there was a covenant between them, that he should
have for his life all the great Tithes, giving to them the small Tithes,
propter exaltationem Monachorum and this covenant in composition, was adjudged
available for the Parson against their Exemption.

Innocent 3. for the first part indeed, shows how some Clergy men, Ep.
Decretal. lib. 2 p. 483.
in posing Decimas, Terragij ratione occasioned their Tenants under this
pretense, to deny such Tithes, which before were paid truly and fully to the
Parish Churches. But this Tithe, as is plain, was not Parochial, but as a
Rent, and therefore there was no covenant imposed of paying Parochial Tithes,
which is the inference: But hereupon these sacrilegious Farmours indeed
grounded their denial. Whose fault yet of distributing their Tithes, in the
second part gave no doubt the occasion to Innocent 3. his censure in the third
Sermon, De dedicatione Templi, before spoken of: Not, but that they had given
Tithes, but that now they would not; for that is said before, Cum in quibusdam
locis tuae Dioeceseos integre quondam Decimae soluerentur, dum praedia, de
quibus Decimae proueniebant, essent in Secularium potestate: Whereas in diverse
places of your Diocese, hertefore Tithes were fully paid, while the Farms
whence the Tithes arise, were in Lay men's hands. And the command is, Vt
persoluant Ecclesiis quibus debentur, That they pay them to the Churches to
whom they are due: Parochial right and practice therefore was before.

P. 145.
But, the Council of Tribur. cap. 15. says, Vbi quis Decimas persoluebat
viuus, ibi sepeliatur and mortuus; as if every man by the choice of the place
of his devotion, in paying his Tithes, might make it his Parish.

Quod si and hoc ineptum, and difficile aestimatur, vbi Decimam persoluebat
vinus, sepeliatur and mortuus: But if this shall be accounted unfit and
difficult, let him be buried there where he paid his Tithes; that is, in his
own Church: which the opposition to Monasteries, and the Cathedral Church in
that Canon (whether most Tithing was diuerted) will enforce, especially the
Law, being that to his own Baptismall Church, he should pay them.

Gregory, or Alexander the third, concerning the question, whether intuitu
Territorij, or obtentu personarum, praediall Tithes should be paid, is not, out
of doubt of Parochial right which they acknowledged; but to which Parish the
right did belong: To one or other by Parochial right Tithes must be paid, but
to which they could not determine. So that by this, Parochial right is
confirmed and presupposed, though the case be not adjudged, neither does it
follow as he would have it, because there were such controversies, Parochial
right was not established, no not in opinion; whereas the opinion of the right,
causes the question; the one and the other craving by that right.

The case of the Monks of Boxley, P. 146.
Extr. de Decimis c.Commissum. wherein the reason to move them to pay Tithes
to the Parish Church is, Quoniam priusquam in eadem Ecclesia morarentur
solebant persolui, For because, before they resided in that Parish they were
paid usually: which reason, though in particular, was necessary for the case,
because they by the exemption, which then was, only De Noualibus, whereof
before nothing was paid; would have defrauded them, De ipsis cultis, as the
words are, which priusquam in eadem Ecclesia morarentur, were usually paid, as
in all other places. This particular claim then cannot infringe Parochial
right but plainly infer it.

But yet even after this Lateran Council 1215. P. 147.
although Pope Innocent the fourth, and Hostiensis took Parochial right as
clearly established, yet until the Council at Lions under Gregory the
tenth, 1274. There was no certainetie; for then says Randall Higden, and Henry
Knighton, and Thomas of Walsingham, it was constituted, vt nulli hominum
deinceps liceat Decimas suas ad libitum, vt antea vbi vellet assignare, sed
matrici Ecclesiae omnes Decimas persoluerent, That it shall be lawful for no man
henceforth to assign his Tithes, as heretofore he listed, where he would,
but that they pay all Tithes to the mother Church.

Can. 62. it is only said, In Lateranensi Concilio, noscitur fuisse
prohibitum, ne quilibet regularis Ecclesias seu Decimas, sine consensu
Episcoporum de manu praesumant suscipere Laicali -- Nos autem id fortius
inhibentes, transgressores condigna curabimus animaduersione puniri, It is
evident that in the Lateran Council it was forbidden that no Monk, dare
receive Churches and Tithes from Lay men, without consent of the Bishops, which
we more firmly forbid, and will more strictly take order for the punishment of
the offenders. But in that Council at Lions the Pope reserved all to himself,
and outed others. Caxton his interpretation of Higden, makes it plain. And
after that time, no man shall have leave, to assign his Tything, as he did
before, at his own will, but all Tythings shall be paid to the mother Church.
And the very words express the meaning, Nulli hominum, not Laicorum only,
but even Episcoporum also, plainly to exclude both Lay and Bishop, himself
only being excepted, who might dispense with his own act: and so the Monks
are to be understood.

P. 148.
And further, he tells us of the practice in the Diocese of Palentia until
1322. which was, that every man wheresoever he dwelt, yet might declare
himself of what Parish he would be, and to that Parish only give his
Tithes, which he says was remedied, by a Council then at Villadolid.

Legate enjoined within the space of a year the limitation of Parishes, by the
Bishops or their Deputies, that so each Parishioner may know his own Parish,
and thereto both repair, and pay his duties. This c^stome therefore cannot
countenance the intention of the Author, in countries where the limits of
Parishes are certain, as if therein men at any time might voluntarily divert
their Tithes lawfully to another Parish, as herein England by the next
immediate quotation before, he would infer: So that herein is his fraud, to
relate the Custom, but conceal the Cause. The whole Canon is long, or else it
had been worthy to have been recited, but it is extant in B^nnius Council.
Tom. 3. part. 2. page 1537. whither I refer the diligent Reader.

In the next Section, Page 1^0.
the opinions are produced of the last 400. years. In which he has a
commendable resolution. NB.
That how ever very many other quaestions about the duty of them are usually
disputed, yet resolve but this, by what Immediate Law, Tithes are payable, and
most of the rest that follow about customs, appropriations, exemptions, and
such more will soon have little doubt.

The opinion of the Canonists, that they are due, The Canonists opinion.
quoad quotam De iure Diuino is related, who yet allow the right of former
Tithes Canonically settled by Consecrations, Appropriations, and Exemptions; for
to those they require Pontificiall confirmations or prescription. They
acknowledge the Popes power in disposing them; they agree that all praediall or
mixed Tithes are due parochially; but for personal, some doubt, for the whole
Tenth or value. They admit no Customs, and indeed no reason is (says the
Author, NB.
and truly) that custom should take away, what God had immediately and by his
Moral Law established. The others that admit other customs, speak not as
Canonists, but as conforming the Canons to the Laws where they live. Some
later say, they are due De Iure Ecclesiastico, and that no more Ius natural,
or Diuinum morale is in it, then what commands a competencie of means to be
given to the Priesthood; so Couarruvias, so some others: But few enough are of
this opinion, says he: (Now let him profess he is not partial.) They admit
no feudall Tithes, as Canonists: They maintain the distinction of lus
p^rcipiendi, and Fructus Decimarum.

consecration to Monasteries, Appropriations, and Exemptions, being in
practice, might stand with the opinion De Iure Diuino, since in these it ^id.
And hence his inclination against the Divine Right apppeares since he thinks
too few oppose it.

The opinion of Divines. Page 156.
The opinion of the Divines is about the question, Whether Tithes are due De
Iure Diuino Morali, to the Evangelical Priesthood, that is, whether the
Priests have right to Tithes as to their inheritance in equal degree as the
Layman has to his Nine; or whether by positive Law for their spiritual
labor: whether by original distributive, or by commutatiue Justice they are
payable.

The Schoolmen. Page 157.
The first opinion, is of the School; That quoad quotam the proportion of the
Tenth, it is due by the positive Law; quoad aliquotam, for a portion of
competencie, it is due by the Moral and Natural Law of God.

politic and pernicious opinion.

22. q. 81. art. 1. in corp.
Politic, For first it aimed at a greater proportion, for this was but
instituted by the Church, says Aquinas, secundum quandam humanitatem, in great
favor; that whereas they were bound to more, they might not give less then
the Jews: yet so, that the Church of whose favor they doubted not, might
enjoin a greater quantity, for a less they never yielded to. M. 2.
Alensis his Conclusion is worth the marking, Forte dicet aliquis quod in
veteri Lege erat sic in praecepto sed in noua Lege non est in praecepto, quoad
istam aliquctam: Sed contra, Ra^io huius praecepti in veteri Lege erat propter
sustentationem minist^orum Domino seruientium sicut dicunt praedictae
authoritates, Number. 18. Mal. ^. Cum igitur in noua lege maxim nunc temp^ris,
multiplicentur ministri Ecclesiae. Ergo nunc mulio magis danda est aliquota
aequalis vel etiam mayor -- Ergo ad hoc vel ad amplius te^e^tur Christiani, si
voluntiam in regnum caelorum intrare: Perchance some will say, that in the old
Law Tithes were under a precept: but that it is not so in the Gospel for the
proportion of the Tenth. But contrariwise, The reason of this precept in the
old Law, was for the maintenance of the Ministers that do God service as the
authorities, Number. 18. Malach. 3. whereas therefore in the new Law, especially
now, the Ministers of the Church are increased: Therefore now much more the
same or a great^r portion is to be given -- Therefore to this, or to more, all
Christians are bound that will enter into the kingdom of heaven.

If this be not contradiction concerning the right, or policy for a gain of
more, let them distinguish, that can. Besides he that will hear him prove
Decimationem, which is the quota, to be de Lege Naturae, of the Law of Nature,
Videsit. p. 4. q. 2. M. 2. A^t. 5. 4. in R^solutione. Where the conclusion is,
Non cessauit sacramen^um decimarum q^ia de Lege Naturae maxim fuit The
sacrament of Tithes ceased not, because it was especially of the Law of Nature:
and in many other places.

The second policy, was to defend their own inioying Tithes, leaving a
competent sustentation to a Vicar; which they thought due to him, de Iure
Diuino for, debent ministranti^ us sacramenta beneficium comp^tens assignare,
quod si ista non fecerint raptores sunt and Decimas detinent unjust. The
religious must assign a competent maintenance to them that administer the
Sacraments, which if they do not, M. 6. Art. 2.
they are as robbers and do unjustly detain Tithes, So Alensis, Now if they
had held the quota de Iure Diuino, then the comp^tens be^eficium would not have
served, while they being Monks and Friars, Iure Ecclesiastico might hold the
rest.

But as it was politic, so it was pernicious. First occasioning the heresy
of those that held them as Alms, as the Mendicants condemned by the Church
(before Wickleffe) who from this opinion, and the aim to gain to themselves,
though by defrauding others,, began their falsehood as himself confesses, page
166. And Secondly thereby the Church lost the iurisdicti^n of Tithes, as in the
Arrest of Parliament cited by him, page 181. Where the English of the French
is. The reason is, for that following the doctrine of S. Thomas A^uinas, we
hold that in the Law of grace, Tithes are due not by divine, but by positive
Law. And the Church, at first, was not owner of this right, but by the gift and
grant of Kings, Princes, and others to whom that right did appertain. These
were the good fruits of that Doctrine, such as usually is of new inventions.

Page 165.
Thirdly, Customs of payment of less, of nothing, and other Civil Tytles, as
page 164. he acknowledges.

looked further into the quaestion then the Canonists, is not probable, since
the practice of the Canonists required their diligence, Constitut. de Decimis
c. Sancta. compellant.
Antonius de Butrio in Lindwood, is of other mind. Nota, inquit, per Ecclesiam
declaratum est -- quod decimae debentur ex praecepto Diuino, sileant propterea
Theologi quia ad eos non spectat declarare, Observe, says he, the Church has
declared Tithes to be due by the Law of God, let therefore the Divines hold
their peace, because it belongs not to them to declare it.

Page 159.
In this opinion, the first quaestion is concerning the first Author of this
Tenet, whether Alensis, or no? He says no, but would have it ancienter.
Although the common ancient phrases were Deus praecepit, and Lex Diuina, and
the like, denoting the right of Tithes.

To prove which, in the first place, he sets before us his often sodden
Coleworts, that the practice of consenting to such conueyances to Monasteries
etc. could not agree with the opinion of Divine right, Of this before too much.

Page 160.
Secondly, that some interpret, Ius Diuinum in those Writers, only to import a
Right exemplariter, by way of example, not obligatiue, as a binding Law. A
poor shift to answer Gods praecept and his command.

But yet St. Ambrose his authority is brought to direct the phrase, De
Clericis lib. 1. cap. 24.. Altero modo.
for, says he, Mayor (he might have said Bellarmine) quoteth the phrase,
Quadragesima diuinitus constituta, denoting only the Ecclesiasticke
commandment of Lent.

Mayor or Bellarmine should think out of this phrase, Lent to be but an
Ecclesiastic commandment upon example, sure is very strange, since Bellarmine
out of the same phrase of the same Father does hold it Apostolical, or
instituted by Christ, De verbo Dei scripto, lib. 4. cap. 9. tertia reg. but
cont^adiction is not strange with Bellarmine, if it may avail him. Vide etiam
Tom 3. de bonis oper. in partic. lib. 2. cap. 14. Add quod non.

Thirdly, that Ius Diuinum, in the quaestion of Tithes, Page 161.
is to be interpreted Ius Ecclesiasticum, and so he would interpret the
Fathers.

Ius Diuinum, when it is opposed Humano were so, what can Deus praecepit, God
commanded, be so understood? or Deus ordinauit, God has ordained? etc. But
yet let us observe his quotations.

In a Judgment, Tit. de praescrip Cap. 6. ad Aures. There, in a case between
two Parsons, the one claiming by parochial Right, the other by praescription,
Tithes in another Parish, the Pope approouing the Title of prescription, says,
de Iure diuino and humano melior est conditio possidentis, both by the Law
divine and humane, he that is in possession, is in better case. Now there,
Iure diuino, can signify no other but humane Church Law.

humane, and yet distinguished from humane? But else, says he, what has the
praescription of 40. years of primer possession to do with the direction of
Divine Moral Law? Yet, why may not that have to do heerewith ratione
scandali, for offense sake, which by the direction of the Moral Law, we must
avoid. And although he admitted praescription in Parochial possession, must it
therefore not be true, that his opinion was of a Divine right for the Clergy
in general? if he had admitted praescription against the Clergy, then it
might have been doubted: but this case is otherwise.

The next quotation, is of Alexander Alensis; P. 162. Part. 3. q. 51. m. 5.
The words are, Decima sicut Domini generalis census, is payable iure Diuino.

authoritate Diuina, which alters his phrase. But he there speaking of Decimae
quo ad indeterminatam quantitatem, (as every man that has understanding, may
observe) cannot help the Author. His words are these, Dicendum, quod Ecclesia
non percipit Decimas sicut communem prouentum, immo sicut censum Domini
generalis, authoritate Diuina, and ideo ab omni condition, and debito est
liberum stipendium Decimarum: I conclude, that the Church does not receive
Tithes as a common profit, but as the revenue of the universal Lord, by Divine
authority, and therefore the stipend of Tithes is free from all condition of
debt. Now whether out of this, his intention may be inferred, I appeal to his
better thoughts: adding this, that M. 6. Art 9. he says, De iure Canonico and
Diuino est quod Decimae soluuntur: Tithes are paid both by the Canonical and
Divine right or Law: where Canonical is distinguished from Divine.

P. 162.
The third quotation is out of Innocent the third: And this is the old School
objection, and the late Jesuits argument.

in Council. Lateran. sub Innocent. 3. c. 5^. In aliquibus reg^onibus quaedam
permixtae sunt gentes quae secundum suos ritus, Decimas de more non soluunt,
quamuis censeantur nomine Christiano. His nonnulli Domini praediorum ea
tribuunt excolenda, vt Decimis defraudantes Ecclesias maiores inde redditus
assequantur. Volentes igitur super his Ecclesiarum indemnitatibus prouidere;
Statuimus, vt ipsi Domini talibus personis, and taliter, sua praedia excolenda
committant, quod absque contradictione, Decimas Ecclesiis cum integritate
persoluant; and ad id si necesse fuerit, per censuram Ecclesiasticam
compellantur: Illae quippe Decimae necessario sunt soluendae, quae debentur ex
lege Diuina, vel consuetudine loci approbata: In some countries there are
certain people mingled, who according to their customs, pay not Tithes
fashionably, although they are named Christians; To such, some Landlords demise
their lands, that deceiving the Church of Tithes, they may receive the greater
rents: Willing therefore to provide for the Churches, that they be not
damnified; We ordeine, that such Landlords do demise their lands to such
Tenants, that without contradiction, will fully pay Tithes to the Church; and
to that, if need be, they may be compelled by excommunication: For those Tithes
are necessarily to be paid, which are due by the Law of God, or the approved
custom of the place.

The last sentence is the Quaestion. The Canonists they indeed are mistaken in
referring the word, Lege Diuina, to Praediall Tithes, due by the Law of God,
and, vel loci consuetudine approbata, to personal Tithes; since it would
cross their own opinion, and yet not agree with the case, which is only of
praediall, as the words manifest. And the Author also is not in the right;
(let others judge) when he says clearly the English of that was, Those are
necessarily to be paid which are due, Lege diuina, that is, by the positive
law of the Church, which extends not always universally; or custom of the
place. Herein I agree (as he in his interpretation) not to suppose in those
words a distinction of Tithes, but Laws: which I gather from the word
necessario soluendae, implying force of laws: And if it had been a
distinctinon of Tithes, it should have been Approbatae, not agreeing with
consuetudine but Decimae: And therefore I so English it, Those Tithes are to
be paid which are due, Ex lege Diuina, by the law of God, which must bind
Christians: vel loci consuetudine approbata, or the allowable custom of the
place, which must constrain all people living in that place, even contra Ritus
suos, against their foreign customs, which they pretended, to pay Tithes. And
by this interpretation, lege diuina cannot signify Ecclesiastic constitution,
but divine right, nor Innocentius be an Author of the duenesse of Tithes, De
iure positiuo, before Alexander de Ales. Which also might be gathered, by his
slighting even their Christianity for such rites and customs, Although they
be named Christians, as if scarce worthy they were of the Name, but his
inferring personal Tithes to be due by the Law of God, Decret. Epist. lib. 2.
page 544. which is related, De Decimis c. Tua Nobis. puts it out of all
doubt, vide Catalogum.

P. 163. Erudit. Theol. de Sacram. l. 1. par. 11. cap. 4.
Neither Hugo de Sancto Victore whom next he would make an Author, does
defend the positive right, and not a Divine. The words cited to make him of
that opinion are: Primum igitur ante Legem paruulos Consilio nutriuit (Deus)
postea sub Lege exercitatos praecepto tentauit; nouissime sub gratia perfectos
in liberate Spiritus ambulare permisit, First therefore before the Law, God
noursed his children by counsel; Then under the Law those that were more
expert, he tried them by a precept; and lastly, under grace he left the
perfect, to walk in the liberty of the spirit.

Hominem ad haec exercendam a principio a Deo instructum and eruditum fuisse.
Vnde enim homo rerum suarum Decimam quam Nonam, vel Octauam vel aliam quamque
partem offerendam esse scire potuisset, nisi a Deo doctus fuisset; That to the
exercise of Tything from the beginning, man was instructed or taught by God;
for how else should man know what part of his goods, either the eight or ninth
part, or the tenth should be offered, but only being taught from God: And,
that Ex institutione diuina, by divine ordinance they are due to the Clergy in
the Gospel, as; De Sacramentis, lib. 2. p. 9. cap. 10. which are quoted in the
Catalogue; cannot make such inference out of his words, but rather a liberty
to the more, as in ( Iraeneus is insinuated) or of spirit in performance of the
Law. Lib. 4. cap. 34.


Number. 4. P. 165.
The next Section is, Concerning their opinion, who accounted Tithes, Alms: But
in this, because he does not oppose the truth here; (though concerning
personal Tithes, both in his Preface, to countenance the Devise, how the
Curates of London may be provided of sufficient living. And page 174. to
censure the determination of the University of Oxford, he does too much
incline, to deny the Divine right:) I will add nothing here, only recite
the names of such of that opinion, namely, the Mendicant Friars, Wickliffe, the
Bohemians; Gerardus Sagarellus, Erasmus, and William Russell the Franciscan.

The third opinion is in the next Section, Page 168.
of such as agree with the Canonists, that the right of the Quota of Tithes is
from the Moral or Divine Law of God: Of whom (says he) some impudently urge
a command to Adam; some prouidently restrain all their Arguments from
Abraham's example referred to the application of it in the Epistle to the
Hebrews; but others not so circumspectly taking in the Leuiticall commandment
of Tithes.

Division without a Distinction; As if all that held the Ius natural to be the
right of the duty of Tithes, do not think it Gods commandment to Adam,
since that Law is eternal, instinctu interiori licet non exterius lege data,
Aquinas. p. 3. q. 60 Art. 5. ad. 3.
by inward motion, though not outwardly: Although no need of revealing it in
form, until the manifestation of a Priesthood; and therefore all must be
Impudent, or rather none: Or do not they urge the Commandments, though
amongst, yet not of the Leuiticall Law; or if, not to ground a right, yet to
show a possession? By distinction therefore they must be styled Impudent, and
not so circumspect, as he would have them. But since he acknowledges such
providence in those who restrain their arguments to the Epistle to the
Hebrews, as those do prove the rest, so should it have made our Author so
provident, as not to oppose it. If Abraham paid Tithes to Melchisedec, as in
that Epistle, then of duty or bounty; If of duty (for else the Apostles
argument were vain) then that is the natural duty, and so no impudency in
auerring a command to Adam, Page 169.
which the Poenitentiall next opposed does infer; which is vindicated from
his contempt, by that religious Knight Sir James Sempill; wherefore I pass it.

The next is the Determination of the University of Oxford, Page 170.
Anno 1427. against William Russell a Franciscan Friar, adiudging him an
Heretic for denying personal Tithes to be due by the Law of God.

This being produced at large, Page 174.
is taxed by him as vehement and confident, and the truth of their Sentence is
slighted thus, If Russell was therefore an Heretic, doubtless he has had,
and now has many fellow-heretickes; for thus, many, nay the most of them who
curiously enquired herein, and diverse Canonists also which are for the Moral
right of Praediall and Mixed Tithes, deny that Personal are otherwise due
regularly, then as Custom or Law positive which is subject to custom, directs.

Leutardus in Glaber, Hist. lib. 2. c. 11.
how the Mendicants in the Council at Vienna 1340. as p. 166. Wickliffe in the
Council of Constance, were accounted and condemned for Heretics, for denying
the true right of Tithes: Besides the Eustathians, who were condemned in the
Council of Gangra for the like opinion of First Fruits: Personal Tithes
therefore, being judged equal in right with Praediall Tithes, the same
Judgment of the University of Oxford need not have such names: neithe should
it be neglected by those many, who might well conceive none to be more
impartial and able Judges, then they were and are; and sure they will not
retract that Determination.

But whereas he says, Many nay the most of such as most ^uriously enquir^
herein, beside^ diverse Canonists are of that opinion:

By the curious Inquisitors, sure he means the Schoolmen, of whom in the
Preface, p ^. he said, This question is handled fully by diverse Schoolmen,
who, as p. 165. looked further into all they meddled with, then the Canonists
could do. Now of their opinion let us hear his own confession, page 263. By
this first opinion of the School men -- no diff rence is to be made of
Praediall Mixed, and Personal Tithes, howsoever some scruples about that
difference have been needlessly handled by them, for quoad substantiam Decimae
-- both are equally due; The Moral Law, according to them, designs not out
real possessions to be more subject here, then personal profit. The
Schoolmen therefore are against Russell, and all those many, even by his
confession.

And although amongst the Canonists, some, who being puzzled with the
interpretation of the Canon In aliquibus Regionibus, Extr. de Decimis, cap. 32.
out of the Council of Lateran under Innocent the 3. have so taught; yet the
ancienter, Innocentius 4. Speculator, etc. as they are cited by him, p. 152.
are of other mind, Innocentius 4. making it a wonder to see any deny it:
Others, afterward conforming their opinion to the pleasure of the times and
places wherein they practiced, admitted the interpretation of the aforesaid
Canon against the Divine right of personal Tithes; which, to avoid scandal,
was tolerated perforce by the secular Clergy; And by some Monk^ not much stood
upon in their writings, because usually by Compositions and ordinations, such
Tithes were passed to their Vicars in their appropriations, and themselves had
no benefit thereof.

But for conclusion, He that shall consider the first Tithe paid, to be a
personal Tithe, as that of Manubiae (if no more) by Abraham, the general
claim of all Tithes, Exodus 22. Malachie 3. Deuteronom. 12. and Sanctifica
Domino secundum quod donatum, Ecclesiastici. 33. to omit both Fathers and
Canons: Besides the reasons, The acknowledgement of Gods dominion over me, as
well as over mine: The duty of my thankfulness, as well for the increase of
my strength and skill, as from my field and cattle; for if Read pluenti,
August. Ser. de Temp. 219.
read serenanti, Give to him that gives rain, to him that gives fair
weather, why not, Read viuificanti, Give to him that gives life; confirmanti,
that gives strength, docenti, that gives instruction, benedicenti, that gives a
blessing? The care of sustentation of the Ministers, is it not as much by one
as other? The expectation of a blessing, is it not alike upon the one as other?
Who dare then, through covetousness by maintenance in Doctrine, make his
Sacrilege haereticall, and undergo the censure of the Church and University
as that Russell did? But neither my aim nor leisure is to determine
quaestions; but only to show the rashness of this censure upon the
determination of the University of Oxford, to which also her sister Cambridge
did subscribe. And only out of it, I will offer this Sentence for a
conclusion, Nimis cruenta ac sacrilega isthaec auaritia, quae antiquissimi
Iuris d^cimale debitum solum consuetudini ascribit, and in dubium reuocat, vt
laborantium victum just exhauriat: Quod Ministris Ecclesiae ad eorum honestam
sustentationem firmum persisteret, si decimae possunt ad libitum conferri, and
Ius decimandi ex debito non esset? That is too cruel and sacrilegious a
covetousness, which does ascribe the duty of Tithes being of most ancient
right to custom alone; and that quaestion them, to take away the maintenance
of the labourer, for what certainty should the minister have for his priestly
maintenance, if Tithes may be paid at will and if the right of Tything be not
of duty?

175.
From the authorities of particulars, he proceeds to Councels, and more general
assemblies, which defend the divine right.

Page 176.
The Section following is of customs against the right.

Augustine does, Vae tibi flumen moris humani quis resistet tibi? Confess. lib.
1. cap. 16.
quamdiu non siccaberis? Woe to thee thou flood of custom, who shall resist
thee? how long will it be before thou be dried up? or answer with St.
Chrysostom, Hom. 19. ad pop.
Ne mihi tam aliquis consuetudinem praetendat, propterea enim indignor and
irascor quoniam consuetudinem vincere non possum. Let no man object to me
custom, for therefore I grieve and am vexed, because I cannot overcome
custom: De velandis virginibus.
And with powerful Tertullian conclude, Veritas est, cui praescribere non
potest, nec spatium temporum, nec patrocinatio personarum, nec priuilegium
Regionum, Truth is such, as neither the distance of time, nor greatness of
persons, nor the privileges of kingdoms can praescribe against. And the
reasons of such customs, first, let Alchwin tell, related by him page 71.
Auara men's hominum decimarum largitati non consentit, The covetous mind, does
not consent to the liberality of Tithes. Secondly, let St. Lewis of France
tell, cited by him page the next, per malitiam inhabitantium defraudata,
defrauded by the malice of inhabitants; Thirdly, let Abbo, as Aimoinus in his
life, cap. 8. Quo nos ducit cupiditas dum refrigescit charitas, Whither does
gain drive us when charity is cold? P. 177.
Nay, let our Author tell, that the Common Law never gave way herein to the
Canon Law.

Now whether the Canon or common Law ought most to bind the conscience, and in
these things ought to be followed, wherein Gods right is praetended, judge any;
the Canons being made to direct the conscience, Inter Sermon. 50. sermon. 49.
(which is only subject to their censure) and the Laws to provide the
Temporal good of the subject, which may be diverse; for, Aliud Ius Fori, aliud
Coeli, There is one Law of the Bar, In Epitaph. Fabiolae ad Oceanum.
another of heaven, as Saint Augustine: and, Aliae sunt Leges Caesarum, aliae
Christi, aliud Papinianus, aliud Paulus praecipit, as Saint Hierome: The Laws
of Christ and Caesar are different, and the praecepts of Paul and Papinian are
not alike. P. 193.


Appropriation to Giseburne by Robert de Bruis, that it may be (for ought he
produces) rather the Founder of that Monastery in King Stephens time, as he
teaches me, Page 309. which was before the Council of Lateran, then any after
of that name, to make such an irregular conueiance, when he might not do it
(even by the saying of the Lawyers, who pitch the time upon the Council of
Lateran, 1215. or of the three Monks, who upon the Council of Lions, 1774.)
unless the Popes authority were obtained, and so it could not be arbitrary to
whom alone such privilege was reserved, before the year 1290. upon which he
places this Appropriation.

ANIMADVERSIONS on the eighth Chapter.
P. 196.
IN this Chapter is an industrious collection of the Laws, Councels, National
and Provincial, or by the Pope, Petitions or Bills of Parliament concerning
Tithes in this kingdom of England: out of which in the Catalogue many are
selected to prove the Divine right.

And to these may be added; that Law in the time of Augustine the Monk,
remembered by Edward the Confessor in his Laws, where speaking of Tithes in
particular, he adds, Haec enim praedicauit beatus Augustinus, and concessa
sunt a Rege, Baronibus and populo: These things Saint Augustine preached, and
they were granted by the King, the Barons, and the people; this no doubt in a
Parliament.

And in the days of Henry the first, a Council under William the Archbishop,
anno 1129. there it is decreed, Decimas sicut Dei summi Dominicas, ex integro
reddi praecipimus: We command Tithes fully to be paid, as the Demesnes of
God. Ex continuatore Florentij Wigorniensis.

And in the days of Roger Niger Bishop of London, that Statute between the
Archdeacon and Rectors in the city of London, In lib. Ms.
where it is said, Detentores Decimarum sententia innodentur: Let the deteiners
of Tithes be excommunicated. And after, under a Title De Excommunicatione pro
Decimis, is this Statute, Tribus vero diebus Dominicis, post Natale Sancti
Iohannis Baptistae, in omnibus Ecclesiis a Capellano annuatim public fiat
inhibitio sub poena Excommunicationis, ne quis, praediorum sieve gardinorum
Decimam fructuum asportet, vel asportari faciat nisi primo Ecclesiae Parochiali
competenter inde fuerit satisfactum. Other passages under him, are in answer
to Mr. Seldens Preface produced, where this is Englished.

By remembrance whereof, P. 244.
a passage in this Chapter is to be considered, whereby he would sample the
custom in London in paying Tithes; Saying, First, before the Acts or Decrees
of Roger Niger ( as I have heard, says he, that of the LII. Farthings in
Lindwood to have been:) that no Tithes as Tithes, were generally paid in that
city.

ad p. 9, etc.

Secondly, He cannot but here remember, P. 245.
the custom of the Eastern Church thus maintained, chiefly with offerings or
Canonica as they call them, Iur. Graec-Rom. in Resp. 57.
which specially appears in the answer of Theodore Balsamon Patriarch of
Antioch, to Mark Patriarch of Alexandria, touching the quantity of what was
to be offered: He tells him that no certain quantity is appointed by the
Canons, and that through inequality of men's estate (none of them giving any
such part to the Church, as that it could discover their ability) which
permits not a regular certainety, they were contented with what custom, and
the bounty of the giuers bestowed.

that no laws in the Eastern Church do mention them, And in this place
observe, how here he supposes the maintenance of the Clergy there, to be
Arbitrarie and mean. But the State of that Church was as far as I can yet
collect, thus. There were Debitae a Laicis primitiae, First fruits due from the
Laity, as Nicolaus Grammaticus witnesses, in his Synodall sentence, Iuris
Grac. Romans page 269. Ib. p. 121. and 123.
(under which why not Tithes comprehended?) which were styled Canonica by
Isaacus, and Alexius Comneni in their Aurea Bulla; and these were a Laicorum
quolibet exigendae pro more facultatum cuiusque, ac Reuerendissimis
Sacerdotibus praestandae, To be exacted of every Lay man, according to his
ability, and to be paid to the most reverend Priests: which because the
Priests might appoint to be paid, either in money or kind, Cunctis in Locis
atque vrbibus citra vllum impedimentum obseruarentur, might easily be observed
in all cities and places. All this is in that his Synodall sentence, who was
the first that intermedled therein. Whence it appears how wrongfully our
Author calls them only offerings, and says, that a regular certainetie was
not due, when they are Debitae and Exigendae, Due and to be exacted.

But he follows Balsamon, whose words are thus by Leunclauius translated,
(...) Resp. 57. in ^^b. citat. p. 390.
whereby will appear the liberty of the Priests, to require them, if they had
known them, whereas if they were free will offerings, they might not have
required them. The words first of the Question are these, Quae and qualia sunt
Canonica quae Sacerdotibus and pontificibus quotannis dantur? What, and of what
sort are the Canonica, which are yearly given to the Priests and Bishops? Page
391.
The words of Balsamons answer; De quantitate autem quae pro Canonario danda
est a plebeijs, Canones quidem nihil definiunt, verum Iussio Inclyti
Imperatoris Illius Isaacij Comneni, formam designat quorundam, quae Episcopis
dantur a Laicis qui seeds in eorum Dioecesibus stabilierunt: Quoniam rerum
irregularitas and indulgentia horum occultauit descriptionem, (multesimam enim
eorum partem Episcopo nemo dat) contenti sumus cousuetudine and dantium
liberalitate. Concerning the quantity of the Canonicum which is given by the
people, the Canons define nothing: But the Edict of Isaacius Comnenus, sets
down a form, what by Lay men of the Diocesses, are given to Bishops. But
because the inequality of things, and favor, has hidden the t^ueth thereof
(for Bishops receive not a great part of them) we are contented with custom,
and the liberality of the giuers. Because they knew not, they were so
contented, whereas else they had a regular certainty due.

So that their case is not like the London Ministers, who demand only the
regular part of what is and may be known, even by set rents: Yet also you
must observe that this Canonica was for the Bishop alone, unless you will
imagine, that as yet no Parochial right was there established, and that all
the estate was in the Bishop; which indeed for ought I read is true. Yet that
this Canonica was a set quantity is even by the signification of the word
certain: Like that in Agobardus his book Contra Insulsam opinionem vulgi de
Grandine and Tonitruo, Page 155.
which the foolish people gave their Tempestarij, those Priests of the witches.
Habent Statutum quantum quod de frugibus suis donant and appellant hoc
Canonicum, They give them a certain portion of corn which they call
Canonicum: which yet there he opposes to rightful Tything.

But yet further, by the Aurea Bulla of Isaacus Comnenus, the ancient
proportion of the Eastern Church before, is not to be considered; since as
Zonaras speaks of him, Annal. tom. 3.
Progressu temporis numen etiam violare ausus, multa Monasterijs consecrata
truncauit -- Sumptibus necessarijs duntaxat illis relictis, caeteris vero fisco
attributis: After, he became impious, he cut off many things consecrate to
Monasteries, (which there, were Colleges of Priests) and only leaving them
even necessary expenses, he confiscated the rest. But how they have been
claimed and named in the Eastern Church, the Greek Authors in the Catalogue
may declare, and how at that time at Constantinople Tithes by name were paid;
Decretal. Epist. lib. 1. p. 83.
Read Innocent the 3. and before him, the testimony of Humbertus, who wrote
against the Greeks: and before him, Anastasius the Abbot, who lived about the
year 860. who in his bo^ke contra Iudaeos, says there, that Laicisolent dare
Decimas Sacerdotibus, The Laymen used to pay Tithes to the Priests.

And so much for the Maintenance of the Eastern Church, concerning which the
Statute of Roger Niger added, gave me occasion to prevent the order of the
Authors leaves.

Antoninus is produced, page 190. in part. 4. Tit. 11. to justify the general
non-paiment of them in the Eastern Church, as a thing not to be censured to be
against Gods Law; The Reader must understand, first, that our Authors quotation
both there, and page 187. is negligently expressed, for it should have been
part. 2. Tit. 4. 6. And secondly, that Antoninus holds with the Schoolmen,
whose opinion occasioned Customs, and admits them. Yet lastly, that they by
his opinion, are no further free from censure to do against Gods Law in not
paying, but only, quia non petat Ecclesia, because the Church to avoid
scandal, does not demand them; which if it did, all the old Schoolmen, and
Antonine is of opinion, that then it were sin not to pay. Now concerning the
duty of demanding, let me only remember the saying of a moderate Papist, In
prior Epist. ad Tim. Digres. lib. 2. cap. 8.
Claudius Espencaeus; Simili casu Ecclesia Decimas modo differt exigere, modo
simpliciter non petit, si quibus in locis solui non consueuerunt, ne fideles
inassueti and infirmi incidant in scandalum, aut auertantur a fide. Verum iuri
ita suo cedere non semper expedit: vt enim scandalum pusillorum ex infirmitate
vel ignorantia ortum totali temporalium dimissione sedandum sit, non tamen ex
malitia natum quod Pharisaeorum vocant, nec propter homines malitiose scandala
concitantes, temporalia quorum sumus Domini, tribuenda aut non repetenda;
quanto minus quorum sumus depositarij atque conseruatores, sieve Reip. Rectores
si communia ea fuerint, sive Ecclesiae pastores, si sacra.

And so I return to vindicate two English Councels in this Chapter before,
from his Exceptions.

Page 197.
The first of Egbert Archbishop of York, who died anno 766. out of his Ms.
Excerptions in Thesauro Cottoniano. This Title must undergo censure (quoth he)
1. Because in that Collection some whole constitutions occur in the same
syllables as they are in the Capitularies of Charles the Great, which could not
be known to Egbert, who died in the last years of Pipin the father to Charles.

2. Because the words, Secundum Canonicam authoritatem decimas coram testibus
diuidant, which are quoted in this Canon for Tithes my show these Excerptions
not to be so ancient; for the ancientest Canonica authoritas, Viti Edit. c. 7.
Leg. Longobard. lib. 3 tit. 8. (it should be) 3.
for dividing Tithes before witness, is an old Imperial, attributed in some
Editions to the 11. of Charles the great being King of France; In others, to
Emperor Lotharius the first: but both these are after Egbert, therefore the
Canon not his.

3. The heads of a Synod under him are extant; but not any express mention is
found in them of Tithes, although most of the particulars of Church government
are touched.

Exceptions, the Author and the Reader may take notice out of Bale, De script.
Brit.
that these Excerptions were not collected by Egbert, but out of him by
Hucarius Lenita about the year 1040, qui redegit in compendium constitutiones
Egberti, who epitomized the Constitutions of Egbert: Wherefore the first
exception well may have answer, and admits excuse from the use of the
middle times, which often inserted into one body, and under one name, Laws of
different Ages, which in this, being written, as he coniectureth, in the days
of Henry the first, might happen. But accepting his answer, let us consider
whether this Canon be inserted, and of a later brood.

This he would infer by his second exception, in that the ancientest Canonica
authoritas vt diuidant coram testibus, is later then Egbert: as by the Canon in
two places quoted (being in both the same) does appear. But if in neither of
the quotations there is such authority for such division, to the ornament of
the Church, the poor, the Clergy: nor no such word of diuisio coram testibus,
but only an inquiry between the Parson and Parishioners, coram testibus,
before witness, whether they were paid, vbi datae vel non datae, and no word
de diuidendo: is this then a fit censure? Nay secondly, if an ancienter
Canonica authoritas may be showed of dividing coram testibus; as in the
Council of Antioch, can. 24. There, sint manifesta quae ad Ecclesiam pertinent
cum cognitione Presbyterorum and Diaconorum quae sunt circa eum, vt sciant and
non ignorent, let the goods of the Church be known to the Priests and Deacons
what they are. But more plainly in the decretall Epistle of Gelasius 1. cap.
29. There, in the division of that to the poor, he says, Quamuis diuinis
rationibus se dispensasse monstraturus videretur, tamen, iuxta quod scriptum
est, vt videant opera vestra, oportet praesenti testificatione praedicari etc.
Although he must give an account to God, yet, that men may see your good
works, let it be proclaimed before witness. Besides a Canon attributed to
the Council at Aruerne Anno 535. Licitum sit Episcopis, praesentibus
Presbyteris and Diaconibus, de thesauro Ecelesiae familiae and pauperibus
eiusdem Ecclesiae secundum Canonicam institutionem, (note the phrase) iuxta
quod indiguerint erogare: Let the Bishops in the praesence of Priests and
Deacons give unto the poor out or the treasure of the Church, and to his
family, according to the Canonical constitution, what they need. And this
very Canon is repeated in Concilio Turonensi, Anno 813. even under Charlemaine.
Where yet, the Canonica institutio has not reference to the persons before
whom, but to the uses upon which. Is not the second therefore a strange
exception, wherein neither quotation, nor observation is true? And are not the
Excerptions of Egbert wronged?

As for the third Exception before repeated, it is merely coniecturall: And
because in such heads in the general word oblations, Off^rings, redditus
revenue, facultates Ecclesiae, Estate of the Church, and such like, Tithes may
be and no doubt were signified, the Exception is very insufficient, being both
on conjecture, and from a negative: especially, since he does not cite any
head of a Canon touching Church revenue, which either in general terms, or in
particular with an etc. might demonstrate the truth of his relation.

But a good authority for the justifying of Egberts Excerptions is, for that
in the book Statuta Synodorum, that belonged to St Augustines in Canturbury,
written about Anno 900. and collected, before the same words are quoted as out
of a former Synod, as himself relates, page 212.

P^g. 198.
The second Council or Canon to be vindicated, is the Synodus Anglicana ad
Ann. 786. under the two Legates of Adrian the first, cited by the Centurie
Writers Tom. 8. cap. 9. page 583. edition. Basil. 1567.

The Exception is, for that in the relation of the Legates to the Pope, mention
is of Kenulph King of West Saxony his joining with Offa in calling the
Council, but the confirmations of the decrees have no reference unto him. But
by story and synchronisme Kenulph perhaps could not have at all to do with
it, for some of our old Monks expressly affirm, that in the second year of
Brithric next Successor after Kenulphs death, Pope Adrian sent his Legates --
How could Kenulph be there then as the Legates relate? Therefore after he
says doubtingly, if it be of sufficient credit.

of good authority, being a most obseruable Law, being made with such
solemnity by both powers of both States of Mercland and Nor^humberland, which
took up a very great part of England, and it is like^y it was made general to
all England: is only discredited by perhaps, and the relation of some of our
Monks ( amongst whom, who are quoted, Ethelwerd Lib. 2. cap. 20. says
nothing:) of whose re^ation and truth, hear what himself says: Believe the
Monks as you will: but ind^ed an exactness here is not easily extracted o^t
of the disturbed times of our Chronicles. The Monks of no absolute credit, the
time of no exact calculation: and yet there must be a doubt of such a Synod,
whereof he gives this testimony, That it cannot be suspectedly any
circumstance in the subscriptions, which being many might have by chance soon
got amongst them a character of falsehood, had it not been genuine. If this
dealing show not a will of Censure and contradiction in the Author, let the
Reader judge But the Centurie writers, for all their infinite pains, as page
53. they have ignorance and erring, and ridiculous opinion laid upon them, but
unjustly; so here their labor is suspected.

After these Councels, Number. 4. Page 204.
in the fourth number is the Act of King Ethelulph by his Charter enquired of,
wherein as Ingulp^us relates it, he says, Cum consilio, (not concilio as our
Author repe^teth it Episcoporum, ac Principum meorum -- affirmantes
consensimus vt aliquam portionem terrarum haere ditariam antea possidentibus
omnibus gradibus, sieve famulis and famulabus Dei, Deo seruientibus, sieve Laicis
miseris, semper decimam Mansionem vbi minimum sit, tum decimam partem omnium
bonoru^ in libertatem perpetuam donari sanctae Ecclesiae dijudicaui, vt sit
tuta and munita ab omnibus secularibus seruitutibus, etc. This is almost in the
same words related by Malmesburiensis, who calls it, Scriptum libertatis
Ecclesiarum: Matthew Westminster relates it, Portionem terrae meae -- iure
perpetuo possidendam, concedam, decimam scilicet partem terrae meae, vt sit
tuta, etc. The Chartularies of Abingdon, whereof one has this Title, Quomodo
Adelulfus Rex dedit decimam Regni sui Ecclesiis, has it thus, Perfeci, vt
decimam partem terrarum per Regnum nostrum, non solum Ecclesiis darem, verum
etiam and Ministris nostris in eadem constitutis, in perpetuam libertatem
habere concessimus, etc.

Ingulphus to the Charter related by him, adds, That by the free consent of the
Bishops, and Princes that were under him, of all the Provinces of England, Tunc
primo cum Decimis omnium terrarum ac bonorum aliorum, sieve catallorum vniuersam
dotauit Ecclesiam Anglicanam, per suum Reginm chirographum.

Since out of the Charter it is hard to collect, what the exact meaning was;
yet by the words of Ingulphus, he does conjecture page 206. that the purpose
of the Charter was to make a general grant of Tithes payable freely, because
it seems before, that the payment of all Tithes had commonly been omitted,
Page 207.

of the tenth part of Lands, not of Tithes properly, besides the words of the
Charters, which do naturally bear that sense: Observe these Reasons and
authorities.

First, Etheluph could not give that first, which was given before; But
Ethelbert and his Parliament gave them upon the preaching of Augustine the
Monk, above 200. years before, as I have produced in the beginning of this
Chapter: King Offa of Mercland grants them, in subscribing to the Council
before, Page 201. as also Aelfwold King of Northumberland, when he and his
Nobles, and people, to whom the Canon was proposed, Se in omnibus custodire
deuouerunt, Page 200.

Whence also a second reason does proceed, since those Kings gave Tithes
properly, and that not only themselves, but also in their subjects, and so
should give more then Etheluph, who gave but this Decima of his own land of
inheritance: which may appear, for that he passes it only per Regium
Chirographum by his royal Charter alone, and no Act of Parliament; and De omni
possessione sua, says Ethelwerd; and by the word hereditariam in the Charter,
and in his Testament in Florence of Worcester, and by some other conjectures.
But Ethelulph in this Grant is magnified, as doing some Extraordinary thing,
for therefore King Edgar in his Oration to the Clergy, relating the bounty of
his Ancestors to the Church, Alred. Rhieuall in Biblioth. Patr. Tom. 13. p.
154.
says Proanus meus vt scit is totam terram suam Ecclesiis and Monasteriis
decimauit, And Malmesburiensis, de gestis Pontificum lib. 2. page 242. says,
Tum vero palam erat, quod eum spiritualis Philosophia docuisset, dum magis
famulorum Dei quam suis vtilitatibus prospiciens, omne Regnum suum Deo
decimaret. In this appeared the fruit of his Monastic profession, in that he
gave this, And in commendation hereof write many other. Therefore this was
more then Tithes.

Thirdly, Ethelulph need not have asked the consent of his Bishops and Nobles,
to give Tithes out of his own lands, though it might seem requisite to convey
so much land; therefore it was some greater matter then Tithes.

Fourthly, Ethelulph gave such a Decima which was liable, not only to Taxes
and Exactions of State then, but also to that Trimoda necessitas, of Pontis
Extructio, Expeditio and arcis munitio, But lands only I suppose, and not
annual profits were liable to such service; Therefore his Charter was of Lands.

Besides fifthly, against our Author, if then Ethelulph gave the Tithes of
praediall and mixed profits, and the Tithe of every man's personal possessions,
were at that time also included in the gift; then how could there be any newly
consecrated Tithes after, as out of Chartularies, in his eleventh chapter he
would prove, since all were now given.

Sixthly, If Monasteries and Nunneries (for so the Charter and Edgars speech do
express) at that time did not enjoy Tithes then it is not probable he gave
them. But in all his History, he has proposed none, nay presupposes none to
have bin long after that time, no not annexed to Parish Churches. Therefore he
gave them not.

But to pass from reason to authority;

Asser Meneuensis lived in Alfreds time, the son of this Ethelulph, De gestis
Alfredi.
and was his Tutor: He re^ateth it thu^; Ethelulphus Rex decimam totiu^s regni
sui partem ab omni Regali seruitio and tributo liberauit, etc. In the same
words wherein Florence of Worcester, and Houeden follow him, and he might
best know the truth and express it. But let Ethelulph himself be his own
interpreter, first in a Charter of his, concerning land given to Diuma, then
Bishop of Rochester, where the words are, In Textu Roffens. and in chart.
Epise. Roffens.
Ego Ethelwolfus Rex Occidentalium Saxonum necnon and Cantuariorum pro
decimatione agrorum quam Deo donante caeteris Ministris meis facere decreui,
Tibi Diumae Ministro meo dabo vnam villa^ quod nos Saxonice An Haga dicimus in
Meridie Castelli Hrobi, and december iugera a meridiana plaga villuli illius
adiacentia -- quod hoc ipsum tibi adhibendum and possidendum concedendo
mandamus, vt post dies tuos cuicunque haeredi tibi placuerit derelinquendam cum
plena liberate habeas potestatem. Anno 855. Indict. 3. hoc est, diuina gratia
largiente qua^do vltra mare Romam perrexi, In this it is manifest that lands,
and not Tithes were given to Diuma, for the Tything he intended to give to
other his Bishops. So that w^ether this Pro decimatione, be for his part of
the Tithe, or in lieu of his Tithes, Tithes properly and in kind were not
given; it would be rather a Commutation then Donation: But neither this Land
given pro Decimatione Agrorum, is not perpetually annexed to him or his Church,
but that he might freely pass it away, cuicunque haeredi voluerit, to whom he
pleased.

2. Let Ethelulphs W^ll and Testament related by Florence of Worcester ad annum
855 be considered, whence some words of the Charter, (sieve Laicis miseris
semper Decimam mansionem) may have interpretation, and by them the rest: The
words are, Pro vtilitate animae suae -- per omnem haereditariam terram suam
semper in December Manentibus vnum pauperem, aut indigenam, aut peregrinum, cibo,
potu vestimento, successoribus suis vsque ad vltimum diem iudicij post se
pascere praecepit; so then, Decima Mansio was Real and continual: why
therefore the words, Aliqua portio terraram, whereof the other design but a
part, should be but annual?

And then if it be considered that the same Ethelulph was a Monk, nay as by
others it is related, even a Bishop; and by this manifested quod eum
spiritualis Philosophia docuisset, that he well expressed his Monasticke
learning, besides the reason he gives, to obtain victory of his enemies, and
of his souls health; I hope it will not seem so improbable, since King Offa,
who had less reason, gave the tenth part of his Estate, as our Author here
cites out of Polydore Virgil, and Alured the son of this Ethelulph gave the
4. part of his state unto them, as Asser Meneuensis, De gest. Alfred.
and Malmesbury de gest. Reg. Ang. lib. 2. cap. 4. testify.

And lastly, if we consider that the words of all the Authors, who anciently
express it, (even those of Ingulphus Cum Decimis omnium terrarum ac bonorum
aliorum sieve catallorum, etc.) do in the natural signification import, no
emanation, but partition; neither can by any other sense, but in the donation
of lands, agree amongst themselves, and with other Authors and Charters: And
further, it being understood, that the reason of sending the Charters to be
published in every Parish Church, was, that they might take notice of the
Service and Prayers which by this Charter he enjoined to be said for him in all
Churches: I hope my opinion (whereto both that worthy Minister of Christ John
Fox and his and our unworthy adversary the Jesuit Parsons, In his 3.
Conuersions.
both well skilled in the Stories of our Country, do give express
testimony) may not be thought improbable, if not true.

And this only for the Chapter of Laws; giving notice to Mr. Seldom, that
part of the Preface cited out of Statuta Synodorum, a book so called by him,
page 211. Hae sunt quatuor principales Synodi, etc. are in the Preface of
Isidore to his Edition set out by Iacobus Merlinus.

ANIMADVERSIONS on the ninth Chapter.
Page 249.
THe next Chapter making entrance to the Practice, begins with the
consideration of the original of Parishes; and that first, in the Britons
time. Where first, he presents with scorn the Tale of S. Augustine the Monk
his preaching at Cometon in Oxfordshire, and of the Parson there: Of which in
the next Chapter.

Dubritius first Bishop of Landaffe, out of the ancient Monuments of that
Church; of the gift of Churches with Tithes to him about the year 490. But
here supposing no Parishes at that time, he thinks the Author, whose writing
he judges not above 400. years old, spoke according to the style of his time.

cum appenditijs and cum decimis, is probable. And that there were in France
the Testament of S. Remigius, Hist. Rhemens. lib. 1. cap. 18.
who was ordered Bishop anno 470. in Flodoardus may witness; and long before
that, was the division of Parishes by Pope Dionysius. And that before S.
Augustine the Monk, here were Churches, the phrase of Ecclesias fabricandi vel
restaurandi, Histor. l. 1. c. 26.
of building or repairing Churches, in Beda, speaking of their request to the
King, may insinuate; which whether they were Parish Churches or no, I know not.
Yet I could be willing that Monument, as that of that Church (called I think
Tile from S. Teliau the next successor of Dubritius) might be freed from
falsehood, though in the argument against him, it avails me nothing, whether
they were so soon annexed to Parish Church or Bishop, since in both, the
possession of the Clergy is defended. Churches were given to Monasteries
before the year 600, Post chron. Casinens. p. 769. and 790.
as in Italy by one Tertullus to the Monastery in Monte Casini, in the 5.
year of Justinius the Emperor, Olympiade 326. This grant was confirmed after
by Gregory the great.

Augustines time there were no Parochial Churches, nor for a hundred years
after: and this he coniectureth out of Bid.

Concerning this, I will maintain no controversy; 256.
Though his reason opposed to the opinion of Archbishop Parker, or Mr.
Iosceline, who thought Honorius the fourth Successor of Augustine did
distinguish Parishes, be vain: it could not extend to all his Province, 258.
Sussex being not converted.

Sussex, for that that was not of his Province? No Provincial Jurisdiction
without Christianity; but therein not until after Honorius time Christianity
was embraced: therefore the reason is frivolous. But whether Honorius divided
Parishes as now they be, or only Bishoprikes, as he would have it, I will not
interpose my slender judgment, though I may well be persuaded, that great
Antiquarie Mr. Iosceline, or the most reverend and learned Archbishop (to whose
pains and care we owe the preservation of many excellent Monuments of our
Kingdom) neither wanted books to search, nor faithfulness to relate what
they found; who is also followed by the Father of English Antiquity, venerable
M. Camden in his Britannia: But not to seem partial, I proceed.

Whereto, 259.
for the encouragement of the devotion of the Founder, the Bishops had reason
not to be unwilling to restrain from the public treasury of the Diocese,
the offerings which out of that territory was thither brought, to the
particular benefit of the Incumbent. This is probable, as before in the
Original of Parishes elsewhere.

But, where he says, That both the limits and the persons that should repair
thither, and offer there, were assigned by the Founder, they being his Tenants
and Family: And that according to his Demesnes was the circuit of the Parish;

Terminum de quibus Villis Decimas recipiant, Limits of what Villages they must
receive Tithes; and this by Imperial command: Surely this was in no country
an Act of private Founders, who had nothing to do in the Execution of such
commands, but the Bishop had, as before is proved. But is it likely that the
Founders demesnes were limits of Parishes? Then hence these improbabilities in
this our Kingdom would arise.

1. That in those Shires of equal extent where are fewest Parishes were the
greatest Lords. 2. That all land in a Parish must have belonged to one Lord. 3.
That Lordships should not extend to adjoining Parishes, without the Parish to
whose Church they are annexed, should therein acknowledge the Founders Church
for the Mother. 4. That then no more Lords then Founders, nay fewer, because
some Founders might, and did build more Churches then one; and Kings being
general Lords might build many. 5. And lastly, the ancient Churches before
these Lay foundations (they being not until the year 700.) and yet for Divine
Service multiplied, must be thought pulled down, or else these Lay Founders
must not have the general privilege. But he that should confess Churches
built every where for the conueniencie of assemblies (as himself confesses,
page 250.) from the beginning of Christianity, might well imagine these to
become Parochial, and for the particular exercise of the cure of souls, that
from stipendarie salaries (wherein the Bishop had care imposed upon him) a
restreined means issuing out of such territory, to be assigned by him, who
had assigned the people to his government, to be ordered; and that was the
Bishop. The Founders dedicated such houses to God, at the entreatie, or by the
consent of the Bishop, more for devotion then honor, resigning up all their
right, and renouncing all civil and natural use of the said place, leaving in
the hands of the Bishop, Gods vicegerent in this business, both the Fabric
and Dowry to be disposed by him. This in other Countries is manifest before,
ad page 83.

He proceeds to enquire the time, 261.
when these Lay foundations began, and finds none here before the year 700.
and that but one of Earl Puch in Beda: Then in the year 800. many appropriate
to Crowland, and so after. After, 262
by occasion of the Law of Edgar, he relates of Mortuaries; of the characters
of a Parish Church to have baptisterium, and sepulturam.

Church Baptismall, only belonged to the Bishop in other countries, as in
Council. in palate. Vernis, is before specified, and the right of a burial place
did first belong to the Cathedral Church, as in Council. Tribur. cap. 15. to
whose assignation may you think the Churches and Parishes did belong? For
herein the custom of our kingdom, and of others was not different.

And at last he confesses, that some Parishes have had other beginning since,
from alterations made in regard of the inconveniences of the former limits, and
this by direction and authority both of the Popes and Bishops, and he adds,
from the King. The example of this latter is, how the King being requested by
Ralph Neuill Bishop of Chichester, 267.
and Chancellor of England, that the Church of Saint Peter's in Chichester,
being poor, and having but two Parishioners, might be pulled down, and the
two Parishioners be adjoined to another Parish there.

Patron, and so have a right of P^tronage, to the extinguishing whereof he
must needs consent; or, as King, have a consent to such actions, wherein by
Escheat, or other casualtie, the Patronage might have reuerted unto him: or for
that, as at the foundation he granted a leave of Mortmaine, so in the
dissolution he might give leave to any thing, that might prejudice his former
Act, and especially to the union of Parishes, as to many Appropriations also
his license seemed necessary, as appears by some Evidences in our
Chartularies.

ANIMADVERSIONS on the tenth Chapter.
P. 269.
NOw he comes to show the practice of Tithing. And first, the natural
practice of Pagans here. Of Cedwalla before his conversion, in tithing the
spoils of war, out of William of Malmesbury, whose credit he would lessen,
because Beda, not remembering the tithing, makes another relation. The second
of the Germane Saxons, of tithing the tenth Slave to be drowned, Lib. 8. ep. 6.
out of Sidonius Apollinaris.

The story of Cedwalla, and the difference of Beda, and the Monk of
Malmesbury, enter him into a consideration, how Decima in Tithing may signify
a greater or lesser proportion: Concerning which he brings two examples.

P. 271.
The first of King Athelstan, who gave to Saint John of Beuerley four Thraues
of corn of every ploughland, which were payable before unto the Kings Auenary,
by custom of the country. And yet in a Bull of one of the Pope Gregory's, as
he supposes, the ninth: this is called Decimae, whereas they are too little
to be near a Tenth.

Ploughland, or what number of sheaues was a Thraue, nor whether they, by
composition received it, nomine Decimae, which is most probable, in that it was
according to the quantity of Land, not of increase, whereas of a Ploughland
but few acres might be sown, and all were not to yield continually a greater
Tithe due then four Thraues: Or whether by the name of a Bull so long after,
the Monks intended a new occasion to enhanse the gift, since by this
authority they might pretend, in the Donors mind, it was in proportion to a
Tithe. If the words of the Bull had been expressed, other conjecture or
answer might have been framed; though from this example truly granted, being
but one, no praeiudice may arise to the cause in hand, unless it had been
vsua^l, which he does not declare.

Yet one example more; And that of one Robert de Hesel, P. 272.
to the Monastery of Giseburne, where he gives Duas garbas de Tota terra
quam de Nouo colui in Territorio de Hesel, postquam illam tenui* aut quam ego
de caetero colam aut haeredes mei, ita vt Decimatio haec cedat in fabricationem
Ecclesiae nouae de Giseburne, Two Garbas of all his land, which he newly
tilled, in the Territory of Hesel, since he held it, and as long as he and his
heirs shall hold it; so that this Tithe may be employed to the building of the
new Church of Giseburne: Here (says he) the gift of the two sheaues is called
Decimatio.

Chartularies of the Church of Rochester, I had not found small gifts, as of an
Halfepenie, of an Egg, and such like, even by Charter conveyed unto
Monasteries, I should wonder at the gift of two sheaues to a Monastery: Yet
because upon the small value of an Halfe-penny or an Egg, being given as
Quittrent, there was some dependence of greater possibility, by the whole
Escheating, unto the Monastery which was seized by the rent, the gift was not
so contemptible. But according to his interpretation of this particular grant;
to give two sheaues for Tithe (which was then scarce worth an Halfe-penie) and
for that to order such an employment, as to build a new Church, which will not
buy a stone, seems to me not so pious as ridiculous. And therefore some
other senses are to be sought, which both out of the signification of Garbas,
and also the regard to the number Duas may be coniectured. For although Garba,
with addition of frumenti, or such like special name of Corn, is sometimes
understood by a Sheafe, yet without addition, it signifies all corn that is
sheafed, as in all compositions, Decimas Garbarum, for all Corn, Coppas
Garbarum, and such other terms: so that calling it Decimatio, and only naming
Duas Garbas, It may well be Decimatio duarum garbarum, the Tything of the two
grains Wheat and Rye, which only every where are sheafed. But rather from
the number Duas, having respect to Decimatio, and to the employment, the Forma
Collationis, why not Duas Garbas, two sheaues of ten, which is dupla
Decimatio, or Decimatio duarum Garbarum, a double Tithe; a fit proportion for
such a purpose, especially being only of new Improoued Land, De terra quam
colui de nouo, and that might not be much in that Parish. Herein because I
neither see the M-ss. nor am skillful in the Husbandry of those times, I can
only conjecture, and that if not probably (which I leave to the Reader) yet
lawfully I may, to reduce a straggling example of phrase, to the common rule of
practice, by a fit sense.

Number. 2. P. 272.
But now to the practice. And first the tale of S. Augustine the Monk, and the
Parson of Cometon in Oxford shire, and the miracle of one raised from death,
certifying of the payment of Tithes, circa Annum Domini 330. is scornefully
rejected, and the payment even in S. Augustines time, is denied to have been
usual, so that the Lord of the Manor might be justly taxed.

Narration is fabulous, and although it be so anciently related, as 400. years
ago, and countenanced with such a Margin to Johannes Anglicus his Aurea
Historia, in the public Library of Oxford, proouing the possibility, because
Nulli dubium est, quod nunqu^m Anglorum durae ceruices Christi iugo se
submisissent, nisi per magna miracula sibi diuinitus ostensa, It is not to be
doubted, that the stiff-necked English men would ever have submitted their
necks to the yoke of Christ, but only by great miracles wrought from God: Yet
for the substance concerning Tithes, it is true, that both in the year 330. or
340. Tithes were here paid, In vita Sancti Augustini.
and that in S. Augustines time, the payment was usual among other good
Christians, so that the Lord of the Manor was justly taxed. For the payment of
Tithes here to the Clergy (for Capgraue does call him only Presbyter)
because as himself page 249. truly says, it is likely, that in those times,
the custom of this Island, should not differ from what was uniformly received,
through those parts of Christendom, whereof we have left Testimony
remaining: Since therefore the 2. Council at Mascon says, Christianorum (not
only Francorum Congeries) longis temporibus custodiuit intemeratas, The number
of christians, for long times, has kept inviolable, the laws of God,
concerning Tything, and those long times, may extend hitherto; as by the
testimony of S. Augustine and S. Chrysostom appears; why not therefore
here, since Christian religion was then defended by Christian kings, the Roman
Christian Emperors then governing this Kingdom as a Province.

But as for S. Augustine the Monks time, the Laws of king Edward (besides the
authorities produced by himself, page 276, make it plain) That King in his
Law for Tything, specifying several kinds of Tithe, and ordaining punishment
for the detainers, that Qui eam detinuerit per iustitiam Episcopi, and Regis,
si necesse fuerit ad redditionem arguatur: He adds, Haec enim praedicauit
Beatus Augustinus and concessa sunt a Rege, Baronibus and populo: These things
were preached by S. Augustine, and were granted by the King, and Barons, and
people: Well therefore might the Lord of the Manor be blamed to resist an
Act of Parliament. And so our Author also, who it seems ouer-saw, or would
not see, this important Testimony, as may appear, since both he cites the
words to other purpose, page 225. and the words next following he censureth,
page 279. But to confirm this, besides the Law of Alfrede, which he says,
supposes some former Law to precede, page 203. me thinks the phrase of
Canutus in his Epistle page 278. where he calls a Law of Tything, Antiquam
Legem, The old Law: and another before him in the Law of Ethelred, cited page
223. Sicut praedecessores nostri concesserunt, As our predecessors have
granted; may have reference hither. To which I could add that, in the Charter
of Henry the 1. of certain Churches to the Monastery of Rochester, In Textu
Rossens.
reckoning up the Tithes and profits given, he says by comparison, Sicut
Middletunam Sanctus Augustinus melius habuit tempore patris mei, As S.
Augustine had Middletune in the time of my father. But here, not the Man, but
Monastery must be understood, as by the designation of a time, Tempore patris
mei, so by the use of those times, calling the Monastery by the Saints name,
as that Charter is Sancto Andreae: But chiefly it appears, page 321. of the
Authors book, where Middletune was so given by the father of Henry the first
to the Abbey of S. Augustines in Canterbury. Neither yet here should the
practice of our Country in payment of Tithes be omitted, which Boniface of
Mentz in his Epistle to Cuthbert Archbishop of Canterbury, circa ann. 750.
relates, Epist. 105.
where he chideth the English Clergy, quod, Lac and lanas ouium Christi
oblationibus quotidianis, ac Decimis fidelium suscipiunt, and curam gregis
Domini deponunt, They Tithe, but teach not. Here therefore was Tything not long
after S. Augustines time.

Page 276.
But from this Tale of S. Augustines, he proceeds to other practice.

In S. Cadoes life in S. Augustines time, where it is said, Qui decimauerit
debet diuidere in tres parts; primam dabit confessori, secundam Altari,
tertiam orantibus pro eo.

Then of Bishop Eadbert his giving a Tenth to the poor, out of Beda lib. 4.
cap. 29.

Page 277.
Then of the Council at Celichyth, where the Tenth of the Estate of every
Bishop dying, was commanded to be given to the poor.

Page 278.
After by King Knouts Epistle a general payment seems to be supposed.

Yet in Edward the Confessors time the common practice is confessed to be
disused by the instinct of the devil, Page 279.
though he cavil at this Addition to the Law. Yet that in his time Tithes were
annexed to the Church, appears in his charter, confirming the gift of the
Manor of Leuesham etc. to the Church of St. Peter of Gant, sita in Monte
Blandinio, Ex Registro Episcopi Roffens.
H^e says, cum Ecclesiis Caemiterijs, Decimis etc.

Howsoever in the Conquerours time there was, says he, a great disuse, nay no
due, which he would prove, because in Dom^sday Book, there being often
remembered, Ibi Ecclesia and Presbyter, and his Hides of land numbered, and in
some places Decima named, and the places from whence: that now here, but where
Tithes are named with Churches they were neither due nor paid:

practice confessed in Canutus time, let the Reader judge. But for answer:
since the Laws and Constitutions of England, before the Conquerours time, were
so many and with such censures and penalties, the descriptions of Domesday
Book, in omitting somewhere, and somewhere not, should be no argument of
Tithes not being due, or not paid, but only of the diligence or opinions of
the several Inquisitours in the several Counties, some thinking the Tithes to
be inquirable, and some not: for in all places, even the Churches are not
specified, though we may well praesuppose them to have been: But, that they
were annexed to Churches then, The judgment in William Rufus his time, cited by
him page 416. may show, namely, That there should be restored upon the
judgment for the Abbey of Fischamp, whatsoever post mortem Regis after the
death of the King, was due in Decimis, and Sepulturis, and Offrendis, in
Tithes, and Burials, and Offerings: here Tithes are specified though not in
Domesday book, Many chartularies of that time remember Tithes which are not in
Dom^sday book, Videsis Chartular. Ecclesiae Cantuariens. per Thomam Spot sieve
Sprot, citata page 321. and deinceps. But the practice both before and after
might declare it.

Page 282.
Since in the next place he remembers, how immediately after the Conquest, were
both Appropriations, Ecclesiaecum Decimis: The claim of Tithes, in the time of
Henry the first, calling it Prouinciae consuetudo, the custom of the Country:
The manner of paying about Abingdon, aut vt Lege praecipitur, either as by Law
it is commanded, or 40. sheafes de Hidagio, Addit ad Conc. ^ater p 4^4. Page
283. Extr. de Decim. cap. 5. peruenit. Inc. commissum est. In Addit. Conc. Lat.
p. 48. c. 1.
as in the Chartularie of Abingdon: That it was called by Alexander 3.
Generalis Ecclesiae Anglicanae Institutio, the general use of the Church of
England: That the phrase was here, Decimas Parochiani consueuerunt Ecclesiis
persoluere, laudabilis consuetudo, The Parishioners used to pay to the Church,
it is a laudable custom: That Parochial payment was a known right as Adrian
4. That Tithes de Iure communi pertinent ad Ecclesiam of common right belong
unto the Church, by Pope Honorius Legate; Anno 1220.

yet conclude not (says he) for practice: Then, out of what premises may we
draw a conclusion, if from general custom we may not draw practice? But we
must expect, the observation of the Examples in the next chapter; where we
shall find nothing to cross this, but only a Collection of grants, made by
the consents of Bishops, who Canonically might agree to the breach of this
common custom by a special Translation to one Monastery or other.

Page 284.
He obiecteth, even in the eleventh of Henry the third, That the King makes a
special grant of Tithes of Hay and Milles to be paid out of his Demesnes,
which therefore, it seems, before were not.

Alexander 3. in his Canon, Extr. tit. de Decimis c. 5. pernenit.
in the next page before, by himself alleged, may infer, which are, Decimas
bonorum suorum consueuerunt Ecclesiis quibus debentur cum integritate
persoluere, nunc tam laudabili consuetudine praetermissa, quidam ex ijs, de
Lana, and de Foeno, and de prouentibus Molendinorum, and Piscariarum, Decimas
ipsis Ecclesiis subtrahere non verentur: They were wont fully to pay the Tithes
of their goods to the Churches, to which they were due: Now this laudable
custom being omitted, some of them dare withhold their Tithes of Wool, and
Hay, of profit of Mills and Fishing from their Churches. This Canon, (if not
some private exhortation by a succeeding Pope) might occasion that Grant by
that King, since this was directed to the Archbishop of Canterbury and his
Suffragans, that is, to himself, and the Bishops of his Province: P. 283.
(though our Author fraudulently interpret it, Diocese, thereby to restrain
the generality of the laudable Custom; as contrariwise, page 290. in an
Epistle of Innocent the third, he interprets Diocese by Province, to dilate
the abusiue practice of a few) The King therefore being in the Province, might
be as some others defective herein, and so in his Demesnes such payment was
only discontinued though before they were paid. And the petition in
Parliament by the Parson of Gillingham against the King for Tithe of Hay in
Forests, in the 6. Edward. 1. cited by him after, may well infer it, where
he claims the payment of Tithe Hay, by Debentur iure communi, as due of
common Right, and no special Grant, even of the King.

But after this, P. 288.
the Author acknowledges the common practice and Right, where some Statute
had not made a discharge, or praescription or custom had not settled a Modus
decimandi.

He further enquires, when this Parochial right began, persuading himself
that it was not until after the Council of Lions under Gregory the tenth, by
the authority of the three Monks, cited and answered before. Ad page 147. and
by the saying of the Common Lawyers, That until the Council of Lateran, each
man might pay his Tithes whither he would. P. 292.


And therefore after, Page 289.
he would interpret those manifold testimonies of general Customs, to be
concerning Laws, not practice: But all is to make way for his Arbitrary
consecrations; all which in their true sense shall be granted him, and the
Parochial right, not at the alone will of the Patron or Parishioners, shall
appear to have been disturbed.

P. 290. Epist. Decret. lib. 2. p. 452.
Innocent the third his Decretall Epistle is cited, to show the use of many,
qui Decimas pro sua voluntate distribuunt, who dispose of Tithes as they list:
And this he would pretend to have been general, and not to have been done by
the wayward opposition of some only, against the received and allowed Laws of
this Kingdom.

clearly good but such were thought clearly Irritae, Void, if from the Lay
Patron alone, without consent both of Ordinary and Incumbent, if the Church
were full. And that they were so froward, may appear, by the Notice the Pope
took of them, Peruenit ad audientiam nostram, by the Reason he made against
them, Inconueniens and a ratione dissimile est: It is unfit and unreasonable,
that he that sows Spiritual things, should not reap carnal things; by the
Order he took for them, upon contumacie, that censure should be inflicted;
and that the Archbishop should ordinare quod Canonicum, ordeine what was
agreeable to the Canons, which were the Laws of Tithes, notwithstanding any
Custom against that which was Canonicum.

As for his dream, rather then opinion of Rentz-charge in Tithes conveyed to
Monasteries about that time, he can never prove.

Author, who in all the remainder of this Chapter, would make the saying of
the Lawyers to have reference only to the Council of Lateran under Innocent
the third, Anno 1215. or to that Decretall Epistle before, about that time:
Until when, say they, men might give their Tithes to what Parish or Monastery
they would. Let him consider, that if Tithes so given to Monasteries, were
reclaimed by demand, by authority of a Council at Lateran, before that
Council; then that Council cannot be meant by the Lawyers, if they speak
true: But, that so it was, is manifest, for amongst the Muniments of the Church
of Rochester, there is an agreement (under seal both on the Monks and Bishops
part) between Gil^ert Glanuill Bishop of Rochester, and the Priour and Covent
there, (after a long suit in the Court of Rome) upon certain demands on each
part, whereof one for the Bishop is thus; Tertio, mou^mu^ ijs quaestionem,
Chart. Roffens. Ecclesiae.
de Decimis quam suis quam alijs, and pensionibus, quas de Ecclesiis in
Episcopatu Roffensi constitutis, contra Concilium Lateranense, and citra
authoritatem Episcopalem percipere non verentur; Thirdly, we questioned them
for Tithes, both their own and others, and for pensions, which they presume to
receive of the Churches, in the Diocese of Rochester, contrary to the
Council of Lateran, and without the Bishops authority. This Record is without
Date, yet this Bishop even dyed before that Council 1215. And yet after this
Agreement, confirmed all the Tithes in particular, collated by Gundulphus and
his successors to that Monastery, and did many Acts of favor. Tithes
therefore before that Council reclaimed, and by the authority of a former
Council at Lateran: both which do cross his surmise of the Lawyers sense,
which better may be referred to that under Alexander the third, and so be
understood of Feodall Tithes, and agree with the speech of Lindwood cited page
293. Tit. de locat. and conduct. c. lice^ V. portiones.
Ante illud Concilium been potuerunt Laici Decimas in feudum retinere, and eas
alteri Ecclesiae vel Monasterio dare; non tamen post tempus dicti Concilij,
Before that Council (under Alexander the third) Lay men might well retain
Feodall Tithes, and give them to another Church or Monastery, but not after
the time of that Council. And with this my Observation I pass to his next
Chapter.

ANIMADVERSIONS on the eleventh Chapter.
THe former part of this Chapter, is a collection out of select Chartularies of
diverse Monasteries, concerning the conueyances by Lay Patrons, of portions of
Tithes to several religious houses.

Whereby his intention is to prove, In some, how they did pass Tithes newly
created: In other, how they did consecrate without consent of the Bishop: In
all, how Lay Patrons did intermeddle in the disposition of Tithes as of other
inheritance: for observe the Title or summarie of this Chapter. Arbitrarie
consecrations of Tithes by conueyance from the owner, of all, or part to any
Church or Monastery, at his pleasure: In examples selected out of monuments of
infallible credit.

needless, and for me inconvenient, who must guess at what I have not seen.
Yet for general answers, let the Reader observe these.

1. That the right of the Patron, to give consent by Charter to the passing
away of Tithes, both his own and Tenants, in part and all, and to divide them
from the Church of his foundation, is not denied; and is proved by all those
Chartularies. The question therefore is not, whether the Patron did it, but
whether he alone did fully and lawfully, without farther consent and
confirmation, give interest sufficient to the possession.

2. Secular and Ecclesiastical Laws had commanded the payment of Tithes: The
custom of payment was general: How then was there any newly created Tithes
not due, not paid before, though it might be through disusance or usurpation
detained, or by composition, nomine decimae altered?

3. No Religious house nor Churchman, durst receive any Tithes of a Layman,
without consent of the Bishop, for the Donationes were Irritae, and themselves
censured. Page 375.
Read his own quotations of the National Council at Westminster under
Anselme, ann. 3. Henrici 1. and of another under Cardinal John de Crema, ann.
25. Henrici 1. To which add another, Ex continuat. Florentij Wigor. ad ann.
1129.
under William the Archbishop, anno 1129. Vt nulla persona, Ecclesias vel
Decimas, seu quaelibet alia Ecclesiastica Beneficia, det vel accipiat sine
consensu and authoritate Episcopali Canonica authoritate vetamus, We forbid by
Canonical authority, that no person without consent and authority of the
Bishop, receive or give Churches or Tithes, or other Church Benefices: To omit
the many Epistles of Paschalis 2. So then, Apud Anselm. lib. 3. Epist.
no receiving without consent therefore no giving.

4. The phrases of many of the Charters proposed are, De omnibus vnde Decimae
dantur, Of all whereof Tithes are given. Quae Parochiani debent reddere suae
matri Ecclesiae, Which Parishioners ought to pay to their mother Church. De
quibus Decimae dari solent, Of what Tithes are wont to be paid. De quibus
Decima danda est and datur, Of what Tithes are and ought to be paid. Rectam
Decimam de quibus Decimae dari solent, A true Tithe whereof Tithes are wont to
be paid. Vndecunque Decimae Sanctae Ecclesiae spectant vel prouenire debent
tam maiores quam minores, Whence soever Tithes may belong or accrue to holy
Church, both small and great. Terram cum Decimis, Land with the Tithes thereof.
All these plainly show these Tithes which were consecrated, not to be newly
created Tithes; and by these the rest may be conceived.

5. Some of their confirmations by Bishops and Popes are produced, wherein
their Damus and Concedimus, show their consent and authority; and the phrase
in the later confirmations of Just and Canonice possidetis, shows the former
conueiance to have been so; for so Just and Canonice is interpreted by Petrus
Cluniacensis, as his authority is applied ad page 75. Lib. 1. Ep. 28.
and so Canonice after does signify, in the confirmation of portions to
Rochester by the Church of Canterbury. Post Chartan^ Gundulph.


Yet in particular, to examine two Chartularies, whereout only, he makes
inferences of new created Tithes.

Page 302.
The first out of the Chartularie of Abingdon. In the gift of the Tithes of
Offington to that Monastery: the Parishioners entreating the Abbot of
Abbingdon to receive their Tithes: He asked, whether anciently the Tithe of
that town were not given to the Church? And they answered, Hoc esse moris
Villae, vt a singula virgata Ecclesiae illi 24. garbae pro Decima numeratae
donarentur, This is the manner of that Village, that 24 sheaues of every
yard-land are paid for the Tithe to that Church. Hence he inferres, Here
plainly no Tithe was Parochially paid before this Grant, but only 24. sheaues
of every Yard land.

pro Decima, at first, by way of composition; though therefore, not paid, yet
compounded for; which is all one. And to the question of the Abbot, supposing
Parochial right, they answer not, Hoc esse Iuris, but Moris: and to the
question of Antiquitus they answer only, Hoc esse, though before this
prescribed composition, it might be otherwise.

diminished though our Author, contrary even to the sense of his own
quotation, does untruly affirm it: for the words are, that the Bayliffe of
the Abbot at the time of gathering Tithes, De singula virgata illius villae tot
manipulos Pre^bytero illius Ecclesiae tribueret, quot superius diximus debere:
But surely it was that he might infer the Patrons authority to do it, even
against the will of the Incumbent.

Page 324.
The other is, out of the Leiger book of the Abbey of S. Albans. The Abbot and
Covent about the 20. of Henry the third, gave to the Church of the holy
Trinity de Bosco, and ^he Nuns there, for ever, Totam Decimam de Dominio
nostro de Caysho in omnibus rebus de quibus Decimae dari solent: All the Tithes
of our Demesnes of Caysho, in all things whereof Tithes are usually paid.

Donation is long after the Council of Lateran 1225. and therefore undoubtedly
was not of Tithes not paid before, as the phrase, De quibus Decimae dari
solent, proves, they were then customably paid. And also note, how he says
there, Perhaps they had discharged them, that is, the Prior and Covent;
necessarily then they were before charged, and therefore could not be newly
created, though in respect of the Monastery, newly bestowed.

Out of other Chartularies he has made no particular inference, which is not
answered in the general.

But because the Chartularies of the Church of Rochester, Ad Page 310. etc.
are both more largely insisted upon by the Author, and for several respects
seem to be of best credit with him, as quoting them page 282. Ante alia
vetera Monumenta consulas si placet Chartul. Roffensis Ecclesiae, and in page
370. Since by the Grant of my gracious Mr. His Majesty, I am a Prebendarie of
the same Church, where, for the knowledge of the Temporal poor estate
thereof, I have had liberty to peruse the Muniments; I will more largely make
answer to his several instances out of them, as far as these Charters and
Registers that remain will permit: for many, either through injury of time,
or sacrilegious suppilation of strangers, or neglect, because the portions are
conveyed away, have miscarried.

And moreover, I will first show, how this Monastery came to portions of
Tithes; Then by whom they were confirmed; and lastly, I will explain
particular Graunts wherein Exception may seem to be taken.

For the first, because the means of lawful Justification of a Title are the
same with those of lawful obtaining, I will out of an ancient Register of this
Church set down a form of Justification of two several portions of Tithes,
which although they are not named by him in his Extracts, yet are of the same
reason with the rest, and being of the ancientest, (for before the foundation
of the Monks here by Gundulphus there were no portions given) are for better
proof; I will exscribe the whole Evidence.

P. 23. Memorandum quod Decimae de Chelesfelde and Fernburgh, ex dono Ernulfi
tunc Domini de Chelesfelde, and Geroldi Domini de Fernburgh, sunt confirmatae
Monachis Roff. per Walterum Roffensem Episcopum, qui fuit in Episcopum
consecratus Anno Domini 1148. and secuta est confirmatio earundem Decimarum per
Dominum Adrianum Papam, 1159. Item per eundem Dominum suum confirmatae i^
Decimae de Modingham, and per eundem Papam, and subsequenter per alios
Episcopos Roff. sicut in eorum apparet scriptis, and per alios Apostolicos
succedentes Adriano: And it is declared by the Charter of the said Walter B
shop of Rochester, that those Tithes of Chelesfeld and Modingham, were possed
by the Monks, in the time of Gundulphus, who gave and granted the said
Tithes, of the gift of ^atrons, with the consent of the Rectors of Chelesfield
and Chiselherst, and Gundulp^us was consecrated Anno 1077. and sithence they
have enjoyed them.
Et declaratum est in litera dicti Walteri, quod istae Decimae possessae
fuerunt ab ijs tempore Gundulphi, qui eis illas Decimas ex dono Patronorum,
accedente consensu Rectorum Ecclesiarum de Chelesfelde and Chiselherst contulit
and co^cessit, and fuit Gundulphus in Episcopum Roffensem consecratus Anno
Domini 1077. and ab illo tempore praedictas Decimas perceperunt. Item habe^t in
Parochia Ecclesiae de Chiselherst, ex concessione Episcoporum Roffensium ex
antiquo Dimidiam Marcam annuae pensionis. This shows plainly the manner of
conueying portions, The Patron gives them to the Bishop by consent of the
Incumbent, and the Bishop does inuest the Monastery.

But for the Second and the confirmation also of this, The Charter of
Gundulphus himself shall be next produced, which still remains with his seal
appendant. The words are I Gundulphus -- approve and rat^fie their devotions to
the Monks, and give unto them Episcopal authority and consent, giving and
granting to the said Monks Tithes lying within the Parishes of diverse Churches
of our Diocese, to wit, the Tithes etc.
Gundulphus Roffensis Episcopus etc. Noscat vestra vniuersitas quod cognita and
intellecta charitate, Christi fidelium, Domini videlicet Henrici Regis and
quorundam procerum Nobilium ad Monachos Ecclesiae B. Andreae Apostoli, cui Deo
authore etsi indignus deseruio. Ego in eorum bona intention laudans Dominum
and gratiam agens Domino Jesus Christo, deuotiones eorum ad ipsos Religiosos
approbo and ratas habeo, and ijs Episcopalem authoritatem attribuo and
consensum, conferens ipsis and concedens Decimas intra Parochias diuersarum
Ecclesiarum nostrae Diocesis constitatas. Decimas videlicet in Strodes and in
Chealks de Dominico eiusdem Domini Regis ex eius liberalitate -- Decimas de
Henherst ex liberalitate Goscelini -- Decimas de Rundull and de Thuang ex
liberalitate Smalmanni de Schornes -- Decimas in Chelesseld and Fernburgh ex
beneuolentia Aloldi and Ernulsi ex eorum Dominicis, Decimas de Modingham, ex
dono Ansgoti de Chiselherst, Decimas de Bertrey, ex largitione Haimonis Maminot
-- Decimas de Dominico de Edintune, ex largitione Willielmi de Gurnay, Decimas
de Westbrooke in Parochia de Culings ex gratia Radulfi Pincernae, Decimas etiam
de Feodis Episcopatus, videlicet de Wicham, etc. Ego dictis Monachis meis do
and concedo in perpetuum. I will that the Monks have the Tithes in their own
Mannours within the Diocese, and retain them in peace. But all those Tithes
above expressed -- I assign unto them, and by my Bishoplike auth^ritie, which
I enjoy, I command and ordeine, that the Monks have and enjoy them always, to
be employed for provision of victuals. These Graunts and orders I have made
for the love of Saint Andrew, in his Church, by ye assent of Archbishop
Anselme. Anno 1091.
Velo etiam, quod ipsi Monachi Decimas prouenientes in Manerijs eorum, infra
Dioecesim nostram constitutas habeant, and retineant omni pace. Has vero
Decimas omnes superius expressas tam eas quae ex deuotione fidelium acquisitae
sunt, quam eas quae de feodis meis -- ipsis assigno, authoritate Episcopali qua
fungor, mando and constituo, quod Monachi nostri eas habeant, and teneant in
vsus victualium suorum, perpetuis temporibus conuertendas -- Istas concessiones
and ordinationes pro amore Sancti Andreae, in eius Ecclesia feci, assensu
Domini Anselmi Archiepiscopi -- Acta anno ab Incarnatione Domini nostri Jesus
Christi, 1091.

This I have so largely exscribed, repeating most of those particulars, which
Mr. Seldom quoteth, and were then given by him; to show both in general, and
in those particulars, the authority of Bishops in such conueyances, though the
grant of the Patron be praesupposed: and even how to the Monks, who were
Landlords, the very Tithes of their own Mannours were by Bishops granted them.

To this I might add the confirmations of Walter, Richard, Gilbert, etc.
Bishops of Rochester; the style of whom is of some, Damus, but of all,
Concedimus and confirmamus, and ad securitatem, and pacem perpetuam concedimus.
And as for Popes, Adrian, Alexander, Innocent, Urban, etc. they confirmed them.
And of those others in other Diocesses, the Archbishops and Bishops
confirmations, even from Anselme downward, are extant: wherein that they and
their Churches had interest, the confirmation of the Church of Canterbury to
Rochester, pointed at by the Author in the end of the cited Chartularies of
this Church, is sufficient testimony, where they say, Tithes belonging to the
Jurisdiction of the Church of Canterbury, by the most reverend fathers
Archbishops of Canterbury, Anselme, William, Richard, Baldwyn, and Hubert,
Canonically collated and confirmed, as we have seen contained in their
Authenticke writings.
Decimas ad Iurisdictionem Cantuariensis Ecclesiae spectantes, a venerabilibus
patribus nostris Cantuar. Archiepiscopis, Anselmo, Willielmo, Richardo,
Baldwyno, and Huberto Canonice collatas, and confirmatas, sicut in Authenticis
eorum perspeximus contineri.

They might have added Theobaldus also, for his confirmation also is extant
with us. And in the Jurisdiction of that Church, are the portions of Buggley,
Dudindale, Stalesfeild, Bilsintune, Elham, Ysfeild, Hamwold, Scraembroce,
Geddings, which are instanced upon by our Author; so that the portions of
Halegele, and of Malmain, and the Church and Tithes of Walton, may only seem
amongst those which he has cited, to want their confirmation.

As for that of Halegele, ex dono Hugonis de Port, although the confirmation of
Ralfe Bishop of Rochester, be not extant, yet in that it is mentioned, that the
gift was pro amore Radulfi Episcopi, as at his entreatie, his consent may not
be doubted of, especially by him, who conceiving the style of Gundulfus
Charter, yet shall consider that his successor Gilbert Glanuill in his
confirmation adds, speaking of Gundulfus, quo procurante and disponente,
const^t Decimas -- fuisse adquisitas; so the Bishop Radulf. both got and
bestowed them, which Radulfus being then Abbas de Sagio, did subscribe to
Gundulfus Charter.

And as concerning the portion of Malmaines, That, with the other of Halegele
were confirmed by Pope Adrian the fourth! Anno 1154. and that of Malmains by
Walter Bishop of Rochester, and his successors, but at what time that was
given, I know not.

And as for Walton being in the Diocese of Norwich (not given in the time of
Richard the first, as he coniectureth, but in the days of one of the King
Williams for his confirmation is in Textu Roffensi) it was not a Portion, but a
whole Church endowed with Tithes, which was assigned to Felix Stow, alias
Filchestow, a cell of this Monastery by Roger Bigot An. 1086. under this name,
Ecclesiam Sanctae Mariae de Waleton cum pertinentijs, which was then confirmed
by William, Hugh, and Roger Bigot: but that had confirmation by the Bishops of
Norwich, as Adrian in his confirmation says, Ex dono Rogerij Bigot and
haeredum eius and concessione Norwycensium Episcoporum, Herberti, Hebrardi,
Willielmi, Ecclesiam Sanctae Mariae de Walton habetis, Of the gift of Roger
Bigot and his heirs, and the grant of the Bishops of Norwich, Herbert,
Euerard, William, you enjoy the Church of Saint Mary of Walton; now Herbertus
was then Bishop. All the Donations therefore of the Church of Rochester, even
Ab initio, we see confirmed.

Yet for the particulars, in the third place.

The portion of Buggeley, for that the Patron by enioyning the payment of three
shillings per annum, to the Monks of Colchester, might seem to have some
real interest in Tithes: You must know that this portion was given to
Colchester; and by them demised to the Monks of Rochester for that sum, to
which demise that Charter is but of consent, which the very words produced by
himself might infer, Reddituris inde annuatim Monachis de Colocestria tres
solidos quamdiu eandem tenent and habere poterunt, Paying yearly to the Monks
of Colchester three shillings, as long as they hold it or may have it. But
Philip of Leyburne, who afterward confirmed them, speaks plain, Ipsis
Monachis Colocestriae duos solidos dabunt, sicut ipsi inter se composuerunt,
They shall pay two shillings to the Monks of Colchester as they compounded
amongst themselves, This then is no imposition, but a consent to a composition.

The Portion of Geddings given by Alan of Geddings, which gave occasion to the
confirmation of Richard the Archbishop, has this worthy observation, that
then, John the Parson of Hese, in which Parish is Geddings, keeping back ten
shillings, which by covenant and promise he was to pay to the Monks for that
Tyth, was impleaded before the Archbishop: And there the Parson promised to
remit his Parochial claim, if one of the Monks sollicitors would swear for
the truth of such Covenants; which he doing, the Archbishop confirmed them to
the Monks. Observe here that Parochial claim, is only answered by pretense
of covenant, not donation of a Patron.

The Portion of Stalesfeild, wherein is the clause Tenendam sicut tenuerunt de
Antecessoribus meis, Must be understood, either for the condition, pro
societate, or pro anniuersario, or for the Tenure, In puram and perpetuam
Eleemosynam, other sense I conceive not.

The Portion of Westbroke in Culings, wherein the Patron seems to impose
half a mark, is thus to be understood: Radulphus Pincerna gave the Tyth of
that field: This Tyth was valued in Textus Roffensis per annum at five
shillings, now Adam Pincerna, willing to pleasure the Monks, in respect of the
love his Ancestors showed them, he and his brother, who was then Parson of
Culings, desiring it for peace sake, He gave consent to the value of half a
Mark, to be paid by way of composition.

The Portion of Hamwold: In this it is to be observed, that the Patrons of this
Portion, did obtain the confirmation of the Prior and Covent of Leeds, to whom
this Parsonage was appropriate; wherein the Prior and Covent of Leeds, even
confirmed the confirmations of the Archbishop: Nay after Nicholas Hacket the
son, and Ralph his son, did swear in the Chapter house at Leeds, for the
indemnitie of the Parish Church, by their Chapel at Hamwold. Such was the
interest of the Parsons through Parochial right.

In the Portion of Edintune, the heir does only confirm a composition.

In the Portion of Wicham, before out of Gundulphus Charter we see that it was
of his own Fee, And this, says Textus Roffensis, he gave to Godfrey de
Talebot, reserving omnem Decimam omnium rerum ad opus Monachorum suorum, quam
etiam dedit illis aeternaliter possidendam. Hamelinus d^ Columbiers, therefore
made no new donation but confirmed the old, as in the Chartularie even quoted
does appear, where in the controversy between the Chaunter of Rochester, and
the Parson of Frindesbury, the Tenants of Wicham swore, Cantoriam eam (that is
the small Tithes) antiquitus possedisse cum blado, That they enjoyed them
anciently, with the Tithe of corn.

By which claims of the Parson of Frindesbury, for the Portion of Wicham, the
Parson of Hese for Geddings, the Parson of Eltham for Modingham, for so it
runs in the Charters, Decimas de Modingham quas disrationauerunt contra
Picardum Personam de Eltham, The Tithes of Modingham which they recovered
against Picard Parson of Eltham (and all these before Anno 1200.) and the
confirmations of Hamwold; I take it the practice of Parochial Tything is
plainly confirmed; for how else could the Parsons impleade the Monasteries for
such portions issuing out of their Rectories? And because against them
Covenants and prescription, and not donation of the Patron is objected, I may
well conjecture in the opinion of the Parsons, that only their predecessors
could pass them for their time; or the Patron but at their pleasure.

But he objects, that in the confirmation of Richard the Archbish, 23. of
Henry the 2. (which he supposes to be the first Confirmation, but he is
deceived, for both Archbishops, and Bishops of Rochester, and Adrian Pope of
Rome had confirmed them) the Archbishop seems to ground the right of the
Monks enjoying such portions, only from the deeds of Lay-granters, Cognito
Iure praedictorum Monachorum, per inspectionem instrumentorum suorum,
considerata etiam diuturna illorum possessione, Knowing the right of the Monks
by sight of their instruments, and considering also their long possession. But
these Instruments are as well (if not rather) of Granters that are Ordinaries,
as of Lay-Donors; as the confirmation of the Prior and Covent of Canterbury
(whose Counsel he took herein) before rehearsed, does testify. Neither am
I of opinion, that either the Bishop without the Donor to praeiudice the
Patronage; nor Donor without the Bishop to empeach the Jurisdiction; nor both
without the Incumbent to empaire the Maintenance, could do any valide Act in
such conueyance. And this may also serve to satisfy the phrase of Hubert the
Archbishops Confirmation.

And so much out of the Records of the Church of Rochester: by which it
appears, that all their portions were at the first confirmed and granted by
the Bishops: that the first, were by consent of Incumbents; that Parochial
right was claimed against them; that Patrons only intermeddled not to make,
but consent to compositions of Tithes. How then can the sense of New created
Tithes, the Arbitrarie disposition of the Patron, the sole interest of him in
the Tithes, the uncertainty of Parochial right, which are his new Inventions
and Fancies, be hence proved? And if not hence, why should not the Grants in
other Chartularies have Interpretation from these, which are both as ancient,
and faithfully related? Lib. 3. Indict. 12. Epist. 41.
To ascerteine which, I will only say with S. Gregory, Venite, and cuncta quae
scripsi, nisi ex lectione monstrauero, cum qua vultis disputatione recedite,
Come, and if I show you not all what I have written, depart with what doubting
you will.

Page 353.
But to return to our Author: who in his next Section after his Chartularies,
enters a passage out of my Profession, to prove his former intention; that is,
the interest of the Patron in Tithes, and that is of a Writ de Aduocatione
Decimarum, Rot. Cart. 5. Regis Johan. Memb. 8. in a suit between H. Bishop of
Lincoln, and the Prior of S. Katherines without Lincoln, etc.

John's time before the Lateran Council, as the quotation of the Roll in the
Margin would import; and the sigle H. may signify Hugh then Bishop of
Lincoln; then the phrase Decimas de Dominicis suis libere confer
consueuerunt, which the Bishop of Lincoln, and the King and Nobles claim, may
have good sense against Parochial right, claimed by the Prior for the Church
of N. and yet admit no Arbitrarie consecrations; for there libere, is not free
from Episcopal authority, but Parochial constraint; they having before been
made canonically Decimae separatae, that is, a portion upon which a
prescription being added, (and the Bishop insists upon the custom of himself,
and predecessors) there can be no reunion. And in such case the King and
Bishops and other Grandes might interpose themselves to make good their
predecessors, and their own Grants.

But suppose his interpretation of Decimae separatae, for a Benefice of Tithes
not annexed to Churches; what is this separation or collation without consent of
the Bishop? that is not expressed in Libere, which as before has only
reference to parochial right: Though in respect of the Aduowson or Patronage
if they were so separate who denies it to King or Patron? yet, in that its
said in the Kings claim, Quia consimiles Decimas conferimus in quibusdam
Dominicis nostris, not in all; and Quamplures Magnates, not omnes do the like,
it may seem some privilege, rather then common Right of Patrons? for then all
Patrons and in all Demesnes should have equal right: Though the Kings
sovereign authority in these and all other causes Ecclesiastical, I do
heartily acknowledge.

The like prohibition, Page 357.
Anno 7. Edwardi 1. in the Chartularie of Osney, between the Abbot and Covent
there, and the Parson of Harewell, for two parts of the Tithes of certain
Lands: there the King prohibits the prosecution in the Ecclesiastical Courts;
because, Tangit nos and coronam etc. maxim cum consimiles Decimas in pluribus
Dominicis nostris conferamus, and etiam plures Magnates Regni nostri etc.

Free Chapel of S. George in the Castle of Oxford (from whence Osney claimed
them) as appears by the words, Ex collatione Progenitorum nostrorum Regum
Angliae, By the gift of our Progenitors Kings of England: Now, Parochial Right
could not reclaim these, being once separated by Canonical authority: And
therefore for the Parson to claim interest in such, might occasion a
Prohibition; and the reason might be; for the King and Nobles did give the like
so anciently collated and severed. Besides, this prohibition and the former may
have the same answer, as before.

Page 358.
Yet the Council under Hubert Archbishop of Canturbury in the 2. of King John,
though repeating and respecting the Lateran Council under Alexander the third,
Houeden. p. 2. fol. 460.
must have an interpretation contrary to that which is the meaning of that
Lateran Council which is examined before, ad page 114. and 138. It must be
understood of receiving arbitrarie consecrations, not the receiving of
Infeodations, because here in England such Infeodations were rare, and
therefore not likely to be intended by this Canon under Hubert. What then?
though they were rare here, yet they were irregular, and therefore here might
be condemned; which he must observe, because that even supposing his
interpretation he may see, that in that Canon the Actors were censured and the
Act annullate; But that at that time there were Tithes given, which were not
before in esse, he cannot prove, and as for Tithes conveyed by Inuestiture of
Churches needs more proof, though any such Extrauagant Act were not Valide.

Page 359.
In the Section following, insisting upon his purpose to prove Arbitrarie
consecrations, He would imagine those phrases, ( Quae Decimari debent, Those
things which ought to be Tythed; And, Quae Decimari debent more Catholico,
Those which ought to be Tythed after the Catholic manner) in many Grants to
express no Canonical payment before: But, that then New Tithes were given,
which though not before, yet then by the Canon Law ought to be Tythed; For
that the obedience to the Canons in this point was general through the
Kingdom is most false, we know the Truth by a cloud of Homebred witnesses.
So our Author.

extent or manner of the Tything, and the duty of payment, not Arbitrarie but
necessary: Nor infer they any opposition to the Canon Law; for that were
absurd, to acknowledge it (before it were objected) in such Donations
especially, in conueying Tithes to those, who could not receive them, if
opposite to Canons: But let him disprooue the general lawful practice, for,
as for the disobedience of some few in bestowing Tithes, though not newly
consecrated, I doubt, but as for newly consecrated, his homebred witnesses can
not testify.

And from his strange interpretation, P. 360.
wherein he strains his wit to make good his paradoxe, he makes a comparison
between these two phrases, Quae offerri solent, and, Quae decimari debent, vel
solent, and would thence infer a like Arbitrarie Custom;

Arbitrary, but Tithings areas much debent as solent, and so are necessary,
and otherwise to call them, and not prove them is petitio principij.

Yet to prove his paradoxe he relates how in the book of Doomes-day, Stori
the Ancestor of Walter de Aincourt is specially thus privileged, that he
might sine alicuius licentia facere Ecclesiam (in Darby or Nottingham Shire) in
sua terra and in sua soca and suam decimam mittere quo vellet, without leave of
any to make a Church in his own land, and in his own Fee, and to send his
Tithes whither he list.

Stori sure was a Privilege, and that from the King, as may seem, for that it
is noted in that Temporal Description, because the granting of any land in
Manum mortuam, (which by making a Church was done) did belong to the King to
give license: To which act of building a Church, the words, Sine alicuius
licentia, meaning, no secular Superior may be restrained. And whereas he
might build a Church in his own land where he list, he might send his Tithes
to which of the Churches he had built, but this by the Bishops permission;
whose consent may as well be supposed, though not expressed, for the conueyance
of Tithes; as the consecration of the same by the Bishop, is not expressed, yet
necessarily required. How in the Empire it was, Goldast. Constitut. Imper. Tom.
3.
the Conuentus Optimatum at Pauy, under the Emperor Berengarius, Anno 903. may
witness, where it was decreed, Vt omnis Decimatio ab Episcopis, vel his qui ab
eo constituti sunt, praebeatur, nullus eam ad suam Capellam, nisi forte
Episcopi concessione conferat. Quod si fecisse contigerit, primum legibus
subiaceat humanis, postea Excommunicatione populi constrictus, ad vltimum, ipsa
Capella quae magis contentionem quam vtilitatem praestat, destruatur: That all
Tithing should be assigned by the Bishop or his Deputy, that without his grant
none should convey them to his own Chapel; which if he do, first the
Secular Law shall punish him, next, the people shall be excommunicated; and
lastly, the Chapel shall be destroyed, as affording more cause of strife then
profit.

P. 361.
But it may seem, he feared such an answer, and therefore sets himself to
prove, that it was lawful to build Churches in their own Fees, without
consent of the Bishop, and this he says was challenged by the Baronage of
England; and therefore cites a Decretall Epistle of Innocent 3, Tom. 2. page
228.

It was challenged without license, but the Pope allows it to the Laity, so
that they had license from the Bishop of the Diocese, and that the new
foundations should not bereave ancient Churches of their assigned endowment.

This last Clause, and not the first, was that which the Baronage pretended in
defense of the Archbishop, for building a Church at Lambeth, for otherwise
besides the Archbishops own authorizing his own Act, even the confirmation
and approbation of Pope Lucius is there signified, and theref^re not challenged
without license: but against this, by reason of the hurt thence arising to the
Church of Canterbury, was this Decretall Epistle; for the immediate words are,
Sed ex hoc opere videtur Ecclesiae Cantuariensis dignitas, ex part non modica
deperire, etc. But by this work the dignity of the Church of Canterbury would
greatly be empayred: and nothing follows concerning license of the Bishop.
As for building of Churches without consent of the Bishop, observe how far the
Emperor was, who even makes this Capitularie, Placuit nobis, L. 5. c. 182.
ne Capella in nostro Palatio, vel alibi, sine permissu Episcopi, in cuius est
Parochia, fiat: It is our pleasure, that no Chapel in our Palace, or
elsewhere, be without permission of the Bishop of the Diocese.

Again, he returns to his Paradoxe, which out of two Epistles of Johannes
Sarisburiensis, he would infer; for that in those cases of Tithes, no title
is made merely by Parochial right, but Praescription or Consecration are the
grounds whereon they are demanded.

former Judgment for him. Here could be no demand by Parochial right, when
the quaestion was of it, and nothing else demanded but Parochial right, and
therefore in the Libell, both Parochiani and Decimae, wherein Parochial right
consists, were the two demands. The like is, Ep. 87.

pertinentes ad Ecclesiam de W. and quas in die Consecrationis iam dictae
Ecclesiae, Radulfus Rotundus obtulerat, Episcopo Londinensi praesente and
approbante: Tithes which belonged to the Church of W. and which in the day of
the Consecration of the said Church, Radulphus Rotundus did offer the Bishop of
London, being both present and approouing it) which were detained by another
Parish, without any sentence; whereas the Parish W. had euicted them from the
predecessor of the Parson, and the other Church. Now in this case is not
Parochial right claimed? Decimas pertinentes ad Ecclesiam? And this, both by
prescription, and ordination, and a former sentence is justified. So that in
both examples he has dealt falsely. But in this later is a plain sign of the
Bishops approbation, to each man's offering of Tithes: like that in the
confirmation of William Giffard Bishop of Winchester, cited by him page 344. In
the same Salis. his 28. Epist. and 109. as also for Parochial right.

But Theobald the Archbishop, reprehendeth Ala the Countess of Warren, P. 362.
for that she did not pay the Tithes which her husband had vowed, therefore
there is arbitrarie Consecration.

Denariorum Gabuli, of rent money, which he might vow, and she ought to pay: The
tenth of rent, not increase, though out of her Dowry; because it was vowed upon
the Altar; it was the Dowry of the Church: it was so to be, for so it was her
Dowry; And this Tything can extend no further. See page 342. the words in the
Author.

P. 363. and 364.
Again the three Monks, Knighton, Higden, and Walsingham, are cited, who
before are answered: and for confirmation of their opinion, concerning the
Council at Lions, He brings a petition in Parliament, made by a Parson of
Gillingham against the King, for denying him out of the Forest situate in his
Parish, Tithe Hay, and Venison, and Pannage, and other profits, which,
Ecclesiae suae de iure communi debentur, secundum formam Supplicationis and
exhortationis Apostolicae porrectam Domino Regi apud Gillingham quando fuit ibi
ad Natale, What was that Exhortatio, or Supplicatio Apostolica? surely some
particular letters from Rome obtained in behalf of the Parsons, and no new
decree.

Parochial right of Tithes, was not yet every where settled, although
increasing in a Parish: Nay by this we may well see, they were every where due
even from the King, in that the Parson could claim them by Iure communi
debentur Ecclesiae suae, They are due to his Church by common right, and durst
procure letters from Rome, and complain even in a Parliament: sure his
complaint was no general complaint, against an allowed custom, but a special
wrong in this place alone. Nothing stronger then this to prove Parochial
right, if the Kings Forests must pay Tithe to Gillingham, de iure communi.

In the next Section, Page 365.
he speaks of Tithes not assigned to any Parish to whom they do belong: And
enters this digression by saying, that until those innouations by Canons, in
denying Laymen right, arbitrarily disposing the jurisdiction, which the common
or secular law had formerly challenged and exercised in detayning, the right of
Tithes between the Priests, and Parishioners, grew out of use.

of Jurisdiction of Tithes, not any secular law so directly intermedled in
Tithes, but even since that time of the Lateran Council (which yet he would
prove to be the time of forbidding such consecrations) the Epistles of Ioannes
Sarisburiensis show the contrary, and the Decretals of Alexander the 3. written
upon suits to this country, can testify, besides those suites for Tithes in
the Archbishops Courts, which after out of the Chartularies of the Priories of
Rochester and Leeds I will produce. And the Temporal Courts cannot hold plea
of Tithes, unless it be by way of prohibition, but only by virtue of late
Statutes.

But says he, out of Thorpe a Judge, that in such places out of any Parish,
as in the forest of Englewood, the King ought to have the Tithes to dispose
of, and not the Bishop, and relates that the Archbishop made suite to the
Council to have them.

Englewood, which well even in reason might be granted him, for that in
Assarted land much grew more Tytheable then before, to the more benefit of the
Clergy: And it is not said, the King may keep, but collate to whom he will;
which inferres the right of Tithes. And since, as in the Records after, the
King there claims a privilege to build Towns, erect Churches, Assart lands,
and give those Churches with the Tithes of that lands, to whom he will, because
it is not within the bounds of a Parish; well he might by his Prerogative and
Supreme power, add the Tithes of the Towns to the Churches, as even by the
Capitulars lib. 1. cap. 93. it is granted, Sancitum est de Villas nouis, and
Ecclesiis in ijs nouiter constitutis, vt Decimae de ijsdem Villis ad easdem
Ecclesias conferantur; It is ordained concerning new villages and Churches
therein newly founded, that the Tithes of those villages should be conveyed to
those Churches. And this is repeated in the Council. Wormatiens. can. 52. And in
Triburiens. c. 14. there it is, Si vero in qualibet sylua vel deserto loco
vltra milliaria 4. aut 5. vel eo amplius aliquid dirutu^ conlaborauerit, and
illic consentiente Episcopo Ecclesiam construxerit, and consecratam
perpetrauerit, prospiciat Presbyterum ad seruitium Dei idoneum and studiosum,
and tunc demum Nouam Decimam Nouae reddat Ecclesiae, salua tamen potestate
Episcopi; If in any forest or desert place above 4. or 5. miles off, or more,
any shall repair or build a new Church, by consent of the Bishop, and shall
have it consecrated, let him provide a fit and honest Priest for the service of
God, and then let him give his new Tithes to his new Church, reserving the
authority to the Bishop: (For as the Church was consecrated by the Bishop, so
the Tithes were disposed by his consent; for in those times nothing concerning
the Church was done without the Bishop or Popes consent and confirmation:) So
in this case, the King making of a desert, an Adesart. But yet Herle the Lawyer
is after cited to be of another mind then Thorpe.

Page 367.
But that this is not only a Prerogative to the King, but the same which the
Baronage claimed in King John's time, he intimates.

Lambeth in the Epistle of Innocent was, and no forest. And the Kings grant of
a prohibition in his own name alone against the Bishop of Carleile, shows it
not to be a common privilege to his Magnates as to himself, for else as
before he would have put his Magnates as himself in the prohibition.

Page 368.
Herle a Lawyer says, that such Tithes out of Parishes might not arbitrarily
be given, but that the Bishop of the Diocese should have them, he is censured,
to speak suddenly, that is, rashly, and out of the Canon Law, not out of the
Common Law. If he knew not how to speak as he ought, what does our Author? It
were well that he should Tutor him in his own profession, and show that
Tithes were given or assigned to any Church without the consent of Bishop or
Pope: and what Rule is there in the Common Law concerning Tithes, but it is
taken from the Ecclesiastical Law?

ANIMADVERSIONS on the twelfth Chapter.
IN this twelfth Chapter, first, Page 370.
concerning Appropriations of Churches, He observes that in the Saxons times
in their Appropriations they used not to say Ecclesia cum decimis, or Ecclesia
cum decimis in annona etc. which in the Normans time was frequent.

Ecclesias, all passed then: Afterward, by reason of the several translations
of them, both the explication cum decimis, with the parts thereof, as also the
place was added, where the Tithe grew, in such a demesnes, of such a man, and
such like: which by the Bishops approbation might be altered and translated.

In this Section of Appropriations, he says, The common intent was that the
Monasteries should put Clerks and Vicars in the Churches.

the Vicar, or did presently do it at the first; and the Vicar had always
recourse to the Bishop, in any grieuance offered from the proprietaries for the
increase of his portion.

Page 371.
Of this inioyning the maintenance of Vicars, he produces two examples of both
Provinces, And first of York before Canterbury (for he will be against the
known authority of those prime Seas.)

But in that last, in the Province of Canterbury, out of Pope Lucius, wherein
is the word, In quibus praesentationem habetis, he says, this can not be
understood of those which the Monasteries enjoyed Pleno Iure: whereof indeed
before he had spoken.

Anno 1255. the Prior and Monks of Rochester, and the Prior or Warden of their
Cell at Filchstow in Walton in the Diocese of Norwich, did present one Stephen
Banaster to the Church of Tremlegh, Officiali tunc vices Episcopi Norwicensis
gerenti, whom the Official instituted; and yet John the Bishop thereof before,
had in his confirmation said Ecclesiam de Tremblega pleno Iure cum omnibus
pertinentibus pertinere ad Priorem and Monachos de Waleton; That the Church of
Trembleigh did belong Pleno Iure to the Monks of Walton. But I conceive
therein, pleno Iure rather to be distinguished from non per vices, or, non
excompraesentatione alterius, then otherwise; though I contradict not the
opinion of the Canonists, who say, a conueyance of Churches pleno Iure, to be
of the right of Institution and Destitution, which in the next example of the
next Section may have place.

Page 373.
In this Number, to prove his paradoxe (which he can never prove) That Tithes
passed from the Patron by his gift no otherwise then Freehold: neither was the
confirmation of the Ordinary necessary. He proposes an example of one
Robert of Dene, who gives to the Church of Lewis, a Church with Lands and
Tithes, and two parts of the Tithes of Corn of another place; so that the
Priest of that Parish shall pay half a mark, and shall enjoy it at the hands
of the Prior, as long as he does well, and by him to be expelled if otherwise.

pleno iure, then for Institution and destitution, it was lawful; if it were a
Donatiue, then more. And whether this privilege were vouchsafed by the Bishop,
or Archbishop, or Pope, who knows? The Author is a Lawyer, why does he not
show the Common Law, that gives power to private men, to apropriate Churches to
Monasteries, without the consent of Ordinaries? And as for the intermeddling in
enioyning a Noble for the Tithes, it was by way of composition (as in the
Chartularies of Rochester I have showed) and by no immediate lawful right: If
no Lease be good at the common Law of Tithes not impropriated, without the
Ordinaries consent, how shall any Impropriation be made, or good without the
consent of the Bishop or Pope?

And so, in his charity, acknowledging the Canons of National Council then,
against such Arbitrary consecrations, yet he will suppose a practice contrary,
both to appropriate, and inuest Churchmen with them, without the Bishop, and
would defend it, though if it were, it were praua consuetudo.

Hauchis, in the last Epistle of Iuo; according to which form, all the
Appropriations of Churches with us, are; The Patron delivering them over to the
Bishop, and the Bishop to the Monastery, and that even Charitatiue, out of
favor.

In the Chartularies of the Priory of Leeds, observe, how in the Appropriation
by Theobald Archbishop of the Church of Eslings in the Diocese of Canterbury,
it is thus; Rogauit nos Alicia de Eslings, quae fuit vxor Radulfi de Cicestria,
vt Ecclesiam de Eslings, quae in fundo eius sita est, Monasterio and Canonicis
Regularibus de Leeds, in perpetuam eleemosynam concederemus, nam and illa,
quantum ad se spectabat, in praesentia nostra, temporalia ijs perpetualiter
concessit: Alice of Eslings, that was the wife of Ralfe of Chichester,
entreated us, that I would grant to the Monastery, and Canons Regular of
Leeds, in perpetual Alms, the Church of Eslings, which is founded in her
lands: for she, in what apperteined to her, in our presence, gave the
Temporalties for ever. And then upon Resignation of the Incumbent, he does
Canonically inuest them with it. All the rest are such like.

Ep st. 39.
But Johannes Sarisburiensis has a pattern for all, where justifying an
Appropriation to the Priory of Saint Osithe, he remembers the gift of the
Founder a Bishop, the Charter of the King, the confirmation of the Archbishop,
the Bull of the Pope. And in the Epistle 28. Ecclesiam de Effigcham, quam
Meritonensibus, petente Domino fundi, donauit Dominus Wintoniensis, Eugenius
Papa confirmauit, The Church of Effigeham, which at the request of the Lord of
the Manor, the Bishop of Winchester granted to the Priour and Covent of
Merton, and Eugenius confirmed it. These may show the practice of that time,
contrary to his opinion.

P. 376.
And whereas he produces the preamble of Alexander the third, Extr. de
Institut. cap. 3. ex Frequentibus;

Quod Clerici Ecclesiastica beneficia, sine consensu Episcopi Dioecesis, vel
Officialium suorum, recipient minus quam deceat: That Clerks, without consent
of the Bishop of the Diocese and their Officialls, receive Church livings,
which sometime, though irregularly to have been used, I never denied. And more
frequently in these times, whereof our Author speaks; wherein as I conjecture,
the viciousness of the former Popes, those Faces Pontificum, which after
Adrian the third succeeded, as Pap. Massonius says, when Sanctitas reliquit
Pontifices, Holiness left the Popes, as Platina; gave occasion to neglect, and
neglect easily bredd contempt, and that upon every occasion brake forth to
opposition of their censures and Canons, each man in as much as concerned his
honor or profit, willing enough to take upon him the praerogatiue of Kings,
and to defend it with strong hand.

P. 378.
In the next Section, to prove the interest of Patrons in the profits of
Churches, he produces a Chartularie of the Priorie of St. Needs, where a
Patron, Nomine certi beneficij, gives to that Priorie six Marks of silver, to
be paid yearly by the Parson of the Church of Wimbisse.

composition, not an original right that the Patron had in Tithes, it is
likely for some portion of Tithes there, so that now by this they may have
Certum beneficium, mark that word, which before was uncertain in Tithes, of
such kind I have spoken out of the Chartularies of Rochester.

Whereas he says, he has not in those times read of a Precedent, wherein the
Incumbent was granter. Now that they were he may read before, in the
justification of a Portion of Tithes, out of the Chartularies of Rochester, and
in Addit. Ad Council. Lateran p. 13. c. 11.

Out of interest supposed, he says, P. 379.
the understanding of the new Canon, in the Synod of Westminster, held under
Richard the Archbishop in 21. Henry 2. may be had, Nulli liceat Ecclesiam
nomine dotalitij ad aliquem transfer, No man may pass over the Church for a
Dowry, that is to remain with the husband of his daughter or kinswoman during
his life.

Ecclesia, the patronage only is understood, which neither the Canons would
suffer to pass by inheritance, nor sale, nor here as a Dowry, but would have
had all bestowed upon Bishoprics and Abbeys, as vide Append. ad Council.
Later. p. 15. c. 6. Religioso loco ius patronatus conferendi liberam habeat
facultatem, Yet he may have free liberty to bestow the patronage on a
religious house, and cap. 16. Vnde cum ius patronatus annexum sit spirituali
nemini licitum est vendere illud, Patronage may not be sold, because annexed
to a spiritual thing, and cap. 17. It is dishonest to sell patronages. And
indeed how can this be otherwise interpreted, unless you could imagine a Lay
man then, might all his life time enjoy a Church (for being married, then he
could be no Clerk) and not suppose it Infeodat^, which here he does not.

But he that observes the distinctnesse of the Canons then, in saying
Ecclesiam vel Decimam, by the one passing the patronage, and by the other the
profit, will allow my interpretation.

P. 380.
But yet, that Patrons might inioyne a Pension upon a Church, without either
Ordinary or Incumbent is proved, by a Fine, where, upon condition, that the
Parson which should be placed in a Church by the Patron, should pay such a
sum yearly to the Monastery, and thereof make faith to the Bishop, upon
institution, and after in their Chapter, a Monastery does remit the patronage
to the Patron. Whence he infers by the authority of the Kings Justices in a
Fine, his purpose is proved.

the making faith, both to Bishop and Covent for such performance was usual,
many are extant in our Registers. And in the confirmation of Bishop Gilbert
Glanuill to his Monastery, observe these words, when having expressed many
pensions, he adds, Et ne in praetaxatis pensionibus percipiendis possit
aliquod praeiudicium dictis Monachis imminere, vel difficultas soluendi:
Volumus and firmiter constituimus -- vt omnes Rectores a nobis in eisdem
constituti, vel a nobis and Successoribus nostris in perpetuum instituendi, de
pensionibus praedictis fideliter and sine difficultate persoluendis, ipsis
Monachis in Capitulo suo fidelitatem faciant praestito Sacramento, etc. And
least in the receiving the foresaid pensions any prejudice may arise to the
Monks, or difficulty of payment, we will and firmly ordain -- that all
Parsons placed therein, by us or our successors for ever, shall take an oath
of fidelity in the Chapter house, to pay the said pensions, faithfully and
readily. And if this pension were not an old, but new one, upon this
composition, me thinks the wisdom of the Monastery would be much
questioned, to leave a patronage for 4. s. per annum, which is the pension. And
undoubtedly this pension was confirmed by the Bishop: And such is the meaning
of those two Fines that follow next save one.

P. 381.
For the next, that seems an erection of a pension by the Patrons, Bishops,
and Incumbents Grants, which is expressed plainly.

P. 382.
After this confessing the practice of Institutions, yet he shows the sole
authority, not only in the Bishop, but usually in Archdeacons, of which, he
produces some proofs.

Archdeacon was the Bishops officer, And as Leuthericus and Fulbertus Epist.
34. was Oculus Episcopi dispensator pauperum, Catechisator insipientium, The
eye of the Bishop, the Amner to the poor, the Catechiser of the innocent,
here was no prejudice to the Clergy; though Alexander the third wrote a
Decretall to rectify even that disorder, it is in Addit. ad Council. Later. p.
24. c. 2. and 3. But that the Archdeacons did in the vacancie suspend, Joan.
Saris. Ep. 3. Did, Vt mos est in possessionem liberam Canonice introducere,
induct. Idem. Epist. 1. Did receive resignations, Ep. 5. and Iuo Epist. 131.
and excommunicated intruders, per Laicorum violentiam. Iuo ibidem do testify.

In the next Section, he proves the alone interest, Page 385.
by the succession in the Benefices of the Ancestors, whereby there needed
neither Resignation, nor Presentation, nor Institution, nor Induction, this
supplying all: For which he cites the Canon at Westminster 3. Henry 1. Vt
filij Presbyterorum non sint haeredes Ecclesiarum Patrum suorum: And another in
the 25. of the said King under the Cardinal John de Crema: Ne quis Ecclesiam
sieve Prebendam paterna vendicet haereditate, aut successorem sibi in aliquo
constituat beneficio, and a multitude of quotations by the side to this purpose.

in right, but even in place, and that by institution from the Bishop, for that
they thought basely of the sons of Priests, and would by no means suffer the
similitude of a Judicial succession, haereditario possidere Sanctuarium, as
Tit. de Iure Patron. c. consuluit, which cannot be even done at this day
without a dispensation, Vt patri succedat filius, that the son succeed his
father.

The whole Title, De filijs Presbyterorum, manifests this truth, and most of
his quotations; so that by the succession, not patronage is supposed of the
father: but whatsoever it were, it was by institution executed.

The next Canon is of Patronages and Infeodations belonging to Laymen, which
this Canon would not permit Laymen to convey to any but to the Church, as
before I have showed; which also may appear, for that in this very Canon it is
added, Vide Hildebert. Coenom. Ep. 55.
Adijcientes quoque statuimus, vt Clerici qui Ecclesias seu Beneficia habent
Ecclesiarum, We ordain also that Clerks (the first part being of Laymen) who
have Patronages or Infeodations of Churches, and that they may live more
licentiously, being invited by the Bishop, will not be promoted to orders, let
them be deprived both of Patronage and Infeodations: for so Ecclesia, and
Beneficium Ecclesiarum, and Praebenda must be interpreted.

Page 386.
Roll of Pleas, 6. Rich. 1. It does not imply a denial of Institution in the
Bishop, but shows that a time was before then, when the father being Patron
and Incumbent, might present his son to the Bishop to succeed him; whereas
then even by presentation, he could not be admitted to the next succession.

Page 387.
Concerning the Law of Lapse, whereof he next treats, I am ignorant; only in
the Novel before cited by me, and page 393. by him, I find, that if the
Patron present not worthy men, the Bishop may choose others; as also Toletan.
9. c. 2. and that if the Patrons agree not, he may seal up the Church, as
before is showed, which shows the power of the Bishop upon their default; but
other thing I know not.

Page 391.
But after that, he searches phrases, which may import the sole interest of the
Patron; the first is, that it is called Donation, in their Writs of Quare
impedit.

In whose gift is such a Benefice? And he may be said to give the Benefice,
for that that individual person, elected and presented by him, having no
Canonical exception taken by the Bishop (a part of whose flock he must
govern) is upon the Patrons Title, and the Bishops Institution, by the
ministry o the Archdeacon possessed of it; the Title being in the Patron the
approbation in the Bishop, and the execution in the Arch deacon: the Patrons
end being the discharge of his trust to present and nominate; the Bishops, the
cure of souls; and the Archdeacons the Church, to which both belong.

The next word is Praesentare, to signify the placing of an Incumbent in a
Church by Inuestiture, being made only of repraesentare, which in that
Council of Lateran and elsewhere, Sub Alexan. 3.
occurres also for praesentare.

Lateran, and the rest of the places, it signifies to present, to be allowed
and instituted by the Bishop; which is quite opposite to Inuestiture,
Praesentare being commanded, and Inuestiture being forbidden to Laymen: And
therefore this interpretation is not true. The phrase of Repraesentare ad
Ecclesiam, is in the first Council at Arles, sub Syluestro Papa, cap. 23. De
his qui Apostatant, and nunquam se ad Ecclesiam Repraesentant. In which sense,
(...) signifies, Repraesento, to Appear or present to view, Restituere vel
reddere vt possit videri, and so his nice deduction will come to nothing.

And the next word Nominare, which is, says he, Page 393.
the same with praesentare, does signify to fill a Church by Inuestiture, and
for that he cites, Nouellarum, cap. 123.. Si quis Oratorium, where the words
are; Si quis Oratorium extruxerit, volueritque in eo promoueri Clericos, vel
ipse vel haeredes eius, si sumptus ipsi Clericis subministrant, and dignos
nominauerint, nominati ordinantor; Si vero qui ab ipsis electi sunt, eos
tanquam indignos ordinari Sacri prohibebunt Canones, tunc locorum sacratissimus
Episcopus eos quos praestantiores putauerit, promoueri curam agito. If any
build an Oratorie and would prefer Clerks, either he or his heirs, if they
give them maintenance, and name those that are worthy, let them that are named
be admitted: but if those who are elected by them shall by the Canons be
hindered from admission, then let the most holy Bishop of the place take care of
promoting the more worthy.

Si sumptus etc. and Si dignos; And observe the explication of Nominati, by
Electi; and the Bishops privilege not only to refuse the unworthy, but in
that case at his own will to promote other more worthy; can not understand as
he does Inuestiture, but the course of presentation as now it is.

Next he produces the same word Nominare in a quotation out of Cicero his
Epistles ad Brutum. Ep. 7. where he says the word Nominatio in the purer time
of Latin signifies giving a place or office that is void.

Brutus to Cicero, are these; In Pansae locum petere constituit (meaning
Bibulus) eam nominationem a Te petimus, neque digniorem nominare potes quam
Bibulum, Bibulus intends to sue for Pansas place -- we desire that Nomination
of you -- neither can you nominate a more worthy then Bibulus. Where Brutus
asks this of Tully, being then (as Manutius affirms) Augur. Concerning
whose office, he notes out of the Rhetorickes ad Herennium lib. 1. Lex iubet
Augurem in demortui locum qui petat, in Concione nominare, The law commands the
Augur to name in a public assembly, who may stand for the place of the dead;
And again, Augur quida^ damnatus de pecunijs repetundis in demortui locum qui
petat nominauit, An Augur condemned for bribery named who may sue for the place
of one departed in an assembly. In which words no giving a place or office is
signified, but only a duty of naming who are or may be competitors for such
an office; that the people who have choice may auspicato take notice how to
bestow their Suffrages; For else why should it be in Concione in such an
assembly? but if not so, it can be only to give a suffrage, for I need not
tell our Author that the Consulship (for in that Vibius Pansa died) was not
collated by any particular nomination, but in Comitijs by suffrages. Neither
yet did Bibulus (for whom Brutus made, and, no doubt, obtained his suite of
Cicero in nomination) succeed in the office. O strange interpretations of a
Critic, to make good his false opinions; well it had been if he had insisted
on his first sense, page 86. of Nomination, where he says praesentation is
only as a nomination, not giving interest and possession.

ANIMADVERSIONS on the thirteenth Chapter.
Infeodations, P. 395.
but before the Statutes of Dissolution 31. Henry 8. me thinks he proves
but few; for that of Odo Bishop of Bayeux and Earl of Kent, saying, Decimas,
quas mei fi^eles habebant; and the other of Decimae hominum meorum; and the
other by d' Oilly, are but the Landlords confirmations of their Tenants gifts
of Tithes of those lands held of them. For Lords had authority therein, as may
appear in the Chartulary of Abingdon, p. 303. where Bradinden giving his
Tithes, said, He would entreat Robert de Insula his Lord, Quatenus illius
permissione and concessu suo hoc confirmaret, vt haec Ecclesiae ipsius Decimae
donatione firmius inposterum potiretur: and the Lord has a Right in the land
demised to his Tenant.

That of Robert d' Oilly is thought to be an Infeodation by the book of Osney,
as that other of his, which repenting himself of, because Contra naturalem
Ecclesiae vsum, he had abused them, he revoked and gave them to the Free
Chapel of Saint George in the castle at Oxford.

But hence his Corollarie is, P. 402.
that it will still remain most probable, if not true, that what Infeodations
were in England, had their original* as well out of the right of arbitrary
disposition of Tithes, challenged by the Laity, without the grant of the
Pope, or Church, as out of Compositions or conueyances from the Clergy.

neither probable, nor clear, especially concerning new created Tithes.

But this he proves, because no sufficient story, no credible monument, no
passage or testimony of worth, can justify that general right of Reteiner or
disposition, to have been given by the Clergy, or Pope, upon any condition
whatsoever.

never say, that the Church by general Indulgence or Canon, did allow any Lay
men, alone to dispose or retain Tithes; but for special considerations, did
grant such privilege to particular men, to the praeiudice of the common right;
and where it could not help, was feign to tolerate. For to show this, all the
Testimonies almost before cited, are alleged.



P. 405.
next Section, he considers Exemptions, and that either by Privileges,
praescription, or grants, and compositions, and Unity of possessions. But in
this, because all came originally from the Church, me thinks I see, how
Praelati were Pilati, and these Dispensatores were Dissipatores: So perditio
nostra ex nobis.

But O that our Lord the King by command, and the consciences of men by
religious consideration would root out these weeds, which mar the come, and
hinder the labourer; These Exemptions, these relics of Romes highest
superstition, the maintenance of Monkerie, which for avoiding scandal, Aug.
contra Epist. Parmen. lib. 1. cap. 2.
though we suffer, yet will be required of the consciences of men. But, Ego
parco, non inuehor, non exaggero, dolorem nostrum melius premo quam promo: I
forbear, I inueigh not, I do not exaggerate, I better conceal, then reveal
our grief. He whose land must be exempted from paying Tithes, let him
consider, if his soul may not be exempted from the blessing of God. And so I
come to the last Chapter.

ANIMADVERSIONS on the fourteenth Chapter.
IN this last Chapter, in the first, second, and third Sections, first he
points at the Histories of the jurisdiction of Tyths in the Saxons and
Normans times, and since King John. And first proposes this axiom.

It is clear by the practiced common law, P. 411. N. B.
both of this day, and also of the ancientest times, that we have in our year
books, that regularly the jurisdiction of spiritual Tithes, that is, of the
direct and original question of the Right, belongs -- properly to the
Ecclesiastical Court. As all spiritual causes, as the Nouel. 123.. Si pro
Criminal. Si Ecclesiasticum negotium sit, nullam communionem habento Ciuiles
Magistratus, cum ea disceptatione, sed religiosissimi Episcopinegotio finem
imponunto. If it be an Ecclesiastical suite, let the Civil Magistrates have
nothing to do there with that Plea, but let the Bishops end it. Yet he
says, P. 412.
in the Saxons time such Pleas were in the Hundred Court, before the Bishop and
Sheriff of the County, as out of the Laws of King Athelstan.

Hlotharius or Charlemain. Leg. long. lib. 3. Tit. 3. c. 7. and in Addit. 4. ad
Cap. cap. 73. A comite vel a misso nostro distringatur, let him be distrained
by our Shrieue or messenger: And to Charles the Great, his addition to the
Laws of the Bauarians n. 10. And to the Canon in Synodo Mogunt. sub Rabano.
cap. 7. where, in cases of Tithes the Lay-officer is added for execution.

P. 413.
But in the Normans time this Hundred Court for spiritual cases was forbidden;

Bishop or Archdeacon which did Tenere placita, that is, Judge cause^, in the
Hundred Court, must appoint themselves places to hear such causes, because
since in the Hundred all suites were brought ad iudicium Secularium hominum*
that is of a Jury, the Conqueror therefore redressed it and distinguished the
seats of Judicature.

P. 414.
But after Henry the second, Tyths were exercised in both Courts, says he,
as well Secular as Spiritual, and that by original suite, for the Spiritual
Court he finds one example in King Stephens time.



In the confirmation of William Archbishop 1131. There it is said, Decimas de
Modingham, de quibus per Rectorem de Eltham, coram nobis fuerint impetiti
propterea ex consilio and assensu Iurisperitorum nobis assidentium ijsdem
Monaechis adiudicamus. The Tithes of Modingham about which they were impleaded
before us by the Parson of Eliham, wherefore by the Counsel and assent of our
Lawyers assessors with us in the business, we adiudge them to the same Monks.
This in the days of Henry the first.

So Theobaldus in the confirmation to the Priorie of Leeds, praecipue Decimam
de Summerfelda quam in Synodo Cantuariae ante nostram praesentiam in iudicio
d^ctus Prior disrationauit, Especially the Tithes of Summerfeld which in a
Consistory at Canterbury, the same Prior before our presence did euict.

So Richard Archbishop made his confirmations upon occasion of the suite before
him, for the Portion of Geddings.

Some others might be produced of those times, and since, there is no question
for the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. Those Appeals to Rome in Johannes
Sarisburiensis, P. 415.
by him cited, may certify, which after were forbidden, by reason of the
immodest behavior of Thomas Becket, who (to use the discreet words of the
same John, Epist. 150. Dominum Regem and suos zelo quodam inconsultius visus
est ad amaritudinem prouocasse, cum pro loco, and tempore, and personis, multa
fu^runt dispensanda, He seems to have provoked his Lord the King to
bitterness with an unadvised zeal, whereas for respect of time, pl^ce, and
person, much was to be remitted and dispensed with) thereby did alienate
altogether the King from Ecclesiastical proceedings, who then forbade, the
then usual courses of Appeals (which were the chief of those Auitae
consuetudines, in the Epistle cited 150.) that so all such Titles were for that
time determined before the King, (the Archbishop and the other Bishops being in
opposition to the King.) But for his examples; How in the Kings case; or of
others, the parties being of other Provinces; or the matters being Churches,
wherein the Patronage was accounted Temporal; or the party being in the Kings
service out of the land, may alter the case (to which all his examples are to
be reduced) I know not: Yet also that usually the Se^ular power, though against
the Canons and claim of the Clergy, would intermeddle in some cases, cannot
be denied; though our Author acknowledge the direct Jurisdiction to belong to
the Spiritual Court page 411. and urges Fleta and Breton for it, page 428.

In the next Section concerning the time after Henry 2. and King John, He
says, the Secular Jurisdiction through fear, Page 421.
was almost out of use in this kind.

no Prohibition, Fine, or Writ, or Record in all the following Paragraphs, but
after these days of fear, the days of Henry 2. and K. John: for after that,
the Canons were more neglected, and the Secular Jurisdiction more increased
then before; which I affirm against that odious passage in his Reuiew,
wherewith he ends his Treatise, whereout, it may be, others may pick more
sacrilege then he meant. And therefore leaving him in the following
Law-passages, to be examined by some Lawyers, who may either find him altering
the question from Tithes to Aduouson, (as to my vnders^anding he altogether
does) or to be otherwise erring in his Collections, I desist from further
answer of his more feared then fearful book. Only for a Corrollarie,
desiring of both Jurisdictions, and the King the Head of both; that since so
many godly and gracious Laws and Canons, in former ages have been made, and
with such conscience by our Ancestors regarded; that the sacrilegious
Tytherobbers, by pretense of new Customs and Considerations, may not be
countenanced; but even the old customs and rates of things, as in those times
they were worth, may in time be remitted: For with what conscience may a man
retain his Tithe, and pay for it but a penie or halfe-penie, which is now xij.
pence, or ij. shillings? And why should the Tenth be less worth, then any
other of the Nine parts are? that so God may have his right, and all may have
Gods blessing.

ANIMADVERSIONS upon such Passages in the Reuiew, which either that worthy
Knight Sr. JAMES SEMPILL has not confuted, or are in the Book before
remembered.
Having read the Book, and then seeing the Title of a Reuiew, I hoped some
religious retractation or recognition (what by the conscience of the weakness
of his proofs, and what by the censures of his book) should have been
published vt secundas parts habeat modestiae qui primas non poterat habere
Sapientiae. But that partial conceit which each man has to the child of his
own brain, especially younger men, has engaged him herein to defend with
strange resolution, what against all truth he had affirmed: Whereof, since in
many places of my former refutation I have made mention, and in some others, am
happily prevented, I will only insist against those passages which are
pretermitted.

And to begin, Page 461.
I must pass to the 4. Chapter wherein a new Quotation of that Great Father
Epiphanius is proposed and insisted upon; to prove, that neither then Tithes
were paid, nor to be paid, because merely ceremonial, as Circumcision, and
the like. The place quoted is in Haeresi 50. of the Tessares-decatitae, of whom
Epiphanius says, that, except this Haeresie of celebrating Easter on the
fourteenth Moon (...), They have all things as the Church. But for the defense
of this Haeresie they proposed the curse of the Law against those that did
otherwise; To which Epiphanius answers, That so the Law curses the
uncircumcised, and (...), those that did not offer at Jerusalem; Ranking
Tithes amongst abrogated Ceremonies, which they also yet agreeing in all things
with the Church, did not, as may seem, observe.

Damascen de Imaginibus Orat. 1. in another case, said of Epiphanius; Vna
hirundo non facit ver, neque vnius oration tanti ponderis est, vt totius
Ecclesiae abortu ad occasum Solis propagatae, mores and instituta possit
euertere; one Swallow makes no summer, neither is the speech of one so
weighty, that it may overthrow the manners and ordinances of the whole Church
scattered from East to West. I will not say so of Epiphanius: Neither will I
say as our Author; He did not sufficiently understand; and neither will I
reprehend him for this, as he is rejected by all for his opinion of the feast
of Christ's Nativity, but make answer from his own sense by repetition of his
former words. At hi quidem omnia habent velut Ecclesia, aberrant autem ab
omnibus, eo quod non consequentiae and doctrinae rituum attendunt, Iudaicis
adhuc fabulis addicti, and neque aequalia ipsis docent; But these have all
things like the Church, yet they err from all, because they observe not the
consequence and doctrine of the Rites of the Church, but still being addicted
to Jewish fables, yet do not hold all as they do. Whence appears, though,
as after it is said, they agreed in the principles of Religion, of the
Trinity, of the Books of Scripture, the Resurrection of the Dead; yet that in
these Rites of the Church by consequence derived from the Doctrine (of which
sort are Tithes) they did err, and being addicted to the Jewish ceremonial
Law, they would observe the day of Easter in the same time as theirs was
observed, for fear of a curse; and yet would not Tithe as they did, and to
whom, and where they did, nor be circumcised; since alike they should observe
the one as the other, if they regarded the curse of the Law. So that here
Epiphanius may seem to rank no Tything with Circumcision, but such as was in
the circumstance Judicial; not to condemn Tything as he does Circumcision,
but only Tything to such persons as Legal Priests were, and in such places as
the Law praescribed: This place makes not against the substance of Tithes, but
the manner and place of Tything, and herein directly follows Eusebius
Demonstrat. Euangelicarum, lib. 1. cap. 10. Whereas to omit his opinion as
uncertain elsewhere; For the practice of these times, Saint Chrysostom his
opposite, and Saint Hierome his defender against John of Jerusalem, in the
condemnation of Origene, may testify, whose authorities both for the practice
and right, appear in the Catalogue, and in other places.

In the sixth Chapter, P. 467.
reuiewing his opinion of Arbitrarie consecrations, in the third 400. years,
he puts this Demurre to the consideration of the Reader; How otherwise could
the Founders and Benefactors of Monasteries, have made Tithes part of their
Endowment? The answer is ready.



But thence he inferres, the validity of the Donors act, P. 478. Ad Tit de
Decimis, Cap. Dudum. number. 11.
for that Confirmatio ex proprio significatu denotat firmitatem actus
confirmati, as Panormitan: And, Nihil iuris noui tribuit, sed tantum vetus
confirmat, as Innocent 4. ad dictum locum, etc.

confirmant, but a concedent, and conferring act, as by the form of
Gundulphus in his Charter, and of all such, which at the time of the Donation
gave their authority.

And secondly, some confirmation may be ad solemnitatem actus, and so give no
right, others, ad necessitatem actus, without which, is no valide act.

And thirdly, the distinction of Angelus de Clauasio in summa, Verbo,
Confirmatio summi Pontificis, may limit those rules. Confirmatio summi
Pontificis ex certa scientia, facit validum, quod erat nullum respectu iuris
positiui; facit firmum, quod alias est infirmum; solemn, quod non est solemn,
supplendo defectus solemnitatis omissae. Si vero fiat in forma communi, non ex
certa scientia, nihil iuris tribuit, sed solum vetus confirmat: The
confirmation of the Pope out of certain knowledge, makes that to be valide,
which was void in Law; makes that strong, which was otherwise weak; that
solemn, which was not solemn, supplying the defects of solemnity omitted: But
if it be made in common form, not out of certain knowledge, it gives no
right, but only confirms the old.

But he proceeds, and allows, that since, about the year 1200. such
grants, even with confirmations after were disallowed, as appears out of the
Canon of Innocent 3. Tit. de his. q. f. a prael. cap. 7 cum Apostolica. and,
Tit. de Decimis c. dudum.

first place is very falsely alleged, such graunts by the consent of the
Bishop, being there allowed; and, Constabit ipsa Donatio, perpetua firmitate
subnixa, are the words. In the second place indeed, the grant is disallowed,
though confirmed by the Pope, but why? because the Tithes were before debitae
to another Church, which had given no consent by the Bishop, whose right might
not be impeached, and a sufficient praescription, since the confirmation could
not be proved. This illation therefore out of these places, is not good,
neither until after the Council at Lions under Gregory the tenth, concerning
whose times the three Monks speak, were grants with confirmations disallowed.
These are therefore false.

And so is another which he adds, more false: For he says, These two places,
Tit. de his qua fiunt a Praelat. etc. cum Apostolica, and Titulo de Decimis, c.
Dudum, are expressly of New creations at least, not of Infeodated Tithes, as
every Canonist will acknowledge.

first place is plainly of Infeodated Tithes, and ends this conclusion with
the interpretation of the Lateran Council under Alexander the third, Hoc autem
de illis Decimis intelligimus, quae Laicis in Feodum perpetuo sunt concessae:
But this I speak of Infeodate Tithes. And in the third place, they cannot be
New created, but, Vesprimensi Ecclesiae debitae, quas non permitterent solui,
due to that Church, which they would not suffer to be paid. And they are
commanded, Non vlterius impedire, quo minus Decimas percipiat memoratas, etc.
Not farther to hinder, that the foresaid Tithes be not paid.

subtlety, P. 469.
which was allowed for the peace of the Church (the claim of praescription of
thirty or forty years) and was praetended before these last 400. years, as
himself has showed, by the example of Goffridus Vindocinensis, page 75. when
such Consecratours, if any were, might have been named. But this praescription
of Times in such Parochial right, was even in Concilio Chalcedon. Can. 17.
decided, and so by Pope Gelasius, in Epistola ad Siculos, number. 2. where he
cites the Imperial Laws, and both Gratian and the Decretals are full of
proof. And those two Canons, Tit. De praescript. c. 6. and 5. quoted, do not
at all insinuate any such claim of prescription to countenance any such act of
Lay consecration, but only are Canons in general.

falsehood, which, he says, seems certain; that the Titles derived by Lay
consecrations, were carefully concealed by the possessors, in such public
Records of their revenues as were of more common and open use, in their Legal
proceeding at the Cannon Law.

Perchance he has not met with any, yet therefore let him hear this out of
our Chartularies, that in most of the confirmations of the succeeding Bishops,
whereof we have most until Anno 1478. expressly the Donors are named, for so
in that year is the confirmation of John Russell, Bishop of Rochester, And in
all pleadings the ancient Muniments were exhibited, wherein the special
Charters of the Donors and Bishops were showed.

But for conclusion, N. B.
he bewrays the novelty of the opinion of Arbitrarie consecrations, even
arrogating (and well may he) this strange doctrine to his own invention, to
which none else has pointed at that wrote of this subject, and therein he
persuades himself, that every understanding Reader will think them worthy
his consideration.

P 470.
Appropriations, his consideration is answered in the Book, and his inference,
though it may seem religious, Namely, that because they are appropriated by
the dedication and vows of men, that therefore they may not be profaned to
Lay men's uses: Yet when they shall consider that these Appropriations and
dedications (of new created Tithes forsooth) were only intended to the
maintenance of such places, which now by reason of the superstition there, they
can willingly acknowledge to be rightfully suppressed: Now the aim of their
dedication, the Monastery, being taken away (to the possessions whereof the
Donors did by many imprecations upon the detractors or detainers religiously
bind them) what now upon his supposition and proof shall hinder, but that
profane Atheists (who will wave the right De Iure Diuino) shall think they
may without scruple of conscience retain them. For they will say, these
Tithes, not before in conscience due, were consecrated to such a Monastery,
Now the Monastery being dissolved, who has right to them? By the Donors gift
none; he gave them for ever; Has the King? Then we may buy it, say they;
Therefore with a safe conscience we may keep it: Let all the curses of the
Donors, light on the dissoluer of the Monastery, but upon us who bought it for
a valuable consideration; no curse can fall: But if he and our Author
consider the Divine right, then such euasions as Civil Titles, customs,
exemptions can nothing free the conscience of sacrilege, but that he may fear
a destruction to himself, who deuoureth what is holy.

But He knows better then I, that if an house of Religion had been dissolved
by death or cession of the Religious, or otherwise before the Statutes of
dissolution of Abbeys, etc. In that case all appropriations belonging to it
should have been presentatiue, and the patronage should have reuerted to the
heirs of the Donors, and the Tithes to the Parish Priest, whose they were by
Divine right; since he did the duty of Tithes: And let those that hold
impropriations, in their consciences weigh their Title, with Gods right in
Tithes.

In another Section of this Chapter He speaks of Episcopal right in Tithes:
Page 472.
And after some examples out of Krantzius (whom before he so scoffed at) he
remembers a passage in Helmoldus Hist. S^lau. cap. 29. Where Gerold Bishop of
Oldenburg, writing to the inhabitants of the Deserts of Wagria, to pay him
Tithes, amongst other passages, he says, Praeceptum cui obedierunt
Patriarchae, Abraham scilicet, Isaac, and Jacob, and omnes qui secundum fidem
facti sunt filij Abrahae per quod laudem etiam and praemia aeterna consecuti
sunt, Apostoli quoque and Apostolici viri hoc ipsum ex ore Dei mandauerunt,
etc. A precept to which the Patriarchs Abraham, Isaac and Jacob obeyed, and
all these that through faith are made the sons of Abraham, by which they
obtained praise and everlasting rewards; The Apostles also and Apostolic men,
have taught this from the mouth of God. Here he insults, saying, It seems he
was in some confidence, that because he was Bishop, he might make them believe
any thing of the Patriarchs and Apostles. And you may see, that he loved the
profit of the Tithes so well, that he would stand upon any unlucky venturing
his credit in Divinity, or upon offering a plain falsehood in writing for
them. For though they were due generally as he would have them, yet how would
he have proved that all the Patriarchs, as the sons of Abraham paid them, or
that thereby all had gained praemia aeterna; or whence could he have justified
it, that the Apostles had ordained it?

Bishop, strive to show his opposition against the Divine right (whereas he
protests in the Preface of his book, that he writes not to oppose it) he
would never have so needlessly opposed that in him, which all that hold Tithes
to be de Iure Diuino, dare, and do defend it: namely, that all the Patriarchs
and faithful did, or ought to have paid Tithes; and that observing this and the
other Commandment, they went to Heaven. Let Council. Aquense. ann. 837. c. 18.
be considered; Quod Melchizedec Sacerdos Dei altissimi Typum gesserit Christi,
Catholica sentit Ecclesiae, quod ei Abraham ex omnibus Decimas dedit, ipsius
Abrahae ingentia commendantur praeconia, quem imitantur, qui Sacerdotibus
Christi ob illius honorem and amorem decimas dant, and ab illius merito
sequ^strantur qui Deo oblatas Decimas auferunt: That Melchizedek the Priest of
the high God, was a Type of Christ, the Church knows. Abraham for giving
Tithes of all, is commended greatly, whom they imitate, who for the honor and
love of Christ, paid Tithes to his Priests; and they are separated from his
merit, who take them away. They are the sons of Abraham that do the works
of Abraham. As for the Apostles their tradition and ordination, how many of the
ancient learned have acknowledged, vide Catalogum.

Page 473.
The next passage is to disgrace the claiming of Tithes, by a speech of Aimoinus
in the life of Abbo, where in the tumultuarie Council of S. Denis, cap. 9. the
Monk in favor of Abbo and his Covent, relates, how when the Bishops met,
secundum vulgar prouerbium cunctum suum sermonem ad Decimas verterunt
Ecclesiarum; Which is, says he, they went from the matter.



And here in that it is said, Laicis ac Deo seruientibus Monachis, To Laymen
and Monks serving God, he will not allow the distinct signification, but
rather conceive them expositiue, one of another, and by both, that Monks, who
in their esteem were accounted Laymen, were signified.

But then, why is the disjunctive put between Laicis ac Deo seruientibus
Monachis? Why do they call them Lay, whom they knew were of the Clergy? So
was Abbo himself* cap. 6. a Priest, and others of his Monastery: But the last
words of the next Chapter before this, does plainly manifest it, since that
Abbo himself in his Apologeticum does complain of it; Est etiam alius error
grauissimus, quo fertur Altar esse Episcopi, and Ecclesiam alterius cuiuslibet
Domini, cum ex domo consecrata and Altari, vnum quoddam fiat quod dicitur
Ecclesia, videte aequissimi Principes, quo nos ducit cupiditas dum refrigescat
charitas: There is also another most grievous error, whereby it is said, that
the Altar is the Bishops, but the Church belongs to another Lord; whereas of
a house consecrated and the Altar, is one thing made which is called a Church.
See, ye just Princes, whither covetousness leads us when charity is cold.
And out of these words, who cannot collect Lay-Infeodations, which yet to have
been, our Author is not willing to confess, and therefore admits that
interpretation.

After this He reuieweth Infeodations, Page 474.
and would not admit them from the Church; And therefore whereas Bertrandus de
Argentre brings this Argument, If Infeodation of Tithes had not come from the
Church, then had the Tithes paid Tithes also to the Church, by reason of the
many Canons to pay Tithe of all Annual increase.

paradoxe, which neither Canonist nor Divine will grant him; nor he can
prove, though he call it the known beginning of Tithes created and consecrated
to Monasteries by Laymen: for, says he, the same might be objected against
them so consecrated, And if so consecrated and not Translated from Bishops or
Churches, so they might and ought; But the New Creations (forsooth) as these
Infeodations came from Churches: And his answer is vain, grounding upon that,
which being his own invention, he should have known to have been admitted,
before he had framed such a comparison. And for that part of the Argument,
that because of the Churches many Canons, it is likely they should have paid
Tithes if not from the Church, He strangely enueyeth against such Arguments,
as ridiculous, and gross, and childish; Which if the Canons were but words
without penalties annexed, and all men must in charity be thought disobedient
and irregular, then they might easily be contemned, and an Argument from
praeceptum, ergo factum, would be as weak, as a posse ad esse. But the Canons
were otherwise, and so should his censure and his answer have been, Page 70.
who should maintain a lawful practice, and as he boasts, allowed clearly
by the Clergy; or else ground all he speaks upon abuses, which to make the
consciences of men afraid of if they did alter, is worse, then deserving such
Titles.

Animaduersions on the last Chapter.
From thence, I pass over to the last Chapter, for the next is only a defense
of the Common Law, which P. Blesensis calls Consuetudinarium, and Seculare
ius, Ep. 25. and the Eight is, the history of William the Conqueror, and a
defense of the language of the Common Law, which is so contemptible among the
many pettielazie ignorants.

And in the last Chapter, is an honest passage from the ground before, of
Arbitrary Consecrations against Impropriations, (but the danger thereof I have
before discovered) and a compassionate consideration upon the manner of the
Dissolution in Henry the eight his time; to which he adds Rodericke Mors his
complaint to the Parliament, which is in his 14. Chapter of that Treatise,

P. 488. etc.
But his Conclusion is a passage of odious consequence, That the payment of
Tithes in these last 400. years, grew more regarded, by how much the
Decretalls and Canons grew most dreadful to Princes and subject, to urge this
on to a continual practice; and that with execution of the reigning Censures
of the Church: And that the insolency of the Pope and Clergy put these Canons
and Decretalls more in execution.

Animaduersio.
The ill Sequel of this, in the conceit of those, who in hate to the Church of
Romes practice, and Decretall authority, (especially growing insolent) will
be glad to make conscience of their gain, who cannot consider? when some
froward praecise Atheist can say, This exaction of Tithes proceeded from Romes
insolency; Therefore let us go out of Babylon, say they, and we will pay none.

But his conclusion is all false, For since these last 400. years there has
been less power of the Canons in practice; more customs maintained against
the Church, De modo Decimandi, and De non Decimando; then ever before: The
insolences of the Pope gained contempt, not obedience: And the Charters of
Kings to the Church were less favorable then before. That of Richard the
first, in the place cited ( who with great favor gave them an indulgent
Charter of their Liberties, says he) what was it, but whereas the Clergy for
his ransom, gave great sums of money, he by that Charter promises that such
their extraordinary contribution should not be taken as a precedent to tax
them for future occasion, Nec hac vel alia occasion volumus dignitatibus
Sanctae Matris Ecclesiae in aliquo vel eius libertatibus obuiare, sed pro omni
posse nostro and scire (Deo volente) volumus omnem eius immunitatem and
vniuersas eius dignitates, and libertates (vt dignu^ est) conseruare integras,
and pro loco and tempore quibus licuerit augmentare, Neither that by this or
any other occasion we would cross the Liberties of the holy Church in any
thing, but in what we can and know (God willing) we will preserve all their
immunitie, and all their dignities and liberties safe, as is fit, and as time
and place shall permit, will augment them.

Is here any more then what Kings at their Coronations did then promise? and
he for his ransom could do no less. And yet in this Kings time was there not
one Fine of Tithes levied in his Book p. 441? And some other Actions of
discontent to the Clergy, although the remembrance of his misery redressed,
by the Clergy, did make him more respectfull then his Successors? And which is
the Authors inference, was Parochial right in his time so settled, but that
many translations and appropriations to Monasteries were admitted, which until
the seventeenth year of King John his Successor, that is until the Council
of Lateran. 1215. (if then) was not restrained as in many places he does
acknowledge? But in the time after, how many petitions of the Clergy, in
general, in particular for redress of Tything? What prohibitions to interrupt
the Jurisdiction, himself does in the 8. and 14. Chapters strive to prove.
Let not therefore any be persuaded that the original of exacting Tithes, was
from the insolency of the Pope, whose easin^sse in granting Exemptions, giving
way to Translations and Appropriations, giving approbation t^ the Doctrine of
the Schoolmen herein, has given occasion to all sacrilegious irregularitie.

Sermon. 1 de Conuers. Pau^i.
So that the Clergy may say in S. Bernards words unto God, Egressa est in
quitas a Senioribus Vicarijs tuis, qui videntur regere populum tuum. -- and
ipsi in persecutione tua primi qui videntur in Ecclesia tua primatum diligere,
gerere principatum Iniquity has proceeded from thy Vicars, O God, who seem
to rule thy people, and they seem to be the first in thy persecution, who both
love and have the primacie of the Church.

And thus have I passed this Authors Book; of whom by his book, Lib. 7
Indict. 2. Epist. 91.
I see that Eloge which S. Gregory gave of Barbatianus the Monk to be true of
him, Sunt bona quae in eo placeant, sed hoc est in illo vehemens vitium, quia
valde sibi esse sapiens videtur. Epist. 77.
And that of S. Bernards of P. Abelardus, Videtur plus nouitatis curiosus quam
studiosus veritatis, grauarique de omni re sentire cum alijs, and dicere, quod
aut solus non dixerit aut primus.

And concerning his Book, in it more pains then truth, more strange reading,
then strong reasoning; more quotations, then proofs; more will (God be
thanked) then power; good to use, August. confess. lib. 3. cap 3. Lactant. l.
1. c. 1.
but dangerous to believe; a History of Tithes, but not true; not only, but
even the Authors surname backward, NEDLES; or in sum, Sacrilega curiositas,
Arguta malitia.

LONDON, Printed by JOHN BILL, M.DC.XIX.


