The debate between Pride and Lowlines, pleaded to an issue in Assise: And
how a Jury with great indifferency being impannelled, and ready to have
given their verdict, were straungely intercepted, no less pleasant then
profitable. F. T.

O taste and see how gracious the Lord is, Blessed are all they that put their
trust in him.

Seen, and allowed.

Imprinted at London by John Charlwood, for Rafe Newbery, dwelling in
Fleete-strete a little about the Condite. ()

To the godly and gentle Reader.
THou have (good Reader) in this short volume
Sum matters that to thee may seem vncooth:
As speech, to things improper, made commune,
But yet mark thon if what they say be sooth.
And if thou find it so have thou no scorn,
Thereof, for their vnlikelines that spoke:
For evident it is long heretoforn,
Christ said the stones should speaken for his sake.
I could prove if me list to stand thereon,
Such manner speaking not to be so new:
As that they have not been right long agon,
Sometime admitted, but sometime very true.
For Balams Ass did speak in very deed,
And him reproved for his couetise:
That went to cursen Israel for meede,
Which caused him to chaungen his advise.
Read we not of a horn that did blaspheme,
The name of God through pride and arrogance:
Yet of his words and speech who did misdeeme,
Or sought not rather their signifiance.
Have therefore (gentle Reader) in good part,
This little volume wherein thou may find:
Some matters (though not pullished with art,)
To make thee laugh and recreate thy mind.
If other matter it may yeelden thee,
As moral counsel, whereby thou may learn:
What things are good to follow, what to flee,
Then thank me when we meeten at the term.
And pray God bless our Queen and Conntrey,
And grant her long to reign and prosperous:
And to us all after this journey,
In heaven with him self a dwelling house.
MEN talken diversely concerning dreams,
Some say they come of causes natural:
Of cholers, melancholies, blood, and fleames,
And been such as their cause material.
Some say they come of superfluity,
That any wight has take of meat or drink:
Engendring in the head fumositie,
While thither from the stomach they do swynk.
And therefore do distinguishe of the time,
When they appear, if in the latter sleep:
The more remarkable they them define,
If in the first they take the lesser keep.
Some holden that they come of love or fear,
Which any wight by day time has icaught:
To thing or place, and wishes to be there,
And this is deep imprinted in the thought.
And so says Cato in his little book,
And therewith does their credit elleuate:
As thing whereof, but small regard he took,
All for the cause ye heard me tell of late.
Others them holden significatife,
Of truth not to be vily pended:
As messages to men of death or life,
How things begoon are likely to be ended.
Now whether this come of perfection,
Which God has given to the soul of man:
Such providence and such direction,
By proper kind when he him first began.
Me think to iudgen so were arrogance,
As from the deity to derogate:
And man above his quality advance,
So making him forgetten his estate.
And as it were a man to deifie,
And to such ma^ters him to intromit:
Whereof our God alone has property,
But as him pleases to reuealen it.
And show to man by revelation,
Some matter strange that he has purposed:
It were great wrong and usurpation,
To say that man's wit had it for warned.
For proof does show that it is otherwise,
Namely for that we can not read aryght:
Theffect of them, ne in our heart comprise,
Except that God have put it in our might.
And that by gift and grace especial,
Such as he has, but given unto few:
Who grew in princes favors therewithal,
For they such secret matters could show.
As Joseph did to Pharao as we read,
And Daniel to Nabuchodonosor:
Whose dreams were frightful and of myckel dread,
Therefore I think as I have said before.
That such been rare and very special,
And unto such as God before does warn:
Of his intent, and things that will befall,
Concerning dearth or cheap, goodness or harm.
This gather I by Saul in holy book,
Now fallen into miseries extreme:
He deemed that of God he was forsook,
For he appeared not to him in dream.
Ne other vision as says the story,
Wherefore he thought his life in distress:
But yet for to relieve his heart full sorry,
He asked counsel at the Phitonesse.
As in that book is to be read at length,
And many a matter after and before:
Concerning dreams, their virtue and their strength
Thereof as now ye get of me no more.
But thus much I have said for this respect
That dreams though some be vain and of no force
Yet are there some that bringen their effect,
And would of men be waied any remors.
Now having often spoken of their efficacy,
And of their cause as much as I can tell:
From thence to other matters I will pass,
To show not long ago what me befell.
And namely in this month of May,
The time I do remember very well:
For it was just upon the sixteenth day,
And eight a clock had rong S. Pulchres bell.
Me thought the weather was not very calm,
For it had reigned all the day beforn:
Wherefore I took my book and red a Psalm,
And bad my host good night until the morn
So when I had me shrouded in my bed,
And thanked God for graces manifold:
Full soon had sleep icaught me by the head,
And Straightly with his arms he can me fold.
This pleasant sleep, this gentle creature,
Nurs of disgestion to man and beast:
Withouten whom none of both can endure,
Of no degree from greatest to the least.
But now to tellen thee my chief purpose,
That has me caused all this thing to write:
And orderly the same for to disclose,
And all the circumstances to endite.
By that time I had slept an hour or less,
I began to dream so wonderful and strange:
As but a few have done before I guess,
Ne yet in sleep so far did ever raunge.
Me thought that I was walking in a Park,
Amyd the wooddes among the pleasant leaves:
Where many was the bird did sweetly carpe,
Among the thorns, the bushes, and the greues.
Which in my heart did kindle such desire,
To hear their songs, their mirth, and melody:
So chaungeable as no heart could require,
That suddenly me thought, Lord where am I.
Besides the stately trees which to behold,
With bodies straight vpryght and of such length:
As skant ye would believe me if I told,
Ne of their bulk for timber and their strength.
By that time I had walked there a while,
About a quarter of an hour forth right:
I think a little more then half a mile,
Of pleasant feeldes I began to have a sight.
So painted and so colored I ween,
As by her leave, and with her patience:
Nas Floras land, that fresh and lusty queen,
Ne with such verdure, and such redolence.
This (may ye ihinke) me seemed very strange,
And so it did, I put you out of doubt:
I could not satisfy me self to raunge,
These pleasant feelds, and meadows round about.
Till at the last I came into a dale,
Amid two mighty hills on either side:
From whence a sweet stream down did auale,
And clear as Crystal through the same did slide.
Which to behold I had such great pleasure,
That power had I none from thence to go:
Considered also that I had leisure,
And in such place had never been or thoe.
Till at the last as I stood by this brook,
And on these matters mused in my mind:
I chanced up the hill to cast my look,
If happyly some people I might find.
And suddenly me thought I had espied,
A thing come down the hilward toward me:
But not on foot, ne yet on horse did ride,
Which me thought very strange there for to see.
And it beheld with full and whole intent,
How downward al at ease it helld the way:
I mused not a little what it meant,
When of the hill it passed had the sway.
I did perceive then what it was in deed,
That is to weete a goodly velvet breech:
Which in it furniture did so exceed,
As hardly shall ye find if that ye seech.
For it was all of velvet very fine,
The nether stocks of pure Granado silk:
Such as came never upon legs of mine,
Their cooller clean contrary unto milk.
This breech was paned in the fairest wise,
And with right satin very costly lyned:
Embrodered according to the guise,
With golden lace full craftily engined.
So when they were come down beneath the hill,
Into the valley whereas I did stand:
I them beheld and looked on my fill,
But ^old so much as touch them with my hand.
For strange me thought from whence they should be
Some body will come after them anon:
Wherefore I will attend (thought I) to see,
For wonder is if such things been alone.
Then to that other hill I cast mine eye,
While I was musing as I have ye told:
And suddenly (me thought) I did epsy,
That even as the velvet breeches rold.
There came another pair, but softer pase,
And never ceased rolling till they came:
Into the dale, and there had taken place,
Now listen, for me thought this little game.
These breeches I did bound on either side,
As one that was in middle them between:
These last were but of cloth withouten pride,
And stitche ne guard upon them was to seen.
Of cloth (I say) both upper stock and nether,
Paned and single lyned next to the thie:
Light for thee were, meet for all sort of weather,
Now paraduenture ye will think I lie.
Then velvet breeches did begin to say,
To them of cloth, as ye shall after here:
But lest ye maruayle how and by what way,
These things did speak, that never speaken ere.
(...)e wot it is a dream that I you tell,
Whose demonstrations are very dark:
And yet unto the truth accorden well,
Admitted as they must be, therefore hark.
The dream of seven blasted ears of corn,
Which Pharao the king saw while he slept:
Devour the seven good ears them beforn,
Were strange as this, and yet their promise kept.
And eke the seven kine that were so lean
And evil favored as they might be:
The seven fat kyne did eat up clean,
What likely hood of truth was there to see.
And many other things that seem untrue,
In figures, and in vncooth terms of speech:
Have been and will, this matter is not new,
For diverse been the ways and means to teach.
Wherefore to turn again where I did leave,
And of my dream the whole effect to tell:
In naked words and easy to perceive,
And every thing and matter as they fell.
Up stood this velvet breeche of which I said,
And spoke to them of cloth in great disdain:
Thou breeche of cloth, how art thou not afraid,
Of our displeasure to incur the pain.
That have presumed here to take thy place,
Without regard of us or reverence:
But as it were to berd us and to face,
I hold it best for thee to get thee hence.
The other at these words was not afeard,
Ne changed color ne yet countenance:
And at the last to this effect answeard.
Great were thy pride, if thou had suffisaunce.
I see between us little difference.
Or none at all, save only woorkmanship:
Whereto if there belong preeminence,
Make thou no claim to thy mistres woorship.
I mean the woorkman which thee garnished,
With silk and gold, and with imbroderie:
By mean whereof Pride has thee ravished,
To bost in things belonging not to thee.
This moved not the velvet breech a lit,
Thou beggars weed (quoth he) base and villayn:
Ill can I take at thy hand such despit,
And that to do thee force I me refryan.
How dare thou speak such language unto me,
Thy better, and thy self with me compare:
So far inferior in each degree,
As they that near us both, witnesses are.
Besides that, I was borne in Italy,
Sometime the mistres of the world so wide:
Famous in learning and chiualry,
As in this world there has been none beside.
Besides all that, my foot is worth thy yard,
So am I iolif fair and precious:
Where I am present, who does thee regard,
Or thee vouchsafe to dwellen in his house.
I let him in, for thee might stand without,
Am bidde^ speak, when thou must hold thy peace:
And many a matter daily bring about,
To hard for thee, therefore I redd thee cease.
Now sure this gere is passing strange thought I,
What (trow I) will become between these twayn
With that the breech of cloth began to reply,
And thus began his sentence for to saien.
Whereas thou say I am inferior,
And unto thee am nothing comparable:
For thou do serve the rich, and I the poor,
That reason is both falls and deceauable.
For if that virtue and humanity,
Were tied to riches or appropriate:
As Pride and vices are most commonly,
Then I ^old in this case with thee debate.
But since apparel does not him amend,
That wears it according to the cost:
But only helps to consume and spend,
The more is laid on thee, the more is lost.
And where thou say thou art of Italy,
Borne and bred in that noble region:
Why live thou not at home in thy country,
Woe worth him brought thee first to Albion.
Which now of us is called England,
Where sometime I have covered the best:
And such as then were thought to understand,
Whose life and manners vices did detest.
For in thy country were thou not alone,
Ne have been ever sith thy dwelling here:
But art with many a vice waited upon,
Which do and have done this land mickle dear.
As for the learning and the chivalry,
Wherein thy country thou do se commend:
About thy coming into that country,
Of both their dwelling there they made an end.
And lost the diadem imperial,
Ne can it bold as their forefathers did:
Lo what thou have to bosten thee withal,
They lost the lands their fathers conquerid.
Whereas thou say thy foot is worth my yard,
That is untrue, save that for argument:
Things are to man as he does them regard,
And other reason none to mine intent.
Whereas thou say that in thy presence,
I am of no regard ne countenance:
That is a lie saving your reverence,
Though with the fools it often so do chance.
With that the velvet breeches as me thought,
Began toward the other fast to roll:
And surely but for me they would have fought,
So I was feign the matter to control.
And spoke unto them both as ye shall here,
At least as I my self imagined:
Nay friend (quoth I) ye shall do him no dear,
But each of them swear other should be dead.
Not so (quoth I) I know a better way,
And more indifferent unto you both:
For when ye have done either what ye may,
Ye must be ruled be ye leefe or loathe.
For here ye dwellen in a land of peace,
And under laws, and under Magistrate:
God grant them in his graces to increase,
That enden will full justly your debate.
And I my self for better was in place,
Though for my learning far unworthy:
Toward the law these long xv. years space,
And thereof sworn to be an attorney.
If I may pleaser you with my service,
I am yours to command right as ye list:
For doubt in law ye shall have mine advise,
Till better come that will herein assist.
For that I see the matter is not small,
Ne yet no trifle wherefore ye contend:
One would feign have his own, the other all,
And hereupon the matter does depend.
The one him bosteth of his woorthynesse,
And of his native soil where he was borne:
And how that he has rowm in throng and press,
Because that of the wealthy he is worn.
The other says he is this country man,
Here has he dwelt and here led all his life:
And here will dwell say the other what he can,
Now for to end all this debate and strife.
And both your minds therein to satisfy,
The best is all your quarrel and complaint:
To have heard and debated orderly,
And each man tell his tall without restraint.
But how so ye your selves do esteem,
Ye are not Judges thereof nor shall be:
But twelve, or four and twenty shall it deem,
And this is reasonable thinks me.
To tell your price and virtues ye have leave,
And your effects, your causes and your end:
Which their well understood will not deceive,
Nor suffer us to err as I entend.
And for you velvet breeches find ye grieved,
And of this clothen breech to have had wrong:
Ye may seek orderly to be relieved,
So will I do (quoth he) or it be long.
And make him yield to mine obeysaunce,
And to confess that he has nothing here:
Bnt only at my will and sufferaunce,
As I doubt not it plainly shall appear.
The other said, as for obeysaunce,
He ought him none homage ne fealty:
All were his looks big and his countenance,
And freendshyp great, all that ne doubted he.
His cause was good, his title auncestrell,
For in this Country was he borne and bred:
And but if law said nay, here would he dwell,
So then unto them both I answered.
Since each of you does think he has a right,
And for to try the same ye are so bent:
Declare and bring your title into light,
Trespass or disseison of frank tenement.
And show your title and whence ye derive it.
And if ye think this good ye velvet breeche:
The clothe shall plead ye non dissesimit,
And thus without long circumstaunce of speech.
Upon this issue ye have liberty,
For proof that he has done ye disseason:
To allege what so ye can bethink ye,
And therein at our hands to ask for reason.
He answered, to be plentiffe in thassise,
He thought not good, ne meant not so to be:
And that it was not good I did advise,
A Jury may be perciall (quoth he.)
For I am woorthyer by much then he,
For many causes that I can allege:
But if they will seem such to the Country,
I doubt, or of them if they will take knowledge.
For I am here a stranger in this land,
And save of late years of small acquayntaunce:
The common people does not understand,
My woorthynesse, estate, ne countenance.
My adversary is their country man,
And is not so chargeable unto them:
Therefore will they do for him what they can,
But if they were of Town and Citizen.
For of the hyndes or of the paysauntie,
I fear I should not have indifferents:
For I know they bear no good will to me,
Because my friends their purses often rents.
This doubt is vain thereof assure ye,
(Quoth I) for whom ye think not indifferent:
Ye may may him challenge from your Jury,
And show your cause why from him ye dissent.
And as that cause shall seem allowable,
By proof or reason that ye for it make:
It shall be holden acceptable,
Thereafter to receive or to forsake.
Go forth therefore as ye began in order,
Until ye come to matter issuable:
Of all the which I shall be the recorder,
And how so it shall be determinable.
To wit by Jury or by judgment,
I shall direct you by my skill:
And to you both shall be indifferent,
Now have I said, trust me if ye will.
Your words (quoth he) does sound to reason,
So I may have my cause heard all at large:
Let him plead me null ne fort null disse^son,
Enter my pleas where with I will him charge.
For I am sure they wylbe sumwhat long,
And so the Jury gladly will me take:
Or leave some of my plea to do me wrong,
The other party would it not forsake.
But pleaded him the issue general.
And prayed as the other prayed before:
To enter his matter especial,
One thing the velvet breeches moved more.
For who shall judge our chalenges (quoth he)
I answeard, if it fall in learning, I:
If not, ye shall have triers two or three,
That shall judge of their indifferency,
I am content (quoth he) my challenge saved,
My matter shall be tried by thassise:
It is but right (quoth I) that ye have craved,
And forth they went, as I shall you devise.
I mean the breeche of cloth in his reply,
And took his hold again whereas he left:
Whereas thou say thou can do more then I.
I know great is thy subteltie and craft.
To let one in, where I can not do so,
And speak where I am hidden hold my peace:
Full many a wight that woorketh mikell woe,
When of their farm expired is their lease.
In penal statute and concealed land,
For so thou tearmest it for thine encreas:
Full hardly can the poor escape thy hand.
That they ne find thy lamp both oil and greas.
THus have I answered (quoth he) thine argument,
From point to point, that have thou not (quoth, he:)
With that I looked up and had a glent,
Of one that came toward us leasurely.
Soft then (quoth I) ye be at a good point,
Your pleas and answears I have fully hard,
Perchance an issue hereon may be joint,
Whereon thassise forthwith we may award.
And here me think does come a gentleman,
Whom if ye think as I have thought it best:
We will entreat by all the means we can,
That he will be the foreman of the quest.
Gladly quoth one, with good will quoth the other,
By, then he was come near, and bad god speed,
And we again said, welcome gentle brother,
Piked he was and handsome in his weed.
A fair black coat of cloth withouten sleue,
And buttoned the shoulder round about:
Of.xx. s. a yard as I believe,
And laid upon with parchment lace without.
His dublet was of Satin very fine,
And it was cut and stitched very thick:
Of silk it had a costly enterlyne.
His shirt had hands and ruff of pure Cambrick.
His upper stocks of sylken Grogerane,
And to his hippes they sat full close and trym,
And laced very costly every pane,
Their lyning was of Satin as I wyn.
His nether stocks of silk accordingly,
A velvet gyrdle round about his wast:
This knight or squyre what so he be (quoth I,)
We will empannell, let him not go past.
He condiscended soon to our request,
Then I beholding him advisedly:
Saw where a needle sticked on his breast,
And at the same a black thread hanging by.
So then I asked him of his estate,
He said he was a Taylour by his art:
All in good time (quoth I) here is debate,
Which to appease I pray you do your part.
Here is a matter pleaded to enquest,
Wherein it may please you to take some pain:
Your wisdom may directen all the rest,
I shall ye read it, evident and plain.
I challenge him then says the clothen breeche,
Why so (quoth I) does be not make you both?
What then, his gain by us is not aleeche,
Quoth he, and therewithal he swore an oath.
He gayneth more by byeng silk and lase,
Of gold and silver and such trumperie:
To welt, to edge, to guard, to stitche and face,
By one of these, then.xv. pair of me.
In making me, there is no gain but one,
Which is, for labor and for woorkmanship:
Except sometime a piece of cloth come home,
As if that by mischaunce the shere did slip.
Now is that trade become a marchandice,
Wherein since pride in peoples hearts does reign:
So great has been and is his exercise,
That only God does know what is his gain.
And how, though he thereof do little reck,
So that to setten down a bill of charge:
There is no Auditor, ne Clarke of Check,
Can pen it bett then he, ne more at large.
So that I doubt of his indifference,
As in that trial here between us twain:
Lest for him he would strain his conscience,
I see this world is set to follow gain.
I Said, all this might come of good intent,
And for to punish pride as he was able:
Then were no reason for it he were shent,
For he nys Officer, ne Constable.
Nor otherwise set in authority,
To execute the statute of aurai:
Then how to punish them supposes he,
The best mean for their pride to make them pay.
And ask for silk, for lase, and other stuff,
To face and line without side and within:
Twyse as much at the least as were inoffe,
And keep the third part, and the rest put in.
And reach them with a bill of reckening,
Shall make them scrat whereas it itcheth naught:
If this may be a necessary thing,
Then of this challenge well advise we ought.
For although some through pride thus down are cast
And waste their living that their friends the^ laft:
Yet others by their means arise as fast,
Some by their cunning, and some by their craft.
Wherefore the cause shalben examined,
By tryors whom we will choose for that end:
To try them or they been empanelled,
They were content both, and did condescend.
Wherefore I prayed him to stand a side,
And watch if any other came that way:
Lest of us they escaped unespied,
He was contented with all that I did say.
WIth that the velvet breeches had me staien,
Our issue is not perfect yet (quoth he:)
I have much other matter for to saien,
Say on (quoth I) you have good liberty.
With that he began to stretchen and to stare,
And said that he did suffer villainy:
That such a Caytiue should with him compare.
A Carters weed, and meet for husbandry.
For who would set his son to school quoth he,
To study scripture, physic, or the law:
But that he bears good will unto me,
If otherwise I hold him but a dawe.
Says not the proverb, honors norishe arts,
Why trotten men so far for merchandise:
Who has the credit at the faires and martes.
Not he that comes in a coat of fryse.
What man or ladde is he that were not loath.
In youth to travel, and to faren hard:
If he ne purposed to wear but cloth.
In time to come, nor further did regard.
Hence risen learned men in each estate,
Coonnyng in handy craft and faculty:
And getten dignities of doctorate,
Who is their mark, what shoot they at but me.
I am the root, thoriginal of laws,
Whose learned mastes holden are in price:
Unto the simple folk I am the cause.
That many a fool and dolt is holden wise.
Who does so sharpen correction as I,
Upon all such as done the laws offend:
If thereto be annexed penalty,
Of money that to me thence may descend.
That this is true and may not be denied,
I will auerte, and if he it gain say,
I am content by verdict it be tried.
Then spoke the breech of cloth without delay.
PRotesting always that he did not judge,
Man, maid, ne wife by their array:
Ne yet much less that ever he did grudge.
Observing comeliness if they were gay.
Namely, the circumstaunce observed.
The birth, the time, the place, or dignity:
Who has of Prince or common wealth deserved,
His weed of right may answer his degeee.
Which matters although they been to allow,
With comeliness for good and tolerable:
Yet who (says Christ) him self does meek and bow,
Exalted shall he be and acceptable.
Example he did make him self herein,
Who thinking it no wrong ne robbery:
With God the father equal for to been,
Was here in earth in all simplicity.
But for to follow him it were to much,
Or John the Baptist with his coat of here:
Yet may we show our selves to be such,
As more esteem our bodies then our gere.
Namely our souls which are celestial,
Whose brave apparel and whose ornament:
Whose diadem and crown imperial,
Is heart that seeks God with whole intent.
But to the point, and for plea to the matter.
Alleged for thy commendation,
As they arysen this is mine answer,
And first thy vain imagination.
That thou art cause, that thou art final end,
Of learning, I ne think thee to be so:
And that thou were, the living God defend,
For sure thou were not in principio.
Nor art among the godly at this day,
Though with a number, I think it be true:
No little unto virtues ruin and decay,
Where it is so, the godly done it rue.
For where thou say, honor does norishe art,
True honor I suppose thou never knew:
That iudgest it in arrogance of heart,
In silk and velvet, and in outward show.
The very baightes and lures of Satanas,
Who for thy sake was thrown out of heaven:
For the Nabuchodonosor eat grass,
And fed with Oxen well nigh years seven.
Which is the honor man has for thy sake,
Has been and is and evermore shall be:
Who Idols of their carcasses do make,
Through foul presumption and vanity.
For he that through learning seeks port,
Ne makes other purpose of the same:
His learning puffs him in such a sort,
That often in sted of honor he has shame.
Now for the merchant and his marchaundise,
His credit in his mart and cheuisaunce:
Thou geuest him to seem both rich and wise,
Where through he brings many to mischance.
Of this me needs little for to speak,
Since I could know a penny from a grote:
I knew not many forced for to break,
If Pride ne made him or his wife a coat.
And where thou say that man or boy were loath,
In youth to travel and to faren hard:
Yes sure and God, there are that have done both,
And only heaven hoped for reward.
As for this world and her fickle glory.
They have esteemed it a thing of naught:
And for their neighbor, friend, and territory,
Employed have their study, care, and thought.
I could rehearse the stories many a one,
Of Greeks and Romans that are memorable:
Though worms some eat, their flesh so long ago^,
Yet are their names accounted venerable.
But I nyl stay to reckon them as now.
How some arosen unto counselshyp:
And thereto weren called from the plow,
When they thought nothing less then mastership.
So that of woorship I do distinguishe,
Some seeken it, and some of it are sought:
And those are such as nothing less do wish,
Some think with gold and silver it is bought.
Which makes offices bear such a price,
And that so greedely they been icaught:
Before thy time men were not half so wise,
As sythen in thy school they have been taught.
To bye and sellen offices for gain,
No question made of his woorthynesse:
That shall them have, but if he may not paien,
How so he powle and pill for his redress.
Then which of these three (for there is but one)
Woorshyp in deed, and of right venerable:
To virtue friend, to vice a deadly sone,
I shall you tell as near as I am able.
The one does beg an office, to what end,
For there are two as it is evident:
Theffect will show whereto he does it bend.
His change of cheer, and eke his government,
The other byeth, pays dear therefore,
His meaning may be good, possible it is:
But (by your leave) twice as unlike and more,
And yet no rule so sure but it may miss.
The third is called utterly unwitting,
For whom spoke neither silver, gold, ne friend:
Thrice happy country where such are sitting,
Whom grace and virtue only done commend.
For there are truth and mercy met together,
And thither looks righteousness from heaven:
All were they cloth or velvet choose them whether,
For pride ne shall their wits from them bereuen.
THat thou art cause of art and faculty.
Of handy craft which may not be forgon:
Pride found them not first but necessity,
In deed thou have corrupted them each one.
And caused them to been adulterate,
And changed clean into another guise:
Deceit a Iorneyman with each estate,
Through whom they waxen rich, and seemen wise,
Which while I was in favor might not be,
The father was contented that his son:
Should lead a life such as before did he,
And end in such estate as he begoon.
Unto the which small thing is requisite,
I mean a godly mind to satisfy:
Whereas to vanity and foul delight.
And Pride I dare affirm the contrary.
To wit, he wastes much unorderly,
And of his cost and charge so small purpose:
That of the good few faren bett thereby,
For it is spent on virtues utter foes.
As daily is to see who list to look,
The Usurer and eke Thextorcioner:
Full sure they are, his name is in their book,
Until his house and land be come to their.
Then come devises, many a shameful shift,
To beg, to borowe, and to deceive their friend:
And many another lewd and preuie lift,
Till lastly foul and shameful is the end:
And where thou say thou art a punisher,
Of sin, it is full true I do confess:
As thou have said, and in such foorme order,
Which is to rob, to rauishe, and oppress.
And so far from all color to do good,
And further I dare safely undertake:
Then devils to cast out through Beelzebub,
No truer gloss of that text can I make.
Here are thy fruits by which (as Christ does say)
The tree is known for good or ill therefore:
Of all these presence, judgment I do pray,
And that I may have right I ask no more.
Naught seek I for, superiority,
Ne thing of thine, ne of none other man:
To hold mine own if I have liberty,
Though it be small right well content I am.
WIth that I began to speak unto them both,
Is this theffect of all ye have to say?
Ye here is all then answered he of cloth,
The other held his peace, and said not nay.
Your matters are iregestred quoth I,
Every plea and every argument:
Here is a paper witness will not lie,
Now hearken if it pleas you mine intent.
Ye are now come to master issuable,
On either side as does appear at large.
And many points therein are inquirable,
Whereof the Jury taken shall thee charge.
As I shall read it to them orderly,
Wherefore unto your chalenges be sure:
Ye take good heed, that blameless I may be.
Which must recorden here your procedure.
They answered me both, they were content,
With that me thought I heard a company:
That down the hill unto vswardhem bent,
And coming near they did us curtesy.
The foremost weren three that went together,
And eke in clokes they weren homely clad.
Both plain and light according to the weather,
And in their gesture sober, wise, and sad.
And Serving men there waited them upon,
Comely arrayed, and in number eleven:
Five of the which were servants all to one,
A knight as after I did apperceyuen.
And namely, for they ware for cognisaunce,
A Pecock (as me thought) without a tail:
Not new, ne yesterdayes remembrance,
What ware the rest my memory does fail.
I could have told ye even at that time,
For four of them to one did apparteyne:
Asquire of an ancient race and line,
And to third a gentleman, but twain.
So when I saw them done us curtesy,
And bidden us with gentle words god speed:
I answeard them again accordingly.
And forward in this cause I did proceed.
And told them what was fallen in debate,
At wixt these paires of cloth and velvet breeches:
Concerning maintenance of their estate,
Their matters, allegations, and speeches.
And prayed them of their humanity,
If they were such as verily they seemed:
To wit, of knighthood and gentle progeny,
By whom of right, such causes should be deemed.
As which concerned very gentillesse,
Wherein in it stant what is thereof the root:
Ye shall do God high service as I guess,
And to your country men no little boot.
The knight as he that gentle was of cheer,
He answered his learning was but small:
But else herein his good will should appear,
Then afterward I up and told him all.
How that he should not been alone him selue,
Ne should above his learning have in charge:
For he should be the foreman of the twelve,
And of their matter should enquire at large.
And of such things as are in their knowledge,
And of which no man can be ignorant:
That lives on this earth, I dare allege,
They were content all three, and didden grant,
Then came there other company a pase,
By two and two together, three and three:
I sought to know some of them by their face,
But I ne might, ne guess what they should be.
The first three seemed for to been of Town,
For they were handsomely apparelled:
Each of them in a very seemly gown,
The one a white knit cappe upon his head.
His coat was faced with graie Coonie skin,
I judged him a baker by his trade:
As he confessed when I asked him,
For of his language nothing strange he made.
Another was a Bruer by his art,
The third a Vitayler, and did retaile:
Bought by the barell, and sold by pint and quart,
And had his living by that travail.
And were clothed after Citizen,
Neither in slouenrie ne yet in pride:
Ne had they term of inkhorne ne of pen,
But plain in speech which gladly I espied.
And after them there came all in a rowt,
Sixteen or seventeen as I did guess:
All likely men, and neither knave ne lowt,
But cheefely two that came before the press.
One of them had a fiddle in his hand,
And pleasant songs he played thereupon:
To queynt and hard for me to understand,
If he were brave I make no question.
Or if his furniture were for the dance,
His breeches great, full of ventositie:
Devised in the castle of playsaunce,
And master of a daunsing school was he.
The other was by trade a Vintener.
That had full many a hoggeshed looked in.
Trauayled he had and was a languager,
His face was redd as any Cherubyn.
A Spanishe cloak he ware fine with a cape.
A sine French cappe on his head according:
Both which upon him fair and seemly sat,
And one his finger ware a mighty ring.
When they came near, I asked what they were,
For naught said they so much as once god speed:
But to my question said the Tauerner,
Answer they might, but thereto lay no need.
But told me at the last of their degree,
As ye have heard before then I them prayed:
If they were such as they would seem to be,
That in this matter we might have their aid.
Yet was there one whom I had nigh forgot,
And he was master of a dysing house:
No word had he, but pay the box and pot,
So brave he was, that me thought marvelous.
The rest were people of the common sort,
Of whom I took no heed especial:
Ne made inquiry of their lives or port,
Save seven of the which tell you I shall.
One of them ware a ierken made of kuffe,
A mighty pouche of canuas at his belt:
Wherein me thought there seemed to be stuff,
A fair cloak on his back, and on his head a felt.
Upon his shoulder he bare a forest Byll,
I asked what he was, wherefore (quod he)
Ask ye: Friend (quod I) for none ill,
And told him as I told the rest perdye.
But he made answer far from my purpose,
And asked me if I could tell of lease:
Of pasture that was to be set or close,
Now to begin, or by some man's decease.
Or office if I wist any to sell,
He had a son or twain be would advance:
And said they should take pains until it fell,
He that will thrive (quod he) must tarry chance.
And merchant tarry for the market day,
On Gods name sir (quod I) ye say full well:
Then what he was, he told without delay,
To wit a grasier, also where he did dwell.
Another was there much of his entaile,
Both for his gesture and his habilement:
His hands were stained, both the skyn and nail,
Full many piece of bark they hadden rent.
He was in very deed a ritche Tanner,
And asked where I thougvt he might purchase:
Some great domayn, some Lordship, or some manner,
But I rehearsed to them both our case.
And told them that of Lordships I ne knew,
Nor in such matters was inquisitiue:
Who bought, who sold, sir Richard, or sir Hew,
And from those purposes I did them drive.
Besides all these a Bricklayer there was,
A man right cunning in his faculty:
He had hope build full many a statelye place,
A trewell at his gyrdle weared he.
And in his hand he had a flat measure,
Ywrought with figures of Arithmetic,
Whereby his length and breadth he took full sure,
And wisely couched both his stone and brick.
Then was there yet another in a gown,
Of fine black cloth, and faced fair with budge:
A black bag from his girdle hung a down,
And full it was, wherewith I could not judge.
He gave no word, so much as once God speed,
I prayed him to tell us what he was:
Why so (quod he) therein lies no need,
I told him yes as things might come to pass.
I am then an infourmer answered he,
All in good time sir, and welcome quoth I:
For we have need of such men as are ye,
We have to few here of your faculty.
That could infourme us of the right upon,
A matter here before us come to controuersed:
Here is none learned but if I be one,
And somewhat of the matter him rehearsed.
He answered that his experience,
Was better then his learning a great deal:
Namely in the Statutes of penitence,
For in these and none others does he deal.
Then was there yet another whom I see,
Which stood one of the hindmost of the route:
For soft and no whit forthputting was he,
Full sunbrunt was his forehead and his soute.
A man about a fifty years of age,
Of Kendall very course his coat was made:
My thought of truth his face was an Image,
Upon his gyrdle hong a rustye blade.
Full simple was thereof both haft and sheath,
A strawen batte he had upon his head:
The which his Chinne was fastened underneath,
His cheeks did show he earned well his bread.
A pair of startvppes had he on his feet,
That lased were up to the small of the leg:
Homely they were, and easier then meet,
And in their soles full many a wooden pegge.
He had a shyrt of Canuas hard and tough,
Of which the band and ruffes were both of one:
So fine that I might see his skin them through,
Which is as much to say as he had none.
This was a husbandman, a simple hind,
Whom when I called had, and bad come near:
And of the matter told him all my mind,
He answered with mild and gentle cheer.
Sir (quod he) gladlye would I done ye prowe,
If in this matter I had half the skyll:
That I have in my harrow and my plowe,
I pray ye of my words, to think none ill.
I bad him not doubt thereof, and told him more,
He should have fellowship and assistence:
Like as ye had, ne tell the knight before:
And of the matter certain evidence.
Then was he well contented therewithal,
Look what is in my knowledge and my might:
Help you (quod he) with all my heart I shall,
Then on my matter further I began me dight.
To make them full, then found I other me,
A Shoemaker, a Weauer, and a Smith:
A Haberdasher of small wares also,
I now me thought to try our matter with.
For I remember not the certainty,
Of all the residue that weren there:
Their names, their science, and their faculty,
For haste also I nould of them enquere.
But these unto my pannell did I write
And read their names, that every man might here
And not full four and twenty names recite,
For sure I was twelve of them would appear.
Then spoke the parties unto me and said,
Them thought that some of these were chale^gable:
Whereof advantage either of them praid,
If any upon cause they could disable.
Reason (quod I) that was agreed upon before,
But who shall judge and try your challenges:
Your self (quod they) no sure (quod I) therefore
Appoint some other to that business.
Yea two or three thereto will scant suffice,
To judge of them and their indifference:
For secreete cause of favor may arise.
Which must be searched which great aduertence.
By such as have experience therein,
And of aduersitye have had their part:
For who so beaten in the world has been,
No further need he take degree of art.
With that they were content and did agree.
To chose them tryers as I had thought meef:
I asked them how many, they said three,
In the name of God (quod I) so be it.
Now did there in the place already stand
A woman well nigh fiftye years of age:
A young boy and a young wench at her hand,
Thin was their weed and light their carriage.
The woman and the wenche were clad in russet,
Both course and old, and worn so very near:
That ye might see clean through both sleeue and gusset
The naked skin whereas it did appear.
Their hosen and their shoes were all of one,
I mean both for the woorkmanshyp and leather:
To wit their skins, for other had they none,
And chapped were they sore with wind and weather.
With homely clouts I knitt upon their head,
Simple, yet white as thing so course might be:
The boy much like them was apparelled,
For hose ne shoe upon his foot had he.
With that I called them, and they came nere,
And bad god speed and save the company:
Then I did ask them, who and whence they were,
They answered me of the North country,
In Comberland, as far hence as Kendall,
And Copy holders were of tenant right:
I wotte not how the Lorship they did call
But hold they did by service of a knight.
To serve the Prince at an hours warning,
And asken neither wages, fee, ne hyre:
Ne choice of time at midnight, or at morning,
All were it rain or shine, in dirt and mire.
Now has a churl (quod they) take it in leace,
To wit the Lordshyp with the perquisite:
And for I we might not pay our term does cease,
So our inheritance have losten quite.
The company thought pity this to here,
Alas, quod I, this is great crueltye:
All gate I bad them all be of good cheer,
And pray to God to send you remedy.
And since ye ben come hither at this time,
I will not let you stand in ydelnesse:
For ye shall have the charge should have been mine,
And meet are ye that have been in distress.
Which teaches man to know the good from ill,
And eke to try a true friend from a shrow:
Which unto them that have all things at will,
And live in wealth is very hard to know.
With that I up and told them all the case,
Whereof before they hadden hard the chief:
And that of no small credit was the place,
Of truth and virtue for to maken pryef.
They all alleged their simplicity,
So did the velvet breches them disable:
And of their choice misliked utterly,
As them that were too vile and miserable.
To judge in causes of such importance,
For how can it be possible (quod he)
But they ben lewd and of great iguoraunce,
And would in no case that it should so be.
The breche of clothe said, that it was not so,
They were right meet the challenges to try:
As simple folk were chosen long ago,
To greater charge, but if the bible lie.
And is reserred to the multitude,
Who answered, they were not to refuse:
So therevppon we dydden all conclude,
Their service in this business to use.
WEll then widow, quod I, and fatherless,
Which both by god unto us are commended:
Have good regard unto this business,
Until that with your help we have it ended.
For you can speak of your experience,
That ye have seen, felt, hard, and understood:
And of the passed gather consequence,
And judge between the evil and the good.
And if it fall in reason to decide,
Moral decree or constitution:
My help and knowledge shall not be denide,
Until we have them tried one by one.
And sith we become this far in the case,
As ye have hard from present have ye been:
And looked both the parties in the face,
That sharp are set, as ye have hard and seen.
And specially the playntiue whom ye here,
his estymation how he does hold:
And of him self how he accompteth dear.
So is his adversary party bold,
And other ways accompteth woorthynesse,
Besides alleges his antiquity:
And that naught but his own he would possess,
Descended to him from his auncestrie.
And for this cause we are assembled here,
My self, and all these others whom ye see:
To make this matter that is doubtful clear,
If God will therein, will grant us faculty.
Therefore as I shall read their names each one,
If either party challenge any man:
And show cause: ye are judges thereupon,
Unto that cause to speaken what ye can.
And it allow for good or otherwise,
To disalow it in your judgment:
Wherein I redd you that ye be precise,
And for the truth to do your good intent.
They answered with all their hearts they would,
Protesting their unableness of skill:
I bad them do no more but what they could,
For God requires of a man but will.
With that I read their names for to appear,
And first the knight* the squire, and gentleman,
Who at the first made answer and said here,
Then to the rest to passen I began.
First, of the Taylours challeng made rehearsal,
And asked if he were indifferent:
The tryors thought him not, and so did all The rest, and therefore from us we him sent.
Then began I for to call the vitayler,
He answered and ready was at hand:
The Baker, Bruer, and the Vintener,
Come nere (quoth I) and with your fellows stand.
Then to the Tanner and the Grasier,
Who answered me both without delay:
The daunsing master and the Bricklayer,
I bad thinformer also come away.
The master of the dysing house also,
The Smith, the Weauer, and the Husbandman:
And there I ceased, and did call no mo.
But for to count their number I began.
And found the number of them just sixteen,
Now masters (to the parties then said I:)
Here is a Jury complet as I ween,
Look to your chalenges advisedly.
And first the knight I called to the book,
Who had no sooner answered thereto:
Then velvet breeches to him challenge took,
And said he would show cause, I bad him do.
THis knight was never friend of mine (quod he,)
So plain in his apparel and his port:
The godly be does more esteem then me.
And spend his living on the poorer sort.
He lives very well content at home,
Nor to the City has desire to go:
Ne up and down there in the streets to rome,
And for him self enquire at placebo.
His Tenaunts and his Fermars live at ease,
To whom he rayseth not a penny rent:
Which thing does not a little me displease,
As unto pride a thing impertinent.
And I think to speak plainly at a word,
He had a great deal rather for to see:
Then silk on back, good vitayles on his board,
And spend his rent his hospitalitee.
Which since it is a thing against my kind,
It must needs follow that he hates me:
And to my adversary is enclinde,
Therefore of this enquest ought not to be.
Then spoke the wydow and the fatherless,
And said a meeter man then he was one:
Whose challenge was his zeal to godliness,
If he be drawn (quoth they) we shall have none.
Of all the chalenges that have been taken,
In all the days and place where we have been:
Ne hard we man for virtue yet forsaken,
Such favor has she with the sons of men.
Or at the least she ought to have of right,
That whom so both the parties would admit,
A man that in her had his whole delight,
There should no private challenge to him sit.
To wit, of kynred or affinity.
Indusing favor as the Lawyers say:
And true, but yet among the ungodly,
Who, for their friends sake from the truth will stray.
But of the godly other is the intent,
For they remember what their master bad:
Thou shall know no man's face in judgment,
This earth to win, from truth they nyl be lad.
For brotherhood ne yet for coossinage,
For hope nor fear, love, ne alliance:
For fair or foul countenance or language.
Unto them all for truth they bid defiaunce.
As they that to no person bearen hate,
Ne wyshen evil unto any wight:
Or would him hinder for their friend his sake,
Such love have they to God, such zeal to right.
Yet are they often judged of thunwyse,
To hate some persons, for they done hem blame:
Which is, for they love them and hate their vice,
And gladly would them bring to better frame.
Wherefore this knight as we have said beforne,
We think right meet to leaden this enquest:
And our assent be shall have to be sworn,
So passed we from him, and unto the rest.
Yea for the love of God then answered I,
And bad him lay his hand upon the book,
And as he was a knight of auncestry.
Bad him regard his truth and oath he took.
Which is (quoth I) that ye shall say the truth,
If that the breeches of cloth have done disseison:
To him of velvet that here as plaintiff sueth,
Or from him has bereaft his right or reason.
Throughout this land in any place or coast,
Namely in London, and parties there about:
Where he him self complayneth wronged most,
And from fee and frank tenement put out.
And him shall repossesse if ye it find,
And cost and damage give him for the wrong:
And this to do your oath here does ye bind,
If not say so, and therein be not long.
That done I called next unto the squyre,
To whom like challenge as unto the knight:
The velvet breeches took, but did retire,
The gentleman also he let go quite.
So three we had our Jury to begin,
Now will we to the meaner sort quoth I:
And bad the Baker and Vitayler come in,
Also the Bruer who came as readely.
The velvet breeche then challenged all three,
And that he said his cause was principal:
I am in debt unto them all (quoth he)
And by my good will pay them nere shall.
And forty pound it is to whom is least,
Wherefore to tell you truth I do them hate:
And as mine enemies I them detest,
Ne shall they in that cause of mine debate.
The breeche of cloth made answer and defense,
And said, with pride this challenge rightly stood:
To yield dispite and hate for recompense,
To such as in his need had done him good.
And this is not of late, ne yesterday.
For Jesus that was the son of Syrack:
Read, if the very same he does not say,
Which of such matter and of others spoke.
Wherefore he thought this challenge could be none,
Though on his side were parcialitie:
That proved neither of them such an one,
As therefore bear to him inimitie.
We asked then the triours what they thought,
I mean the wydowe and the fatherless:
They answered the challenge seemed naught,
Yet asked mine advise nevertheless.
For that the velvet breeches further said,
That he had been arrested at their suit:
Desiring that the matter might be wayd,
And further of the cause they would dispute.
And if the common law did it allow,
As he did think in reason well it ought:
Those three be utterly would disauowe,
With that I answered, and said I thought.
The law would not, ne could intend so ill,
If him that sueth for to have his debt:
That he of malice or of evil will,
Would seek to be his hinderaunce or let.
Which were they ware his debtor to disable,
And bring him self to loss and hinderaunce:
Which is not to be thought nor intendable,
So thought the rest in final concordaunce.
Wherefore they were itaken every one,
So seven of our Jury sworeu were:
Then called I the Bricklayer alone,
Who answered, but or he were come near.
The breeche of cloth to him this challenge took,
Of forty Chimneys that by him were built:
In one house there are scantly five that smoke,
So was there much good brick and mortar spilt.
So held he him unfaithful in his heart,
That takes wage and woorketh all in vain:
Ne for his hyre does wyllyngly his part,
But only seeks how to raise his gain.
And so thereof he drew this consequent,
He that does fail in one, will fail in all:
For profyt or for freendshyp will relent,
And thought this challenge was material.
The velvet breeches hereunto replied,
The challenge was both false and slanderous:
And want of smoke to be his fault denied.
But rather of the dweller in the house.
Which was no fault in houses where he dwelt,
I built for pleasure cheefely and for show:
Where roast ne sodde is very seeldome smelt,
Save for our self and others very few.
The fire then being small or none within.
It must needs follow of necessity:
The smoke that comes thence for to be thine,
I am the cause thereof my self, not he.
So this was thought by all the multitude,
A good excuse and fully answered:
And him a lawful man they did conclude,
For proof whereof was further alleged,
How greatly was the science to commend,
Which makes houses wherein men may dwell:
In him is not to lymytte other end,
To wit if men them vsen ill or well.
Or feeden there the poor or else the rich,
Ne in what part their bellies or their eyes,
For hospitalyties are not all aliche:
With them that now adays are holden wise.
But as I said before it was agreed,
The crafts man could not do there with all:
That truly did employ his work in deed,
As well upon the kytchin as the hall.
Wherefore he was admitted to the rest,
And numbered unto them they weren eight:
Thence to thinformer forthwith I me dressed,
And called him, and he appeared straight.
The breche of clothe him forthwith challenged,
I asked him the cause he would show none:
But that the name it self was detested,
What need he show cause unto such a one.
Whose very name, and whose profession,
Throughout this land is foul and sclaunderous,
Ye speak (quod I) without discression.
And in your judgment are preposterous.
That for an evil member two or three,
Or more or less that be degenerate:
And fallen from their office and degree,
Condemns all the bodies whole estate.
And gives private fault, a blame public,
I mean the office for his Officer:
Alas yet the common sort so wicke,
Of Innocence to make a trespasser.
This wickedness is not of yesterday,
That private fault does give public offense
For one ill man of thousands to myssay,
Of callinges and Estates of reverence.
That in a commonwealth ben seruisable,
And of the same the preservation:
Degrees and Laws so high venerable.
That who can say their commendation.
That for their worthiness they ought to have,
Yet these I say do suffer evil name:
And sclaunder for naught else, but that a knave,
Has of them made a cloak for deed of shame.
What wickedness can greater be then this,
Of honest trade, so evil for to speaken:
For one or two that vsen it amiss,
On whom it has not might it self to wreken.
For laws and statutes, are naught else but words,
And do not speak them selves, which is worse.
For if they could, or handle knives and swords,
A number should be leaner in the purse.
Wherefore I wish no man that fears God,
To iudgen all after the deed of Sum:
For that by common reason is forbod,
And Christ has said there shall be scandalum.
Men ought therefore to prove or they allow,
Or hastilye done any wight despise:
As Christ and Paul I know, but who are you,
To find them out that use his name for lies.
And prove if they be such in very deed,
As in their word, and in their countenance.
For falsehood often is clad in costly weed,
And ill men com by offices by chance.
In whom although there be misgouernaunce,
As some for lack of wisdom or of skyll:
Others for they make of it cheuisaunce:
And to command, and have the world at will.
Wherefore to turn whereas we left before.
And of this challenge better to enquire:
For of this trade me neeneth say no more,
As of it self pure honest and entyre.
But to the person what ye can object,
Or put it to the tryours to defyne:
If ye can him of any vice detect,
Let them upon the matter determine.
With that the widdowe and the fatherless,
Said, they knew not his person what he was:
Yet with our leave they woulden make a guess,
And we should see how it would come to pas.
For we that dwell far from this town, quod they,
Thought we come not at Innes of Court to lern:
Yet dearly for our learning do we pay,
As peradventure here ye shall discern.
And for to try this matter first of all,
(For we must go quod they by circumstaunce:
His bag is full, let us see wherewithal,
Which he was loathe, but did at our instaunce.
It was a great bag like a Fawconere,
And hong upon his gyrdle by a ring:
And hundredth writtes at least within it were,
Now shall ye see, quod they, for your learning.
And bad me readen them as they arose,
Naught but the Labell, and the parties name,
She asked then thinformer who were those,
And where they dwelt, wherein they were to blame
But of an hundredth he ne knew but three,
Ne what they were, ne what town they dwelt in
Nor what they had offended more then we,
And so me thought strange matter did begin.
How that this widow and this fatherless,
Which both were of no learning neither skyll,
Should by such circumstaunce this matter guess,
To try a man his inward thought and will.
Then they him asked what was his purpose,
He answered it was yet long to term:
And sure he was there were such men as those,
For he had messagers abroad to lern.
So that or term he could them serve each one,
And for all those that he thought would appear
He would not want his declaration,
And though he did yet were they not the nere.
For I declare (quod he) in the Tam quam,
How so the matter go they get no cost:
For always on the surer side I am,
To agree with me is best, and so do most.
And better then upon it to appear,
And stand to trial to their great expense:
And though not guyltie, yet never the nere:
They get of me no penny in recompense.
So that the best is always to agree,
Although they have offended in nothing:
And give a crown to save forty,
Yea rather then fail smaller offering.
Sometime I take a Capon, or a Goose,
A piece of Bacon or a piece of Beef:
Or for a pecke of Corn we let one loose,
A small price to redeem so great a mischief.
With that the company began on him look,
Namelye the widow and the fatherless:
And bad him take his hand of from the hook,
For they believed all he did confess.
And bad him go his way such as he was,
The sclaunder of an honest misterye,
Suborned thereunto by Sathanas,
What is there that abused may not be.
THen to the Master of the daunsing school,
And eke the Master of the dysing house:
The worst of them no howball, ne no fool,
To them the breche of clothe did cry rescouse.
As they that in no wise were to admit,
Professed foes to virtue by their trade:
To godliness and goodness oppositte,
And of all mischief very root and blade.
So for the Master of the dysing house,
He said he would not answer to that name,
And thereof he mislyked marvelous,
And for I termed him so he did me blame.
Would God it were so said the company.
And that men did account as myckle shame:
In deed to execute iniquitye,
As them were loathe thereof to have the name.
In deed (quoth he) I keep an ordinarye,
Eight pence a meal who there, does sup or dyne:
And dyse and cards, are but an accessarye.
At aft meals who shall pay for the wine.
These wayten all upon our principal,
As collourable cause to bring them in,
And then from thence to sheere money they fall,
Till some of them be shrieuen of their sin.
But of this game and other harlotrye,
That there is used both by day and night:
Suffiseth me to waren rich thereby.
Thereafter yet in name I will not hight.
This challenge was holden peremptorye,
Such as of further trial had no need:
A trade maintained though vain glory,
And pride, and many a lewd and shameful deed
The velvet brech said that it was not so,
He said it was both false and sclaunderous:
To his good name and to a number mo,
By such as were of his wealth envious.
And of his good estate and countenance,
Which was not small, ne with the lowest sort:
And prayed witness of his foul misparlaunce,
That of a Gentleman gave such report.
A man that for his wealth, his land and fee,
Is taken as I said among the best:
For fortye pound a year dispend may he,
That he has purchased this is the least.
The breeche of cloth said, whereto is this gloss,
Of wealth, of friendship and possession:
Which serves not to this present purpose.
But from our matters are dygression.
For wealth we holden no conclusion,
What so it be, of gold or reuenew:
Namelye, gotten by the confusion,
Of youth, and other means, lewd and untrue.
But he remains that he was before,
A wicked wretch, yea and a great deal worse:
His craft and lewdness cause of his great store,
His house of sin, a mother and a nurse.
But to the wydowe and the fatherless,
Their judgment and experience:
They answered, and that with quick address,
And this was all theffect of their sentence.
That his attendaunce here was little worth,
Nor if it were gods will in other place:
So thought the rest, and bad him get him forth,
And forward on our matter began we pace.
Then came the daunsing master well be seen,
Who somewhat eke misliked of that name:
Master of Music termed would have been,
A Science liberal of noble fame.
The breeche of cloth to him a challenge took,
And said to him he never yet was friend:
For in his school his arse be never shook,
The school of pride where only it does end.
Where well is him that brauest show can make,
In hose and doubled leueled by line.
Poynted and bottoned as in a brake.
No silk ne velvet there is holden fine.
And as for me, I am as welcome there,
As if in Pairis garden ye have been:
The dogs are welcome to the Bull or Bear,
Which for to done them mischief are full keen.
The velvet breeches forthwith answered,
And said he spoke full like such as he was:
A fool that knew nothing of lustiehed,
But all his live had lived like an ass.
Ne knew what did become a gentleman,
And brought him into favor and to grace:
And to no small preferment now and than,
If finely with a woman he couth trace.
A thing not inferior to virtue,
And has prescription for her usage:
The story of king David is not new,
What so the foolish breeche of cloth does rage.
The breech of cloth as touching lustiehead,
Made answer that he knew not what it was:
But it were youth with wealth yrauished,
To spoil them selves and their name to deface.
As many he had known do thereby,
And as for favor that it purchases:
A wanton mind may cast a fantasy,
But as it lightly came it vanishes.
And whereas of prescription ye tell
And for such filth aledgen usage:
Of that good patriarch of Israel.
To that good king ye done great disparage.
His daun^ss^ng was sul far unlike to this,
Who has the story read and understood:
For woman led he none certain that is,
And on his back ware a linen Ephood.
Ne there did trick of xv. or eleven,
Of both the which to whom he came the next
I dare well undertake he lacked seven,
Read if ye find such matter in the text.
Or in his dance observed cinquopas,
Save plain and simply leaped as for joy:
His wife Mycholl ne liked of the grace,
Resemblyng him to a light head boy.
For sturdie proud and arrogant was she,
And thought it full unseemly and unmeet:
To see a prince of that humility,
To dance amid the people in the street.
And namely in a simple white Ephod,
Wherefore she cast him in the teeth withal:
But what said he I will yet serve my god,
And lower yet before his face will fall.
Which has disherited thy fathers house,
And chosen me to sit upon his seat:
He brings down the proud presumptuouse,
And kindly does the humble sort entreat
Her words and eke his answer to the same,
Ye may find written in the book of kings:
How earnestly the good king she did blame,
And him disdayned for his dooinges.
So when I saw the matter go so hard,
And so defended by the breeche of cloth:
Well (said I) let the triours then award,
And judge indifferently between ye both.
With that the wydowe and the fatherless,
Said, they thought well of mirth and melody:
As things that heavy minds did oftredresse.
So that no further evil came thereby.
Which was a matter hard to undertake,
Where daunsing was practiced to much:
And lusty gallant for his Ladies sake,
Supposes as him self there is none such.
For there is wonderful abuse quoth she,
Even among the plain and simple sort:
Where naught else but a Bag piper is to see,
Yet is there pride and folly in their sport.
And rather then they will not be as fine.
As who is finest, yea as smooth and slicke:
And after sit uppermost at the wine,
Or nale to make hard shift they will not stick.
Such humble courtesies, and such loving looks,
As there been used, practiced, and taught:
There need to lechery none other books,
Ne other schools to bring young folk to naught.
Shortly they said he was a man unmeet,
And to the velvet breeches perciall:
So then I spoke to him, and bad him fleet,
And take his ease, and did another call.
Which was the husbandman the seely Hind,
And he no sooner was come in the place:
Then velvet breeches began great fault to find,
And for his simpleness did him disgrace.
And took not his challenge particular,
But said he was unworthy and unable:
As he by proof and reason would aver,
And to the cloth breeche also favorable.
And for the first point was to him denied,
Which was concerning his ability:
He said that his addicion employed,
No thing so little as civility.
Nor knowledge in such causes to debate,
Of policy or educacion:
But rather of his mattockes and his rake,
With whom he has his conversation.
For of al other folk he knows lest,
And farthest is from learning and from skill:
But if it be in fodderyng of a beast,
Then how can he be judge of good and ill.
And so much for his first exception,
To prouen that he was a man unmeet:
And partial he would him prove anon.
For causes that he would us done to weet.
Besides that he was insufficient,
And had not.xl. s. of freeholde:
Which was another matter that he meant,
That from this charge also does him withold.
The breech of cloth mayntayned the reuers,
And in the matter said he would be short:
And first he would the chalengers rehearse,
And to their answer orderly resort.
For ignorance and insufficience,
For want of.xl. s. of free hold:
Because that of his non indifference,
No cause was showed he knew not what there would.
Conserning first of al his ignorance,
And that he was unworthy for to deem:
In matters of so great importance,
He said the contrary was daily seen.
And that they should not charged be to saine,
Matter that was in learning and judgment:
For to their hands it shall be made so plain,
And eke by proof so plain and evident.
That ere they could not but of wylfulnesse.
And of their proper malice wittingly:
Then want of learning is not wickedness,
Nor yet appropriate to husbandry.
An art above all others commendable,
For eld of time and for necessity:
I mean to man's life so seruisable,
As other none science ne faculty.
Requires learning, pain, and diligence,
To dealen with the earth that is so just:
Where but he mark the heavens influence,
In stead of corn often shall he gather dust.
And but he deal with judgment and with skyll,
Observing well his seasons, times, and hours:
And in due order plant, sow, set, and till:
And wisely can foresee the wyndes and showers.
He does not well deserve to have that name,
And that these things are not of importance:
Who so it says, I hold him much to blame,
As of our lives the greatest sustenance.
A Science holden always reverend,
Of which also if I should speak the prays:
And for the woorthynesse should it commend,
It might suffice a work for many days.
By kings and patriarchs that han it used,
An art by God so loved that from thence:
To choose a king often time he not refused,
As Samuel does bear good evidence.
As touching his freehold I will not mell,
But put it to the tryours to enquire:
And as they find the truth so let them tell,
Which is as much as ye both can desire.
The tryours said he had sufficient,
And quickly of that doubt resolved us:
They said he might spend.xls. rent,
And in the Queens book was assessed thus.
Thus are those causes fully answered,
Then said the breech of cloth, and further prayed,
He might be sworue that was more bast then need,
Quoth they of velvet, for he had not said.
Ne spoken for to prove him parciall.
Which at the first was one exception:
Go to (quoth we) he answered so I shall,
And forward with his matter is he gone.
As sure (quod he) as where is discordaunce,
And opposition of quality:
Can be no friendship ne alliance,
So sure I am this plowman hatcth me.
For velvet breeche are not for his wear,
To toil and tomble in the dirt withal:
He hates too much costlinesse of gear,
And says therein is purpose none at all.
Besides all this how he does sclaunder me,
As one that gives dangerous counsel:
Both against him and each other degree,
A whole day would not serve me for to tell.
He says I was the chiefest counselor,
And first that bad his Landlorde raise his rent:
And after for to sell both farm and manor,
And made him borrow where he might have lent
Such extreme pylling, and such bryberie,
As never was hard tell of or this age:
The villain says it is all long of me,
He says I have brought men into that rage.
That no man is content with his estate,
No nor yet woman by your leave says he:
And thence arises such suit and debate,
At Westminster as daily is to see.
And Offices so very profitable,
That by a man has had one seven year:
Is some can use them now he may be able,
With Esquier Knight or Baron to be peer.
I know I have had often his bitter curse,
For he is sometime pynched for my sake:
But no force for his words he shall fare worse,
This is the third exception that I take.
The breech of cloth made answer that him thought,
This opposition of quality.
And all the other causes by him brought,
Were no proof that he parciall would be.
To any wight that truth had on his side,
Whom for to doubt is almost to confess:
That by a just judge he dare not be tried,
And said his challeng did implie no less.
For he him thought of that indifference,
That he in all this earth ne hates wight,
Ne would but for pure zeal of truth dispense,
Ne shrink for King ne Caesar from the right.
And prayed me to speaken what I thought,
If this objection were answered:
Which he against the husbandman had brought,
For long he thought to be delivered.
He prayed the widow and the fatherless,
Their mind and what they thought thereof to tell:
Who shortly did their minds therein express,
And said the challeng was avoided well.
So was the plowmen taken to the rest,
And sworn to deal according to the troth:
Then forward in our matters we us dressed,
Between this breech of velvet and of cloth.
Then called I the Shoemaker and Smyth,
The Tanner graisier and the Vintener:
Who ready were at hand and came full swith,
And challenged of neither part they were.
As men like favorable unto both,
No more unto the one then to the other:
Save to the vyntener the breeche of clothe,
Spoke thus in gentle words and said my brother*
Your lycour is so mighty and so strong,
And therewithal it goes down so soft,
That of your guestes some bibb thereof so long,
Till from the ground it lifts them aloft.
Higher (as they suppose) then any steeple,
In all this Town, Saint Mighell or the Bow*
No longer are they of the common people,
And if they talk of beggars, no I trow.
But all of Myllions of marks and pounds,
And of their credit, and their great chaffare:
An Oak is but a tree, no by his wounds.
So that ye win theee by, what do ye care.
Or else for other foul and filthye talk,
Which is so lou'de and common in your house:
Your cheker man for it does keep no chalk,
Wherefore me thinks it were perilous.
By such a man as ye are, to be tried,
Whose trade is galiaudise, drink and disport:
Both which are friends to wylfulnesse and pride,
Contrary to the sober godly sort.
For from your house, you send them forth so hot,
So very rank their blood so sore incensed:
That shame and fear of sin is clean forgotte,
And heart and mind are thereunto licensed.
The filthye whoredom I take to witness,
That is so common, and so exercised:
I will not say the Sodomites had less,
Ne for it smaller punishment devised.
Then up and down to have them by cart,
To shame such as knew never any shame:
And less of Godly nurture any part,
But often laughan slylic at the same.
The Velvet breeches for him answered,
And for strength of his drink excused him:
For he allayed them both white and red,
And often with water made them small and thin*
Or with some other wine that was full ill,
So that if any it mistempered:
It should seem at the least against his will,
That from him went so many a drunken head.
As for their lewd talk and their harlotrye,
He was no officer to punish them:
But as he might and had aucthoritye,
Their good drink (as I said) to ming and blenne.
And good inought (he thought) to spoil and waste,
For when the drink has once their head posse
The good and ill to them has all one taste,
So that they pay for it, as for the best.
And where he says that whoredom is in wine,
And drunkenness he said that was not true:
In all, though in some, and namely for the time,
For some (quod he) had more need to go spue.
As they that been full ill at ease and sick,
And have not might so much as they have will,
Till they have slept but after if they kick,
Allas the day is that so great an ill.
That it should need so great a pnnishment,
The vintener amercing them so deep:
That though they have not grace for to repent,
Their wife and children often for hunger weep.
And this he does the rather for my sake,
The other answered he thought no less:
And said thereof non oath him neadeth take,
So was it put unto the fatherless.
And widow for to say thereof their mind,
They said the chaileng was not principal:
And that the creature of proper kind,
Was good though we offenden therewithal.
As for the Seller though there were abuse,
And much ungodliness within his house,
He might allege unawares for his excuse,
And eke to deal with such is dangerous.
No further then by fair persuasion,
Which to these drunkerds and ungodly:
Does rather kindle more occasion,
To wickedness and life unthrifty.
Therefore was he admitted to the rest,
And as his fellows all did him before.
Upon his oath did faithfully protest,
They had me count or I took any more,
So then I called them as ye shall here,
The Knight the squire and the gentleman:
The Baker Brewer and the vittaller,
The Tanner graisier and the husbandman.
The Haberdassher and the Vintener,
The Bricklayer and the Smyth also:
The weauer and with him the Shoemaker,
So was onr Jury full complet and mo.
For I them counted no less then fifteen,
Yet would I put none of them out again,
The more (thought I) the better will they deem,
So then to open them the matter plain,
I read them over all the whole record,
Every point and article at large:
And eke the sense and meaning of each word,
I showed, and therwithall what was their charg(...)
And had them for a time to go aside,
And ripely of the matter to debate:
And pray to God therein to be their guide,
That they ne did but right to none estate.
With that they went from me a certain space,
Not full the distaunce of a hundred foot:
I with the rest abode still in the place,
And sodainlye while I aside did look.
Me thought I was ware of a company,
That down the hill did come an easy pace:
Thinking to me they meant to gone us by,
As, passagers that would to further place.
Till I perceived by the way they took,
They meant to turn from us to neither hand:
Then began I nearer upon them to look,
Whence and who they should be to understand.
And saw them three in number, more ne less,
Youthful as their apparel did report:
But who they were, or whence I could not guess,
Weaponed in very defensable sort.
Each of them having at his side a sword,
And in his hand a buckler large and broad:
We mused all what would hereof beword,
Yet said nothing said, but in our place abode.
And lo where yet came from the other side,
Three other like in every regard:
Unto the first, and fast against them hyde,
To meten them, who came as ye have hard.
We began to marvel what they meant to done,
And gessed diversely of their intent:
For that they did each toward other come:
We judged all some strange purpose they men
One gessed, surely here will be some fray,
For which this time and place appointed are:
And truly: but alas and well away,
Far other wise then all we were aware.
And that the breeche of cloth fall dew abought,
As ye shall here, before this matter end:
And of their cruelty which there they wrought,
Upon the gyltlesse who might not defend.
A story pitiful and lamentable,
Enough to warn each wight that he ne trust:
To worldly proffer, falls and deceyuable,
Which turns as the wheel of fortune lust.
Against all wisdom, counsel, and forecast,
Against all hope and expectation:
How so we build, how so we^tyen fast,
When we think surest, fare well all is gone.
What so it was in show or likelynesse,
Of what security or assurance:
One minute turns it to nothing less,
As in this matter ye shall see did chance.
This breeche of cloth having in all our sight,
His cause so good that needelie must he win:
And that the verdict must needs find his right,
And that in all our judgments well ^^^hym.
Yet came he to a miserable end,
A great example of al humane chance:
From which yet no wight may himself defend,
While Fortune has his matter in ballaunce.
Which plainly for to show as it befell,
And where I left to take my hold again:
These fire of whom I told you fair and well,
In two companyes as ye heard me said.
Directly came toward the breech of cloth,
By us till unto him they came so nere,
As that the breech was midd between them both.
And then spoke one of them as ye shall here.
Tho^^^^^^ of cloth thou weed of lowlines,
That have not feared to maintain thy cause:
Against this garment of such woorthynes,
And al of confidence the^ have in laws.
And told and uttered have in thy defense,
Such things as were not meet to been i know
And better had thou of them kept silence,
Then tell them to thine utter: overthrow.
Thou shall therefore be a memorial,
Of such as with their betters daren stryve:
In cause never (...), and there withal,
Upon the breech they al took hold belyue.
But for to see how they him pulled and halde,
My self and others of the company:
That it beheld for pity were appald,
To see them show that extreme cruelty.
For three and three laid hold upon a side,
Upon the panes before and eke behind:
That one pane from another began to ride,
Both out side and that where with it was lyude.
So that they were defaced in a throw,
And piece by piece so very small itorn:
That there nys man so connyng that couth know,
Or guess what garment they had been beforn.
Not so much as the codpeece was exempt,
Or for his service so much favor found:
As not to be in pieces al to rent,
And here and there in pieces thrown a ground.
I read of no such execution,
But it were Pentheus that did despise:
The Bachanals and dissolution,
Done to that dronken god in sacrifice,
Of whom his mother and his nearest friends,
In maintenance of their idolatry:
Became the truel murderers and feends,
Read Ovids Metamorphose it I lie.
The Jury when they saw the breeche itorne,
And saw by consequent the strife was ended:
For which they were impanelled and sworn,
And for they wist not what was them intended.
Away ran they each man in all he might,
Ne chose their way, but as adventure fell:
Or I it wist they were nigh out of sight,
To follow them I need ask no council.
But after them as hard as I could gone,
So fast me thought as never yet did man:
But he were legged as was Acteon,
When he unware had looked on dyan.
Nor never turned once to look behind,
For all our matters and our business:
They were the furthest thing out of my mind,
For that no hope remained of redress.
But for to make an end as I have said,
Thus ended was our matter of debate:
I suddenly out of my sleep abraid,
And at the first full pensive was and mate.
And looked all my chamber round about,
And called to remembrance all my sweuen:
And if I were at home yet began I doubt,
I mean where as I laid me down at even.
So when I had a while considered,
And viewed well the wyndowe and the wall:
And found my self between my sheets in bed,
I began to sigh and thanked God for all.
I saw the day that now began to disclose,
And Phoebus rising with his golden beam:
Then thought I suddenly upon my hose,
Such was yet my remembrance of my dream.
I looked where I laid them ouernight,
Upon my bed even at the very feel:
And when I saw them whole and in good plight,
If I were glad it was not for to weete.
Then cast I in my mind where I had been,
And mused of these matters that I met:
So strange, and so incredible to ween.
And to that end I would them not forget.
I purposed to write them in a book,
Yet therewithal I had this fantasy:
They will but laugh at me that on it look.
And if they do, I lose not all thought I.
For laughter healthy is and profitable,
And sign of both, men say where I have been:
Of heal and weal which both are delectable,
For common is this (...), they laugh that wyn.
So that it hurt no wight shall me suffice,
Which yet it can not do but if they will:
For they may shutt their ears or close their eyes*
That fear in hearing it taken ill.
Thus wandered my mind in matters small,
And how that as small things were put in thought
Though some judge of it i^, so will not al,
Nor him condemn of folly that it wrought.
So after al these things considered,
As also that it was long to endite:
Now will I prove (quoth I) my simple head,
What he has kept and what he can recite.
And help me all this matter to contryue.
In order as it passed in my sleep:
If in him be virtue memoratiue,
To hold the things given him to keep.
And have it written to my remembrance,
Without omitting matter principal:
Although that some what of the circumstance,
I have for want of caryage let fall.
Therefore beseech I every gentle wight,
That shall it read to judge of it the best:
The rather for it is not in our might,
What we will dream in bed when we do rest.
But as it falls us by adventure,
Both for the substance and the quality:
We can not covenant by Indenture,
Ne yet compound before what it shall be.
And therefore though it have small appearance,
To be a truth let no man it despise:
Or him that wrote it for no recompense,
Save labor for his pain without reprice.
For who so shall esteem his labor lost,
That shall it read, he may think therewithal:
I lost more manifold both pain and cost,
Yet never grieved me ne never shall.
For while I wrote this I did nothing else,
Save that I kept mind from idleness:
The cause of harlottry as Ovid tells,
So will it them that read it as I guess.
Better I wys then Amadis de Gaul,
Or else the pallas forced with pleasure:
Who though they promise honny yelden gale,
And unto coals do turn their fained treasure.
Or Ballads that entreat of naught but love,
Of plaints, unkindness, and of gelosie:
Which are of wonderful effects to move,
Young peoples minds that read them to folly.
Of which nevertheless we daily see,
How many, and how cunning are the Clerks:
I bid ye not herein to credit me,
Believe their writings and their noble warkes.
But to my purpose which I have attained,
For my defense and of my dream also:
There is no man alive that here is blamed,
I know not such a man as weren tho.
That by the breeche of cloth were challenged,
Nor I think never were, for to my wit:
They were fantastical imagined,
Only as in my dream I did surmit.
Wherefore no man think him self spoken to,
For any thing that I have told you in my sweuen,
Who thinks he does well, so let him do,
And choose him how this matter he will leeuen.
Besides all this, least any man misiudge,
Of these my words, or hold me parciall:
As bearyng to the buttockes any grudge.
More then unto the other members all.
Because my matter has been of a breeche*
Which is their habit and their couerture:
To think none ill therein I them beseech,
Or that their loss, I have meant to procure.
As that they might not wear as may the rest,
I mean the members of more worthiness:
For sure I hold they ought to wear the best,
And if ye read S. Paul, he says no less.
Wherefore to buttockes evil I ne meant,
More then unto the belly or the back:
Or else the head concerning ornament,
For nature has more furnished their lack.
They may with less shame be discovered,
And naked then the lower parts may be:
Though yet unseemly saving for the head,
Of man: for why of God the image is he.
And is the ground of reason and the root,
The seat of understanding and of wit:
Guide of the rest, yea both of hand and foot,
And Royal as a king on high does sit.
And therefore if the buttockes do exceed,
Or be to monstrous in that they wear:
The head ought to be blamed for the deed,
For reason ought to have his dwelling there.
Not in the buttockes who know nothing less,
Then what is seemly for them to put on:
And are appointed other business,
But if the head they chaunes to over gone.
And take upon them for to bear the sway,
For reason let in Sensuality.
Which sure they will do if they get the kaye,
As prove some weddings made to hastily.
Withouten any council had before,
Of them that should of right have dealt therein:
Fie fie let be, I pray ye of that no more,
What should we ask advise of friend or kynne,
Among our youth this chances now and then,
But seeld or never with the elder sort:
That set their childrens parts at six or ten,
And all for neither counsel and comfort.
But this is somewhat out of my purpose,
Whose meaning was naught but to satisfy:
Such as (because my matter was of hose)
Might think I would the buttockes injury.
Thus for the matter of my dream enough,
To him or her that might thereof misthinke:
(...)ow for the form thereof is very rough,
I may not that defend with pen nor Ink.
But as in the first part of this journey,
When first we entered into this matter:
(...) told them I was but an attorney,
What needed me to bragg or else to clatter.
And of that order (I am sure) the worst,
I say for knowledge in this action:
For sure in all my life it was the furst,
Not only whereof I had the direction.
But whereof I had been at the passage,
So that I had but small experience:
To been the guide of such a caryage,
and having there also no presidence.
And as for my learning and my study,
Has been but small though somewhat I have red:
I wrote never day with prothonotory,
And therefore was but smally furnished.
Therefore beseech I such as be learned,
Into whose hands this work may chance to come
Barresters or how so ye ben termed,
To iudgen of it after your wisdom.
For that I give the plentife no collor,
Nor for such matters do observe decorum:
With us was neither dyer nor Fuller,
And (as I said) my self had nihil horum.
Therefore no colors there they gat of me,
Save such as they themselves with them brought,
which (as me thought) were but to great plenty,
And that to little purpose as me thought.
If I have pleaded further in the right,
In action which is but possessory:
Then by the nature of thee write I might,
I could not therein be peremptory.
But that each party would have his reason,
To prove their issue which was general:
Is ye have hard, null tort null disseason,
And weyuen would no point for them might fall*
Wherefore my masters you that in pleading,
And in the learned points thereof have skill:
Worthy of weighty matter to have leading,
Bear with him that ground never in your mill,
(...)e in your large corn fields has haruested,
The sheaues of that right noble Science:
But here and there as ye have scattered,
Has gleaned after you without offense.
And did in this matter for his talent,
Which is as much as he could do therein:
As he to whom was but one penny lent,
Yet was not using of it holden sin.
And so Christ himself has said in parable,
Wherefore I trust ye will account no wourse:
Of him that would do good as he is able,
Then him that gave all that was in his purse.
As whilom did the widow with her myte,
Your gentle judgment and your courtesy:
I pray the author of all goodness quite.
To whom be laud and praise eternally.
printer's or publisher's device
Ecclesiasticus. Cap. x. The beginning of man's pride is to fall away from God,
and why his heart is gone from his make for pride is the original of all sin.
A commendation of lowlynesse for her consolation.
TO show the value price and worthiness,
And truly to describe humility:
(Which is in English called lowlynes)
So lively as to say, lo this is she.
Although it pass my learning and my skill,
Yet is my labor to her such a debt:
Of right so due that as I can I will,
To quiten her my diligence beset.
And tell her praise as nere as I can guess,
Her nature her effect and quality:
Although for want of cunning I them less,
So fair unable her to beautify.
A work for him that learned were and wise,
And had of collors and of Rethoricke:
As does belong to such an enterprise,
Or else that could of Science poeticke.
With who^ though mine acquaintance be but small,
Such as I have (if any thing as be)
She does command has done and ever shall,
Win I thereby or lose naught recketh me.
Then duly of this virtue to discource,
In order Showing what she is and whence,
And of what virtues origin and source,
I purpose asking (Lord) thine assistence.
And seeking first from whence she has her name,
Of earth I find does come humility:
Then ought she be resemblant to the same,
Now is the earth the lowest in degree.
I mean of every other element,
Which round about her ben encompassed:
Yet with that place does hold her well content,
Since he that all might has so ordered.
Who though he gave to her the lowest seat,
Yet we that dwell upon her daily see:
In how great kindness he does her entreat,
And us his creatures that in her be.
For there nys element so high ne fall,
That does not serve her by commandment,
The Sun his beams upon her must let fall,
And clouds their fatnes and their norishment,
Hence for my matter gather I this proof,
That as the earth contented is to dwell:
In base estate and yet for her behoof,
Provided is and furnished so well.
Whereas if otherwise she would becall,
Heaven the Moon the Stars, or else, ye Sun:
I doubt not but that worse would her befall,
Wisely therefore she leaves it undone.
And holds to the place where she was set,
Ne with the planets seeks to compare:
But from them does her necessaries fet,
Which they to yelden her contented are.
That by the same example we are taught,
which ben her children of her body borne:
Considered that we be come of naught,
Of base and low degree to think no scorn.
Which is the thing I call humility.
And is a virtue dear and precious:
And has the promise of eternity,
And in this life of blessings meruellous.
In earth begets peace and plenty,
Two things now wished for of all mankind,
By their contraries I may well conclude,
Who maken heavy heart and woeful mind.
To prove the first which is that lowlines.
Begets peace* It is as evident:
As it is plain that pride does nothing less,
For proof whereof there need none argument.
But if that matter will you not suffice,
And that ye will demand authority:
Read books that of such matter done devise,
In holy or in profane history.
If ye can find that there was truth or love,
Or unity of heart in house or town:
Where every Iauell needs would be above,
And held his halpeny to be a crown.
Mark (I say) if ye have seen charity,
And loving kindness in any nation:
Suffering each others adversity,
Which is the thing we call compassion.
Mark well these persons and their governance*
And ye shall find on peril of my life:
They been such as done not them selves advance,
Ne will for little matter mouen strife.
As done the proud, who thereof think disdain,
I mean to borowe any evil word:
That they ne pay it treble home again,
So largely any good they nold afford.
Then ryseth quarrel up go the fistes and battes,
And I as good as thou, and thou as I:
Out gone sub penes, out flaien latitat^es,
Who may him rule, who may hun pacifye.
Then warrants of the peace, and good a bearing,
And deep oaths sworn of matters dangerous:
For fear of meeting with a pickled hearing,
And mountains made of matters fryuolous,
For council he ne wants of his sort,
That will him tell his cause is very good:
And with such words his folly will support,
Then must they go to let a hoggeshed blood.
Or else a barrel of strong ale or beer,
Whereas between the goblet and the wall:
His adversary shall abie full dear,
And casten how the matter will befall.
Of learned lawyer seeks he no skill,
Him needs not, for why he has at hand:
A broker that shall teach him law his fill,
And show him fully how his case does stand.
Though be ne studied in his life a day,
Yet through his brocage and his great practice:
Bears him self so, that he dares say,
The law shall end right as he does devise.
And says, he has to much abused you,
And thus and thus he pleads all the case:
Tells what action must be brought, and how,
All for a matter dee^ of quater ase,
They never will give council to submit,
That were humility, that were to vile:
Nor to our estimation does sit,
Until our purse have had the lax a while.
And then our neighbors may our matter end,
Though worse then us was offered before:
And reason good we may no longer spend,
Thus many a wylfull man his thrift has lore.
And for it has been laughed well to scorn,
By flatterers that han upon him fed:
And filled their hoodes with good strong ale in corn,
For which his purse full heartily has bled.
This would not chance so often if lowlynes,
Were half esteemed as she ought to be:
Nor such extremities sought of redress,
For with discresion proceeds she.
And often with sufferaunce does overcome,
Leaving revenge to him that will and shall:
Revenge the wrongs that to thee just are done,
And bring full low their Cedars high and fall.
And so much for my proof that lowliness,
Begets concord, and does nourishe peace:
Which twain who is so lewd but will confess,
They been the cause of wealth and of increase.
And are of Town and Country such defense,
As is no Bulwark, ne Municion:
Against the foe to maken resistance,
As has been proved years and days agon.
For God who may not lie has promised,
Where brethren dwell together as in love:
With life and blessings to be cherished,
They may not fail, and that from heaven above.
To prove this matter of it self so plain,
Me needs bring no more authority:
Ne what the fathers of such matters sayen,
Experience does it so ratifye:
Wherefore to turn again to lowlines,
The matter of my work, and for whose sake:
To travel in so great a business,
So high and worthy I have undertake.
I say she has such multiplicitie,
Of favor and of grace especial:
That I dare call her of humanity,
The note, the proof, and judgment principal.
Whereby a man does differ from a beast,
For one has wylful inclination:
And reason none of deed, ne of beheast,
But violence of sense and passion.
Of whom God by his prophet David says,
Be not (says he) like unto Horse or Mule:
That more his will, then any reason wayeth,
And must with bitte and bridle live in rule.
Whereas the soul of man is reasonable,
And of his lust and will has governance:
But if he abuse that gift inestimable,
Which to the lowly heart does seeldome chance.
For once he seems small in his own eyes,
Of godly mind a mighty argument:
And of a man whom little may suffice,
Both worthy of great praise in mine intent.
For be it much or lit that be possesses,
Of land or fee, of silver or of gold:
His heart increases not thereby, ne lesseth,
As edoon these ^ooles, for they han gotten molde.
What some by legacy, some by descent,
Bytitle auucestrel and coosinage:
Some, for in all their life no truth they meant,
But usure bribring, and such foul outrage.
And so have filled cupbord, chest, and coffer,
For which hem thinks they should been above:
And that each wight to them should dowke and proffer,
All for their wealth, and nothing for their love.
For love does nothing for their purpose make,
That seeken worldly pomp and maintenance:
Not askyng question for conscience sake,
In bargayne, purchase, or in cheuisaunce.
Of word, of yard, of measure, ne of weight,
Of thirty for a hundred by the year:
Not plainly took, but closely and by sleight,
Ask of the Brokers how, and ye shall hear.
Yet for they break no house by violence,
Nor by the high ways in await do lie:
But rob at home withouten resistance,
No man against them dare make hue and cry.
But if the godly preacher light thereon,
Who for his words are spoken unto all:
Tushe good enough say they be named non,
And so from evil unto worse they fall.
For these are statutes made and ordinance,
To bridle their vnsaciablenesse:
That make the fatherless and wydow dance,
With hungry bellies through their cursednesse.
Not for the other safely dare I say,
Who stands of his God in such an awe:
And by his word so orders his way.
That he is to him self a perfect law.
Thinks of God, and that before his eyes,
He goes, and that to him there is no night:
Wayeth also that what so men devise,
How so they collouren their deeds with slight.
They may not him deceive ne bleare his eye,
As they can do to men by diverse ways:
Avoiding laws their pain and penalty,
Yea and of wisdom thereby get the praise.
If all these things come of humility,
Why may I not conclude upon her then:
And say no man can praise her worthily,
Ne show what good she does the sons of men.
But for my fynall proof this will I say,
That read the books of kings and ye shall find:
How God accepted lowlines always.
And made the proud and hautie come behind.
And them despised though with sacrifice,
And many a ceremony they him sought:
Which (as appears well) he did despise,
For that so well they of them selves thought
Ye fast says he to smyten with your fist,
And to your debtors done oppression:
Your barts to meek and humble ye resist,
Yet shame ye not to make profession.
Of sacrifice and of religion,
With solemn outward ceremony:
Hypocrisy and mere derision,
Where in the heart is not humility.
Shortly the humble, low, and contrite heart,
Says David, is to God most acceptable:
That will I offer (says be) for my part,
And Bullockes of my lips lay on thy table.
Wherein almighty God us grant that we,
By his example, and a number mo:
Enforsen us, such as he was to be,
Encreas and bless all them that wyshen so.
That each man seeking others, not his own,
In patience, and longanimitie:
Of life may make his calling to be known,
And win the weak, to praysen God thereby.
Through steadfastness and truth in word and deed,
Abhorring filthy gain, and all excess:
Supportyng each another in his need,
Accompting godly living great richesse.
Shortly subduing lust and lewd desire,
Of sport or speech, and fleshes foul delight:
May so put out of wickedness the fire,
And grow in fruits and graces of the spirit.
And thus much of this virtue have I said,
Of duty bound and eke most willingly:
The rather for pride has her sore afraid:
And bosteth he will putten out her eye*
Which God of his pure grace shield and defend,
And bless his people and inheritance:
To him be laud and praise world without end,
And of all creatures obeyssance.
printer's or publisher's device

The Book to the Reader.
(...)F, gentle Reader, thou have found in me,
Thing which thy stomach hardly can digest,
Here is discribed an Epythyme,
(...)arm it and lap it close unto thy breast,
(...) was compounded with great diligence,
Of Symples by an Apothecary,
(...)th trusty and skillful in that Science,
And from these iiii. verses does not vary.
The Epythyme.
(...)ho purposes to liuen virtuous,
In favor of our God, let him take keep,
(...)hat pride none office bear within his house,
For where he does virtue is laid to sleep.
A Prayer to almighty God.
LOrd God through whose eternal ordinance,
Decreed is and set down by statute:
That human life shall stand of sustenance,
And must for want thereof be resolute.
Into the matter whereout he was take,
Which was the earth and therefore have him give,
In token of thy love and for his sake,
All necessary things whereon to live.
Both for his pleasure and necessity,
To number them and make division:
The first I may not for infinity,
But to the last belongen three and one.
Which are apparel, meat, and drink and sleep,
Whereof the last three ben so necessary:
That who so lacks them no life may keep,
The fourth to hide our shame thou will we carry.
These for our life we holden suffisaunt,
For these we make shift and provision:
Forgetful of the fourth and ignorant,
Which yet is chief of all and liefe allone.
Thy word (O Lord) by whom all these are led,
And through thee which they yelden norishment:
For else man lives not only by bred,
By meat or drink or other accident.
Nor yet by sleep to nature so friendable,
Though of all these we taken what we will:
Yea rather for we been unmeasurable,
And use them not for need but to fulfill.
A foul delight and priden us therein,
They been our snares and hasten our decay:
Thy just reward (O Lord) allas for sin,
When we by them are led forth of thy way.
Grant us therefore (O Lord) that we so use,
Thy Creatures as may stand with thy will,
That for their sakes we do not thee refuse,
Nor turn thy gifts and goodness to our ill.
But that above all other things we thirst,
Thy kingdom and of it the righteousness,
Which thou have bidden us to seeken first,
So shall the rest not hurt us through excess.
In this life nor yet in the life to come,
Which grant us Lord for Jesus Christ's sake:
And when in earth our part is played and done,
Our souls and bodies to thy mercy take.
FINIS.

