ENDOXOTAT LAKEDAION


ELLAS


ELLADOOS ELLAS ATHNAI


APIDAOS


PEPIKLS


OI APISTOI


THOYKYDIDS
portrait of Thucydides KTA ES AEI



OI POLLOI


Eight Books Of the PELOPONNESIAN WAR Written by THVCYDIDES the son of
OLORVS.

Interpreted with Faith and Diligence Immediately out of the Greek By Thomas
Hobbes Secretary to ye late Earl of Devonshire

LONDON Imprinted for Hen: Seile, and are to be sold at the Tigres Head in
Paul's churchyard. 1629.

Cecill sculp.



TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, SIR WILLIAM CAVENDYSSHE, Knight of the BATH, Baron of
HARDVVICKE, and Earl of DEVONSHIRE.
Right Honorable,
I Take confidence from your Lordships goodness, in the very entrance of this
Epistle, to profess, with Simplicity, and according to the faith I owe my
Master now in Heaven, That it is not unto your self, but to your Lordships
Father, that I Dedicate this my Labor, such as it is. For neither am I at
liberty to make choice of one, to whom I may present it as a voluntary
Oblation, being bound in duty to bring it in as an Account, to him, by whose
Indulgence, I had both the time, and Ammunition to perform it: Nor if such
Obligation were removed, know I any to whom I ought to Dedicate it rather. For
by the experience of many years I had the honor to serve him, I know this,
There was not any, who more really, and less for Glories sake, favored those
that studied the Liberal Arts liberally, then My Lord, your Father did; nor in
whose house a man should less need the University, then in his. For his own
study, it was bestowed, for the most part, in that kind of Learning, which
best deserves the pains and hours of Great Persons, History, and Civil
knowledge, and directed not to the Ostentation of his reading, but to the
Government of his Life, and the Public good. For he so read, that the Learning
he took in by study, by judgment he digested, and converted into Wisdom, and
ability to benefit his Country; to which also he applied himself with Zeal,
but such as took no fire, either from Faction or Ambition. And as he was a
most able man, for soundness of advice, and clear expression of himself, in
matters of difficulty and consequence, both in public and private; so also was
he one whom no man was able either to draw, or iustle out of the straight path
of Justice* Of which virtue I know not whether he deserved more, by his
severity, in imposing it (as he did, to his last breath) on himself, or by his
Magnanimity in not exacting it to himself from others. No man better discerned
of Men; and therefore was he constant in his Friendships, because he regarded
not the Fortune, nor Adhaerence, but the Men; with whom also he conuersed with
an opennesse of heart, that had no other guard then his own Integrity, and
that Nil Conscire. To his Equalles he carried himself equally; and to his
inferiors familiarly; but maintaining his Respect fully, and only, with the
native splendor of his worth. In sum, he was one in whom might plainly be
perceived, that Honor and Honesty are but the same thing, in the different
degrees of persons. To him therefore, and to the memory of his worth, be
consecrated this, though unworthy Offering.

And now, imitating in this Civil Worship, the Religious worship of the
Gentiles, who when they Dedicated any thing to their Gods, brought and
presented the same to their Images; I bring and present this Gift of mine, the
History of THVCYDIDES translated into English, with much more diligence then
elegance, to your Lordship, who are the Image of your Father, (for never was a
man more exactly coppied out, then he in you,) and who have in you the seeds of
his virtues already springing up. Humbly entreating your Lordship to esteem it
amongst the Goods that descend upon you, and in your due time to read it. I
could recommend the Author unto you, not impertinently, for that he had in his
veins the blood of Kings; but I choose rather to recommend him for his
writings, as having in them profitable instruction for Noblemen, and such as
may come to have the mannaging of great and weighty actions. For I may
confidently say, that notwithstanding the excellent both Examples and Precepts
of Heroique Virtue you have at home, this Book will confer not a little to
your institution; especially, when you come to the years, to frame your life
by your own Observation. For in History, actions of honor and dishonor do
appear plainly and distinctly, which are which; but in the present Age they
are so disguised, that few there be, and those very careful, that be not
grossly mistaken in them. But this, I doubt not, is superfluously spoken by
me to your Lordship: Therefore I end with this prayer, That it will please God
to give you Virtues suitable to the fair dwelling he has prepared for them,
and the happiness that such Virtues lead unto, both in, and after this world.

Your Lordships most humble Servant, THO. HOBBES.

TO THE READERS.
THough this Translation have already past the Censure of some, whose
Judgments I very much esteem; yet, because there is something, I know not
what, in the censure of a Multitude, more terrible then any single Judgment,
how severe or exact soever, I have thought it discretion in all men, that have
to do with so many, and to me, in my want of perfection, necessary, to
bespeake your Candor. Which that I may upon the better reason hope for, I am
willing to acquaint you briefly, upon what grounds I undertook this Work at
first; and have since, by publishing it, put my self upon the hazard of your
censure, with so small hope of glory, as from a thing of this nature can be
expected. For I know, that mere Translations, have in them this property, that
they may much disgrace, if not well done; but if well, not much commend the
doer.

It has been noted by diverse, that Homer in Poesy, Aristotle in Philosophy,
Demosthenes in Eloquence, and others of the Ancients, in other knowledge, do
still maintain their Primacy, none of them exceeded, some not approached, by
any, in these later Ages. And in the number of these, is justly ranked also our
Thucydides; a Workman no less perfect in his work, then any of the former;
and in whom (I believe with many others) the Faculty of writing History is at
the highest. For the principal and proper work of History, being to instruct,
and enable men, by the knowledge of Actions past, to bear themselves prudently
in the present, and prouidently toward the Future, there is not extant any
other (merely humane) that does more fully, and naturally perform it, then
this of my Author. It is true, that there be many excellent and profitable
Histories written since; and in some of them, there be inserted very wise
discourses, both of Manners and Policy. But being discourses inserted, and not
of the contexture of the Narration, they indeed commend the knowledge of the
Writer, but not the History it self, the nature whereof, is merely narratiue.
In others, there be subtle conjectures, at the secret aims, and inward
cogitations of such as fall under their Pen; which is also none of the least
virtues in a History, where the conjecture is thoroughly grounded, not forced to
serve the purpose of the Writer, in adorning his style, or manifesting his
subtilty in coniecturing. But these conjectures cannot often be certain,
unless withal so evident, that the narration it self may be sufficient to
suggest the same also to the Reader. But Thucydides is one, who, though he
never digress to read a Lecture, Moral or Political, upon his own Text,
nor enter into men's hearts, further then the actions themselves evidently guide
him, is yet accounted the most Politic Historiographer that ever writ. The
reason whereof I take to be this: He fills his Narrations with that choice
of matter, and orders them with that Judgment, and with such perspicuity and
efficacy expresses himself, that, as Plutarch says, he makes his Auditor a
Spectator. For he settteh his Reader in the Assemblies of the People, and in
the Senates, at their debating; in the Streets, at their Seditions; and in the
Field at their Battles. So that look how much a man of understanding, might
have added to his experience, if he had then lived, a beholder of their
proceedings, and familiar with the men, and business of the time; so much
almost may he profit now, by attentive reading of the same here written. He may
from the narrations draw out lessons to himself, and of himself be able, to
trace the drifts and counsels of the Actors to their seat.

These Virtues of my Author did so take my affection, that they begat in me a
desire to communicate him further; which was the first occasion that moved me
to translate him. For it is an error we easily fall into, to believe, that
whatsoever pleases us, will be, in like manner and degree, acceptable to all;
and to esteem of one another Judgment, as we agree in the liking, or dislike
of the same things. And in this error peradventure was I, when I thought, that
as many of the more judicious, as I should communicate him to, would affect him
as much as I my self did. I considered also, that he was exceedingly esteemed
of the Italians and French in their own Tongues; notwithstanding that he be
not very much beholding for it to his Interpreters. Of whom (to speak no more
then becomes a Candidate of your good opinion in the same kind) I may say
this, That whereas the Author himself, so carries with him his own light
throughout, that the Reader may continually see his way before him, and by that
which goes before, expect what is to follow, I found it not so in them. The
cause whereof, and their excuse may be this: They followed the Latin of
Laurentius Valla, which was not without some errors, and he a Greek Copy,
not so correct as now is extant. Out of French he was done into English, (for
I need not dissemble to have seen him in English) in the time of King Edward
the sixth; but so, as by multiplication of error, he became at length
traduced, rather then translated into our Language. Hereupon I resolved to take
him immediately from the Greek, according to the Edition of Aemilius Porta;
not refusing, or neglecting any version, Comment, or other help I could come
by. Knowing that when with Diligence and Leisure I should have done it, though
some error might remain, yet they would be errors but of one descent; of which
nevertheless I can discover none, and hope they be not many. After I had
finished it, it lay long by me, and other reasons taking place, my desire to
communicate it ceased.

For I saw, that, for the greatest part, men came to the reading of History,
with an affection much like that of the People, in Rome, who came to the
spectacle of the Gladiators, with more delight to behold their blood, then
their Skill in Fencing. For they be far more in number, that love to read of
great Armies, bloody Battles, and many thousands slain at once, then that
mind the Art, by which, the Affairs, both of Armies, and Cities, be conducted
to their ends. I observed likewise, that there were not many, whose ears were
well accustomed to the names of the places they shall meet with in this
Histroy; without the knowledge whereof, it can neither patiently be read over,
perfectly understood, nor easily remembered; Especially being many, as here it
falls out; because in that Age, almost every City, both in Greece and Sicily,
the two maine scenes of this War, was a distinct Common wealth by it self,
and a party in the Quarrel.

Nevertheless I have thought since, that the former of these considerations
ought not to be of any weight at all, to him that can content himself with the
Few and better sort of Readers; who, as they onley judge, so is their
approbation only considerable. And for the difficulty arising from the
ignorance of places, I thought it not so insuperable, but that with convenient
pictures of the Countries it might be remoaed. To which purpose, I saw there
would be necessary, especially two; a Gene^rall Map of Greece, and a General
Map of Sicily. The latter of these, I found already extant, exactly done, by
Philip Cluuerius; which I have caused to be cut, and you have it at the
beginning of the Sixth Book. But for Mappes of Greece, sufficient for this
purpose, I could light on none. For neither are the Tables of Ptolomie* and
descriptions of those that follow him, accommodate to the time of Thucydides;
and therefore few of the Places by him mentioned, therein described: nor are
those that be, agreeing always with the truth of History. Wherefore I was
constrained to draw one (as well as I could) my self. Which to do, I was to
rely, for the maine Figure of the Country, on the modern description now in
reputation; and in that to set down those Places especially (as many as the
Volume was capable of) which occur in the reading of this Author, and to
assign them that situation, which, by travel in Strabo, Pausanias, Herodotus,
and some other good Authors, I saw belonged unto them. And to show you that I
have not played the Mountibanke in it, putting down exactly some few of the
Principal, and the rest at adventure, without care, and without reason, I have
joined with the Map an Index, that points to the Authors which will
justify me, where I differ from others. With these Mappes, and those few
brief notes in the Margin, upon such passages, as I thought most required
them, I supposed the History might be read with very much benefit, by all men
of good Judgment and Education, (for whom also it was intended from the
beginning by Thucydides) and have therefore at length made my Labor public,
not without hope to have it accepted. Which if I obtain, though no otherwise
then in virtue of the Authors excellent matter, it is sufficient.

T. H.

These errors of the Press, I desire the Reader to correct with his Pen,
thus.
Error. Correct. Page 32. l. 5. Maydonia, Mygdonia. Page 39. l. 5. their,
other. Page 54* l. 33.34. Cyrus, Cyprus. Page 71. l. 28. from, to. Page 85. l.
41. affessed, assessed. Page 129. l. 36. of Cyllene, to Cyllene. Page 131. l.
19. act, art. Page 133. l. 9. amazed. amused. Page 142. l. 21. Oenia, Oenias.
Page 151. l. 36. liknesse, sickness. Page 205. l. 31. encounter, encounter
them. Page 245. l. 12. necessities, necessaries. Page 250. l. 35. first forth.
Page 254. l. 14. Phanocis, Phanotis. Page 256. l. 1. Thessalonians,
Thessalians. Page 268. l. 40. this, his. Page 278. l. 12. Gerastion, the month
Gerastio^. Page 282. l. 2. Arrhibaeans, Arrhiboeus. l. 26. this for power. this
power. l. 27. and as these. and as for these. p. 314. l. 4 which, with. p. 334.
l. 5. but, yet. p. 416. l. 14. in, into. p. 457. l. 4. whole, the whole. p.
488. l. 40. Tissaphepnes, Theramenes. In the Margin.
Error. Correct P. 14. Now the Gulf of Venice, called so from Ius an Illyrian,
So called from Ius an Illyrian. Now the Gulf of Venice. P. 117. went, sent. P.
364. desire, deter. In the Life of the Author.
Error. Correct. P. 5. l. 34, affection, affectation.

OF THE LIFE AND HISTORY OF THVCYDIDES.
We read of diverse men that bear the name of Thucydides. There is Thucydides
a Pharsalian, mentioned in the eighth Book of this History; who was public
Host of the Athenians, in Pharsalus, and chancing to be at Athens, at the time
that the government of the 400 began to go down, by his interposition, and
persuasion, kept asunder the Factions then arming themselves, that they fought
not in the City to the ruin of the Commonwealth. There is Thucydides the son
of Milesias, an Athenian, of the town of Alope, of whom Plutarch speaks in
the Life of Pericles; and the same in all probability, that in the first Book
of this History, is said to have had the charge of 40 Galleys, sent against
Samos, about 24 years before the beginning of this War. Another Thucydides
the son of Ariston, an Athenian also, of the Town of Acherdus, was a Poet,
though of his verses there be nothing extant. But Thucydides the writer of this
History, an Athenian, of the Town of Halimus, was the son of Olorus, (or
Orolus) and Hegesipyle. His Fathers name is commonly written Olorus though in
the Inscription on his Tomb, it was Orolus. Howsoever it be written, it is the
same that was borne by diverse of the Kings of Thrace, and imposed on him, with
respect unto his descent from them. So that though our Author (as Cicero says
of him Lib. 2. De Oratore) had never written an History, yet had not his name
not bin extant, in regard of his Honor and Nobility. And not only Plutarch,
in the Life of Cimon, but also almost all others that have touched this point,
affirm directly that he was descended from the Thracian Kings. Adducing this
for proof, that he was of the house of Miltiades, that famous General of the
Athenians, against the Persians at Marathon; which they also prove by this,
that his Tomb was a long time extant amongst the Monuments of that Family. For
near unto the Gates of Athens, called Melirides, there was a place named
Coela, and in it the Monuments called Cintoniana, belonging to the Family of
Miltiades, in which, none but such as were of that Family, might be buried. And
amongst those was the Monument of Thucydides, with this inscription, Thucydides
Oroli Halimusius. Now Miltiades is confessed by all, to have descended from
Olorus, King of Thrace, whose daughter another Miltiades, Grandfather to this,
married, and had children by. And Miltiades, that won the memorable victory
at Marathon, was heir to goodly possessions, and Cities in the Chersonnesus of
Thrace, over which also he raigne^. In Thrace lay also the possessions of
Thucydides and his wealthy Mines of Gold, as he himself professes in his
fourth Book. And although those riches might come to him by a Wife (as is also
by some affirmed) which he married in Scapte-Hyle, a City of Thrace, yet even
by that marriage, it appears, that his affairs had a relation to that
Country, and that his Nobility was not there unknown. But in what degree of
kindred Miltiades, and he, approached each other, is not any where made
manifest. Some also have coniectured that he was of the house of the
Pisistratides; the ground of whose conjecture has been only this, that he
makes honorable mention of the government of Pisistratus, and his sons, and
extenuateth the glory of Harmodius and Aristogiton; proving that the free^ng of
the State of Athens from the tyranny of the Pisistratides, was falsely ascribed
to their fact (which proceeded from private revenge, in a quarrel of Love) by
which the tyranny ceased not, but grew heavier to the State, till it was at
last put down by the Lacedaemoniaus. But this opinion, as it is not so well
grounded, so neither is it so well received as the former.

Agreeable to his Nobility, was his institution in the study of Eloquence, and
Philosophy^ For in Philosophy, he was the Scholar (as also was Pericles and
Socrates) of A^a^^goras, whose opinions, being of a strain above the
apprehension of the vulgar procured him the estimation of an Atheist, which
name they bestowed upon all men that thought not as they did, of their
ridiculous Religion, and in the end, cost him his life. And Socrates after him
for the like causes, under* went the like fortune. It is not therefore much to
be regarded, if this other disciple of his, were (...) some reputed an Athiest
to. For though he were none, yet it is not improbable, but by the light of
natural reason, he might see enough in the Religion of these (...), to make
him think it vain, and superstitious; which was enough to make him an
Atheist, in the opinion of the People. In some places of his History, he
notes the aequiuocation of the Oracles; and yet he confirms an assertion of
his own* touching the time this War lasted, by the Oracles prediction. He
tax^th Nicias for being to punctual in the observation of the Ceremonies of
their Religion* when he overthrew himself and his Army, and indeed the whole
Dominion and liberty of his Country by it. Yet he commends him in another
place for his worshipping of the Gods, and says in that respect, he least of
all men deserved to come to so great a degree of Calamity as he did. So that in
his writings our Author appears to be, on the one side not superstitious, on
the other side not an Ath^i^t.

In Rhetorique, he was the Disciple of Antiphon* one (by his description in the
eighth Book of this History) for power of speech almost a miracle, and feared
by the People, for his eloquence. Insomuch as in his latter days he lived
retired, but so as he gave counsel to, and writ Orations for other men that
resorted unto him, to that purpose. It was he that contrived the deposing of
the People, and the setting up of the government of the 400. For which also he
was put to death, when the P^^pl^ again recovered their authority;
notwithstanding that he pleaded his own cause, the best of any man to that day.

It need not be doubted, but from such a Master, Thucydides was sufficiently
(...), to have become a great Demagogue, and of great authority with the
People. But it seems he had no desire at all to meddle in the government,
because in those ti^^s it was impossible for any man to give good and
profitable counsel for the Commonwealth and not incur the displeasure of
the People For their opinion was such of their own power, and of the facility
of atchieuing whatsoever action they undertook, that such men only swayed the
Assemblies, and were esteemed w^se and good Commonwealths men, as did put them
upon the most dangerous and desperate enterprises. Whereas he that gave them
temperate, and discreet advice, was thought a Coward, or not to understand, or
else to malign their power. And no marvel; for much prosperity (to which they
had now for many years been accustomed) makes men in love with themselves;
and it is hard for any man to love that counsel which makes him love himself
the less. And it holds much more in a Multitude, then in one Man; For a man
that reasons with himself, will not be ashamed to admit of timorous
suggestions in his business, that he may the stronglyer provide; but in
public deliberations before a Multitude, Fear, (which for the most part
advises well, though it execute not so) seldom or never shows it self, or
is admitted. By this means it came to pass amongst the Athenians, who thought
they were able to do any thing, that wicked men and flatterers drove them
headlong into those actions that were to ruin them; and the good men either
durst not oppose, or if they did, undid themselves. Thucydides therefore, that
he might not be either of them that committed, or of them that suffered evil,
forbore to come into the Assemblies, and propounded to himself, a private life
as far as the eminency of so wealthy a person, and the writing of the History
he had undertaken, would permit.

For his opinion touching the government of the State, it is manifest that he
least of all liked the Democracy. And upon diverse occasions, he notes the
emulation and contention of the Demagogues, for reputation, and glory of wit;
with their crossing of each others counsels to the damage of the Public; the
inconstancy of Resolutions, caused by the diversity of ends, and power of
Rhetorique in the Orators; and the desperate actions undertaken upon the
flattering advice of such as desired to attain, or to hold what they had
attained of authority and sway amongst the common people. Nor does it appear,
that he magnifieth any where the authority of the Few* amongst whom he says
every one desires to be chief, and they that are undervalued, bear it with
less patience then in a Democracy; whereupon sedition follows, and
dissolution of the government. He prayseth the government of Athens, when it
was mixed of the Few and the Many; but more he commends it, both when
Pisistratus reigned (saving that it was an usurped power) and when in the
beginning of this War, it was Democraticall in name, but in effect
Monarchical under Pericles. So that it seems that as he was of Regal
descent, so he best approved of the Regal Government. It is therefore no
marvel, if he meddled as little as he could in the business of the
Commonwealth, but gave himself rather to the observation and recording of
what was done by those that had the mannaging thereof. Which also he was no
less prompt diligent and faithful by the disposition of his mind, then by his
fortune, dignity, and wisdom, able to accomplish. How he was disposed to a
work of this nature, may be understood by this, that when being a young man he
heard Herodotus the Historiographer reciting his History in Public, (for such
was the fashion both of that, and many Ages after) he felt so great a sting of
aemulation, that it drew tears from him, insomuch as Herodotus himself took
notice how violently his mind was set on letters, and told his Father Olorus.
When the Peloponnesian War began to break out, he coniectured truly, that
it would prove an Argument worthy his labor; and no sooner it began, then he
began his History; pursuing the same, not in that perfect manner, in which we
see it now, but by way of Commentary, or plain Register of the Actions and
passages thereof, as from time to time they fell out, and came to his
knowledge. But such a Commentary it was, as might perhaps deserve to be
preferred before a History written by another. For it is very probable that the
eighth Book is left the same it was when he first writ it, neither beautified
with Orations, nor so well Cemented at the Transitions, as the former seven
Books are. And though he began to write as soon as ever the War was on
foot, yet began he not to perfect and polish his History, till after he was
banished.

For notwithstanding his retired life upon the Coast of Thrace, where his own
possessions lay, he could not avoid a service of the State, which proved to him
afterward very unfortunate. For whilst he resided in the I Will Thasus, it fell
out that Brasidas the Lacedaemonian, besieged Amphipolis, a City belonging to
the Athenians, on the Confines of Thrace, and Macedony, distant from Thasus,
about half a days sail. To relieve which, the Captain thereof for the
Athenians, sent to Tbucydides, to leuy a power and make haste unto him, (for
Thucydides was one of the Strategi, that is, had authority to raise forces in
those parts, for the service of the Commonwealth.) And he did accordingly. But
he came thither one night too late, and found the City already yielded up. And
for this he was afterward banished, as if he had let slip his time through
negligence, or purposely put it off, upon fear of the Enemy. Nevertheless he
put himself into the City of Eion, and preserved it to the Athenians, with
the repulse of Brasidas, which came down from Amphipolis, the next morning,
and assaulted it. The author of his banishment is supposed to have been Gleon,
a most violent Sycophant in those times, and thereby also a most acceptable
Speaker amongst the people. For where affairs succeed amiss, though there
want neither providence, nor courage in the Conduction, yet with those that
judge only upon events, the way to calumny is always open, and Envy, in the
likeness of Zeal to the Public good, easily finds credit for an
accusation.

After his Banishment he lived in Scapt^-Hyle, a City of Thrace, before
mentioned, as Plutarch writes; but yet so as he went abroad; and was present
at the Actions of the rest of the War as appears by his own words in his
fifth Book. Where he says, that he was present at the Actions of both parts,
and no less at those of the Peloponnesians, by reason of his exile, then those
of the Athenians. During this time also, he perfected his History, so far as is
now to be seen; nor does it appear that after his exile, he ever again
enjoyed his Country. It is not clear in any Author, where, or when, or in
what year of his own Age, he dyed. Most agree that he dyed in Banishment; yet
there be that have written, that after the defeat in Sicily, the Athenians
decreed a general reuocation of all banished persons, except those of the
Family of Pisistratus; and that he then returned, and was afterward put to
death at Athens. But this is very unlikely to be true, unless by after the
defeat in Sicily, he meant so long after, that it was also after the end of the
Peloponnesian War, because Thucydides himself makes no mention of such
return, though he out-liued the whole War, as is manifest by his words in the
fifth Book. For he says he lived in banishment twenty years after his charge
at Amphipolis; which happened in the eighth year of this War, which in the
whole, lasted but 27 years complete. And in another place he makes mention of
the razing of the Long-walles between Peiraeus, and the City; which was the
last stroke of this War. They that say he dyed at Athens, take their
conjecture from his Monument which was there. But this is not a sufficient
Argument; for he might be buried there secretly, (as some have written he was)
though he dyed abroad; or his Monument might be there, and (as others have
affirmed) he not buried in it. In this variety of conjecture there is nothing
more probable then that which is written by Pausanias, where he describes the
Monuments of the Athenian City, and says thus. The worthy Act of Oenobius, in
the behalf of Thucydides, is not without honor (meaning that he had a
Statue.) For Oenobius obtained to have a Decree passed for his return; who
returning was slain by treachery, and his Sepulcher is near the Gates called
Melirides. He dyed, as says Marcellinus, after the seven and fiftieth year of
his Age. And if it be true that is written by A. Gellius, of the Ages of
Hellanicus, Herodotus, and Thucydides, then died he not before the sixty eighth
year. For if he were forty when the War began, and lived (as he did,
certainly) to see it ended he might be more when he dyed, but not less then
sixty eight years of Age. What children be left, is not manifest. Plato in
Menone, makes mention of Milesias and Stephanus, sons of a Thucydides, of a
very Noble Family; but it is clear that they were of Thucydides, the Rival of
Pericles, both by the name Milesias, and because this Thucydides also, was of
the Family of Miltiades, as Plutarch ^fieth in the Life of Cimon. That he had a
son, is affirmed by Marcellinus, out of the authority of Polemon, but of his
name there is no mention, save that a learned man reads there, in the place
of (...)... (which is in the imperfect Copy) Timotheus. Thus much of the
person of Thucydides.

Now for his writings, two things are to be considered in them, Truth, and
Eloquution. For in Truth consists the Soul, and in Eloquution the Body of
History. The latter without the former, is but a picture of History; and the
former without the latter, unapt to instruct. But let us see how our Author
has acquitted himself in both. For the Faith of this History, I shall have
the less to say, in respect that no man has ever yet called it into question.
Nor indeed could any man justly doubt of the truth of that Writer, in whom they
had nothing at all to suspect of those things that could have caused him either
voluntarily to lie, or ignorantly to deliver an untruth. He ouertasked not
himself by undertaking an History of things done long before his time, and of
which he was not able to inform himself. He was a man that had as much
means, in regard both of his dignity and wealth, to find the truth of what he
relates, as was needful for a man to have. He used as much diligence in
search of the truth, (noting every thing whilst it was fresh in memory, and
laying out his wealth upon intelligence,) as was possible for a man to use. He
affected least of any man the acclamations of Popular Auditories, and wrote not
his History to win present applause, as was the use of that Age, but for a
Monument to instruct the Ages to come. Which he professes himself, and
Entitleth his Book (...), A Posses^ion for everlasting. He was far from the
necessity of servile Writers, either to fear or flatter. And whereas he may
peradventure be thought to have been maleuolent toward his Country, because
they deserved to have him so, yet has he not written any thing that
discovers any such passion. Nor is there any thing written of them that
tends to their dishonor, as Athenians, but only as People; and that by the
necessity of the narration, not by any sought digression. So that no word of
his, but their own actions do sometimes reproach them. In sum, if the truth
of a History did ever appear by the manner of relating, it does so in this
History; So cohaerent, perspicuous and perswasiue is the whole Narration, and
every part thereof.

In the Eloquution also; Two things are considerable, Disposition or Method,
and Style. Of the Disposition here used by Thucydides, it will be sufficient in
this place, briefly to observe only this. That in his first Book, first he
has by way of Exordium, derived the State of Greece from the Cradle, to the
vigorous stature it then was at, when he began to write; and next, declared the
causes, both real and pretended of the War he was to write of, In the rest,
in which he handles the War it self, he follows distinctly and purely
the order of time throughout; relating what came to pass from year to year,
and subdiuiding each year into a Summer and Winter. The grounds and motives of
every action, he sets down before the action it self, either Narratiuely,
or else contriueth them into the form of Deliberatiue Orations, in the persons
of such as from time to time bare sway in the Commonwealth. After the actions,
when there is just occasion, he gives his judgment of them, showing by what
means the success came either to be furthered or hindered. Digressions for
instructions cause, and other such open conueyances of Precepts (which is the
Philosophers part) he never uses, as having so clearly set before men's eyes,
the ways and events, of good and evil counsels, that the Narration it self
does secretly instruct the Reader, and more effectually then possibly can be
done by Precept.

For his Style, I refer it to the judgment of diverse ancient and competent
Judges. Plutarch in his Book* De gloria Atheniensium, says of him thus.
Thucydides aymeth always at this, to make his Auditor a Spectator, and to cast
his Reader into the same passions that they were in, that were beholders. The
manner how Demosthenes aranged the Athenians on the rugged shore before Pylus.
How Brasidas urged the Steeresman to run his Gally a ground; how he went to
the Ladder, or place in the Gally for descent, how he was hurt, and swowned,
and fell down on the ledges of the Gally; how the Spartans fought after the
manner of a Land-fight upon the Sea, and the Athenians of a Sea Fight upon
Land. Again, in the Sicilian War, how a battle was fought by Sea and Land,
with equal fortune. These things, I say, are so described, and so evidently
set before our eyes, that the mind of the Reader is no less affected
therewith, then if he had been present in the Actions. There is for his
perspecuity. Cicero in his Book entitled Orator, speaking of the affection of
diverse Greek Rhetoricians, says thus. And therefore Herodotus and Thucydides
are the more admirable. For though they lived in the same Age with those J have
before named, (meaning Thrasymachus, Gorgius, and Theodorus) yet were they
far from this kind of delicacy, or rather indeed f^olery. For the one without
rub, gently glideth like a still River, and the other (meaning Thucydides)
runs stronglier, and in matter of War, as it were, blows a trumpet of
War. And in these two (as says Theophrastus) History has rowsed her self,
and adventured to speak, both more copiously, and with more ornament then in
those that were before them. This commends the gravity, and the dignity of his
language. Again in his second Book, De Oratore, thus. Thucydides in the Art
of speaking, has in my opinion far exceeded them all. For he is so full of
matter, that the number of his sentences, does almost reach to the number of
his words; and in his words he is so apt, and so close, that it is hard to say,
whether his words do more illustrate his sentences, or his sentences his words.
There is for the pithinesse and strength of his Style. Lastly, for the purity,
and propriety, I cite, Dionysius Halicarnassius, whose testimony is the
stronger in this point, because he was a Greek Rhetorician for his faculty,
and for his affection, one that would no further commend him, then of necessity
he must. His words are these. There is one virtue in Eloquence, the chiefest of
all the rest, and without which there is no other goodness in speech. What is
that? That the language be pure and retain the propriety of the Greek tongue.
This they both observe diligently. For Herodotus is the best rule of the
Ionique, and Thucydides of the Attique Dialect. These testimonies are not
needful to him that has read the History it self, nor at all, but that this
same Dionysius has taken so much pains, and applied so much of his faculty in
Rhetorique to the extenuating of the worth thereof; Moreover, I have thought it
necessary to take out the principal objections he makes against him, and
without many words of mine own, to leave them to the consideration of the
Reader. And first Dionysius says thus. The principal, and most necessary
office of any man that intends to write a History, is to choose a Noble
Argument, and grateful to such as shall read it. And this, Herodotus, in my
opinion, has done better then Thucydides. For Herodotus has written the joint
History, both of the Greeks and Barbarians, to save from oblivion, etc. But
Thucydides writes one only War, and that neither honorable, nor fortunate;
which principally were to be wished never to have been; and next, never to
have been remembered, nor known to posterity. And that he took an evil
Argument in hand, he makes it manifest in his proeme, saying, That many Cities
were in that War made desolate, and utterly destroyed, partly by Barbarians,
partly by the Greeks themselves: so many banishments, and so much slaughter of
men as never was the like before, etc. So that the hearers will abhor it, at
the first propounding. Now by how much it is better to write of the wonderful
acts both of the Barbarians, and Grecians, then of the pitiful and horrible
calamities of the Grecians, so much wiser is Herodotus in the choice of his
Argument, then Thucydides.

Now let any man consider whether it be not more reasonable to say. That the
principal, and most necessary office of him that will write a History, is to
take such an Argument, as is both within his power well to handle, and
profitable to posterity that shall read it. Which Thucydides, in the opinion
of all men* has done better then Herodotus. For Herodotus undertook to write
of those things, of which it was impossible for him to know the truth; and
which delight more the ear with fabulous Narrations, then satisfy the mind
with truth. But Thucydides writes one War, which, how it was carried from
the beginning to the end, he was able certainly to inform himself. And by
propounding in his Proeme, the miseries that happened in the same, he shows
that it was a great War, and worthy to be known, and not to be concealed
from posterity, for the calamities that then fell upon the Grecians; but the
rather to be truly delivered unto them for that men profit more by looking on
adverse events, then on prosperity. Therefore by how much men's miseries do
better instruct, then their good success, by so much was Thucydides more happy
in taking his Argument, then Herodotus was wise in choosing his.

Dionysius again, says thus. The next office of him that will write a
History, is to know where to begin, and where to end. And in this point
Herodotus seems to be far more discrect then Thucydides. For in the first
place he lays down the cause, for which the Barbarians began to iniure the
Grecians; and going on, makes an end at the punishment, and the revenge taken
on the Barbarians. But Thucydides begins at the good estate of the Grecians,
which being a Grecian, and an Athenian, he ought not to have done; nor ought
he, being of that dignity amongst the Athenians, so evidently to have laid the
fault of the War upon his own City, when there were other occasions enough
to which he might have imputed it. Nor ought he to have begun with the
business of the Corcyraeans, but at the more Noble Acts of his Country, which
they did immediately after the Persian War, (which afterward in convenient
place he mentions, but it is but cursorily, and not as he ought.) And when he
had declared those, with much affection, as a lover of his Country, then he
should have brought in, how that the Lacedaemonians, through envy and fear,
but pretending other causes, began the War, and so have descended to the
Corcyraean business, and the Decree against the Megareans, or whatsoever else
he had to put in. Then in the ending of his History, there be many errors
committed. For though he profess he was present in the whole war, and that
he would write it all, yet he ends with the Nauall battle at Cynossema, which
was fought in the 21 year of the war; whereas it had been better to have
gone through with it, and ended his History with that admirable, and grateful
return of the banished Athenians from Phile, at which time the City recovered
her liberty.

To this I say. That it was the duty of him that had undertaken to write the
History of the Peloponnesian War, to begin his Narration no further of, then
at the causes of the same, whether the Grecians were then in good, or in evil
estate. And if the injury, upon which the war arose, proceeded from the
Athenians, then the writer, though an Athenian, and honored in his Country,
ought to declare the same, and not to seek, nor take, though at hand, any
other occasion to transfer the fault. And that the Acts done before the time
comprehended in the war he writ of, ought to have been touched but cursorily,
and no more then may serve for the enlightening of the History to follow, how
Noble soever those Acts have been. Which when he had thus touched, without
affection to either side, and not as a lover of his Country, but of truth,
then to have proceeded to the rest, with the like indifferency, And to have
made an end of writing, where the War ended, which he undertook to write;
not producing his History beyond that period, though that which followed were
never so admirable and acceptable. All this Thucydides has observed.

These two criminations, I have therefore set down at large, translated almost
verbatim* that the judgment of Dionysius Halicarnassius, may the better
appear, concerning the main and principal virtues of a History. I think
there was never written so much absurdity in so few lines. He is contrary to
the opinion of all men that ever spoke of this subject besides himself, and to
common sense. For he makes the scope of History not profit by writing truth,
but delight of the hearer* as if it were a Song. And the Argument of History,
he would not by any means have to contain the calamities and misery of his
Country, (these he would have buried in silence) but only their glorious and
splendid actions. Amongst the virtues of an Historiographer, he reckons
affection to his Country; study to please the hearer; to write of more then
his Argument leads him to; and to conceal all actions that were not to the
honor of his Country. Most manifest vices. He was a Rhetorician, and it
seems he would have nothing written, but that which was most capable of
Rhetorical ornament. Yet Lucian* a Rhetorician also, in a Treatise, entitled,
How a History ought to be written, says thus, That a writer of History, ought
in his writings, to be a forraigner, without Country, living under his own
Law only, subject to no King, nor caring what any man will like, or dislike,
but laying out the matter as it is.

The third fault he finds, is this That the method of his History is governed
by the time rather then the periods of several actions. For he declares in
order what came to pass each Summer, and Winter, and is thereby forced
sometimes, to leave the Narration of a siege, or sedition, or a War, or other
action, in the midst, and enter into a Relation of somewhat else* done at the
same time, in another place, and to come to the former again when the time
requires it. This says he, causes confusion in the mind of his hearer, so
that he cannot comprehend distinctly the several parts of the History.

Dionysius aymeth still at the delight of the present hearer; though Thucydides
himself profess that his scope is not that, but to leave his work for a
perpetual possession to posterity. And then have men leisure enough to
comprehend him thoroughly. But indeed, whosoever shall read him once
attentively, shall more distinctly conceive of every action this way, then the
other; and the method is more natural; for as much as his purpose being to
write of one Peloponnesian War, this way he has incorporated all the parts
thereof into one body, so that there is unity in the whole, and the several
Narrations are conceived only as parts of that; Whereas the other way, he had
but sowed together many little Histories, and left the Peloponnesian War
(which he took for his subject) in a manner vnwrltten; for neither any part*
nor the whole, could justly have carried such a Title.

Fourthly, he accuses him for the method of his first Book, in that he
deriueth Greece, from the infancy thereof to his own time; and in that he
sets down the Narration of the quarrels about Corcyra, and Potidaea, before
he entreats of the true cause of the War, which was the greatness of the
Athenian dominion, feared and enuyed by the Lacedaemonians.

For answer to this, I say thus. For the mentioning of the ancient State of
Greece, he does it briefly* insisting no longer upon it then is necessary for
the well understanding of the following History. For without some general
notions of these first times, many places of the History are the less easy to
be understood, as depending upon the knowledge of the original of several
Cities and Customs, which could not be at all inserted into the History it
self, but must be either supposed to before known by the reader, or else be
delivered to him in the beginning, as a necessary Preface And for his putting
first the Narration of the Public, and auowed cause of this War, and after
that the true and inward motive of the same, the reprehension is absurd. For it
is plain that a cause of War, divulged and auowed, how flight soever it be,
comes within the task of the Historiographer, no less then the War it
self, for without a pretext, no War follows. This prete^t is always an
injury received, or pretended to be received. Whereas the inward motive to
hostility is but coniecturall, and not of that evidence, that a Historiographer
should be always bound to take notice of it; as envy to the greatness of
another State, or fear of an injury to come. Now let any man judge, whether a
good writer of History, ought to handle, as the principal cause of War,
proclaimed injury, or concealed envy. In a word the Image of the Method used by
Thucydides in this point, is this. The Quarrel about Corcyra, passed on this
manner; and the Quarrel about Potidaea, on this manner; (relating both at
large) and in both, the Athenians were accused to have done the injury.
Nevertheless the Lacedaemonians had not upon this injury entered into a War
against them, but that they enuyed the greatness of their power, and feared
the consequence of their ambition. I think a more clear, and natural order
cannot possibly be devised.

Again he says, that he makes a Funeral Oration (which was solemnly done
on all occasions through the War) for 15 Horsemen only, that were slain at
the Brooks called Rheiti; and that for this reason only, that he might make
it in the person of Pericles, who was then living, but before another the like
occasion happened, was dead.

The manner of the Athenians was, that they that were slain the first, in any
War, should have a solemn Funeral, in the suburbs of the City. During this
War, they had many occasions to put this custom in practice. Seeing
therefore it was fit to have that custom, and the form of it known, and that
once for all, the manner being ever the same, it was fittest to relate it on
the first occasion, what number soever they were that were then buried; which
nevertheless is not likely to have been so few as Dionysius says. For the
Funeral was not celebrated till the Winter after they were slain, so that
many more were slain before this solemnity, and may all be accounted amongst
the first. And that Pericles performed the office of making their Funeral
Oration, there is no reason alleged by him, why it should be doubted.

Another fault he finds, is this; That he introduces the Athenian Generals in
a Dialogue, with the Inhabitants of the I Will of Melos, pretending openly, for
the cause of their invasion of that I Will, the power and will of the State of
Athens, and rejecting utterly, to enter into any disputation with them,
concerning the equity of their cause; which he says, was contrary to the
dignity of the State.

To this may be answered; That the Proceeding of these Generals was not unlike
to diverse other Actions, that the people of Athens openly took upon them; and
therefore it is very likely they were allowed so to proceed. Howsoever, if the
Athenian People gave in charge to these their Captains, to take in the Island,
by all means whatsoever, without power to report back unto them first, the
equity of the Ilanders cause, as is most likely to be true, I see then no
reason the Generals had to enter into disputation with them, whether they
should perform their charge, or not, but only whether they should do it by
fair, or foul means; which is the point treated of in this Dialogue. Other
Cauils he has, touching the matter, and order of this History, but not
needful to be answered.

Then for his phrase, he carpeth at it in infinite places, both for obscure and
licentious. He that will see the particular places, he reprehendeth, let him
read Dionysius himself, if he will; for the matter is too tedious for this
place. It is true, that there be some Sentences in him, somewhat long, not
obscure to one that is attentive; and besides that, they are but few. Yet is
this the most important fault he finds. For the rest, the obscurity that is,
proceeds from the profoundnesse of the Sentences, containing contemplations
of those humane passions, which either dissembled, or not commonly discoursed
of, do yet carry the greatest sway with men, in their public conversation.
If then one cannot penetrate into them without much meditation, we are not to
expect a man should understand them at the first speaking. Marcellinus says,
he was obscure on purpose, that the Common people might not understand him. And
not unlikely; for a wise man should so write (though in words understood by all
men) that wise men only should be able to commend him. But this obscurity is
not to be in the Narrations of things done, not in the descriptions of places,
or of battles* in all which, Thucydides is most perspicuous, as Plutarch in the
words before cited* has testified of him. But in the Characters of men's
humors and manners, and applying them to affairs of consequence, it is
impossible not to be obscure to ordinary capacities, in what words soever a man
deliver his mind; If therefore Thucydides in his Orations, or in the
Description of a Sedition, or other thing of that kind, be not easily
understood, it is of those only that cannot penetrate into the nature of such
things, and proceeds not from any intricacy of expression. Dionysius further
finds fault with his using to set word against word, which the Rhetoricians
call Antitheta. Which, as it is in some kind of speech, a very great vice, so
is it not improper in Characters; and of comparatiue discourses, it is almost
the only Style.

And whereas he further taxes him for licentiousness in turning Nownes into
Verbes, and Verbes into Nownes, and altering of Genders, Cases, and Numbers, as
he does sometimes for the more efficacy of his Style, and without Soloecisme,
I leave him to the answer of Marcellinus; who says, That Dionysius finds
fault with this, as being ignorant (yet he was a professed Rhetorician) that
this was the most excellent, and perfect kind of speaking.

Some man may peradventure desire to know, what motive Dionysius might have, to
extenuate the worth of him, whom he himself acknowledges to have been
esteemed by all men, for the best by far of all Historians that ever writ,
and to have been taken by all the Ancient Orators* and Philosophers, for the
measure and rule of writing History. What motive he had to it, I know not; but
what glory he might expect by it, is easily known. For having first preferred
Herodotus, his Countreyman* a Halicarnassian, before Thucydides, who was
accounted the best, and then conceiving that his own History might perhaps be
thought not inferior to that of Herodotus, by this computation he saw the
honor of the best Historiographer falling on himself; Wherein (in the opinion
of all men) he has misreckoned. And thus much for the objections of Denis of
Halicarnasse.

It is written of Demosthenes, the famous Orator, that he wrote over the
History of Thucydides with his own hand, eight times. So much was this Work
esteemed, even for the eloquence. But yet was this his eloquence not at all fit
for the bar, but proper for History, and rather to be read, then heard. For
words that pass away (as in public Orations they must) without pause, ought
to be understood with ease, and are lost else; though words that remain in
writing* for the Reader to meditate on, ought rather to be pithy, and full.
Cicero therefore does justly set him a part, from the rank of Pleaders, but
withal, he continually gives him his due for History. Lib. 2. De Oratore.
What great Rhetorician ever borrowed any thing of Thucydides? yet all men
praise him, I confess it, as a wise, severe, grave Relator of things done. Not
for a Pleader of Causes at the Bar, but a Reporter of War in History. So
that he was never reckoned an Orator, nor if he had never written a History,
had his name therefore not been extant, being a man of Honor and Nobility.
Yet, none of them imitate the gra^ity of his Words and Sentences; but when they
have uttered a kind of lame and disioynted stuff, they presently think
themselves brothers of Thucydides. Again, in his Book, De optimo Oratore, he
says thus. But here will stand up Thucydides; For his eloquence is by some
admired; and justly. But this is nothing to the Orator we seek; for it is one
thing to unfold a matter by way of Narration; another thing to accuse a man, or
clear him by Arguments. And in Narrations, one thing to stay the hearer;
another to stir him. Lucian, in his Book entitled, How a History ought to
be written, does continually exemplify the virtues which he requires in an
Historiographer, by Thucydides. And if a man consider well that whole Discourse
of his, he shall plainly perceive, that the Image of this present History,
praeconceiued in Lucians mind, suggested unto him all the Precepts he there
delivers. Lastly, hear the most true and proper commendation of him, from
Iustus Lipsius, in his Notes to his Book, De Doctrina Civilly, in these words.
Thucydides, who has written, not many, nor very great matters, has perhaps
yet won the Garland from all that have written of matters, both many and great.
Every where for Eloquution grave; short and thick with sense; sound in his
judgments; every where secretly instructing, and directing a man's life and
actions. In his Orations and Excursions, almost Divine. Whom the oftener you
read, the more you shall carry away, yet never be dismissed without appetite.
Next to him is Polybius, etc. And thus much concerning the Life and History of
Thucydides.

The names of the places of Greece occurring in Thucydides, or in the Map of
Greece, briefly noted out of diverse Authors, for the better manifesting of
their situation, and enlightening of the History.
A
ABas, a City of the Locrians of Opus, confining on Hiampolis, which is a City
of Phocis. Pausanias in Phocicis. Abdera, a City situate next beyond the River
Nestus, toward the East* Strab. Epitome lib. 7. Nestus a River of the
territory of Abdera. Herodotus, lib. 7. Abydus, a City on the entrance of
Hellespont, between Lampsacus and Ilium, equally distant from both. In sight
of Ilium, and is distant from the mouth of the River Aesepus by Sea 700
furlongs. Strab. lib. 13. Acanthus, a City near to the Jsthmus of Mount Athos,
and (as in the Epitome of Straboes seventh Book) in the Bay of Singus. But it
appears by Herodotus in his seventh Book, that it lies on the other side,
in the Bay of Strymon; where he says, that the Isthmus of Mount Athos is of
twelve furlongs length, and reaches from Acanthus to the Sea that lies before
Torone. And in another place of the same Book he says, that the Fleet of
Xerxes sailed through the Ditch (which Xerxes had caused to be made through
the said Isthmus) from Acanthus, into the Bay, in which are these Cities,
Singus, etc. Acarnania, a region in Greece, divided from Epirus by the Bay of
Ambracia. Pol. lib. 4. it reaches from Ambracia to the River Achelous; and is
divided from the Aetolians by Achelous. Srab. lib. 10. Achaeum, a City of
Troas, opposite to the I Will Tenedos. Strab. lib. 13. Achaia, a Region of
Peloponnesus, confining on Elis, Arcadia, and Sicyonia, bounded on one side
with Elis, at the Promontory of Araxus, and on the other side with the
Territory of Sicyon. Strab. lib. 8. It has in it 12 Cities in this order,
beginning at that part which confineth on Sicyonia. Pellene, Aegirae, Aegae,
Bura, Helice, Aegium, Rhypes, Patrae, Pharae, Olenus, Dyme, Tritaea. Herodotus
lib. 1. Strab. lib. 9. It is also a part of Thessaly, in which are the
Phtiotae. Herod. lib. 7. Strab. lib. 9. Acharnae, a Town of Attica, distant
from Athens about 60. Furlongs; Thucyd. lib. 2. and lies toward the North of
it, as may be collected out of the narration of the journey of Archidamus with
his Army, in the same Book. Achelous, a river that rises in the Mountain
Pindus, and running through the Territories of Agrae^s, and Amphiloch^a, and by
the City of Stratus, deuideth the maritime parts of Acarnania from Aetolia.
Strabo lib. 10. Achelous rises in Pindus, and runs through Dolopia,
Agraeis, Amphilochia, by the City of Stratus, and by the City Oenias into the
Sea. Thucyd. lib. 2. in the later end. Acheron, -- Acherusia,
Acherusia is a Lake which issues into the Sea, near unto Cheimerium, a
Promontory of Thesprotis, and into this Lake falls the River Acheron. Thuc.
lib. 1. Acheron comes out of the Lake Acherusia, into the Haven Glycys.
Strab. lib. 7. Acheron comes out of Molossis, and falls into the Lake
Acherusia, which Liuy calls the Bay of Thesprotis: Liuy, lib. 8. Acriae, a
City of Laconia; between it and Gythium the river Eurotas goes out into the
Sea. Strabo lib. 8. From Helos, which is at the mouth of Eurotas, it is 30
furlongs distant, and from the Promontory of Taenarus 230 furlongs. Pausan. in
Laconicis. Acritas, a Promontory joining to the Territory of Methone, and is
the beginning of the Bay of Messenia. Strabo. lib. 8. Acrothoi, -- Acrothos
prom. Acrothoon, --
Acrothoi are the People of a City in the Territory of Act, in which Act is
the Mountain Athos. Thucyd. lib. 4. Acrothos is a Promontory of Mount Athos,
toward the Bay of Strymon. And Acrothoon a City in the same. Herodotus lib. 7.
In stead of this Acrothos and Acrothoon, Ptolomie has Athosa, a City and
Promontory. Acroton, a Town on the top of Mount Athos. Pliny, lib 4. Act is
that Territory wherein stands the Mountain Athos, disioyned from the
Continent by a Ditch made by the King of Persia, and has in it these Cities,
Sane, Dion, Thyssus, Cleonae, Acrothoi, Olophyxus. Thucyd. lib. 4. Actium, a
Temple of Apollo, upon the shore. It is situate where the Bay of Ambracia is
narrowest. Polybius. lib. 4. In the mouth of the Bay of Ambracia, not far
from Anactorium. Strab. lib. 10. Adramyttium and sinus Adramyttenus,- The Bay
of Adramyttium (taken in the greatest extent) begins at the Promontory of
Lectus, and ends at the Promontory of Canae, which is opposite to Mal^a of
Lesbos. And the Bay of (...) (properly so called) begins at the Promontory
of Gargara, and ends at the Promontory of Pyrrha. And the City of
Adramyttium is within the Promontory of Pyrrha. Strabo lib. 13. Aedepsa, a City
of Euboea, over against Opus, a City of the Locrians. Strab. lib 9. Aedessa, a
City of Macedonia, in the way called by Strabo, Ignatia, from Apollonia and
Dyrrachium (or Epidamnus) to Thessalonica (or Therme,) and lies between
Thessalonica and the Eordians. Strab. lib 7. Aegae, a City of Euboea, opposite
to the mouth of the River Cephissus. Strab. libro 9. It is also the name of a
City of Achaia in Peloponnesus, between Helice and Bura. Herodotus, lib. 1.
Pausan. in Achaicis. It is the name also of another City in Aeolia, lying up
from the Sea behind the Territory of Cyme. Strab. lib. 13. Aegina, an Island
over against Epidaurus, in the Saronian Bay. Strab. lib. 8. Pausan. in Cor.
Aegirae, a City of Achaia, between Pellene and Aegae. Herod. lib. 1. Strab.
lib. 9. Opposite to Parnassus. Polyb. lib. 4. Also a City of Lesbos, where the
Island is narrowest between the Bay of Pyrrha, and the other Sea. Strab. lib.
13. Aegitium a Town in Aetolia, amongst the Hills, 80 furlongs distant from the
Sea. Thucyd. lib. 3. Aegium, a City of Achaia, between Helice and Rhypes.
Herodot. lib. 1. Strab. lib. ^. distant from Pa^^ae 160 Furlongs. Pausan. in
Achaicis. Aegos potamos, a River in the Thraci^^ Chersonnesus, distant from
Sestos 15 furlongs. Xenophon. Graecorum 2. Aemathia, a Region of Macedonia,
placed by Ptolomie between Thessaly and the River Axius. Aemus, a Mountain of
Thrace, which divides it almost in the midst, and reaches from the
Pannonian Mountains, to Pontus Euxinus. Strab. lib. 7. Aenia, a City in the
Bay of Therme, last in order from Po^idaea toward Therme. Herodotus lib. 7. It
is distant from Thessalonica, (which is the same with Therme) 120 Furlongs, and
opposite to Pydna. Liuy lib. 44 in the beginning. Aenus, a City between the
River Hebrus and the Bay of Melas* (.i. the Black Bay,) Herod. lib. 7. Appian.
lib. 4. Ciuilium. Aenianes, a Greek Nation, inhabiting in Mount Octa, part of
them above the Aetol^ans, (that is, so as the Aetolians are between them and
the Sea) They border on the Locri Epicnemides, in such manner, as the Aetolians
do on the Locri Oz^lae, Strab. l. 9, 10. Aeo^^s, a Greek Nation inhabiting by
the Sea side in Asia from the Promontory of Lectus to the River Hermus. Strabo.
lib. 13. Aesepus, a River in Troas, rising out of Mount Ida, falling into
Propont^s, in that part which is nearest to Zelcia, about seven hundred
furlongs from Abydus by Sea. Strab. lib. 13. Aethea, a City of Laconia, not
far from Thurium, as may be gathered out of Thucydides. lib. 1. Aetolia, a
Region divided from the Acarranians, on the parts toward the Sea, by the River
Achelous; confining on the East, with the Locrians called Ozolae. On the North
it has the Athamanes, and part of the Aenianes. Strab. lib. 10. Aetolia,
Locris, Pho^is, and Boeotia are divided from each other by parallel lines,
drawn from the West Northwards. Idem. lib. 9. Ag^ra, a City near to the
Thracian Chersonnesus. They that go to it from Sestus, leave Cardia on the
left hand. Herod. lib. 7. where he describes the way of the Persian Army.
Agraeis, a Region North of Acarnania. The river Achelous rising out of the
Mountain Pindus, passes first through Dolopia, then through Agraeis, and
lastly, through Acarnania, by the City of Stratus, and the City of Oeneias,
into the Sea. Strab. lib. 10. Thucydid. lib. 3. in the later end. (...), a
Nation dwelling at the head of the River Strymon, in the Mountain (...).
Strab. in the Epitome of the end of (...) Book^. Thucydides in his second
Book, seems to place them also there^^outs A^alcomene, a City of Macedonia
by the River Er^gon. Strab. lib. 7. Also a City of (...), neer^ the Lake
Copais. Aliacmon, a River of Macedonia. It rises out of the Mountains called
Canaluuij, according to Ptolomie: Liuy has (...), a City by the River
Aliacmon, near the Mountains which he calls Cambunij, which are likely to
be the same. Liu. lib. 42. It mixeth waters with Lydius, the confluent of
which two Rivers divide Bottia from Macedonia. Herodot. lib. 7. (...), a Region
of Macedonia, of whose situation I find nothing, but in Ptolomies Tables, who
puts it between 46 and 47 Degrees of longitude, and between 41 and 42 of
latitude. Ptolomie in his tenth Table of Europe. Alonnes^s, a little Island
lying before Magnesia of Thessaly. Strab. lib. 9. Also a City in the
Chersonnesus of Erythraea, between Casystus and the Promontory Argenum. Strab.
lib. 14. Alope, a City of the Locri Epicnemides, distant from Ela^ea of Phocis
120 furlongs, from Cynus the Haven of the Opuntians, 90 furlongs. Strab. lib.
9. Alpheus, a River of Pel^ponnesus, rising in the Territory of Megalopolis,
near unto the Springs of Eurotas, Strab. lib. 8. deuideth Laconia from
Megalopolis, and from Tegea. Pausanias in Arcadicis. It runs by Heraea. Idem
ibidem. and Polybius, libro 4. It goes out into the Sea near Olympia. Strab.
lib. 8. Pausanias says it goes out above Cyllone, the Haven of the Eleans;
but it is contrary to all other, both ancient and modern Geographers. Alyzea,
a City on the Seacoast of Acarnania, between the City Palyre, and the
Promontory Crithota. Strab. lib. 10. Ambracia, and sinus Ambracius, Ambracia is
a City in the bottom of the Ambracian Bay, upon the River Aracti^^s, a little
remote from the Sea. Strab. lib. 7. The Ambracian Bay deuideth Epirus from
Acarnania. Polyb. lib. 4. Amo^gos, an Island, one of the Sporades. Strab. lib.
10. Ampel^s, a Promontory of Torone. Herod. lib. 7. Amphilochia, a Region lying
North of Acarnania, South of Dolopia, through it runs the River Achelous,
Strab. lib. 10. Amphipolis, Called formerly the Nine-wayes, a City situate on
the River Strymon, the River running on both sides it: 25 furlongs from Eion.
Herod. lib. 7. Thuc. lib. 4. Amphissa, a City of the Locrians called Ozolae,
confining on the Territory of Crissa. Herodotus. lib. 8. Strab. lib. 9. Distant
from Delphi one hundred and twenty furlongs. Paus. in Phocicis. Amyclae* a
City of Laconia, twenty furlongs from Sparta toward the Sea. Pol. lib. 4.
Anactorium, a City of Acarnania, within the Gulf of Ambracia, forty furlongs
from Actium. Strab. lib. 10. in the mouth of the Ambracian Bay. Thucyd. lib. 1.
Anaea, a City in Asia, by the Seaside over against the I Will Samos. Thucydid.
lib. 4. Anapus a River of Acarnania, mentioned by Thucydides, lib. 2. it should
seem by the History (that it runs between Stratus and Oeneias. Liuy
mentions a River there about also called Peletarus. lib. 43. it may be it is
ehe same. Anaphe, an Island not far from Thera. Strab lib. 10. Andania, a City
of Messenia, on the confines of Arcadia. Paus. in Messen. Andros, an Island, one
of the Cyclades, Strab. lib. 10. vide Cyclades. Antandrus, a City of Troas.
Herod. lib. 5. in the Bay of Adramyttium, (properly so called.) Strab. lib 13.
under Mount Jda. Thuydid. lib. 3. Anthedon, a City of Boeotia, on the shore
opposite to Euboea, the utmost on that shore toward Locris. Strab. lib. 9.
Anthemus, a territory in Macedonia, not far from Grestonia, as may be
gathered out of Thucyd. lib. 2. Anthena, a City of the Territory of Cynuria.
Thucyd. lib. 5. at the foot of the Hill Parnethus, Paus. in Corinthiacis.
Anticyra, a City of Phocis upon the Seaside, next after Crissa toward
Boeotia. Strab. lib. 9. Also a City of the Melians, upon the River Spercheius.
Idem. Antirrhium, Which is called also Rhium Molychricu^, is that Promontory
which with the opposite Promontory of Achaia, called Rhium, comprehends the
straight of the Crissaean (or Corinthian) Bay, of 5 furlongs breadth. Strab
lib. 8. It is near to the City Molycria, Strab. lib. 9. and to the East of it.
Idem. lib. 10. Antissa, a City of Lesbos, between the Promontory of Sigrium,
and the City Methymna. Strab. lib. 13. Antitan^s, a Nation whom Strabo calls
Atintanes, and places in the Mountains of Epirus. Strab. lib. 7. Appianus
has also Atintanes: and Liuy, lib. 45. makes them as an addition to the
fourth part of Macedonia, in the division of that Kingdom by Paulus Aemilius.
So that it may be gathered that the Atintanes, whom Thucydides calls
Antitanes, and numbreth amongst Epiroticall Nations, are situate on the
confines of Epirus and Macedonia. Aous, a River of Jllyris. After Epidamnus
(says Strabo, describing the Seacoast toward Epirus) are the Rivers Apsus,
and Aous. Strab. lib. 7. Near to it stands Apollonia. Ibidem. Plutarch has
Anius instead of it, in the life of Caesar. In this River it was that he took
Boat to cross the Ionian Sea unknown, and was forced back by Tempest.
Aphrodisia, a Town of Laconia, near the Sea side. Thucyd. lib. 4. Aphytis, a
City in Pallene, Herodot. lib. 7. Thucyd. lib. 1. between Potydaea and Menda.
Strab. in the Epitome of the end of his seventh Book. Apidanus, a River of
Achaia in Thessalie. Herodotus. lib. 7. It falls into Peneus. Idem. It
runs by Pharsalus. Strab. lib. 8. Apodoti, a Nation, part of the Aetolians,
nearest to the Sea. Thucyd. lib. 3. Apollonia, a City of Illyris, in the Ionian
Gulf, Herodot. lib. 9. upon the River Aous, threescore furlongs from the Sea.
Strab. lib. 7. Also a City between Therme and Amphipolis. Itinerar. Peutinger.
Itiner. Antonini. A Chalcidique City Athen. 8. Apsus, a River of Illyris,
between Epidamnus and Apollonia. Strab. lib. 7. Aracthus, a River of Epirus,
rising out of the Hill Stympha, in the Territory of the Paroraei, (peradventure
the same with Parauaei) and running by the City of Ambracia into the Ambracian
Bay. Strab. lib. 7. Araxus, a Promontory in the confines of Elis and Arcadia.
Strab. lib. 8. Arcadia, a Region of Peloponnesus, in the midst of it; bounded
with Elis, Achaia, Argolica, Laconia and Messenia, Strab. lib. 8. Argenum, a
Promontory of Erythraea in Asia, lying out between Alonnesus and the A^ty
Erythrae, opposite to, and distant 60 furlongs from Posideum a Promontory of
Chius. Strab. lib. 14. Arginusae, are three Islands lying near to the
Promontory of Cane in Aeolis, opposite to Malea, a Promontory of Lesbos. Strab.
lib. 13. Argilus, a City by the Seaside, West of the River Strymon, Herod.
lib. 7. not far from Amphipolis. Thucyd. lib. 4. Argos, Argolica,
Argos is a City of Argia, much celebrated in History; It stands from the Sea
forty furlongs. Paus. in Corinthiacis. In all Mappes that I have yet seen, it
is placed unreasonably far from the Sea; but it appears by the beginning of
the first Book of Herodotus, where he speaks of the women of Argos, that
came down to the Seaside, to the Ships of the Phoenicians: and by Thucydides,
lib. 5. where he relates, that the Argiues were building Walls to reach unto
the Sea from their City, that it cannot be farther from it then is by Pausanias
set down. Argolica confineth on Laconia, Arcadia, Isthmus. Strab lib. 8. Argos
Amphilochicum, a City of Amhilochia, upon the side of the Bay of Ambracia.
Thuc. lib. 2.22 miles from Ambracia. Liuy. lib. 48. Arnae, a City of the
Chalcidaeans near Acanthus, as it seems by Thucyd. lib. 4. Arne, a City of
Thessaly, Thucyd. lib. 1. in that part of Thessaly which is called Estio^is.
Strab. lib. 9. Arrhianae, a place in the Thracian Chersonnesus, opposite to
Abydus. Thucyd. lib. 8. Arnissa, a City of Macedonia, on the confines of
Lyncus. Thucyd. lib. 4. Artemisium, a Temple of Diana by the Seaside, in
Euboea, at the streights of it, not far from Thermopilae, Herodot. lib. 7.
Famous for a Battle by Sea, fought there between the Grecian and Persian
Fleet. Asine, a maritime City in Argolica, (or Argia) the first in the Bay of
Hermione, Strab. lib. 8. Also a maritime City of Messenia, and the first in the
Bay of Messenia, Strab. lib. 8. between the Promontory Acritas, and the City
Colonides, forty furlongs from each. Pausan. in Messenicis. Also a City of
Laconia, by the Seaside, between Taenarus the Promontory, and Gythium. Strab.
lib. 8. Also a City of Laconia, near Cardamyle. Herod. lib. 8. Asopus, a River
running between Plataea and Thebes, Thucyd. lib. 2. It divides the Territory
of the Plataeans from that of the Thebans, and runs within ten furlongs of
Thebes. Pausan. in Boeoticis. According to Strabo, it runs into the Sea by
Tanagra, Strab. lib. 9. But according to Ptolomle* Cephisus, and Asopus, and
Ismenus meet all in Boeotia, and Asopus passing through Attica, enters into
the Sea by the Promontory Cynosura. Ptolom. Tab. 10. It is also the name of a
River rising about Phlius in Peloponnesus, and entering into the Sea near
Corinth. Pausanias in Corinthiacis. It is also the name of a City in Laconia,
by the Seaside, distant from the Promontory Onugnathos two hundred furlongs,
and from the City Acriae, threescore furlongs. Pausanias in Laconicis. Astacus,
a maritime City of Acarnania, between the Promontory Crithota, and mouth of
the River Achelous. Strab. lib. 10. Asteria, an Island between Ithaca and
Cephallenia. Strab. lib. 10. Astypalaea, an Island, one of the Sporades, lying
far within the maine Sea. Strabo, libro 10. Also a Promontory of the
Territory of Mindus, in Asia. Strab. lib. 14. Atalante, a little Island in the
Bay of Opus, between Euboea and Boeotia, over against the City of Opus, Strab.
lib. 9. Thucyd. lib. 2. Atarneus, a City of Aeolis, over against Lesbos.
Herodot. lib. 1. between Pitane and Adramyttium. Strab. lib. 13. Athamanes, a
Nation inhabiting on the North of the Aetolians, the last of the Epirotes.
Strab. lib. 9. above the Aetolians (that is, more remote from the Sea then the
Aetolians) Idem. lib. 10. Athens, Hellados Hellas, the most renowned City of
Greece, situate in Attica, about 40 furlon^s from Piraeus, and the Sea. Strab.
lib 9. Thucyd. lib. 2. Athos, a famous Mountain in the Chersonnesus called
Act, abutting on the Aegaean Sea. Thucyd. lib. 4. and beginning at the Ditch
made by Xerxes, of twelve furlongs length, between Acanthus, and the Sea
opposite to Torone. Herodotus, lib. 7. Atrax, a City of Thessaly, by which
Peneus runs, before it come to Larissa, Strab. lib. 9. Attica, a famous
Region of Greece, bounding on the Territory of Megara, on the shore, over
against Salami^, Strab. lib. 9. and on the Territory of the Boeot^ans by Sea at
Oropus. Idem. by Land at Panactum, Thucydid. lib. 5. at Oenoe, Thucyd. lib. 2.
a^ Hysiae, Idem. lib. 2. Aulis, a Village in Boeotia, of the Territory of
Tanagra, by the Sea side, thirty furlongs from Delium, Strab. lib. 9. Aulon, a
place near the Sea side, in the Bay of Strymon, near which the Lake Bolbe
issues into the Sea, and is some where between Arnae of Chalcidea, and
Argilus, as may be gathered out of Thucydides, lib. 4. Axius, a River of
Macedonia, rising in the Mountain Scardus. Ptolomie. It divides Bottia from
Mygdonia, Herodot. lib. 7. it falls into the Bay of Therme, between Therme
and Pella. Strab. Epit. lib. 7. Azorus a City of Perhaebia. Liuy lib. 44.
B
BErmius, a Mountain of Macedonia, Herodot. libro 8. at the foot whereof
stands the City Berrhoea. Strab. Epitom. lib. 7. Berrhoea, a City of
Macedonia, between Pydna, from which it is distant seventeen miles, and
Thessalonica (or Therme,) from which it is distant one and fifty miles. Itiner.
Antonini Pij. Bisaltia, a Region of Macedonia, near the River Strymon,
containing the City of Argilus, and the Country about it. Herodot. lib. 7.
Bistonis, a Lake in Thracia, close by the City Dicaea. Herod. lib. 7. Boea, a
City of Laconia, between the Promontories of Onugnathos and Malea. Strab. lib.
8. directly opposite to Cythera, in the utmost part of the Bay of Boca, which
begins at Onugnathos, and ends at Malea. The Territory of Boea joins to that
of Epidaurus Limera. Pausan. in Laconic^s. Bo^otia, a Region of Greece,
between Attica and Phocis, reaching from Sea to Sea. Strab. lib. 9. Boium, a
City of Doris. Thuc. lib. 1. Strab. lib. 9. Bolbe, a Lake in Myg^lonia, Thucyd.
lib. 1. A Lake not far from Olynthus. Herodotus, lib. 8. It is called Bolyce by
Athenaeus, lib. 8. It goes out into the Sea by Aulon and Bromiscus, which are
two places between Arnae in Chalcidea, and Amphipolis. Thucyd. lib. 4.
Bolyssus, a place in Chius. Thucyd lib. 8. Bome, a Town of the Aetolians,
toward the Melian Bay. Thucyd. lib. 3. Bottia, or Bottiaea, or Bottiaeis, --
A Region of Macedonia, lying to the Sea, divided from Mygdonia by the River
Axius, and from Macedonia by the confluent of the Rivers, Aliacmon and Lydius.
Herod. lib. 7. Branchidae, a Town where there was a Temple of Apollo, on the
Milesian shore. Herodot. lib. 7. between the Promontory of Posideum, and the
City Miletus. Strab. lib. 14. Brauron, a Town of Attica, between Prasiae and
Marathon, on the Seaside toward Euboea. Strab. lib. 9. Bri^essus, a Mountain
in Attica, between Eleusis and Acharnae. Thuc. lib. 2. Bromiscus, a Town
near the Sea, between Acanthus and Argilus. Thucyd. lib 4. Budorus, a
Promontory of the Island Salamis, lying out toward Megara. Scholiastes ad Thuc.
lib. 2. Buphras, a Mountain of Messenia, about Pylus. Thucyd. lib. 4. Bura, a
City of Achaia, between Helice and Aegirae, distant from Helice thirty
furlongs, and from Aegirae, seventy two furlongs. Paus. in Achaicis. Byzantium,
called now Constantinople, situate at the entrance of the Bosphorus. Strab.
lib. 12.
C
CA^cus, a River of Asia, which passing by Pergamus, falls into the Bay of
Elaea, in Aeolis, between Elaea and Pitane. Strab. lib. 13. Calauria, an Island
in the Bay of Hermione, lying just before Troezen. Strab. lib. 8. Calliae, a
Town of the Aetolians, toward the Melian Bay. Thucyd. lib. 3. Calydon, a City
of the Aetolians, near the Sea, upon the River Euenus. Strab. lib. 10.
Cambunij, Mountains of Macedonia, between it and Peroebia. Liuy, lib. 42, 44.
Cameiros, a City of the Dorians in Asia, Herod. lib. 1. It stands in the
Island Rhodus. Strab. lib. 14. Thucyd. lib. 8. Canae, a City and Promontory of
Aeolis, distant from Elaea toward Jonia 100 furlongs, and as much from Malea,
a Promontory of Lesbos, to which it is opposite* Strab. lib. 13. Canastraea, A
Promontory of Pallene. Her^d. lib. 7. Strab. Epit. l^b. 7. Liuy, lib. 44.
Ca^hareus, a Haven of Euboea, on the out side, not far from Geraestus.
Herodot. ^ib. 7. Caphyae, a City of Arcadia, not far from Orchomenus. Polyb.
lib. 4. the River Ladon runs between it and Psophis. Paus. in (...).
Cardamyle, a City of Laconia, between Pha^ae and Le^ctra, by the Sea side, in
the M^ssenia^ Bay. Strab. lib. 8. distant from the Promontory of Taenarus 400.
Furlongs. Paus. in Laconicis. It is also a City in the Island Chios. Thucyd lib.
8. Cardya, a City in the Isthmus of the Thracian Chersonnesus, upon the
Seaside in the black Bay [or Bay of Melas] Herod. lib. 6. (...)* an Island in
that Sea, which called from it Mar^ Ca^^athium, has to the No^th, the Sea
called ^carium, to the South, the (...) Sea, to the West, the Cretik and
African Seas. Strab. in the end of the tenth Book. Carye, a Town in Arcadia,
between (...) and Phe^eum, in the confines of both, distant from Pheneum
threescore Furlongs. Paus. in Arcadicis. (...), a City of Euboea, at the foot
of the Mountain Ocha* Strab. lib. 10. Maratho^ a City of Attica, is equally
distant from it and Athens. Paus. in Atticis. Casus, an Island in the Ca^pathian
Sea, f^^m Carpati^^s 80 furlongs, and from (...) a Promontory of Crete, 250. in
quantity 80 furlongs about. Strab. lib. 10. (...), a Haven in the Chersonnesus
of (...)* at the foot of the Mountain Cory^us. Strab. lib. 14. (...), a
m^ritime City of Lycia, subject to the Rhodians, by the River Calbis. Strab.
(...). 14. (...), a River of Asia, falling into the S^a at ^phes^s, so as the
mouth of it is the Haven of the Ephesians, Strab. lib. 14. When (...) made a
journey against Sardes, they left their Fleet at Cor^^sus, and then went up by
the River Ca^^trus, and then over the Mountain (...), and so to (...). Herod.
(...). 5. (...), a Region of Attica, between the Hills (...) and (...). Thucyd.
l^b. ^. (...), a place mentioned in the first Book of Thucydides. Pl^ny has
the Island (...), opposite to (...), and ^istant from it 6 miles. The Scholiast.
and (...). put it in the West parts of Peloponne^^^* falsely. C^neum, a
Promontory of Euboea, opposite to the Promontory of ^nemides of the Locrians,
and to Thermopylae, Strab. l^b. 9. C^nchreae, a Haven of the Corinthians, on
the side of the Isthmus that lies toward Athens. Thucyd. lib. 8. Cenchreae on
one side, and ^^chaeum on the other, contain the Isthmus. Paus in
Corinthiacis. Ceos, an Island, one of the Cyclades, the nearest to the Island
Helena, Strab. lib. 10. Cephallenia, an Island over against Acarnania, distant
from Leucadia ten furlongs, Strab. lib. 10. T^ucyd. lib. 2. and has in it 4
Cities, Pale, Same, Prone, Cranij, Thucyd. lib. 2. Cephissus, a River, which
rising about Lilaea, a City of Phocis, and going by Elatea, Daulia and
Phanotis, Cities of Phocis, and Chaeronea and Coronea, Cities of Boeotia,
falls into, at Coronea, and fills the Lake called Copais. Afterward, an
Earthquake opening the way, it went on to the Sea, and entered it at Larymna, a
Town of Boeotia, opposite to Aegae of Euboea. Strab. lib. 9. Also a River of
Attica, rising in the Territory of Eleusis, and falling into the Sea by
Piraeus. Paus. in Atticis. Ceraunij, Mountains of Epirus, on the Seaside, in
the entrance of the Jonian Gulf. Strab. lib. 7. Ceraunus, a Town between
Cnidus and Halicarnassus, from whence also the Bay there is called the
Ceraunian Bay. Strab. lib. 14. Cerdylium, a Hill of the Argilians, beyond
Strymon, near Amphipolis. Thucyd. lib. 2. Cercine, a Mountain between
Thracia and Macedonia, the same deuideth the Paeonians from the Sintians.
Thucyd. lib. 4. Cestrine, a Region of Epirus, divided from Thesprotis by the
River Thyanis. Thucyd. lib. 1. The Cha^^ians and Thesprotians have all the Sea
coast from the mountains called Cerau^ij, to the Ambracian Bay, (therefore
Cestrine seems part of the Chaonians) Strab. lib. 7. called Cestrine from
Cestrinus the son of Helenus. Paus. in Corinthiacis. Chaeronea, a City of
Boeotia, confining on Phocis, twenty furlongs distant from Panopeus or
P^anotis, and situate upon the River Cephissus. Pausan. in Phocicis. Strab.
lib. 9. Chalce, an Island, one of the Sporades, distant from Telos 80 Furlongs,
and from Carpathus 400 Furlongs. Strab. lib. 10. Chalcedon, a City of Bithynia,
over against Byzantium* Strab. lib. 12. in the mouth of Pontus Euxinus. Ibid.
Thucyd. lib. 4. Chalcis, a City of Euboea, at the Euripus. Herodot. lib. 7.
Strab. lib. 10* Also a City of Aetolia, upon the River Euenus, on the East
side of it, Strab. lib. 10. beneath Calydon. Idem lib. 9. Chalcidea, a Region
joining to Thrace, containing most of the Towns upon or near the Sea, from
the mouth of the River Strymon, to Potidaea in Pa^lene. This may be gathered
out of Thucydides. It was so named, for that they were Colonies of Chalcis in
Euboea, either immediate or derived. Challaei, the people of a City of the
Locri Ozolae. Thucyd. lib. 3. Chaonia, a maritime Region of Epirus, beginning
at the Mountains called Ceraunij, and together with Thesprotis reaching as
far as the Ambracian Bay. Strab. lib. 7. It is divided from Thesprotis by the
River Thyanis. Thucyd. lib. 1. Che^dorus, a small River of Macedonia, which
rising in Grestonia, runs into the River Axius. Herod. lib. 7. Cheimerium, a
Promontory of Epirus, between the Islands called Sybota, and the the mouth of
the River Acheron. Strab. lib. 7. vide Acheron. Chelonata, a Promontory of
Elis, between the Promontories of Araxus and ^^thys. Strab. lib. 8.
Chersonnesus signifies any portion of Land that is almost environed with the
Sea; but for the most part, when there is no word added to determine the
signification, it is here that Territory of Thrace, which is included with
these three Seas, Propontis, Hellespont, and the Black Bay, Melas. Strab.
Epit. lib. 7. In the Isthmus of this Chersonnesus stands the City Cardya, at
the side toward the Black Bay, and Pactya on the part toward Propontis. Herod.
lib. 6. Chius, now called Scio, an Island and City of the Ionians. Herod. lib.
1. distant from Lesbos about 400. Furlongs, and 900. furlongs in circuit.
Strab. lib. 13. Chrusis, a part of Mygdonia so called* Steph. Chrysopolis, a
Village of the Chalcedonians, in the mouth of Pontus. Strab. lib. 12. Cimolis,
an Island, one of the Cyclades. vide Cyclades. It lies West of Sicinus,
Pholegandros, and Lagusa. Strab. lib. 10. Cirrha, a City of Phocis, in the
Corinthian Bay, over against Sicyon. Strab. lib. 9. distant from Delphi
threescore furlongs* from Delphi to Cirrha runs the River Plistus. It is the
Haven or Town of shipping for D^lphi. It confineth upon Locris. Pausan. in
Phocicis. He makes it the same with Crissa. vide Crissa. Citarius a Mountain
of Macedonia, joining to Olympus, out of which rises the River Eurotas. Strab.
Epit. lib. 7. Cithaeron, a Mountain of Attica. When the Persian Camp under
Mardonius lay about Asopus in the Territory of Plataea, the Army of the
Grecians that were encamped at the foot of Cithaeron, were opposite to them.
Herod. lib. 9. Plataea is between Cithaeron and the City of Thebes. Strab.
lib. 9. Citium, a City of Cyprus.* Claros, an Island, one of the Sporades. Ex
Ortelij thesauro. Also a City belonging to the Colophonians, Paus. in Achai.
between the mouth of the River Caystrus and the City of Colophon. Strab. lib.
14. Clazomenae, an Ionique City in Lydia. Herodot. lib. 1. Situate in the
Chersonnesus of Erythrae, confining on the Erythraeans, these being within, the
Clazomenians without the Chersonnesus. Between Clazomenae and Teos, acrosse
the Isthmus it is but fifty Furlongs, but round about by Sea, a thousand
Furlongs. Presently without the Isthmus, where it is narrowest, stands
Clazomenae. Strab. lib. 13. Before it lie 8 little Islands. Idem. lib. 14.
Cleitor, a City of Arcadia, between Psophis and Caphyae. Polyb. lib. 4. It
confineth on the Territory of Pheneum, toward the East. Paus. in Arcadicis.
Cleonae, a City of Argia, between Argos and Corinth, confining on the
Phliasians. Paus. in Corinthiacis. Also a City in the territory where Mount
Athos stands. Herod. lib. 7. Thucyd. lib. 4. Cnemides, a Promontory of
Locris, distant from Cynus, the Haven of the Opuntians, toward Thermopylae, 50
Furlongs. Strab. lib. 9. Cnidus, a City of the Dorians in Asia, by the Sea
called Triopium. Herod. lib. 1. On the North it has the Ceraunian Bay; on the
South, the Rhodian Sea. Strab. lib. 14. Colonae, an vpland City of Hellespont,
in the Territory of Lampsacus. Strab. lib. 13. Also a maritime City of Troas,
140 furlongs from J^um, between Hamaxitus and Larissa. Jd. lib. 13. Colonides,
a maritime City of Messenia, between Asine and the mouth of the River
Pamisus, distant from Asine 40 Furlongs. Paus. in Messeniacis. Colophon, an
Ionique City in Lydia, Herod. lib. 1. between Ephesus and Lebedus: from
L^bedus 120 furlongs: from Ephesus 70 furlongs. Strab. lib. 14. Colo^honiorum
portus, a Haven not far from Torone. Thucyd. lib. 5. Cop^ and Copais lacus.
Cope is a City of Boeotia, situate on the North part of the Lake Copais.
Strab. lib. 9. Paus. in Boeoticis. Corassi^e, Two little Islands on the West of
the Island Patmus. Strab. lib. 10. Corcyra, now called Corfu, an Island over
against Epirus, whose East parts are opposite to the Islands called Sybo^a, and
West parts, to the Haven called Onchimus. Strab. lib. 7. Coressus, a Town of
the Territory of Ephesus, by the Sea side, near to the mouth of the River
Caystrus. Herodotus. lib. 5. Corinthus, a famous City, near the Isthmus of
Peloponnesus. Coronea, a City of Boeotia, upon the River C^phisus, where it
enters into the Lake Copais, and not far from the Hill Helicon. Strab. lib. 9.
Corontae, a City of Acarnania. Thucydid. lib. 4. Cortyta, a Town near the Sea
in Laconia. Thucyd. lib. 4. Corycus, a Mountain in the Chersonnesus of
Erythrae, between Teos and Erythrae. Strab. lib. 13. Coryphasium, a Promontory
of Messenia, distant from Methone 100 furlongs: in this Promontory stood the
Fort of Pylus. Paus. in Messeniacis. Cos, a Island with a City in it of the same
name. It belonged to the Doriens of Asia. Herodot. lib. 1. called Cos
Meropidis, Thucyd. lib. 8, because inhabited of old by the Meropians. It lies
in the Carpathian Sea, Strab. lib. 10. Opposite to Termerium, a Promontory of
the Mindians. Id. lib. 14. Cranaon a City in the Champaigne of Thessaly, Strab.
lib. 9. The same may be gathered out of Liuy, lib. 42. Cranij, a people of
Cephallenia. Thucyd. lib. 2. About the straight of that Island. Strab. lib. 10.
Crate^ei, a Haven near the City of Phocaea in Aeolis. Thucyd. lib. 8. Crenae,
Id est, the Wells* a place in Acar^nania, not far from Argos. Thucydid. lib.
3. Creusa, a Sea-Towne of Boeotia, upon the Bay of Crissa, belonging to the
City Thespiae. Strab. lib. 9. Pausan. in Boeoticis. Crissa, vnde sinus
Crissaeus, a Sea Town of Phocis, between Cirrha and Anticyra, from which the
Bay of Corinth is called also the Crissaean Bay, Strab. lib. 9. This Bay is
called now the Bay of Lepanto. Crithota, a Promontory of Acarnania, lying out
into the Sea, between the City Alyzea, and the mouth of the River Achelous.
Strab. lib. 10. Crocylium, a Town in Aetolia, of the Region inhabited by the
Apodoti. Thuc. lib. 3. Crommyon, a Town in the Isthmus of Corinth, Thucyd.
lib. 4. Paus. in Corinthiacis. between Schoenus and the Rocks called
Scironides, and confineth on Megaris. Strab. lib. 8. Cyclades, Islands in the
Aegaean Sea, so called, for that they lie round about the Island Delos. Their
number and order, according to Strabo, is this, Helena, Ceos, Cythnus,
Seriphus, Melos, Siphnus, Cimolis, Prepesinthus, Otearus, Naxus, Parus, Syrus,
Myconus, Tenus, Andrus, Gyarus. Strab. lib. 10. Cyllene, a Sea-towne of Elis in
Peloponnesus, belonging to the City of Elis, and where their shipping lay, 60
furlongs distant from Araxus. Strab. lib. 8. and from Elis 120 furlongs. Paus.
in 2. Eliacorum. Also a Mountain, the highest in Peloponnesus, on the confines
of Arcadia and Achaia, near Pheneum. Paus. in Arcadicis. Cyme, a City of
Aeolis, on the Seacoast, Her. l. 1. the last of the maritime Cities of Aeolis,
toward Ionia, as may be gathered out of Strab. lib. 13. Cynos-sema, a
Promontory of the Thracian Chersonnesus, not far from Abydus. Thucyd. lib. 8.
over against the mouth of the River Rhodius, which falls into the Sea
between Abydus and Dardanum. Strab. lib. 13. Cynus, a Town of Locris, upon
the Sea toward Euboea, belonging to the City of Opus, distant from the
Promontory Cnemides 50 furlongs, in the entrance of the Bay of Opus. Strab.
lib. 9. Liuy lib. 28. Cynuria, a territory on the border between Argia and
Laconia, toward the Seaside, containing the Cities Thyrea and Anthena. Thucyd
lib. 5. Paus. in Corinthiacis. Cyphanta, a maritime Town of Laconia, distant
from Zarex on one side 16. furlongs, from Prasiae on the other 200. Paus. in
Laconicis. Cypsela, a Castle in Parrhasia, a Territory of Arcadia, near to
Sciritis of Laconia. Thuc. lib. 5. Cyrrhus, a City of Macedonia, not far from
Pella. Thucyd. lib. 2. Cyrrhestae, that is, the people of Cyrrhus are placed
there*abouts by Pliny, lib. 4. Cytinium, a City of Doris on the side of
Pernassus* Thuc. lib. 3. Strab lib. 9. Cythera, an Island opposite to Malea, a
Promontory of Laconia and distant from it forty furlongs. Strab. lib. 8.
opposite directly to the City Boea. Paus. in Laconicis. In it are two Cities,
Cythera and Scandea. Thucyd. lib. 4. Paus. in Laconicis. Cythnus, an Island, one
of the Cyclades. vide Cyclades. Cyzicus, an Island and City in Propontis, Strab.
lib. 12. distant from Z^leia, which is a City near the Sea, on the River
Aesepus 190 furlongs. Id. lib. 13.
D
DArdanus and Dardanum. Dardanus is a City on the Sea side from Abydus, 70
furlongs, between it and Rhoetium. Strab. lib 13. It confineth on Abydus.
Herodot. lib. 7. Dardanum, is a Promontory between Abydus and Dardanus. Strab.
l^b. 13. Da^sylis, a Region of Bithynia, lying vp^^ Propontis. Ptolomy and
Strabo mention the Town Dascyclos or Das^ylium, which Strabo says stands
upon the Lake Dascylitis, by the River Rhind^cus, Strab. lib. 12. It was a
Province subject to the Persians in the time of Xerxes, and governed by
Megabates, his Lieutenant. Thucyd. lib. 1. Daulia, a City of Phocis, on the
East of Delphi, upon the River Cephissus, and at the foot of Pernassus. Strab.
lib. 9. Pausanias in Phocicis. Decelea, a Town in Attica, in the way between
Oropus and Athens, distant from Athens 120 Furlongs, and not much more from
Boeotia. Thuc. lib. 7. Delium, a Temple of Apollo by the Seaside in the
Territory of Tanagra. Thucyd. lib. 4. Paus. in Boeoticis. opposite to Chalcis
of Euboea. Herod. lib 6. Delos, an Island, and in it a City with a Temple
consecrated to Apollo, Thucyd. lib. 3. It is distant from Andros 15 miles, and
as many from Myconus. Plin. lib. 4. Delphi, a City of Phocis, famous for the
Temple and Oracle of Apollo. It stands at the foot of the Hill Pernassus.
Herod. lib. 8. on the South part of the hill. Strabo lib. 9. threescore
furlongs from the Sea. Paus. in Phocicis. Delphinium, a Town in the I Will Chius,
not far from the City Chius, and by the Seaside, Thucyd. lib. 8. Dercaei, a
people of Thrace.* Dicaea, a City of Thrace, between Abdera and Maronea,
Herod. lib. 7. Dictidij, a people in Mount Athos, Thuc. lib. 8. Dion, a City,
and in it a Temple of Jupiter, standing at the Sea side, at the foot of
Olympus, Thucid. lib. 4. Strab. Epit. lib. 7. Also a City in Mount Athos. Thuc.
lib. 4. Doberus, a City of Paeonia, at the foot of Cercine. Thuc. lib. 2.
Doliche, a City of the Perrhaebians, not far from the Mountains called
Cambunij. Liuy, lib. 44. Dolopia, a Region on the South side of the hill
Pindus, on the North of the Amphilochians, and confining on Phthiotis of
Thessaly. Strab. lib. 9, 10. Doris, a Region confining on the Melians, and with
a narrow corner running in between them and Phocis. Herod. lib. 8. It lies on
the East part of Parnassus, and deuideth the Locrians called Ozolae, from the
Locrians called Opuntians. It was called Tetrapolis, because it contained these
4 Cities, Erineus, Boium, Cytinium, and Pindus. Strab. lib. 9. The Doriens are
also a Nation in Asia, by the Sea side, joining to Caria, of which were
numbered, the inhabitants of the Islands Rhodes and Cos, and the Cities Cnidus
and Hal. carnassus. Strab. lib. 14. Doriscus Campus, a large Champaigne by the
side of the river Hebrus in Thrace, where Xerxes passing on toward Greece,
mustred his mighty Army. Herodot. lib. 7. Drabescus, a City of Edonia, beyond
the River Strymon. Thucyd. lib. 1. Drecanum a Promontory of the Island Cos,
distant from the City Cos, 200 furlongs. Strab. lib. 14. Dremyssa, an Island
lying before Clazomenae. Thucyd. lib. 8. Liuy, lib. 38. vide Clazomenae. Droi,
a people of Thrace.* Dyme, a City of Achaia, the nearest to the confines of
Elis. Strab. lib. 8. Pausan. in Achaicis.
E
EChinades, Islands, lying in and out before the mouth of the River Achelous.
Thuc. lib. 3. Strab. lib. 10. Edonia, a Region of Thrace, lying to the River
Strymon, and the Sea; It had in it Amphipolis, Drabescus, and other Cities.
Thuc. lib. 1. by which the situation thereof may be sufficiently understood.
E^d^mene, a City of Macedonia, not far from Doberus. Thuc. lib. 2. Plin. lib.
4. Eion, a City of Thrace, on the river Strymon. Herod. lib. 7. In the mouth of
Strymon, 25 furlongs from Amphipolis. Thucyd. lib. 4. Elaea, a Sea-towne in
Aeolis, belonging to the City of Pergamus, distant from the mouth of the River
Caicus toward Ionia, 12 furlongs: and from Canae 100 furlongs. Strab. lib. 13.
Ela^aea, a City of Phocis, by the River Cephis^^^, confining on the Locrians.
Strab. lib. 9. Pausanias in Pho^^cis. It stands in the straights of the
Phoccan Mountains. Strab. lib. 9. El^utherae, a Town of Attica, between
Ele^sis and Plataea, on the border of Attica. Paus. in Attic. Id. in Boeotic.
Eleus, a City of Chersonnesus to the North of Lemnos, Herod. lib 6. Eleusis, a
Sea-towne of Attica, Strab. lib. 8. on the confines of Megaris. Pausanias in
Atticis. Elis. Elis and Messenia are two Regions, that take up the West part of
Peloponnesus. Elis is bounded on the North by the Promontory Araxus, and
divided from Messenia in the parts toward the Sea, by the River Neda. Strab.
lib. 8. Elis the principal City thereof is distant from the Sea 120 Furlongs,
and from Olympia almost three hundred. Pausan. in fine secundi Eliacorum.
Ellom^nus, a Town in Neritum of the Territory of Leucadia, Thuc. lib. 3.
Elymio^ae, Elimaea, --
a Nation of Macedonia, which Ptolomy places on the Seaside upon the Ionian
Gulf. Liuy has the City Elimaea at the foot of the Mountains Cambunij, and
by the River Al^acmon, Liu. lib. 42. Embatus, a Town of ^rythraea. Thuc. lib.
3. on the part toward Lesbos, as may be probably coniectured by the History.
Enipeus, a River of Thessaly, which falls into the River Peneus. Herodot.
lib. 7. But first it receives into itself the water of Apidanus, that passes
by Pharsalus. Strab. lib. 8. It rises in the Mountain Othrys. Id. ibid.
Eorda, a Region of Macedonia, between the Lyncestians and Thessalonica (or
Ther^a) in the way called Ignatia, that leads from Epidamnus to Thessalonica,
Strab. lib. 7. Ephesus, an Ionique City in Lydia. Herod. lib. 1. at the mouth
of the River Caistrus, on the side toward Mycale. Strab. lib. 13. Ephyre, a
City of Thesprotis, upon the River Thyamis. Strab. lib. 7. Thuc. lib. 1. Also a
City of Agraeis. Strab. lib. 7. and lib. 10. Epidamnus, a City afterward
called Dyrrachium, now Durazzo, situate on the Ionian Gulf, amongst the
Taulantij, Illyrians. Thucyd. lib. 1. next without the Bay called Rhizicus.
Strab. lib. 7. Epidaurus, a City of Argia by the Seaside, in the inmost part
of the Saronian Bay. Strab. lib. 8. Epidaurus Limera, a maritime City of
Laconia, in the Bay of Argos, 300 furlongs from the Promontory of Malea.
Pausan. in Laconicis. Erae, a City in Erythraea, between Teos and Casystus.
Strab. lib. 13. Eressus, a City in the I Will Lesbos, between Pyrrha, and the
Promontory Sigrium. Strabo, libro 13. Eretria, a City of Euboea, between
Chalcis and Gerestus. Strab. lib. 10. opposite to Oropus in Attica Strab. lib.
9. Erigon, a River of Macedonia, arrising in Illyris, and falling into the
River Axius. Liu. lib. 39. Strab. lib. 7. Erineus, a City of Doris. Thucyd.
lib. 1. Strab. lib. 9. Also a Haven in the Territory of Rhypes, in Achaia.
Thuc. lib. 7. Pausan. in Achaicis. Erythrae, an Ionique City. Herodot. lib. 1.
It stands in the midst of the Chersonnesus, between the Promontory Argenum
and the Mountain Mimas, and before it lie certain Islands called Hip^i. Strab.
lib. 13. Also a Town in the confines of Attica, not far from Plataea.
Thucyd. lib. 3. Herod. lib. 9. Estiotis, a Region of Thessaly, confining on the
Mountains Olympus and Ossa. Herodot. lib. 1. It is the West part of Thessaly,
and lies between Mount Pindus and the upper Macedonie. Strab. lib. 9. Euboea,
an Island lying opposite to the Continent of Attica, and Boeotia, and Locris,
extending from Sunium, as far as Thessaly. The length of it is reckoned from
the Promontory Ceneum, to the Promontory Geraestus. Concaua Euboeae is all that
shore that is from the Euripus to Geraestus. Strab. lib. 10. Herodotus makes
it to be on the other side of the Island. Herod. lib. 7. It seems therefore
that Concaua Euboeae is not the proper name of a place, but an appellation
signifying any hollow bending of the shore. Euenus, a River, which rising
amongst the Boij, a Nation of Aetolia, runs by Chalcis and Calydon, and then
bending toward the West, by Pleuron into the Sea. Strab. lib. 10. Eurotas, a
River of Laconia, rising in the Territory of Megalopolis, and passing by the
City of Lacedaemon, on the East side of it, falls into the Sea near Helos,
between Gythium and Acria. Strab. lib. 8. Also a River of Thessaly, rising out
of the Hill Citarius, and falling into the River Peneus. Strab. lib. 7. Epit.
Eurytanes, a Nation of Aetolians, one of the three. Apodoti being those that
dwelt toward the Sea; Ophtonei, those toward the Melians, Thucyd. lib. 3.
Eurytanes therefore must be those toward Agraeis and Athamania.
G
GAlepsus, a City not far from Torone. The Fleet of Xerxes compassing the
Promontory of Ampelus, passed by these Cities, Torone, Galepsus, Sermyla, etc.
Herodot. lib. 7. Gapsolus, a City of Thrace, not far from Amphipolis. Thucyd.
lib. 4. Ortelius thinks it the same with Galepsus: but it is more probable by
the History to be another. Gargara, a Promontory in Asia, 260 furlongs within
the Promontory of Lectus, and is the beginning of the Bay of Adramyttium,
properly so called. Strab. lib. 13. Geraestus, a Promontory of Euboea.
Geraestus and Petalia are opposite to Sunium, a Promontory of Attica. Strab.
lib. 10. Geraestus is between the City Styra, and Eretria. Jdem. lib. 10.
Geranea, a Hill in Megaris, near the entrance of the Isthmus. Thucyd. lib. 1.
Paus. in Atticis. Glauce, a City in Ionia, near the Mountain Mycale* Thucyd.
lib. 8. Gigonus, a Promontory not far from Potidaea. Thuc. lib. 2. Herod.
lib. 7. Gomphi, a City of Thessaly, in the Region called Estiotis. Strab. lib.
9. near to the springs of Peneus. Plin. lib. 4. The nearest of the Thessalian
Cities to Epirus. Liuy, lib. 32. Gonnus, a City of the Perrhaebians in
Thessaly, at the foot of Olympus. Strab. lib. 9. in the entrance to Tempe.
Polyb. lib. 17. Liuy, lib. 44. twenty miles distant from Larissa, Liu* lib. 36.
Gonnus, is in the entrance out of Macedonia through the Perrhaebians into
Thessaly. Herod. lib. 7. Gortynia, a City of Macedonia, not far from the Hill
Cercine. Thucyd. lib. 2. Granicus, a River in Hellespont, rising in Mount Ida,
near xnto Scepsis, and falling into Propontis between the City Priapus, and
the mouth of the River Aesepus. Strab. lib. 13. Grestonia, a Region of
Macedonia, joining to Mygdonia, in which rises the River Chedorus. Herod. lib.
7. Gyarus, a small Island, one of the Cyclades. Vide Cyclades. Gyrton, a City of
Perrhaebia, at the foot of Olympus. Strab. lib. 9. before Gonnus to such as
come out of Macedonia, by the Mountains called Cambunij. Liuy, libro 44.
Gythium, a City of Laconia, the Harbor of the Lacedaemonian Shipping between
Asine and Acriae. Strab. lib. 8. distant 230 furlongs from the Promontory of
Taenarus. Paus. in Laconicis.
H
HAlias Thucydidi, Halieis Straboni, Halice Pausaniae, --
A maritime Town of Argia, in the Bay of Hermione. Strabo, lib. 8. between
Asine and Hermione, two hundred and fifty furlongs from Asine. Paus. in
Corinthiacis. Haliartus, a city of Boeotia, by the side of the Lake Copais,
toward Helicon. Strab. lib. 9. It confineth on the Territory of Thespiae.
Paus. in Boeoticis. Halicarnassus, a City of the Doreans in Asia. Herod. lib.
1. In the bottom of the C^raunian Bay. Strab. lib. 14. Halimus, a Town of
Attica, next after Phaleron, toward the Promontory of Sunium. Strab. lib. 9.
In this Town was Thucydides borne, the Author of this History. Halisarna, a
Town in the Island Cos, near unto the Promontory of Lacter. Strab. lib. 14.
Hamaxitus, a City of Troas, under the Promontory of Lectus. Strab. lib. 13.
Harmatus, a City in the Continent, over against Methymna of Lesbos. Thuc. lib.
8. Harpagium, a place on the confines of Priapus and Cyzicus. Strab. lib. 13.
Hebrus, a River of Thrace, falling into the Sea between Aenus and Doriscus.
Herod. lib. 7. Helena, an Island, one of the Cyclades, adjacent to the Continent
of Attica, and extending from Sunium to Thoricus. Strab. lib. 10. Helice, a
City of Achaia, on the Seaside, between Aegium and Bura, distant from Aegium
forty furlongs. Pausan. in Achaicis. Helos, a Laconique City, by the side of
the River Eurotas, not far from the Sea. Strab. lib. 8. distant from Gythium
a hundred furlongs, and from Acriae thirty, Paus. ^n Laconicis. Heraea, a City
of Arcadia, in the confines of Elis, upon the River Alpheus. Polyb. lib. 4.
Paus. in Arcadicis. It confineth on Megalopolis; and the River Ladon runs
within 15 furlongs of it. Pausan. in Arcadicis. Heraclea, a City of the
Melians, built by the Lacedaemonians, within the straight of Thermopylae,
distant from it forty furlongs, and from the Sea twenty. Thucyd. lib. 3. Strab.
lib. 9. Also a City in the Bay of Latmus, between Miletus and Pyrrha, distant
from Pyrrha 100 furlongs. Strab. lib. 14. Also a City of the Sinti, a people of
Macedonia, called Heraclea Sintica. Liu. lib. 45. Hermione, a maritime City in
Argia, between Asine and Troezen. Strab. lib. 8. Paus. in Corinthiacis. From
it is named the Bay of Hermione, which has in it in order these three Cities,
Asine, Hermione, Troezen. Strab. lib. 8. Pausanias in Corinthiacis. But Strabo
seems to make the Bay of Hermione to begin at the Promontory Scyllaeum, and
to end at Epidaurus. Quaere. Hermus, a River dividing Aelis from Jonia,* Strab.
lib. 14. It runs through the Plains that lie before the City Sardis, and
enters the Sea by Phocaea. Herod. lib. 1. Hessij, the people of a City of the
Locri Ozolae. Thucyd. lib. 3. Hestiaea, a City of ^uboea, not far from the
Promontory Ceneum. Strab. lib. 10. The Territory of Hestiaea is called
Hestiotis, and is over against Thessaly, as may appear out of Herod. lib. 7.
Hyaei, The people of a City of the Locri Ozolae. Thucyd. lib. 3. Hyampolis, a
City of Phocis, confining on Abas, a City of the Locrians of Opus. Paus. in
Phocicis. Hysiae, a Town of Attica, on the confines of Plataeis. Herodot. lib.
9. Thucyd. lib. 3. Vide Oeno^. Also a Town of Argia, on the confines of Tegea,
in the way between Tegea and Argos. Pausanias in Corinthiacis.
I
Iassus, a maritime City of Asia, situate in an Island, near to the Continent.
Strab. lib. 14. in that Bay which on the side toward Miletus has Posideum for
bound, and on the other side, the City Mindus. Polyb. lib. 16. The Bay is
called ^inus Bargilcaticus. Jidem. Icarus, or Icaria, an Island on the West of
the I Will Samos. Strab. lib. 10. distant from it 80 furlongs. Idem, lib. 14.
Icthys, a Promontory of Elis, near the City of Phia. Thucyd. lib. 2. Vide
Phia. Icus, an Island lying before Magnesia. Strab. lib. 9. Ida, a Mountain of
Asia, extending from Lectus and the places on the Adramyttian Bay, to the City
Zeleia by Propontis. Strab. lib. 12. Idacus, a place in the Thracian
Chersonnesus, opposite to Abydus and Dardanus. Thuc. lib. 8. Idomenae, two Hill
tops so called, between Ambracia and Argos Amphilochicum. Thucyd. lib. 3.
Ielysus, a City in the Island of Rhodes, between Cameirus and the City of
Rhodes. Strab. lib. 14. Jlium sieve Troia, a famous City in Asia, 170 furlongs
from Abydus, standing from the Sea toward the Mountain Ida. Strab. lib. 13.
Imbros, an Island not far from the Thracian Chersonnesus. Thucyd. lib. 8. It
is distant from Lemnos two and twenty miles, and from the I Will Samothrace, that
lies before the River Hebrus, two and thirty miles. Plin. lib. 4. Iolcus a
maritime Town of Thessaly, in the Pegasean Bay, not far from Demetrias. Liu.
lib. 4. Ionia, a Region inhabited by the Grecians in Asia, by the Seaside,
reaching from Posideum a Promontory of Miletus, on the South, to Phocaea, and
the mouth of the River Hermus, on the North, Strab. l^b 14. Ionian Gulf. The
Ionian Gulf, or the Ionian Sea, is the utmost part of the Adriatique Sea,
beginning at the Ceraunia Mountains. Strab. lib. 7. Ios, an Island on the Coast
of Crete, equally distant from Therasia an Anaphe. Strab. lib. 10. Ipnenses,
The people of a City of the Locri Ozolae. Thucyd. lib. 3. Ismaris, a Lake in
Thrace, between Stryma and Maronea. Herod. lib. 7. Istone, a Hill in the I Will
Corcyra. Thuc. lib. 3. Ithaca, an Island over against C^phall^nia, and near to
it. Strab. lib. 10. Ithome, a Hill in Messenia, near the Sea, and on it a
City, which was afterward the Cittadell of the City (...), that was built after
the Peloponnesian War, by Epaminondas. Paus. in Messenicis.
L
LAconia, a Region of Peloponnesus, confining on Messenia, Argia, and Arcadia.
Strab. lib. 8. divided from the Territory of Megalopolis of Arcadia, by the
River Alpheus. ^aus. in Arcadicis. Lact^r, the most Southern Promontorie of
the I Will Cos. Strab. lib 14. Laced^mon, the head City of Laconia, on the West
side of the River Eurotas, remote from the Sea, beneath the Mountain Taygetus.
Strab. l^b. 8. Polyb. lib. 5. ^ade, a small Island, lying before the City
Myletus. Herod. li^. 6. Thucyd. lib. 8. Paus. in Attic^s* Ladon, a River rising
in the Territory of Cleitor in Arcad^a, passing by the border of Heraea, and
falling into the River P^neus in Elis, near to Py^us. Paus in Arcad^cis, and
Eliacorum secundo. Lagusa, an Island on the West of the Island Ios. Strab. lib
10. Lampsa^us, a maritime City in Hellespont, from Abydus* toward Propont^s,
distant 170 furlongs. Strab. lib. 13. Laodicea, a Town of the Territory of
Orestis in Arcadia. Thucyd. lib. 4. Larissa, a City of Thessaly, on the River
Peneus. Strab. lib. 9. Also a City of Tra^^* between Achaenni and C^lonae.
Strabo, lib. 13. Latmus, and the Bay of Latmus.-Latmus, a Mountain at the
bottom of the Bay of Latmus, which Bay begins at Posideum in the Territory
of Miletus, and ends at the Promontorie of Pyrrha, between which places by
the shore, it is two hundred furlongs* and straight over, but thirty. Strabo,
libro 4. Latmus is also an Island in those parts, as appears by Thucydides,
lib. 2. but I can find no mention of it in any other Author. Laurium, a
Mountain and Town in Attica, not far from S^^ium, between Sunium and Athens.
Paus. in Atticis. The Athenians had silver Mines in this Mountain. Thuc.
Herod. Leaei, a Nation dwelling on the River Strymon, and the border between
Thrace and Macedonie. Thucyd. lib. 2. Lebedus, an Ionique City in Lydia. Herod.
lib. 1. Situate on the Seaside, between Colophon and Teus, distant from each
120 furlongs. Strab. l^b. 14. Lechaeum, a Haven of the Corinthians in the
Crissaean or Corinthian Bay. Between ^echaeum and Cenchreae is contained the
Corinthian Isthmus. Paus. in Corinthiacis. Lectus, a City and Promontory of
Troas, the beginning of the Bay of Adramyttium, Strab. lib. 14. Lennos, an
Island in the Aegean Sea, on the East of the Mountain Athos, so as the shadow
of the Mountain falls sometimes upon it. Plin. lib. 4. Strab. Epitom. lib.
7. Lepreum, a City of Elis, forty furlongs from the Sea. Pa^s. Fl^a^orum
secundo. On the con^ines of Arcadia. Thucyd. lib. 5. Lerus, an Island, one of
the Sporades, near to Pat^os. Strab. lib. 10. Lesbos, an Island over against
Aeolis in Asia, distant from ^emnos, Tenedos, and Chios almost equally; less
then five hundred furlongs from the fa^thest of them. It reaches in length
between Lectus and Canae 560 furlongs, and is in compass 1100 furlongs.
Strab. lib. 13. Leucas, a Penin^ula, distant from Actium 240 furlongs. Strab.
lib. 10. now an Island, and called Santa Maura. Leuctra, a Town in Boeotia,
between Plataea and Thespiae. Strab. lib. 9. Also a Town of Laconia in the
Messenian Bay, between T^urides and Cardamyle, distant f^^m Cardamyle 60
furlongs* and from Taenarus three hundred and forty. Strab. lib. 8. Paus. in
^aconicis. Leucimna, the most Eastern Promontory of the I Will Corcyra, opposite
to the Islands called Syb^ta, Strab. lib 7. Lilaea, a City of Phocis, distant
from Delphi by Pernassus 180 furlongs. Paus. in Phocicis. Limnaea, a City on
the confines of Agraeis, on the West to the River Achelous, as may be gathered
out of Thucyd. lib. 3. Lin^ij, a City of the Island Rhodes, situate on the
right hand to them that sail from the City of Rhodes Southward. Strab. lib.
14. Lissus, a small River of Thrace, between Mesembria and Stryma. Herod lib.
7. Locri, a Nation of Greece, whereof one part, called Locri Ozolae, inhabit
on the West of Pernassus, and confine on Aetolia. Strab. lib. 9. And the other
part, called Locri Opuntij, are divided from the Ozolae by the Mountains
Pernassus and the Region of Doris. Idem, lib. 9. Part of the Opuntians are
called Epicnemides, for that they dwell near the Promontory called Cnemides.
Loryma, a City in the opposite Continent to Rhodes, between Cnidus and
Physcus, where the shore begins to turn Northward. Strab. lib. 14. distant
twenty miles from Rhodes. Liuy, libro 45. Lycaeum, a mountain in Arcadia,
near to the confines of Laconia, and Megalopolis. Paus. in Arcadicis. Not far
from Tegea. Strab. lib. 8. Lychnidus, a City of Illyris, on the Confines of
Macedonie, in the Ignatian way, that leads from Apollonia to Therme. Strab.
lib. 7. Lydius, a River of Macedonie. Lydius and Aliacmon meeting in one,
divide Bottiaea from Macedonie. Herodot. lib. 7. Lyncus, a Region and City of
the upper Macedonia, the people are called Lynchesti by Thucyd. lib. 4, and
placed by Strabo in the way between Epidamnus and Therme, which he calls the
Ignatian way. Strab. lib. 7.
M
MAcedonia, a famous Kingdom, bordered with Thracia, Epirus, Illyris, and
Thessaly Mady^us, a City in the Thracian Chersonnesus. Between Sestus amd
Madytus, is the shortest cut over the Hell^spont, of not above seven furlongs.
Herod. lib. 7. Maeander, a River of Caria. The mouth of it is fifty furlongs
from Pyrrha, the beginning of the Latmian Bay. Strab. lib. 14. Maedi, a people
of Thrace, bordering on Maceconie. Polyb. lib. Thucyd. lib. 2. Moenalia, a
Territory of Arcadia, belonging to the City M^enalus, which City is about
threescore and ten furlongs from Megalopolis. Paus. in Arcadicis. Magnesia, a
City of Thessaly, the Territory whereof extends from the Mountain Ossa and
the Lake Boebeis, to the Mountain Pelion. Strab. lib. 9. Before the Continent
of Magnesia, lies the Island Scyathus. Herodot. lib. 7. Also a City of Ionia
called Magnesia on Maeander, above the City of Myus. Strabo, libro 14. Mal^a,
a Promontory of Laconia, between which and Taenarus is comprehended the
Laconian Bay. Strab. lib. 8. Also the most Southe^ne Promontory of Lesbos,
opposite to Canae. Strab. lib. 13. Mantinea, a City of Arcadia, confining on
Argia, Tegea, Methydrium, and Orchomenus. Paus. in Arcadicis. Marathon, a Town
in Attica, over against E^etria of Euboea. Herod. lib. 6. Between Rhamnus and
Brauron. Strab. lib. 9. Equally distant from Athens and from Carystus in
Euboea. Paus, in Atticis. Marathusa, an Island lying before Clazomenae. Thucyd.
lib. 8. Vide Clazomenae. Maronea, a City of Thrace, lying to the Aegean Sea.
Xerxes, after he had passed the River Lissus, went on toward Greece by these
Cities, Maronea, Dicaea, Abdera, etc. Herod. lib. 7. Mecyberna, a maritime
Town in the Bay of Torone, serving for the shipping of the City Olynthus.
Strab. Epitom. lib. 7. The Fleet of Xerxes being come about Ampelus, (This is
a Promontory near Torone,) passed by these Cities, Torone, Galepsus, Sermyla,
Mecyberna, etc. Herodot. lib. 7. Medeon, a City of Amphilochia, on the West of
the River Achelous. The Army of the Peloponnesians having passed the River
Achelous, out of Aetolia, went on into Agraeis by these Cities in order,
Phytia, Medeon, and Limnaea. Thucyd. lib. 3. Megalopolis, a City of Arcadia,
built after the Peloponnesian War, by Epaminondas. The Territory thereof
confineth on Laconia, Messenia, Heraea, Orchomenus, Mantinea, and Tegea. It
stands on the River Helisson, not far from Alpheus. Pausan. in Arcadicis.
Megara, a City confining with Attica at Eleusis* distant from the Sea 18
furlongs. Paus. in Atticis. Strab. lib. 8. Melas, a River, and a Bay into which
it enters, on the West of the Thraeian Chersonnesus. Herod. lib. 7. Melena, a
Promontory of the Island Chios, over against the I Will Psyra. Strabo, libro 15.
Melienses, and the Melian Bay. The Melienses are next to Thessaly Southward.
Strab. lib. 8. The Melian Bay begins at the Promontory Cnemides. Id. lib. 9.
Melitea, a City of Thessalie, near the River Enipeus. Strab. lib. 9. between
Pharsalus and Heraclea. Thucyd. lib. 4. Melos, an Island, one of the Cyclades
Vide Cyclades. Distant from the Promontorie Scyllaeum seven hundred furlongs.
Strab. lib. 10. Mende, a City in the Chersonnesus of Pallene. Herod. lib. 7.
between Aphytis and Scione. Strab. Epit. lib 7. Mesembria, a maritime City of
Thrace, near Doriscus, the last in the shore of Doriscus toward the West.
Herod. lib. 7. Messenia, a Region on the West part of Peloponnesus, confining
on Elis, Arcadia, and Laconia, divided from Elis on the parts to the Sea, by
the River Neda, and confining with Laconia at Thurides. Strab. lib. 8. Paus. in
Messenicis. Of the Messenian Bay, the first Town is Asine, the last Thurides.
Idem, lib. 8. The City of Messene was built after the Peloponnesian War, by
Epaminondas, under the Hill Ithome. Paus. in Messenicis. Vide Ithome. Methone,
a City of Macedonia, forty furlongs from Pydna. Strab. Epit. lib. 7. Also a
City in Argia, between Epidaurus and Troezen. Strab. lib. 8. Situate in a
Chersonnasus belonging to the Troezenians. Paus. in Corinthiacis. Strabo
calls it Methana. Also a maritime City of Messenia, between the Promontories
Coryphasium and Acritas. Strab. lib. 8. Paus. in Corinthiacis. Pausanias
calls it Mothone. It is now called Modeno. Messapij, the people of a City of
the Locri Ozolae. Thucyd. lib. 2. Methydrium, a City of Arcadia, confining on
Mantinea, distant from Megalopolis 170 furlongs. Paus. in Arcadicis. Methymna,
a City of Lesbos, between the Promontories Sigrium and Malea, distant from
Malea 340 furlongs, and from Sigrium 210. Strab. lib. 13. Miletus, an Ionique
City of Caria, the farthermost toward the South. Herodot. lib. 1. next to
Posideu^, in the Latmian ^ay. Strab. lib. 14. Mimas, a Hill in the Chersonnesus
of Erythrae, between the Cities Erythrae and Clazomenae, Strab. lib. 13.
Mindus, a maritime City of Caria, between the Promontorie of Astypalaea, and
the City Iasus. Strabo. libro 14. Minoe, an Island, as Thucyd. a Promontory as
Strabo says, that makes Nisaea a Haven. Strab. lib. 9. Thucyd. lib. 2.
Mitylene, the chief City of Lesbos, situate between Methymna and Malea,
distant from Malea threescore and ten furlongs, from (...) one hundred and
twenty furlongs. Strab. lib. 13. Melossians, a people of Epirus. Thucydid. lib.
1. dwelling by the River Acheron. Liuy, lib. 8. Molychria, a City of the Locri
Ozolae, on the Sea side, next to Antirrhium, on the part toward Euenus. Paus.
in Phocicis. Manychia, a Promontory of Attica, which with Piraeus made the
Harbor of the Athenian shipping, with three fair Havens within it. Strab.
lib. 9. Mycale, a Promontory over against the I Will Samos, Herodot. lib. 1. A
Mountain near to Priene, opposite to Samos, which with Posideum a Promontory
of Samos, makes the straight of seven furlongs over. Strab. lib. 14.
Mycalessus, a City of Boeotia, between Thebes and Chalcis of Euboea. Paus. in
Boeoticis. Thucyd. lib. 7. Mycenae, a City once the head of Argia, on the left
hand to those that go from Cleonae to Argos, distant from Argos fifty
furlongs. Strab. lib. 8. Paus. in Corinthiacis. Mycon^s, an Island, one of the
Cyclades. Vide Cyclades. Mygdonia, a Region of Macedonia, divided from Bottiaea
by the River Axius, and and reaching unto Pallene. Herodot. libro 7. Mylasa, an
vpland City of Caria, nearest to the Sea at Physcus. Strab. lib. 14. Myonnesus,
a maritime City of Ionia, between Teos and Lebedus. Strab. lib. 14. Myrcinus,
a City of the Edonians in Thrace, by the River Strymon. Herodot. lib. 5. Myus,
an Ionique City, 30 furlongs above the mouth of the River Maeander. Strabo,
lib. 14. Also a City of the Locri Ozolae, near Amphissa, and thirty furlongs
more remote from the Sea. Paus. in Phocicis.
N
NAupactus, a City of the Locri Ozolae, near to Antirrhium, within the
Crissaean Bay. Strab. lib. 9. and next to it is Oeanthea. Paus. in Phocicis.
Nauplia, a City of Argia, in the Argiue Bay, next after Temenium, toward the
Promontory Scyllaeum. Strab. lib. 8. Naxus an Island, one of the Cyclades. Vide
Cyclades. Neda, a River of Peloponnesus, rising in the Mountain Lycaeum.
Pausanias in Arcadicis. and passing through Messenia. Jdem in Messenicis. It
divides the maritime parts of Elis and Messenia. Strab. lib. 8. Nemea, a
Forest and Town, The Forest between Cleonae and Phlius. Strab. lib. 8. The
Town between Cleonae and Argos. Paus. in Corinth. Neritum, The Chersonnesus
of Leucas, since cut off and made an Island by the Corinthians. Strab. lib. 10.
Nestus, a River of Thrace, that goes out into the Sea, near to the City
Abdera. Herod. lib. 7. on the West side of Abdera. Strab. Epit. lib. 7. Nisaea
the Haven Town to the City of Megara. Pegae and Nisaea comprehend the Isthmus,
and are distant from each other 120 furlongs. Strab. lib. 8. On the East of the
Island Minoe. Id. lib. 9. Nisyra, an Island, one of the Sporades, 60 furlongs
from the I Will Cos, and as many from the I Will Telos, in compass 80. furlongs.
Strab. lib. 10. Non^^ris, a City of Arcadia, to the West of Pheneum, and
enclining to the right hand* Paus. in Arcadicis. Notium, a Town on the
Seaside, belonging to the Colophonians, and distant from Colophon two miles.
Liuy, lib. 37. Also a place in the I Will Chius, between the Promontory Melena
and the Haven Phanae. Distant from the City Chius by Land threescore furlongs,
by Sea 300. Strab. lib. 14. Nympheum, a Promontory of Mount Ath^s, toward the
Bay of Singus. Strab. Ep. lib. 7
O
OChe, a Mountain, the greatest of Euboea, near to the City Carystus. Strab.
lib. 10. Odomanti, a people of Thrace, near the Mountain Pangaeum. Herod.
lib. 7. Odrysae, a people of Thrace. Thucyd. libro 2. Oeanth^i, a maritime City
of the Locri Ozolae. Paus. in Phocicis. Over against Aegirae of Achaia. Polyb.
lib. 4. Oenias, a City of Acarnania, by the Sea side, opposite to the
Promontory Araxus, in Peloponnesus, and confining on Aetolia. Polyb. lib. 4. on
the East side of the River Achelous, at the mouth of it. Strab. lib. 10.
Oeneon, a City of the Locri Ozolae, not far from Naupactus, as may be gathered
out of Thucyd. lib. 3. Oenoe, a Town on the border of Attica, toward Boeotia.
Thucyd. lib. 2. Oenoe and Hysiae the last of the Towns of Attica, toward
Boeotia, on that part which is remotest from Chalcis and Euboea. Herodot. libro
5. Oenophyta, a place in Boeotia. Thucyd. lib. 2. but whereabouts, I cannot
find. Oenussae, certain Islands upon the Coast of Chius. Herod. lib. 1.
Thucyd. lib. 8. Oeta, a Mountain near Thermopylae: that part which is near
Thermopylae, for about twenty furlongs, is properly called Octa, though the
whole tract from Thermopylae, as far as the Bay of Ambracia, be commonly
also called Oeta. Strab. lib. 9. Oezyme, a City of the Eidonians. Thucyd. lib.
4. Beyond the River Strymon, and by the Seaside, according to Ptolomie.
Olcarus, an Island, one of the Cyclades. Vide Cyclades. Olenus* a city of
Achaia, between Patrae and Dyme, at the mouth of the River Peirus. Paus. in
Achaicis. Olpae, a Castle by the side of the Bay of Ambracia, near to Argos
Amp^alochicum. Thucyd. lib. 3. Olpe, a city of the Locri Ozolae. Thucyd. lib.
3. but whereabouts I know not. Olophyxus, a city in Mount Athos. Herod. lib. 7.
Olympia, a place in Elis, with a Temple dedicate to Jupiter, upon the side of
the River Alpheus, distant from the Sea 80 furlongs. Strab. lib. 8. Olympus, a
Mountain, which is the bound of Thessaly on the North, and of Macedonia on the
South, between it and the Mountain Ossa, in a narrow Valley, runs the
River Peneus, Herod. lib. 7. Paus. Eliacoram secundo, Olynthus, a city of the
Bottiaeans driven out of Bottiaea by the Macedonians. Herod. lib. 8. The
Bottiaeans driven out of Bottiaea, seated themselves on the borders of the
Chalcideans toward Thrace. Thucyd. lib. 2. Olynthus stands somewhat remote
from the Sea, and about threescore furlongs from Potidaea. Id. lib. 2.
Mecyberna, which stands on the Bay of Torone, served them for the place of
their shipping. Strab. Epit. lib. 7* Onugnathos, a Promontory of Laconia,
between which and Malea, is the city and Bay of Boca. Paus. in Laconicis.
Ophionei, a people of Aetolia, toward the Melian Gulf. Thucyd. lib. 3. Opus,
the chief city of the Locri Opuntij, distant from the Sea fifteen furlongs,
opposite to Aedepsa in Euboea. Strab. lib. 9. Orchomenus; a city of Boeotia,
confining on Phocis, through the Territory whereof the River Cephissus passes
from Chaeronea into the Lake Copais. Strab. lib. 9. Paus. in Boeoticis. Also a
city of Arcadia, confining on Mantinea and Pheneum. Pausanias in Arcadicis.
Orestis, a Region of Macedonia, confion Epirus. Thucyd. lib. 2. not far from
Elymaea. Liu. lib. 31. Orestium or Orestasium
A city of Arcadia, in the way between Sparta and the Jsthmus. Herodot. lib.
9. and between Megalopolis and Tegea. Paus. in Arcadibis. Oreus, a city of
the Hestiaeans, in Euboea. Thucydid. lib. 1. Strab. lib. 9. not far from the
Promontory of Ceneum. Id. lib. 9. the first City of Euboea on the left hand to
them that come from the Bay of (...), (or Pegasaean Bay) toward Chalcis. (...),
lib. 9. O^neae, a City of Argia, on the borders of the Phliasian and Sicyonian
Territories. Paus in Corinthiacis. Orebiae, a City of Euboea, not far from
Aegae. Strab. lib* 9. O^opas, a maritime town in Attica, toward Euboea, and
opposite to Eret^ia. Strab. lib. 9. It is distant from Eretria 60 furlongs.
Thucyd. l^b. 8. Ossa, a Mountain of Thessaly. Between Ossa and (...), in a
narrow valley, runs the River Peneus. Herod. lib. 7. Othrys, a Mountain
bounding Thessaly on the South. Herod. lib. 7. It has on the North ^ide the
Ph^hiotae, but reaches also, to the Dolopians. Strab. lib. 9.
P
PActolus, a River of Asia the less, rising in the Mountain Tinolus, and
falling into the River Hermus. Strab. lib. 13. It runs through the
Marketplace of Sar^^s. Herod. lib. 5. (...), a City standing in the Isthmus of
the ^hracian Chersonnesus, toward Propontis. Herod. lib. 6. (...), a Region of
Macedonia, reaching on one side to the River Strymon. Herodot. lib. 5. on the
other side to the River Axius. Paus. Eliacorum primo, in the beginning. Pale, a
City of Cephallenia, in the narrow part thereof, near to the Bay. Strab. lib.
10. Pa^yre, a maritime City of Acarnania, between Leucas and Alyzea. Strab.
lib. 10. Par^^sus, a River of Messenia, rising between Tharium and Arcadia,
and falling into the Sea in the midst of the Messenian Bay. Strab. lib. 8.
Pana^^um, a Town in Attica, on the confines of Boeo^ia* Thucyd. lib. 5. (...),
a People of Thrace. * Thucyd. lib. 2. Pangaeum, a Mountain in Thrace, above
the Region called the Pierian Bay. Thucyd. lib. 2. Vide Pierian Bay. Panopeus,
the same with Phanotis. Vide Phanotis. Panormus, a Haven of Achaia, near to
Rhium. Thucyd. lib. 2. opposite to Naupactus. Polyb. lib. 4. Distant from Rhium
within the C^issaean Bay 15 furlongs. Strab. lib. 9. Also a Town in the
Territory of Miletus. Thucyd. lib. 8. Parasia, a City of Thessaly. Thu^. l. 1.
Where abouts in Thessaly I find not. Parauaei, a Nation of Epirus, near to the
Molossians. Thucyd. lib. 2. Plutarch. in quaest. Graecis. quaest. 13, 26.
Parium, a maritime City of Hellespont, between Lampsacus and Priapus. Strab.
lib. 13. Parnassus, a Mountain, on whose West part are the Locri Ozolae; East
part, the Pheceans and Doreans; and which extends to the Mountains that
run along from Thermopylae to the Ambracian Bay, and meets with them at a
right angle. Strab. lib. 9 Parnethus, a Hill in Peloponnesus, wherein are the
bounds of Argia, Tegeae, and Laconia. Paus. in Corinthiacis. Also a Hill in
Attica. Thucyd. lib. 2. Paros, an Island, one of the Cyclades. Vide Cyclades.
Parrhasia, a City and Territory of Arcadia, bordering upon Laconia. Thuc. lib.
5. Patmus, an Island, one of the Sporades, on the West of Icarus. Strab. lib.
10. Patrae, a maritime City of Achaia, distant from Rhium, fifty furlongs; from
Olenus 80 furlongs. Paus. in Achaicis. Strab. lib. 8. Pegae, a City in the
Mountainous part of Megaris. Paus. in Achaicis. Pegae and Nisaea comprehend the
Corinthian Isthmus. Stra. lib. 8. Pegasaea, a City of Thessaly, in the
Pegasaean Bay. Herod. lib. 7. Pe^raice, a small Territory on the confines of
Attica and Boeotia, near to Oropus. Thucyd. lib. 2. Pelasgiotis, a Region of
Thessaly, between Estiotis, and the Territory of Magnesia. Stra. lib 9. Pele,
an Island lying before Clazomenae. Thucyd. lib. 8, vide Clazomenae. Pel^on, a
Mountain in the Territory of Magnesia in Thessaly, joined to the Mountain
Ossa. Herod. lib. 7. Pella, a City of Macedonie, wherein Alexander the Great
was borne. It stands in a Lake between the Rivers Axius and Lydius. Strab.
Epit. lib. 7. Pellene, a City of Achaia, confining on Sicyonia and Pheneum,
distant from the Sea threescore furlongs, and from Aegirae 120 furlongs. Paus.
in Achaicis. Also a Peninsula of Macedonie, between the Bay of Torone, and the
Bay of Therme. Herod. libro 7. Thucyd* lib. 4. Pelagonia, a Region of
Macedonia, toward Illyris. Liuy. lib. 45. Peloponnesus, that part of Greece
within the Isthmus of Corinth, now called Morea. Peneus, a River of Thessaly,
rising in the Mountain Pindus. near to Macedonie. Stra. l. 7. running by
Lariffa, and thence through Tempe into the Sea. Idem. lib. 9. It divides Ossa
from Olympus with a narrow valey, and receives into it the Rivers Apidanus,
Enipeus, and others. Herod. lib. 7. Also a River of Peloponnesus, between the
Promontory Chelonata, and the Town Cyllene. Strab. lib. 8. Peparethus, an
Island that lies before Magnesia. Strab. lib. 9. Pergamus, a City of the
Pierians of Thrace under the Mountain Pangaeum. Herod. lib. 7. Also an
Aeolique City, 120 furlongs from the Sea, by the side of the River Caicus.
Strab. lib. 13. Perinthus, a maritime City of Thrace, on the side of Propontis.
Perrhaebi, a People of Thessaly, that inhabit the Mountainous Country about
Olympus, from the City Atrax, as far as to Tempe, and the City Gyrton. Strab.
lib. 9. Out of Macedonie into Thessaly there lies a way through the Perrhaebi,
by the City Gonnus. Herod. lib. 7. Petalia, a Promontory of Euboea, against
which, lie the Islands called also Petaliae, opposite to the Promontory Suni^m
in Attica. Strab. lib. 10. Placium, a City of Thessaly, between Pharsalus and
Dion. Thucyd. lib. 4. Phagres. Phagres in Thucydides, Niphagres in Herodotus, a
City of the Pierians, between Pangaeum and the Sea, Thucyd. lib. 2. Herod.
lib. 7. Phaleron, a maritime Town of Attica, between Piraeus and Halimus.
Strab. lib. 8. It was heretofore the Haven of Athens. Paus. in Atticis.
distant from Athens 20 furlongs. Idem in Arcadicis. Phanae, a Haven in the I Will
Chios. Liuy, lib. 44. between the Promontory Posideum, and the shore called
Notium. Strab. lib. 14. Phanotis, a City of Phocis, upon the River Cephissus.
Strab. lib. 9. the same with Panopeus, distant 20 furlongs from Chaeronea in
Boeotia. Paus. in Phocicis. Pharae, a City in the Messenian Bay, next after
Cardamyle, Westward. Strab. lib. 8. above it, within the Land, are Thurium and
Anthea, fourscore furlongs distant from it. Paus. in Laconicis. Also a City of
Achaia, upon the River Peirus, distant from Patrae, 150 furlongs, from the Sea
70 furlongs, Paus. in Achaicis. Pharsalus, a City of Thessaly, by the River
Apidanus, Strab. lib. 8. Pharybus. Pharybus to Ptolomy, but in Liuy Baphyrus, a
River of Macedonia, falling into the Sea near to the City Dion. Liu. Pheia, a
City of Elis, between the mouth of the River Alpheius, and the Promontory
Icthys. Strab. lib. 8. Pheneum, a City of Arcadia, confining on Pellene and
Aegirae, Cities of Achaia, and on Stymphalus, Nonacris, and Cleitor, Cities of
Arcadia. Paus. in Arcadicis. Pherae, a City of Thessaly, near the Lake
Boebeis, and confining on Pelion, and the Territory of Magnesia. Strab. lib. 9.
Phile, a Town of Attica, confining on Tanagra of Boeotia. Strab. lib. 9.
Phlius, a City near the head of the River Asopus in Achaia, the Territory
whereof is enclosed as it were in a circle, with the Territories of Sicyon,
Cleonae, and Stymphalus. Strab. lib. 8. Phocaea, an Ionique City in Lydia, at
the mouth of the River Hermus. Herod. lib. 1. the bound of Jonia that way.
Strab. libro 14. Phocis, a Region of Greece, between the Locri Ozolae and
Boeotia. Aetolia, Locris, Phocis, Boeotia, lie parallel one to another. The
Phocaeans inhabit the East side of Pernassus, Strab. lib. 9. and extend by the
Seaside from Cirrha to Anticyra. Paus. in Phocicis. Phoenicus portus, a Haven
in Messenia, near the Promontory Acritas, between it and the City Methone.
Pausanias in Messenicis. Also a haven in the Peninsula Erythraea, under the
Hill Mimas. Thucyd. lib. 8. Phologandros, an Island to the West of the Island
Ios. Strab. lib. 10. Phrygij, a place in Attica, near Acharnae. Thucyd. lib.
2. Phygalca, a City of Arcadia, on the confines of Messenia, Polyb. lib. 4.
upon the River Lymax, which falls into the River Neda. Paus. in Arcadicis.
Phyrcus, a Castle not far from Lepreum in Elis. Thuc. lib. 5. Physca, a City
of Macedonia. Thucyd. lib. 2. Ptolomie places it about the River Chedorus, not
far from the River Axius. Physcus, a maritime City of Caria, between Loryma
and Caunus, opposite to Rhodes. Strab. lib. 14. Phytia a City on the West side
of the River Achelous, not far out of the way from Stratus, into Agraeis, as
may be gathered out of Thucydides, lib. 3. Pieria, a maritime City of
Macedonie, touching on one side the River Peneus. Strab. lib 9. and on the
other side the confluent of the Rivers Lydius and Aliacmon, where begins
Bottiaea, according to Herodotus, lib. 7. Pierius sin^s, a tract of Land
between the Mountain Pangaeum and the Sea, in which stands the City
Phagres. Thucydid. lib. 2. Pergamus and Niphagres, Towns of the Pierians,
under the Hill Pangaeum, on the West of the River Nestus. Herodot. lib. 7.
Pindus, a Mountain bounding Thessaly, on the West. Herodot. lib. 7. It has on
the South the Dolopians; on the North, Macedonie. Strab. lib. 9. Also a City of
the Region called Doris, one of the four for which it was called Tetrapolis,
and stands above Erin^us, Strab. lib. 9. Piraeus, a Town and Haven of
Attica, serving for the shipping of Athens, in the midst between Pegae and
Sunium. Strab. lib. 8. distant from Athens 40 furlongs. Thucyd. lib. 2. Also a
desert Haven in the Territory of Corinth, the utmost toward Epidaurus. Thucyd.
lib. 8. Piresia, a City of Thessaly, near the mouth of the River Peneus. Ex
interpret Orphei Argonaut. Pitane, an Aeolique City in the shore of Asia.
Herod. lib. 1. between Atarneus and the mouth of the River Caicus. Strab. lib.
13. Also a City of Mess^nia, on the confines of Elis. Strab. lib. 8. Pla^aea, a
City of Boeotia, seventy furlongs from Thebes. Between these Cities runs
the River Asopus. Thucyd. lib. 2. Paus. in Boeoticis. It stands between
Mount Cithaeron and Thebes, near the confines of Attica and Megaris. Strab.
lib. 9. Pleuron, a City of Aetolia, between Chalcis and Calydon, upon the River
Euenus, on the Seaside, West of Chalcis and the mouth of the River. Strab.
lib. 10. Polichna, a Town in the Continent of Asia, near to Clazomenae.
Thucyd. lib. 8. Polis, a village of the Locri Ozolae. Thucyd. lib. 3. Posideum,
a Temple dedicated to Neptune: and because those Temples were for the most part
in Promontories, and places open to the Sea, diverse Promontories have been so
called. There is Posideum a Promontory of Chius, opposite to the Promontory of
Argenum in Erythraea, and between the City Chius and the Haven Phanae. Strab.
lib. 14. Also a Promontory of the Milesians, the utmost of Jonia Southward.
Strab. lib. 14. Also a Promontory of Samos, which with Mycale in the Continent,
make the straight there of seven furlongs over. Strab. lib. 14. Also a
Promontory of Pellene, near the City of Menda. Thuc. lib. 5. Of two
Promontories that are in Pallene, (Canastraea being one) this is the les^er.
Liuy, lib. 44. Also a Temple in the Corinthian Isthmus, where were celebrated
the Isthmian Games. Potidea, a City in Pallene. Herodot. lib. 7. in the very
Isthmus of it. Thuc. lib. 1. Cassand^ea is a City in the straight that ioineth
Pellene to Macedonie, enclosed on one side with the Toronaean Bay; on the
other, with the Macedonian Sea. Liu. lib. 44. Cassandrea was formerly called
Potidaea. Strab. Epit. lib. 7. Potidania, a City of Aetolia, on the confines of
the Locri Ozolae. Thucyd. lib. 3. Prasiae, a maritime City of Laconia, in the
Bay of Argos. Strab. lib. 8. Pausan. in Laconicis. the last Laconian City
toward Argos, and distant from Cyphanta 200 furlongs. Paus. in Laconicis. Also
a Town in Attica, by the Sea side toward Euboea, between Thoricus and
Brauron. Strab. lib. 9. Preposinthus, an Island, one of the Cyclades. Vide
Cyclades. Priapus, a City lying upon Propontis, between Lampsacus and the
River Granicus, Strab. lib. 13. Priene, an Ionique City in Caria. Herodot. lib.
1. between the mouth of Maeander, and the Mountain Mycale. Strab. lib. 14.
Proconnesus, an Island in Propontis, over against the shore that is between
Parium and Priapus. Strab. lib. 13. Prone, a City of Cephallenia. Thucyd. lib.
2. Strab. lib. 10. Propontis, the Sea between Hellespont and Pontus Euxinus.
Strab. lib. 2. Proschion, a City of Aetolia, not far from Pleuron, but more
remote from the Sea. Strab. lib. 10. Prose, an Island over against Messenia, not
far from Pylus. Thucyd. lib. 4. Psyra, an Island, distant fifty furlongs from
Melaena a Promontory of Chius, Strab. lib. 44. Psyttal^a, an Island between the
Continent of Attica, and the I Will Salamis. Herod. lib. 7. Psophis, a City of
Arcadia, in the West parts thereof, toward Achaia and Elis. Polyb. lib. 4.
Pt^leum, a Town on the Sea side in Erythraea. Thucyd. lib. 8. Phthiotis, the
South part of Thessaly, reaching in length to Mount Pindus, and in breadth as
far as Pharsalus. Strab. lib. 9. Ptychia, a small Island, near to the City
Corcyra. Thucyd. lib. 4. Pydna, a Macedonian City in Pieria, Strab. Epit. lib.
7. opposite to Aenea. Liu. Pylus, a City of Messenia, in the Promontory
Coryphasium, distant from Methone 100 furlongs. Paus. in Messenicis. Thucyd.
lib. 4.5. Also a City of Elis, at the confluent of Peneus and Ladon. Paus.
Eliacorum secundo. Pydius, a River between Abydus and Dardanus. Thucyd. lib.
8. It seems to be the same which Strabo calls Rhodius. Vide Rhodius.
Pyrrhae, a Promontory of Asia the less, which with Gargara (another
Promontory) distant from it 120 furlongs, makes the Bay of Adramyttium,
properly so called. Strab. lib. 13. Al^o a City of Lesbos, on the Seaside
toward Greece, distant from Mitylene, which is on the other Sea, 80 furlongs.
Strab. lib. 13. Also a City of Jonia, in the Latmian Bay. Strab. lib. 14.
R
RHamnus, a maritime Town of Attica, between Marathon and O^opus, distant
from Marathon 60 furlongs. Pausan. in Atticis. Rheiti, certain Brooks of salt
water, supposed to come from the Sea between Attica and Euboea, under ground,
as from the hither Sea, and rising in Attica, to fall into the Saronian Bay, as
a lower Sea, between Piraeus and Eleusis. Pausan. in Atticis and Corinthiacis.
Rhenea, an Island, four furlongs distant from Delos. Strab. lib. 10. It lies
before Delos, as Sphacteria before Pylus. Pau^. in fine Messenicorum.
Polycrates Tyrant of Samos, tied it to Delos with a chain. Thucyd. lib. 3.
Rhium, a Promontory of Achaia, between Patrae and Aegium, which with
Antirrhium, makes the straight of the Corinthian (or Crissaean) Bay, of five
furlongs over. Strab. lib. 8. Rhium Achaicum, and Antirrhium, (which is also
called Rhium Molychricum) are the jaws of the Corinthian Bay. Liuy, lib. 28.
Rhodope, a Mountain of Thrace. * Rhodius, a River in the Hellespont, between
Abydus and Dardanus. Strab. lib. 13. Rhodus, an Island in the Carpathian Sea,
920 furlongs in compass, inhabited by the Doreans. Strab. lib. ^4. Rhoetium, a
City of Hellespont. Thucyd. lib. 8. on the Seaside, between Dardanum and
Sigeum. Strab. lib. 13. Rhypes, a City of Achaia, thirty furlongs from Aegium.
Paus. in Achaicis.
S
SAla, a City of the Samothracians, in the shore of Doriscus. Herod. lib. 7.
Salamis, an Island adjacent to Eleusis of Attica. Strab. lib. 8. Paus. in
Atticis. Same, a City in the Island Cephallenia, at the passage between it and
Ithaca. Strab. lib. 10. Samia, a City of Elis, a little above Samicum, between
which Cities runs the River Anigrus. Paus. Eliacorum primo. Samicum, a
maritime City of Elis, the first beyond the River Neda, at the mouth of the
River Anigrus. Paus. Eliacorum primo. Saminthus, a Town of Argia, in the
plains of Argos toward Nemea. Thucyd. l^b. 5. Samothracia, an Island in the
Aegean Sea, ouet against the mouth of the River Hebrus. Plin. lib. 4. Samus, an
Ionique Island, and City of the same name. The Island is six hundred furlongs
about, and Posideum a Promontory thereof, not above seven furlongs from the
Continent. The City stands on the South part of it, at the Seaside. Strab.
lib. 14. Sa^e, a City in Pallene. Herod. l^b. 7. Strab. Epit. lib. 7. Also a
City by the side of the Ditch made by Xerxes, in Mount (...), without the same,
and to the Bay of Sing^s. Herod. lib. 7. Thucyd. lib 4. Sardes, the chief City
of the Lydians, situate under the Hill T^molus. Strab lib. 13. Through it
runs the River Pactolus. Herod. lib. 5. Scamander, a River of Troas, rising
in Mount Jda. S^^neis, and Scamander meet in a Fenne, and then go out into
the Sea by one Channel, at Sigeum. Strab. lib. 13. Scandarium, a Promontory of
the Island Cos, near the City Cos, opposite to Termer^um, a Promontory of the
Continent. Strab. lib. 14. Scandea, a City in the Island Cythera. Paus. in
Laconicis. Scepsis, a City of Troas, in the highest part of Mount Ida. Strab.
lib. 13. Scione, a City in Pallene. Herod. lib. 7. between M^nde and Sane.
Strab. Epit. lib. 7. Sciritis, the territory of Scirus, a Laconian Town on the
confines of Parrhasia in Arcadia, near to Cypsela. Thucyd. lib. 1. Schoe^^s, a
Haven of the Territory of Corinth, at the narrowest part of the Isthmus,
between ^enchreae and Crommyon. Strab. lib. 8. Sco^us, a City of Chalcidea,
not far from ^^ynthus. Strab. lib. 9. Scomius, a Mountain in Thrace, out of
which rises the River Strymon. Thucyd. lib. 2. Scyathus, an Island in the
Aegean Sea, lying before the territory of Magnesia. Strab. lib. 9. Between
Scyathus and the Continent of Magnesia, there is a narrow straight. Herod l^b.
7. Scyllaeum, a Promontory of Peloponnesus, the bound of the Bay of Argos,
toward Corinth. Strab lib. 8. Scyrus, an Island in the Aegean Sea, lying over
against the Continent of Magnesia, Strab. lib. 9. between Euboea and Lesbos.
Plin. lib. 4. Sellasia, a Town in Laconia, between Lacedaemon and the Hill
Parnethus, which is the bound of Laconia and Argia. Paus. in. Laconi^is.
Selymbria, a City of Thrace, by the side of Prop^ntis. Sepias, a Promontory of
Magnesia. Herod. lib* 7. the beginning of the Pegasaean Bay. Ptolomie.
Seriphus, an Island, one of the Cyclades. Vide Cyclades. Serrium, a Promontory;
the utmost Westward, of the shore of Doriscus in Thrace Herod. lib. 7. S^rmyla,
a City of Chalcidea, upon the Toronaean Bay. The Navy of Xerxes being come
about the Promontory Ampelus, passed by these Cities, Torone, Galepsus,
Sermyla, etc. Herod. lib. 7. Sestus a City of the Thracian Chersonnesus, thirty
furlongs from Abydus, but nearer to Propontis then Abydus is. Strab. lib. 13.
Sicinus, an Island not far from Melos, on the West of the Island Ios. Strab.
lib. 10. S^cyon, a City of Peloponnesus, between Corinth and Achaia, distant a
hundred furlongs from Phlius. Paus. in Corinth. Sidussa, a Town by the
Seaside in Erythraea. Thucyd. lib. 8. Sigeum, a City and Promontory of Troas,
at the mouth of the River Scamander. Strab. lib. 13. Sigrium, the most
northern Promontory of the I Will Lesbos, between Eressus and Antissa. Strab.
lib. 13. Simoeis, a River of Troas, which running into a Fenne, joins there
with the River Scamander. Strab. lib. 13. Singus, and the Bay of Singus. A
Town, and Bay taking name from it, between Mount Athos and Torone. Herodotus.
lib. 7. Sintij, a people about Amphipolis. Liu. lib. 44. divided from Paeonia
by the Mountain Cercine. Thuc. lib. 2. Siphae, a City of Boeotia, upon the
Crissaean Bay. Paus. in Boe^ticis. Siphnus, an Island, one of the Cyclades. Vide
Cyclades. Smyrna, a maritime City of Asia, in the Bay called from it the Bay of
Smyrna, beyond Clazomenae toward Aeolis. Strab. l. 14. Solium, a maritime
Town of Acarnania. Thucyd. Scholiast. ad lib. 2. Sparta, the same with
Lacedaemon. Strab. lib. 10. Vide Lacedaemon. Spartolus, a City of the
Bottiaeans, on the border of the Chalcideans. Thuc. lib. 2. Spercheius, a River
that rises in Dol^pia, at a Mountain called Tymphestus, and falls into the
Melian Bay, ten furlongs within Thermopylae. Strab. lib. 9. Sphacteria, a
little Island lying before Pylus of Messenia. Thucyd. lib. 4. Pausan. in
Messenicis. Sporades, Islands upon the Coast of Caria, and of Creta. Strab. lib.
8. Stagirus, a City in the Bay of Strymon, between Argilus and Acanthus.
Herodot. lib. 7. Stratus, a City of the Amphilochians in Acarnania, upon the
River Achelous. Thucyd. lib. 3. two hundred furlongs from the Rivers mouth.
Strab. lib. 10. Strophades, Islands over against Messenia, about 400 furlongs
from the Continent. Strab. lib. 8. Stryma, a City on the Coast of Thrace, next
after Mesembria, toward Macedonia, Herod. lib. 7. Strymon, a River dividing
Thrace from Macedonie. It rises in the Hill Scomius, Thucyd. lib. 2. It
passes by Amphipolis, on both sides of it, and falls into the Sea at the
City Eion. Herodot. lib. 7. It is said to rise out of the Mountain Rhodope.
Str^b. Epit. lib. 7. But it is probable that the Hill Scomius is part of
Rhodop^. Stymphalus, a City of Arcadia, confining on the Territory of Phlius.
Paus. in Arcadicis Strab. lib. 8. Styra, a City in Euboea, near to the City
Carystus. Strab. lib. 10. Sun^um, a Promontory and Town in Attica, toward
Euboea, between the Saronean Bay and the Sea toward Euboea. Strab. lib. 10.
and distant from Euboea three hundred furlongs. Idem. lib. 9. Sybota, Islands
between Leucimne, a Promontory of Corcyra, and the Continent. Strab. lib. 7.
Thucyd. lib. 1. Also a Haven by the Promontory of Cheimerium, in the same
Continent. Thucyd. lib. 1. Syme, an Island over against the Continent of Caria,
between Loryma and Cnidus. Strab. lib. 14. Syros, an Island, one of the
Cyclades. Vide Cyclades.
T
TAenarus, a Promontory of Laconia, between the Laconian and the Messenian
Bays. Paus. in Laconicis. Also a maritime City of Laconia, in the Messenian
Bay, distant from Taenarus the Promontory forty furlongs. Paus. in Laconicis.
Tanagra, a City of Boeotia, confining on Attica, thirty furlongs from Aulis, a
Haven on the Euboean Sea. Strab. lib. 9. Taulantij, a People of Illyris, about
Dyrrachium (or Epidamnus) Strab. lib. 7. Thucyd. lib. 1. Taigetus, a Mountain
of Laconia, beginning at the Sea, above Thurides, and reaching up toward
Arcadia, as far as Amyclae and Lacedaemon. Strab. lib. 8. Tegea, a City of
Arcadia, between Argos and Lacedaemon. Thucyd. lib. 5. Herodot. lib. 6. Polyb.
lib. 4. the Territory thereof confineth with the Argiues at Hysiae, with
Laconia at the River Alpheus, and with the Territory of Thyrea at the Hill
Parnethus. Paus. in Arcad. These Cities of Peloponnesus, Argos, Tegea, and
Mantinea, though much celebrated in History, are placed with little
consideration of any History, in all the Maps that I have hitherto seen.
Teichiussa, a Castle of the Milesians in the Bay of Iassus. Thucyd. lib. 8.
Telos, an Island over against Triopium. Her. lib, 7. a narrow Island, in circuit
140 furlongs, adjacent to Cnidus. Strab. lib. 10. Temenium, a Town in Argia,
distant from Argos 26 furlongs. Strab. lib. ^. from Nauplia 50 furlongs. Paus.
in Corinth. Tempe, a pleasant Valley between the Mountains Ossa and Olympus:
through it runs the River Peneus. Herod. lib. 7. Strab. lib 9. Liu. lib. 44.
Tenedus, an Island in circuit about 80 furlongs, opposite to the Continent of
Troas, at Achaeum, between Sigeum and Larissa, and distant from it 40
furlongs. Strab. lib. 13. Tenos, an Island, one of the Cyclades. Vide Cy^lades.
Teos* a maritime City of Ionia, situate in the very Isthmus of the Erythraean
Chersonnesus, distant from Lebedus 120 furlongs. Strab. lib. 14. Termerium, a
Promontory of the Mindians, opposite to the I Will Cos. Strab. lib. 14. Teuglussa,
an Island not far from Halicarnassus. Thucyd. lib. 8. Thassus, an Island upon
the Coast of Thrace, half a days sail from Amphipolis. Thucyd. lib. 4.
Thebae, the principal City of Boeotia, situate near the Rivers Ismenus and
Asopus. Strab lib. 9. distant from Plataea 70. furlongs. Thucyd. lib. 2. Thera,
an Island on the Coast of Crete, distant from a Promontory thereof called Dion,
seventy furlongs, Strab. lib. 10. Therasia, a small Island near to Thera.
Strab. lib. 10. Therme and the Thermaean Bay. Therme is a City in the bottom
of the Thermaean Bay; and the Thermaean Bay is presently within Pallene. Herod.
lib. 7. Thermopylae, the straight entrance into Greece out of Thessaly, of
about half an Acres breadth, between the Mountain Oeta and the Melian Bay.
Called Thermopylae, from hot waters that rise there (which the Grecians call
Thermae,) and from Gates made there by the Phoceans in old time, (which they
call Pylae.) Herod. lib. 7. This straight is distant from Chalcis in Euboea
530. furlongs. Strab. lib. 9. Thespiae, a City of Boeotia, under Mount Helicon,
on the confines of the City Aliartus. Paus. in Boeoticis. near to the
Cri^saean Bay. Strab. lib. 9. Thesprotis, a maritime Region of Epirus,
bordering on the Ambraciotes and Leucadian^s. Herod. lib. 8. The Chaones and
Thesproti have the whole coast, from the Ceraunian Mountains to the Bay of
Ambracia. Strab. lib. 7. Thessalia, a Region of Greece, contained with^n the
Mountains Olympus, Ossa, Pelion, (which is to the Sea,) Othrys and Pyndus.
Herod. lib. 7. where he lays out the bounds of Thessaly exactly. Thoricus, a
maritime Town of Attica, toward the Euboean Sea, next beyond the Promontory
Sunium. Strab. l. 9. Vide Helena. Thracia, a Kingdom bordering on Macedonie,
at the River Strymon, described at large by Thucyd. lib. 2. Thrio, and Thriasij
campi. Thria or Thrio, a Town of Attica, between Athens and Eleusis, over
against Salamis. The Fields belonging to it, are called Thriasij Campi, and the
shore Thriasium litus. Strab. 9. Herod. lib. 8. Thronium, a City of Locris,
upon the Melian Bay, between the Promontory Cnemides, and Thermopylae. Strab.
lib. 9. Thurides, a City in the Messenian Bay, the first toward the East,
distant from the Promontory Taenarus 70 furlongs. Paus. in Laconicis. Thurium,
a City of Laconia, 80 furlongs above Pharae. Paus. in Mess^nicis. Thyamis, a
River of Epirus, dividing Thesprotis from Cestrine. Thucyd. lib. 1. Thyamus, a
Hill on the consines of Agraeis and Amphilochia, not far from Argos
Amphilochicum. Thucyd. lib. 3. Thyrea, a maritime City, in the Bay of Argos, in
the Territory called Cynuria, It confineth on Argia and Laconia. Thucyd. lib.
5. and on the Territory of Tegea. Paus. in Arcadicis, Thyssus, a City in Mount
Athos. Thuc. lib. 4. Herod. lib. 7. Tichium, a City of Aetolia, in the part
inhabited by the Apodoti. Thuy. lib. 8. Tithorea, a City in the top of
Pernassus, called also Neon, 80 furlongs from Delphi. Paus. in Phocicis.
Tmolus, a Mountain between the River Caystrus and the City of Sardes. Herod.
lib. 5. Sardes stands at the foot of Tmolus, and out of this Hill rises the
River Pactolus. Strab. lib. 13. Tolophon, a City of the Locri Ozolae. Thuc.
lib. 3. Tomeus, a Hill near to Pylus in Messenia. Thucyd. lib. 4. Torone, and
the Bay of Torone. -- Torone is a Chalcidique City, between the Singitique and
Toronaean Bays, near the Promontory Ampelus. Herod. lib. 7. The place of the
Toronaean Bay is understood out of Liuy, lib. 44. where he says, that
Cassandrea (or Potidaea) stands between the Macedonian Sea, and the Bay of
Torone. Trag^a, an Island near to Samos. Thuc. l. 1. Tragaeae, Islands about
Miletus. Strab l^b. 14. Triopium, a Promontory of the Cnidians. Thuc. lib. 8.
Vide ^nidus. Tripodiscus, a Village of Megaris. Thucyd. lib. 4. Tritaea, a City
of Achaia, remote from the Sea, distant from Pharae 120 furlongs. Paus. in
Achaicis. Also a City of the Locri Ozolae. Thucyd. lib, 3. Troas, a Territory
of Asia the less, upon the side of the Aegaean S^a, between Aeolis and
Hellespont. Strab. lib. 13. Troezen, a maritime City of Argia, the utmost in
the Bay of Hermione. Strab. lib. 8. confining on Epidauria. Pausan. in
Corinthiacis. Troia. Vide Ilium. Trogilium, a Promontory, and foot of the
Mountain Mycale, over against the I Will Samos, which with Posi^eum a Promontory
of that I Will, makes the straight there of seven furlongs over. Strab. lib. 14.
Z
ZAcynthus, an Island over against Peloponnesus. Strab. lib. 10. Now called
Zan^e. Zarex, a maritime City of Laconia, distant on one side from Epidaurus
Limera 100 furlongs, and from Cyphanta on the other side, sixteen Furlongs.
Paus. in Laconicis. Zeleia, a City under Mount Ida* toward Propontis, distant
from Cyzicus 190. furlongs, and from the Sea 80. furlongs. Strab. lib. 13.
Zona, a City on the shore of Doriscus in Thrace. Herod. lib. 7.
THE FIRST BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF THVCYDIDES.
The principal Contents.
The estate of Greece, derived from the remotest known Antiquity thereof, to
the beginning of the Peloponnesian War. The Occasion and Pretexts of this
War, arising from the Controversies of the Athenians with the Corinthians,
concerning Corcyra and Potidaea. The Lacedaemonians, instigated by the
Confederates, undertake the War; not so much at their instigation, as of
envy to the greatness of the Athenian Dominion. The degrees by which that
Dominion was acquired. The War generally decreed by the Confederates at
Sparta. The Demands of the Lacedaemonians. The obstinacy of the Athenians; and
their Answer, by the advice of Pericles.

THVCYDIDES an Athenian, wrote the War of the Peloponnesians and the
Athenians, (...).
as they warred against each other; beginning to write, as soon as the War
was on foot, with expectation it should prove a great one, and most worthy the
relation, of all that had been before it: Coniecturing so much, both from
this, that they flourished on both sides in all manner of provision: and also
because he saw the Greece, siding with the one or the other Faction; some then
presently, and some intending so to do. For this was certainly the greatest
Commotion that ever happened amongst the Grecians, reaching also to part of the
The common appellation (...) by the Grecians, to ^ll Nations besides (...).

To make it appear that this War was greater then any before it, the Author
shows the imb^c^llity of former times; describing 3. Periods; 1. From the
^eginning of the Grecian memory, to the War of Troy. 2. The War it self 3.
The time from thence, to the present War which he writes.

The state of Greece before the Trojan War.


Barbarians, and, as a man may say, to most Nations. For the Actions that
preceded this, and those again that are yet more ancient, though the truth of
them, through length of time, cannot by any means clearly be discovered; yet
for any Argument that (looking into times far past) I have yet light on to
persuade me, I do

For it is evident, that that which now is called Greece.
Hellas, was not of old constantly inhabited; but that, at first, there were
often remouals, every one easily leaving the place of his abode, to the
violence always of some greater number. For whiles Traffic was not, nor
mutual intercourse, but with fear, neither by Sea nor Land; and every man so
husbanded the ground, as but barely to live upon it, without any (...).
stock of (...) Arist^t. Whatsoever is estimated by money.
Riches; and planted Thessalia, and Boeotia, and the greatest part of
Peloponnesus, Arcadia) and of the rest of Greece, whatsoever was most fertile.
For, the goodness of the Land increasing the power of some particular men,
both caused Seditions, (whereby they were ruined at home) and withal, made
them more obnoxious to the insidiation of strangers. From hence it is, that The
territory of the Athenian City, so called, from Atthis, the Daughter of Cranaus.
Attica, from great antiquity, for the sterility of the Soil, free from
Seditions, has been inhabited ever by the same The Athenians had an opinion
of themselves, that they were not descended from other Nations, but that their
Ancestors were ever the Inhabitants of Attica: wherefore they also styled
themselves (...),.i. men of the same Land.
People. And it is none of the least evidences of what I have said, That
Greece, by reason of sundry transplantations, has not in other parts Athens;
where receiving the Freedom of the City, they long since so increased the
same in number of People, as Attica, being incapable of them it self, they
sent out Colonies into Ionia.

And to me, the imbecility of ancient times, is not a little demonstrated also
by this [that follows.] For before the Trojan War, nothing appears to
have been done by Greece in Common; nor indeed was it, as I think, called
Hellas; nor before the time of Hellen, the son of Deucalion, was there any
such name at all. But Pelasgicum (which was the farthest extended) and the
other parts, by Regions, received their names from their own Inhabitants. The
original of the name Hellas.
But Hellen and his Sons being strong in Phthiotis, and called in, for their
aid, into other Cities; these Cities, because of their conversing with them,
began more particularly to be called Hellenes: and yet could not that name of a
long time after prevail upon them all. This is coniectured principally out of
Homer; for, though Trojan War, yet he gives them not any where that The name
of Hellenes not given to all the Grecians in the time that Homer wrote his
Poemes.
name in general; nor indeed to any, but those, that with Achilles came out of
Phthiotis, and were the first so called. But in his Poemes, he mentionenh
Danaans, Argiues, and Achaeans; nor does he likewise use the word Barbarians;
because the Grecians, as it seems unto me, were not yet distinguished by one
common name of Hellenes, oppositely answerable unto them. The Grecians then,
neither as they had that Name in particular by mutual intercourse, nor after,
universally so termed, The Trojan War was the first Enterprise where the
Grecians combined their forces.
did ever before Trojan War, for want of strength and correspondence, enter
into any Action, with their Forces joined. And to that Expedition they came
together, by the means of Navigation, which the most part of Greece had now
received.

For Minos was the most ancient of all, Minos, King of Creta, the first that
had a Navy.
that by report we know to have built a Navy: and he made himself Master of
the now Before that time, it was called the Carian Sea.
Grecian Sea; and both commanded the Isles called Cyclades, and also was the
first that sent Colonies into most of the same, expelling thence the Carians,
for the better coming in (as is likely) of his own Revenue.

A Digression, touching the Piracie and Robberies of old time; with other Notes
of Saulvagenesse.
For the Grecians in old time, and such Barbarians as, in the Continent, lived
near unto the Sea, or else inhabited the Islands, after once they began to
cross over one to another in Ships, became Thieves, and went abroad under the
conduct of their most puissant men, both to enrich themselves, and to fetch in
maintenance for the weak: and falling upon Towns unfortified, and scatteringly
inhabited, rifled them, and made this the best means of their living; Robbing
had in honor.
Being a matter at that time no where in Greece uses that old custom, as the
Locrians called Ozolae, In distinction to the other Locrians, called Opuntij.
the Acarnanians, and those of the Continent in that quarter, unto this day.
Moreover, the fashion of wearing Iron, remains yet with the people of that
Continent, from their old Trade of Theeuing.

Continual wearing of Armor in fashion.
For once they were wont throughout all Greece, to go armed, because their
Houses were unfenced, and travailing was unsafe, and accustomed themselves,
like the Barbarians, to the ordinary wearing of their Armor. And the Nations
of Greece that live so yet, do testify, that the same manner of life was
anciently universal to all the rest. The Athenians grew first civil.
the Athenians were the first that laid by their Armor, and growing civil,
passed into a more tender kind of life. And such of the Rich as were any thing
stepped into years, laid away, upon the same delicacie, not long after, the
fashion of wearing linen Coats, and The Athenians, holding themselves to be
sprung from the ground they lived on, wore the Grasshopper for a kind of
Cognizance, because that Beast is thought to be generated of the Earth.
golden Grasshoppers, which they were wont to bind up in the locks of their
hair: from whence also the same Fashion, by reason of their affinity, remained
a long time in use amongst the ancient Ionians. But the moderate kind of
Garment, and conformable to the wearing of these Lacedaemonians; amongst
Exercises of diverse kinds instituted in honor of Jupiter, at Olympia in
Peloponnesus, to which resorted such out of Greece, as contended for Prizes.
Olympicke Games, stripped themselves This was perhaps the cause, why it was a
capital crime, for Women to be Spectators of the Olympicke exercises.
naked, and anointed their bodies with ointment: whereas in ancient times, the
Champions did also in the Olympicke Games use Breeches; nor is it many years
since this custom ceased. Also there are to this day amongst the Barbarians,
especially those of Asia, Prizes propounded of fighting with Fists, and of
Wrestling, and Greeks used the same form of life, that is now in force
amongst the Barbarians of the present Age.

As for Cities, such as are of late Foundation, The Cities of Greece, how
seated, and for what causes.
and since the increase of Navigation, in as much as they have had since, more
plenty of riches, have been walled about, and built upon the Shore; and have
taken up Isthmi, [that is to say, necks of Land between Sea and Sea] both for
Merchandise,

But these Robberies were the exercise especially of the Ilanders; namely, the
Carians, and the Phoenicians: The Carians and Phoenissians, were those that
committed the most robberies.
for by The Cyclades.
Islands inhabited. A testimony whereof, is this: The Athenians, when in this
present Vide Lib. 4. in the beginning.
War they hallowed the I Will of Delos, and had dug up the Sepulchers of the
Dead, found that more then half of them were Carians, The Carians having
invented the Crest of the Helmet, and the handle of the Target, and also the
drawing of Images on their Targets, had therefore a Helmet and a Buckler buried
with them, and had their heads laid toward the West.
known so to be, both by the armor buried with them, and also by their
manner of burial at this day. And when Minos his Navy was once afloat,
Nauigators had the Sea more free: For he expelled the Malefactors out of the
Islands, and in the most of them, planted Colonies of his own. By which means,
of whom, some grown now rich, compassed their Troy.

The Action of Troy.
And to me it seems, that The Son of Atreus, the Son of Pelops.
Agamemnon got together that Fleet, not so much for that he had with him the
The opinion was, that Tyndareus, the Father of Helena, took an Oath of all his
Daughters Suitors, that if violence were done to him that obtained her, all the
rest should help to revenge it. And that Menelaus having married her, and
Paris the Son of Priam, King of Troy taken her away, Agamemnon, in the
behalf of his Brother Menelaus, drew them by this Oath to the Siege of Ilium.

Peloponnesus, so called from Pelops.

The increase of the power of the Pelopians.


Suitors of Helena, bound thereto by oath to Tyndareus, as for this, that he
exceeded the rest in power. For they that by tradition of their Ancestors,
know the most certainety Peloponnesians, say, That first, Pelops, by the
abundance of wealth which he brought with him out of Asia, to men in want,
obtained such power amongst them, as, though he were a Stranger, yet the
Country was called after his name. And that this power was also increased by
his Posterity: For, Euristheus being slain in Attica, by the A kindred and
race of men, whereof was Hercules. This Family was persecuted by Euristheus,
who was of the House of Perseus, and driven into Attica, thither he following
them, was slain by the Athenians.
Heracleides, Atreus, that was his Astidamia, the Mother of Euristheus, was
Atreus his Sister.
Uncle by the Mother, (and was then abiding with him as an exiled person, for
fear of his Father, for the Atreus and Thyestes, Sons of Pelops, at the
impulsion of their Mother, slew this Crysippus, who was their half Brother,
viz. by the Father; and for this fact, Atreus fled to Euristheus.

Atreus King of Mycenae, after the death of Pelops.


death of Chrysippus) and to whom Euristheus, when he undertook Mycenae, and
the government thereof, for that he was his Kinsman; when as Euristheus came
not back, (the Mycenians being willing to it, for fear of the Heracleides,
and because he was an able man, and made much of the Common people) obtained
the Kingdom of Mycenae, and of whatsoever else was under Euristheus, for
himself: And the power of the The House of Pelops.
Pelopeides became greater then that of the The House of Perseus.
Perseides. To which greatness The Son of Atreus, heir to the power of both
Houses, both of the Pelopeides, and of the Perseides.
Agamemnon succeeding, and also far excelling the rest in Shipping, took
that War in hand, as I conceive Arcadians. And this is likewise declared by
Homer (if any think his testimony sufficient) who, at the delivery of the
Scepter unto him, calls him, Of many Isles, and of all Argos King. Now he
could not, living in the Continent, have been Lord of the Islands, other then
such as were adjacent, which cannot be many, unless he had also had a Navy.
And by this Expedition, we are to estimate

Mycenae was but a small City, Mycenae, though no great City, yet was of
great power.
or if any other of that Age seem but of light regard, let not any man for
that cause, on so weak an Argument, think that Fleet to have been less then
the Poets have said, and Fame reported it to be. For, if the City of
Lacedaemon were now desolate, and nothing of it left, but the Temples, and
floores of the buildings, I think it would breed much unbelief in posterity
long hence, of their power, in comparison of the Fame. For although of 1.
Laconia. 2. Arcaedia. 3. Argolica. 4. Messenia. 5. Elis. Morea.
five parts of Peloponnesus, it possess Laconia, Messenia.
two, and has the leading of Greece, The City of Sparta less, and the City of
Athens, greater, then for the proportion of their power.
their power would seem inferior to the report. Again, the same things
happening to Athens, one would conjecture by the sight of their City, that
their power were double to what it is. We ought not therefore to be
incredulous, [concerning the Forces that went to Troy,] nor have in regard so
much the external show of a City, as the power: but we are Homer, who being a
Poet, was like to set it forth to the utmost. And yet even thus it comes
short. For he makes it to consist of 1200. Vessels: those that were of
Boeotians, carrying 120. men apiece, A Survey of the Fleet sent to Troy.
and those which came with Philoctetes, 50. Setting forth, as I suppose, both
the greatest sort, and the least, and therefore of the bigness of any of the
rest, he makes in his Catalogue, no Philoctetes, served both as Mariners and
Soldiers: for he writes, that they who were at the Oar, were all of them
Archers. And for such as wrought not, it is not likely that many went along,
except As Achyles, Ulysses, Ajax, Diomedes, Patroclus, and the like.
Kings, and such as were in chief authority, especially being to pass the Sea
with Munition of War, The whole number of men, estimating the Ships at a
medium to carry 85. men apiece, which is the mean between 120. and 50, come
to 102000. men, carried in these 1200. Ships. Yet the Author makes it a light
matter in respect of the present War.
and in Bottomes without Deckes, built after the old and Peiraticall fashion.
So then, if by the greatest and least, one estimate the mean of their
Shipping, it will appear, that the whole number Greece, were not very many.
And the cause hereof was not so much want of men, as of wealth. For, for want
of victual, they Chersonesus, and part to fetch in Booties: whereby divided,
the Trojans the more easily made that ten years resistance; as being ever a
Match The poverty of the G^^ekes was the cause why the Trojans could so long
hold out.
but also this, (which is of greater name then any before it) appears to be
in fact beneath the Fame, and report, which, by means of the Poets, now goes
of it.

The state of Greece, after the Trojan War.
For also after the Trojan War, the Grecians continued still their shiftings,
and transplantations; insomuch as never resting, they improued not their power.
For the late return of the Greeks from Ilium, caused not a little innovation;
and in most of the Cities there arose seditions; and those which were driven
out, built Cities for themselves Boeotians, in the sixtieth year after the
taking of Troy, expelled Arne by the Thessalians, seated themselves in that
Country, which now Boeotia, was then called Cadmeis. (But there was in the
same, Boeotia, more anciently Cadmeis.
a certain portion of that Nation before, of whom also were they, that went to
the Warfare of Troy.) And in the eightieth year, the Doreans, together with
the Heracleides, seized on Peloponnesus. And with much ado, after long time,
Greece had constant rest; and shifting their seats no longer, at length sent
Colonies abroad. The Jonians were the Colonies of the Athenians.
Athenians planted Ionia, and most of the Peloponnesians, most of Italy, and
Sicily, and also certain parts of the rest of Greece. But these Colonies were
all planted after the Trojan War.

But when the power of Greece was now improoued, and the desire of money
withal, their revenues being enlarged, in most of the Cities there were
erected Tyrannies: (for before that time, The difference (...) Tyranny, and
(...) Auth^rity.
Kingdoms with honors limited, were hereditary.) And the Grecians built
Nauies, and became more seriously addicted to the affairs of the Sea. The
Corinthians are said to have been the At Corinth were made (...) first (...),
or (...)* o^ th^^e ti^^ of Oar, one above another.
into the nearest to that which is now in use; and at Corinth are reported to
have been made the first Galleys of all Greece. Now it is well known, that
Aminocles the Ship-wright of Corinth, built 4. Ships at Samos. And from the
time that Aminocles went to Samos, until the end of this present War, are at
the most but 300. years. And the most ancient nauall Battle that we know of,
was fought between the By this it (...) Thucydides (...) whole (...).
Corinthians and the Corcyraeans, and from that Battle to the same time, are
but 260. years. B^ Periander, (...) of Corinth, (...) of his Son (...)*
Herod. in Th^lia.
For Corinth seated on an Isthmus, had been always a place of Traffic;
because the Grecians of old, from within and without Peloponnesus, trading by
Land more then by Sea, had no other intercourse one to another, but through the
Corinthians Territory. The means of the wealth of Corinth.
And was also wealthy in money, as appears by the Poets, who have surnamed
this Town the Rich. And after the Grecians had co^merce also by Sea, Corinth
surnamed the Rich.
then likewise having furnished themselves with a Navy, they scowred the Sea of
Pirates, and affording Traffic both by Sea and Land, mightily increased their
City in revenue of money. After Ionians in the times of Cyrus, The Ionians had
a Navy in Cyrus his time.
first King of the Persians, and of his Son Cambyses, got together a great
Navy, and making war on Cyrus, obtained for a time the dominion of that part
of the Sea that lies on their own Coast. Also Polycrates, who in the time of
Cambyses, Tyrannized in Samos, had a strong Navy, Polycrates Tyrant of Samos,
had a Navy in the time of Cambyses.
wherewith he subdued diverse of the Islands; and amongst the rest, having won
Rhenea, he consecrated the same to Apollo of Delos. The The Phocaeans in the
time of Ta^quinius, came into the Mouth of Tyber, entered into amity with the
Romans, and thence went and built Marseilles amongst the Savage Nations, of the
Ligurians, and Gauls. Justin l. 42.
Phocaeans likewise, when they were building the City of Marseilles, overcame
the Carthagineans in a sight

These were the greatest Nauies extant, and yet even these, though many Ages
after the time of Troy, consisted Medes and Persians used here promiscuously
the Medan Monarchy, being translated to the Persians.
Medan War, and death of Darius, successor of Cambyses in the Kingdom of
Persia, that the Tyrants of Sicily, and the Corcyraeans had of Galleys any
number. For these Of the Corinthians, Ionians, and Phoceans.
last, were the only Nauies worth speaking of, in all Greece, before the
invasion of the Medes. And the People of Aegina, Egina.
and the Athenians, had but small ones, and the most of them consisting but of
fifty Oars a piece; and that so lately, as but from the time, that the
Athenians making Aegina, and withal expecting the coming of the Barbarian,
The shipping of Greece very mean before this War.
at the persuasion of Themistocles, built those Ships, which they used in that
War; and these also, not all had Deckes.

Such were then the Nauies of the Greeks, both ancient and modern.
Nevertheless, such as applied themselves to navall business, gained by them
no small power, both in revenue of money, and in dominion over other people.
For with their Nauies (especially those men that had not sufficient Land, where
they inhabited, to maintain themselves) Islands. But as for War by Land, such
as any State might acquire power by, there was none at all. And such as were,
were only between Borderer and Borderer. The causes why the Grecians never
joined their forces in any great action.
For the Grecians had never yet gone out with any Army to conquer any Nation
far from home; because the lesser Cities, neither brought in their Forces to
the great ones, as Subjects, nor concurred as Equals, in any common Enterprise;
but such as were neighbors, warred against each other, hand to hand. For the
War of old, between the Chalcideans and the Eretrians, Greece was most
divided, and in league with either party.

The I^nians kept down by the Persian.
As others by other means were kept back from growing great, so also the
Ionians by this, That the Persian Affairs prospering, Cyrus and the Persian
Kingdom, after the defeat of Croesus, made war upon all that lies from the
River Halys to the Sea side, and so subdued all the Cities which they
possessed in the Continent, and Darius afterward, when he had overcome the
Phoenissian Fleet, did the like

Grecian Cities, who forecasted only for themselves, how, with as much safety
as was possible, to look to their own persons, and their own Families, they
resided for the most part in the Cities, and did no Action worthy of memory,
unless it were against their neighbors: for, as for the Tyrants of Sicily,
they were already arrived at greater power. Thus was Greece for a long time
hindered, that neither jointly it could do any thing remarkable, nor the Cities
singly be adventrous.

Pisistratus and h^s s^nnes
Tyrants both of Athens, and of the rest of Greece, where Tyrannies were, were
the most, and last of them (excepting those of Sicily, The Lacedaemonians put
down the Tyrants through all Gr^ece.
put down by the Lacedaemonians, (for Lacedaemon, after it was built by the
Doreans that inhabited the same, though it has bin longer troubled with
seditions, then any other City we know, yet has it had for the longest time,
good Laws, and bin also always free from Tyrants. For it is unto the end of
this War, 400. years, and somewhat more, that the Lacedaemonians have used
one and the same government: and thereby being Greece, it was not long before
the Battle was fought by the Medes, against the Athenians, in the Fields of
Marathon. And in the tenth year again after that, came the Xerxes.
Barbarian, with the A Fleet of 1200. Galleys, and 2000. Hulks of the round
manner of building. Cer^. Nepos in vita Themistoclis.
great Fleet into Greece, to subdue it. And Greece being now in great danger,
the leading of the Grecians that leagued in that War, was given to the
Lacedaemonians, as to the most potent State. And the Athenians, who had
purposed so much before, and Medes, went The Athenians being admonished by the
Oracle, for their safety against the Medes, to put themselves within Walls of
wood: Themistocles interpreting the Oracle, they went into their Galleys.

All Greece divided into two Leagues, the Lacedaemonians and their League, and
the Athenians and their League.


a ship-boord, and became Seamen. When they had jointly beaten back the
Barbarian, then did the Grecians, both such as were revolted from the King, and
such as had in common made War upon him, not long after, devide themselves
into Leagues, one part with the Athenians* and the other with the
Lacedaemonians; these two Cities appearing to be the mightiest; for this had
the power by Land, and the other by Sea. But this Confederation lasted but a
while: for afterward, Lacedaemonians and the Athenians, being at This variance
began upon this, That Cimo^ having been sent for to ayd^ the Lacedaemonians
against the Helots, was sent back with his Athenians, out of distrust the
Lacedaemonians had of their forward spirit: which the Athenians to^ke for a
disgrace.
variance, warred each on other, together with their several Confederates. And
the rest of Greece, where any discord Medes to this present War, being
continually [exercised*] sometimes in peace, sometimes in War, either one
against the other, or against revolted Confederates, they arrived at this
War, both well furnished with Military provisions, and also expert, because
their practice was with danger.

The manner how the Lacedaemonians dealt with their Confederates.
The Lacedaemonians governed not their Confederates so, as to make them
Tributaries, but only drew them by fair means to embrace the The government
of the Few, that is to say, of the Nobility. The manner how the Athenians
handled their Confederates.
Oligarchy, convenient to their Athenians, having with time, taken into their
hands the Galleys of all those that stood out, (except the Chians and Lesbians)
Hence it is, that through all this History, Subjects and Confederates are taken
for the same thing, especially with the Athenians.
reigned over them, and ordained every of them to pay a certain tribute of
money. By which means, their Of the People of Athens it self, excluding their
Confederates.
own particular provision was greater in the beginning of this War, then
when in their flourishing time, the League between them and the rest of Greece
remaining whole, it was at the most.

Such then I find to have been the state of things past, hard to be believed,
though one produce proof for every For Men receive the report of things,
though of their own Country, if done before their own time, all alike, from
one as from another, without examination.

Digression, to show how negligently men receive the fame of things past, by
the example of their error touching the Story of Hippias the son of
Pisistratus, which it seems he willingly mentions, both here and hereafter,
on light occasion.
For the vulgar sort of Athenians think, that Hipparchus was the Tyrant, and
slain by Harmodius and Aristogeiton; and know not that Hippias had the
government, as being the eldest son of Pisistratus, and that Hipparchus and
Thessalus were his brethren; and that Harmodius and Aristogeiton, suspecting
that some of their Accomplices had that day, and at that instant, discovered unto
Hippias somewhat of their Hippias, as a man forewarned, and desirous to effect
somewhat, though with danger, before they should be apprehended, lighting on
Hipparchus, slew him, near the Temple called Leocorium, whilst he was setting
forth the Panathenaica, were Solemnities instituted by Theseus, in memory of
that he had drawn together all the Athenians that lived dispersed in Attica,
into the City of Athens Paus. in Arcad.
Panathenaicall Show. And likewise diverse other things now extant, and which
Time has not yet involued in oblivion, have been conceived amiss by other
Grecians; as that the Kings of Lacedaemon, in giving their suffrages, had not
Lucan seems to retain the same error, in Harmodias.
single, but double Votes. And that A Tribe of the Lacedaemonians.
Pitanate was a band of Soldiers, so called So impatient of

Now he, that by the Arguments here adduced, shall frame a Judgment of the
things past, and not believe rather, that they were such as the Poets have
sung, or Prose-writers have composed, more delightfully to the ear, then
conformably to the truth, as being things not to be disprooued, and by length
of time, turned for the most part into the nature of Fables without credit; but
shall think them here searched out, by the most evident signs

What particular persons have spoken, The diligence of the Author in the
inquiry of the truth of what he wrote: both touching the Orations, and the
Actions.
when they were about to enter into the War, or when they were in it, were
hard for me to remember exactly, whether they To the analogy and fitness of
what was to be said: so that though he used not their words, yet he used the
arguments that best might serve to the purpose, which at any time was in hand*
sum of the truth, of all that has been uttered, to speak most agreeably
to the matter still in hand, so have I made it spoken here. But of the Acts
themselves done in the War, I thought not fit to write all that I heard from
all Authors, nor such as I my self did but think to be true; but only those
whereat I was my self present; and those of which with all diligence I had
made particular inquiry. And

To hear this History rehearsed, The use of this History.
for that there be inserted in it no Fables, shall be perhaps not
delightful: But he that desires to look into the truth of things done, and
which (according to the condition of humanity) may be done again, or at
least, their like, he shall find enough herein, to make him think it
profitable: And it (...).
EVERLASTING POSSESSION, then to be Both Poet, and Historiographers of old,
recited their Histories to captate glory. This emulation of glory in their
writings, he calls (...).
rehearsed for a Prize.

The greatest Action before this, was that against the ^.
Medes, and yet that, by (...) Sea, viz. o^e (...), and (...). And 2. (...)
Thermopyle, (...).
two Battles by Sea, and as many by Land, was soon decided. But, as for this
War, it both lasted long, and the harm it did to Greece* was such, as the
like, in the like space, had never been seen before. For neither had there
ever bin so many Cities expugned, and made desolate, what by the Barbarians,
and what by the Greeks warring on one another, (and some Cities there were,
that when they were taken, changed their inhabitants;) nor so much banishing
and slaughter, some by the War, some by sedition, as was in this. And those
things which concerning Earthquakes, Eclipses, Famine, Pestilence, concomitants
of this War.
were now made credible: As Earthquakes, general to the greatest part of the
World, and most violent withal; Eclipses of the Sun, oftener then is reported
of any former time; Great droughts in some places, and thereby Famine; and that
which did none of the least hurt, but destroyed also its part, the Plague. All
these Evils entered together with this War, which began from the time that the
Athenians and Peloponnesians brake the League, which immediately after the
Conquest of By the Athenians.
Euboea, Negroponte.
had been concluded between them for thirty Grecians could arise. And the
truest Quarrel, though least in speech, I conceive to be the growth of the
Athenian power; which putting the Lacedaemonians into fear, The causes of the
War. Fear necessitates the War in the Lacedaemonians.
necessitated the War. But the Causes of the breach of the League, publicly
voyced, were these.

EPIDAMNVS is a City situate on the right hand to such as enter into the
Ionian Gulf; The first pretext.

Dyrrhachium. Dur^zzo.

Now the Gulf of Venice, called so from (...) ^n Jllyrian.

(...), now Slauonia, and Dalmatia.


bordering upon it, are the Taulantij, Barbarians, a people of Illyris. This
was planted by the Jnhabitants of Corcyra, now Corfu.
Corcyraeans, but Captain of the Colony, was one Phalius, the son of
Heratoclidas a Corinthian, of the lineage of Hercules, and according to an
ancient Custom, called to this charge out of the Corcyra was a Colony of
Corinth, and Epidamnus of Corcyra.
Metropolitan City; besides that the Colony it self, consisted in part, of
Corinthians, and others of the Dorique Nation. In Epidamnus, became great and
Barbarians, brought low, and deprived of the greatest part of their power. But
that which was the last accident before this War, was, that the Nobility,
forced by the Commons to fly the City, went and joined with the Barbarians,
and both by Land and Sea, robbed those that remained within. The Epidamnians
that were in the Town, oppressed in this manner, sent their Ambassadors to
Corf^.
Corcyra, as being their Mother Corcyraeans not to see them perish, but to
reconcile unto them, those whom they had driven forth, and to put an end to the
Barbarian War. And this they entreated in the form of Either the
Epidamnians* had offended the Corcyraeans, or the manner was (...) those (...),
to t^ke Sanctuary, not only for crimes but for ob^aining aid in extremities,
tacitly disclaiming all other help, save that of the Gods, and those to whom
they trade supplication.

The Epidanians neglected by their Mother City* Corcyra, procure the
protection of the Corinthians.


Suppliants, sitting down in the Temple of Juno. But the Corcyraeans, not
admitting their ^upplication, sent them away again, without effect. The
Epidamnians now despairing of relief from the Corcyraeans, and at a stand how
to proceed in their present affairs, sending to Delphi, enquired at the
Oracle, whether it were not best to deliver up their City into the
Corinthians, as of their Founders, and make trial what aid they should
obtain from thence. And when the Oracle had answered, That they should deliver
it, and take the Corinthians for their Leaders, they went to Corinth, and
according to the advice of the Oracle, gave their City to them, and declared
how the first Founder of it was a Corinthian, and what answer the Oracle had
given them, entreating their help, and that they would not stand by, beholding
their destruction. And the Corinthians undertook their defense, not only for
the equity of Corcyraeans Colonie) but also for hatred of the Corcyraeans, who
being their Colony, yet contemned them, and allowed them not their due honor
in public meetings, nor in the distribution of the Sacrifice, began at a
Corinthian, as was the custom of other Colonies; but being equal to the
richest Graecians of their time, for store of money, and strongly furnished
with ammunition of War, had them in contempt. Also they sticked not sometimes
to boast how much they excelled in shipping; and Corcyra had been once
inhabited by the By Homer this I Will is called Phaeacia.
Phaeace^, who flourished in glory of nauall affairs; which was al^so the
cause, why they the rather provided themselves of The Corinthians send
inhabitants to Epidamnus.
The Corinthians therefore having all these criminations, against them,
relieved Epidamnus willingly, not only giving leave to whosoever would, to go
and dwell there, but also sent thither a Garrison of Ambraciotes, Leucadians,
and of their own Citizens; which succors, for fear the Corcyraeans should
have hindered their passage by Sea, marched by Land to Apollonia. The
Corcyraeans understanding that new inhabitants, and a Garrison were gone to
Epidamnus, and that the Colonie was delivered to the Corinthians, The
Corcyraeans angry at the aids sent by the Corinthians, make War on Epidamnus.
with 25. Galleys, and afterward with another Fleet, in an insolent manner
commanded them, both to recall those whom they had banished, (for these (...).
Diverse occasions force men from their Country. Sentence of Law which is
commonly called Banishment. Prescription, when the Sentence is death, for which
cause they fly into banishment: But those that are here meant, are such as in
Seditions being the weaker Faction, fly for fear of being murdered, which I
call here, banished men; or might call them perhaps better Outlawes or
Fugitives, but neither of them properly. The Florentines, and other places of
Italy, that were or are Democraticall, wherein such banishment can only
happen, call the properly Fuoru^citi.
banished men of Epidamnus, had been now at Corcyra, and pointing to the
Sepulchers of their Ancestors, and claiming kindred, had entreated the
Corcyraeans to restore them) and to send away the Garrison and Inhabitants sent
thither by the Corinthians. But the Epidamnians gave no ear to their
commandments. Whereupon, the Corcyraeans with forty Illyrians, whom they had
joined to their part, warred upon them; and having laid Siege to the City,
made Proclamation, that such of the Epidamnians as would, and all strangers,
might depart safely, or otherwise, were to be proceeded against as Enemies.
But when this prevailed not, the place being an Isthmus, The Corcyraeans
besiege Epidamnus.
they enclozed the City in on every side. The Corinthians, when news was
brought from Epidamnus, how it was besieged, presently made ready their Army,
and Corinthian Drachmaes, might stay behind. And they were very many, both that
went, and that laid down their silver. The Corinthians send an Army to
relieve it.
Moreover, they sent to the Megareans, for fear of Corcyraeans, to aid Pale
in Cephalonia, 4. Cephalonia.
They also required Galleys of the Epidaurians, who sent them 5. the Citizens
of Hermione, 1. the Traezenians, 2. the Leucadians, 10. the Ambraciotes, 8. Of
the Thebans and Phliasians they required money; of the Eleans, both money, and
empty Galleys; and of the Corinthians themselves, there were ready 30. Galleys,
and 3000. (...), Men in arm^^^.
men of Arms. The Corcyraeans, advertised of this preparation, went to
Corynth, in company of the Ambassadors of the Lacedaemonians, and of the
Sycionians, whom they took with them, Corinthians to recall the Garrison and
Inhabitants, which they had sent to Epidamnus, as being a City, they said,
wherewith they had nothing to do; or if they had any thing to allege, The
Corcyraeans offer to stand to Arbitrament.
they were content to have the cause iudicially tried, in such Cities of
Peloponnesus, as they should both agree on, and they then should hold the
Colonie, to whom the same should be adjudged. They said also, That they were
content to refer their cause to the Oracle at Delphi: that War they would
make none, but if they must needs have it, they should by the violence Meaning
the Athenians.
better friends then those whom they already had. To this the Corinthians
answered, The Corinthians unwilling to accept it, and not without cause.
that if they would put off with their Fleet, and dismiss the Barbarians from
before Epidamnus, they would then consult of the matter: for before they could
not honestly do it: Because whilst they should be pleading the case, the
Epidamnians should be suffering the misery of a Siege. The Corcyraeans replied
to this, That if they would call back those men of theirs already in
Epidamnus, that then they also would Corinthians had required them; or
otherwise, they were content to let the men on both sides stay where they were,
and to suspend the War, till the cause should be decided. The Corinthians not
assenting to any of these propositions, The Corinthian Fleet.
since their Galleys were manned, and their Confederates present, having defied
them first by a Herald, put to Sea with 75. Galleys, and Either here or
before, it is likely the number has been mis-written: for a little before he
says they had made ready 3000.
2000. men of Arms, and set sail for Epidamnus, against the Corcyraeans.
Their Fleet was commanded by Aristaeus, the son of Pellicas, Callicrates, the
son of Callias, and Timanor Timanthes: and the Land Forces by Archetimus, the
son of Eurytimus, and Isarchidas the son of Isarchus. After they were come
as far as A Haven famous afterward, for the Battle between Augustus Caesar,
and Marcus Antonius.
Actium* in the Anactorium, (which is a Temple of Apollo, and ground
consecrated unto him in the mouth of the Gulf of Ambracia) the Corcyraeans
sent a Herald to them, at Actium, to forbid their coming on, and in the mean
time manned out their Fleet* and having repaired, and made fit for service
their old Galleys, and furnished the rest with things necessary, shipped their
Munition, and went aboard. The Herald was no sooner returned from the
Corinthians, with an answer not inclining to peace, but having their Galleys
already manned and furnished, The Corcyraean Fleet.
to the It is said (...), that the Corcyraeans had i^ all 1^0 Galleys, which
number agreeeth with this 80. that (...), and the 40. that maintained the Siege.

The Corcyraeans have the victory at Sea, and on the same day take the City.


forty attended always the Siege of Epidamnus) they put to Sea, and arranging
themselves, came to a Battle: In which the Corcyraeans were clearly Victors;
and on the part of the Corinthians, there perished 15. Galleys. And the same
day it happened likewise, that they that besieged Epidamnus, had the same
rendered unto them, with Conditions, That the Strangers therein found, should be
ransomed, and the Corinthians kept in bonds, till such time as they should be
otherwise disposed of. The Battle being ended, the Corcyraeans, after they had
set up (...) Turning, particularly turning the back. Trophies, Monuments, in
remembrance of having made the Enemy turn their backs. These were usual in
those times, now out of date.
Trophie in Leucimna, a Promontory of Corcyra, slew their other prisoners, but
kept the Corinthians still in bonds. After this, when the Corinthians with
their vanquished Fleet, were gone home to Corinth, the Corcyraeans, Masters now
of the whole Sea in those parts, went first, and wasted the Territory of
Leucas, a Corinthian Colonie, and then sailed to Cyllene, Santa Maura, now an
Island, then a Penin^ula.
which is the Arsenall of the Eleans, and burnt it, because they had, both with
money and shipping, given aid to the Corinthians.

The Corcyraeans Masters of the Sea.
And they were Masters of those Seas, and infested the Corinth, for the most
part of that year; till such time as in the beginning of the Summer following,
the Corinthians sent a Fleet and Soldiers unto Actium, the which for the more
safe keeping of Leucas, and of other Cities their friends, encamped about
Chimerium in Thesprotis: and the Corcyraeans, both with their Fleet and Land
Soldiers, Thesprotis, part of Albania.
lay over against them in Leucimna. But neither part stirred against the other,
but after they had lain quietly opposite all the Summer, they retired in
Winter, both the one side and the other to their Cities.

The Corinthians prepare a greater Name.
All this year, as well before as after the Battle, the Corinthians being
vexed at the War with the Corcyraeans, applied themselves to the building of
Galleys, and to the preparing of a Fleet, the strongest they were able to make,
and to procure Mariners out of Peloponnesus, and all other parts of Greece.
Both Corcyraeans and Corinthians send their Ambassadors to Athens.
The Corcyraeans having intelligence of their preparations, began to fear,
and (because they had never been in League with any Grecian City, nor were in
the Roll of the Confederates, either of the Athenians, or Lacedaemonians)
thought it best now, to send to Athens, to see if they could procure any aid
from thence. Corinthians, they also sent their Ambassadors to Athens, lest the
addition of the Athenian Navy, to that of the Corcyraeans, might hinder them
from carrying the War as they desired. And the Assembly at Athens being met,
they came to plead against each other; and the Corcyraeans spoke to this
effect.

THE ORATION OF THE Ambassadors of CORCYRA.
Athens, It is but Justice, that such as come to implore the aid of their
neighbors, (as now do we) and cannot pretend by any great benefit or League,
some precedent merit, should before they go any further, make it appear,
principally, that what they seek conferreth profit, or if not so, yet is not
prejudicial at least, to those that are to grant it: and next, that they will
be constantly thankful for the same. And if they cannot do this, then not to
take it ill, though their suite be rejected. And the Corcyraeans being fully
persuaded that they can make all this appear on their own parts, have
therefore sent us hither, desiring you to ascribe Corinthians. And that which
before we thought wisdom, namely, not to enter with others into League,
because we would not at the discretion of others enter into danger, we now
find to have been our weakness, and imprudence. Wherefore, though alone we
repulsed the Corinthians, Peloponnesus, and the rest of Greece; and seeing with
our own single power we are not able to go Greece; it is both necessary that
we seek the succors, both of you, and of whomsoever else we can; and we are
also to be pardoned, though we make bold to cross our former custom of not
having to do with other men, proceeding not from malice, but error of
judgment. Now if you yield unto us, in what we request, this coincidence (on
our part) of need, will on your part be honorable, for many reasons. First,
in this respect, that you lend your help to such as have suffered, and not to
such as have committed the injustice. And next, considering that you receive
into League, such as have at Lacedaemonians, through fear of you, are already
in labor of the War; and that the Corinthians, gracious with them, and
enemies to you, making way for their Enterprise, assault us now, in the way to
the invasion of you hereafter, that we may not stand amongst the rest of
their common Enemies, but that they may be sure beforehand, either to weaken
us, or to strengthen their own estate. It must therefore be your part, we
offering, and you accepting the League, to begin with them, and to Epidamnus,
they chose to prosecute their quarrel, rather by Arms then Judgment. Now let
that which they have done unto us, who are their kindred, serve you for some
Argument, Lacedaemonians, they are not broken by receiving us into your League,
because we are in League with neither party. For there, it is said, That
whosoever is Confederate of neither party, may have access lawfully to either.
And sure it were very unreasonable* that the Corinthians should have the
liberty to man their Fleet out of the Cities comprised in the League, and out
of any other parts of Greece, and not the least out of A^ Cephalonia.
places in your Dominion; and we be denied both the League now propounded,
and also, all other help from whence soever. And if they impute it to you as a
fault, that Athens, then Corcyra; wherein he forecasteth none of the best,
(considering the present estate of affairs) that makes a question, whether
against a War at hand, and only not already on foot, he should join unto
it, or not, that City which with most important advantages, or disadvantages,
will be friend or enemy. For it lies so conveniently for sailing into Italy,
and Sicily, that it can both prohibit any Fleet to come to Peloponnesus from
thence, and convoy any coming from Peloponnesus or not, by this. For Greece
having but three Nauies of any Corinth, if you suffer the other two to join in
one, by letting the Corinthians first seize us, you shall have to fight by Sea
at one time, both against the Corcyraeans and the Peloponnesians; whereas by
making League with us, you shall with your Fleet augmented, have to deal
against the Peloponnesians alone.

Thus spoke the Corcyraeans, and after them, the Corinthians, thus.

THE ORATION OF THE Ambassadors of CORINTH.
THe Corcyraeans in their Oration having made mention not only of your taking
them into League, but also, that they are wronged, and unjustly warred on; it
is also necessary for us first to answer concerning both those points, and
then afterward to proceed to the rest of what we have to say, to the end you
may foreknow, that ours are the safest demands for you to embrace, and that
you may upon reason reject the needy estate of those others. Whereas they
allege in defense of their refusing to enter League with other Cities, that
the same has proceeded from modesty, the truth is, that they took Epidamnus
it follows, they must defend themselves, not without you. You should
Corcyraeans, (for between the Corinthians and you, there are Articles of
peace, but with the Corcyraeans you never had so much as a Truce) and not to
constitute a new Law of receiving one another Rebels. For neither did we give
our votes against you, when the Samians revolted, though the rest of
Peloponnesus was divided in opinion: But plainly alleged, That it was reason,
that every one should have liberty to proceed against their own revolting
Confederates. And if you shall once receive and aid the doers of wrong, it
will be seen, that they will come over as fast from you to us; and you shall
set up a Law, not so much against us, Grecians. And now we come to matter of
advice, and claim of favor; which (being not so much your enemies as to hurt
you, nor such friends as to surcharge you) we say, ought in the present
occasion, to be granted us by way of requital: For when you had want of Long
Barques against the Aeginetae, a little before the Medan War, you had 20. lent
unto you by the Corinthians; which benefit of ours, and that other against the
Samians, when by us it was, that the Peloponnesians did not aid them, was the
cause both of your victory against the Aeginetae, and of the punishment of
Samians. And these things were done for you in a season, when men, going to
fight against their enemies, neglect all respects, but of victory. For even a
man's Domesticke affairs are ordered the worse, through eagerness of present
contention. Which benefits considering, and the younger sort taking notice of
them from the elder, be you pleased to defend us now in the like manner. And
have not this thought, that though in what we have spoken there be equity;
yet, if the War should arise, the profit would be found in the contrary. For
vtility follows those actions most, wherein we do the least wrong; besides
that the likelihood of the War, wherewith the Corcyraeans frighting
Corinthians; but it were rather fit for you indeed, to take away our former
iealousies concerning the This which was done against the Corinthians, by the
Athenians that aided Megara, is related afterward in this first Book.
Megareans. For the last good turn done in season, though but small, is able
to cancel an accusation of much greater moment. Neither suffer your selves to
be drawn on, by the greatness of the Navy which now shall be at your service
by this League; for to do no injury to our equals, is a firmer power, then
that addition of strength, which (puffed up with present shows) men are to
acquire with Lacedaemon, that every one ought to proceed, as he shall think
good, against his own Confederates, we claim that liberty now of you; and
that you that have been helped by our votes, will not hurt us now by yours,
but render like for like; remembering, that now is that occasion, wherein he
that aydeth us, is our greatest friend; and he that opposes us, our greatest
enemy. And that you will not receive these Corcyraeans into League against our
wills, nor defend them in their injuries. These things if you grant us, you
shall both do as is fit, and also advise the best for the good of your own
affairs.

Corinthians.

Both sides having been heard, and the Athenian people twice assembled; in the
former Assembly, they approved no less of the reasons of the Corinthians,
(then of the Corcyraeans;) but in the latter, they changed their minds; not
so, as to make a League with the Corcyraeans, both offensive and defensive,
that the Friends and Enemies of the one, A League defensive made between the
Athenians and Corcyraeans.
should be so of the other, (for then, if the Corcyraeans should have required
them to go against Corinth, the Peace had Peloponnesians) but made it only
defensive, that if any one should invade Corcyra or Athens, or any of their
Confederates, they were then mutually to assist one another. For they expected,
that even thus, they should grow to War with the Peloponnesians, and were
therefore unwilling to let Corcyra, that had so great a Navy, to fall into the
hands of the Corinthians; but rather, as much as in them lay, desired to break
them one against another; that if need required, they might have to do with
the Corinthians, and others that had Shipping, Italy, and Sicily. With this
mind the people of Athens received the Corcyraeans into League; and when the
Corinthians were gone, sent ten Galleys not long after to their aid. They
aid Corcyra with ten Galleys.
The Commanders of them were Lacedaemonius the son of Cimon, Diotimus, the
son of Strombichus, and Proteas, the Son of Epicles; and had order not to
fight with the Corinthians, unless they invaded Corcyra, or offered to land
there, or in some other place of theirs. Which if they concluded with the
Peloponnesians. So these Galleys arrived Corcyra.

The Corinthian Fleet.
The Corinthians, when they were ready, made toward Corcyra with 150. Sail; (
viz.) of the Eleans, 10. of the Megareans, 12. of the Leucadians, 10. of the
Ambraciotes, 27. of the Anactorians, 1. and 90. of their own. The Commanders
of these, were men chosen out of the said several Cities, for the several
parts of the Fleet which they sent in; and over those of Corinth, was
Xenocleides, the son of Euthicles, with 4. others. After they were all come
together, upon the Coast of the Continent over against Corcyra, they sailed
Leucas, and came to Cheim^^ium, in the Country of Thesprotis. In this place is
a (...), and above it, further from the Sea, the City of Ephyre, in that part
of Thesprotis, which is called Eleatis; and near unto it, disbogueth into the
Sea the Lake Acherusia, and into that (having first passed through Thesprotis)
the River Acheron, from which it takes the Name. Also the River Thyanis
runs here, which divides Thesprotis from Cestrine the Territory of
Cestria, part of Chaonia.
Cestrine, betwixt which two Rivers, arises this Promontory of Cheimerium. To
this part of the Continent came the Corinthians, The Corcyraean Fleet.
Corcyraeans understanding that they made against them, having ready 110.
Galleys under the conduct of Miciades, Aesimides, and Eurybatus, came and
encamped in one of the Islands called Sybota. And the ten Galleys of Athens
were also with them. But their Landforces stayed in the Promontory of
Leucimna, and with them 1000. men of Arms of the The Corinthians set forward.
Zacynthians that came to aid them. The Corinthians also had in the Continent
the aids of many Barbarians, which in those quarters have been evermore their
friends. The Corinthians, after they Cheimerium, with purpose to fight; and
about break of day, as they were sailing, descryed the Galleys of the
Corcyraeans, which were also put off from Sybota, and coming on to fight with
the Corinthians. As Soon as they had sight one of another, they put themselves
into order of Battle. In the right (...), The Galleys stood all one by one,
in a row, and the right wing were those that were on the right hand from the
midst; and the left wing, those on the left hand.
wing of the Corcyraeans were placed the Galleys of Athens; and the rest being
their own, were divided into three Commands, under the three Commanders, one
under one. This Corcyraeans. The Corinthians had in Megara, and of Ambracia;
Megara.
in the middle, other their Confederates in order, and opposite to the
Athenians, and right wing of the Corcyraeans, they were themselves placed, with
such Galleys as were best of Sail, in the left. The (...), A Picture or Image
h^^d up, as the Ea^le amongst the Romans.
Standard being on either side lift up, they joined Battle; having on both
parts, both many men of Arms, and many Archers and Slingers, The Battle.
but after the old fashion, as yet somewhat unskillfully appointed. The Battle
was not so artificially as cruelly fought; near unto the manner of a fight at
Land. For after they had Athenian Galleys, being always, where the Corcyraeans
were oppressed, at hand, kept Athenian people. The right wing of the
Corinthians was in the greatest distress; for the Corcyraeans with twenty
Galleys, had made them turn their backs, and chased them dispersed, to the
Continent; and sailing to their very Camp, went aland, burnt their abandoned
Tents, and took away their Baggage; so that in this part the Corinthians and
their Confederates were vanquished, and the Corcyraeans had the victory. But in
the left wing, where Corinthians were themselves, they were far superior;
The Corinthians have the better.
because the Corcyraeans had twenty Galleys of their number, which was at first
less then that of the Corinthians, absent in the chase of the Enemy. And the
Athenians, when they saw the Corcyraeans were in distress, now aided them
manifestly, whereas before, they had abstained from making assault upon any.
But when once they fled out*right, and that the Corinthians lay sore upon them*
then every one fell to the business, without making difference any longer* and
it came at last to this necessity, Corinthians, and Athenians. The Athenians
and Corinthians fight.


The Corinthians, when their enemies fled, staid not to Grecians against
Grecians. When the Corinthians had chased the Corcyraeans to the shore, they
returned to take up the broken Galleys, and bodies of their dead, which for the
greatest part they recovered, and brought to Sybota, where also lay the
Landforces of the Barbarians, that were come to aid them. Sybota of the
Continent, a Haven.
This Sybota is a desert Haven of Thesprotis. When they had done, they
reunited themselves, and made again to the Corcyraeans; and they likewise,
with such Galleys as they had fit for the Sea, remaining of the former Battle,
Athens, put forth to meet them, fearing lest they should attempt to land upon
their Territory. By this time the day was far spent, and the Paean, a Hymn,
to Mars in the beginning of fight: to Apollo after the victory.
Song which they used to sing when they came to charge, was ended, when suddenly
the Corinthians began to row a Stern: for they had descried twenty Athenian
Galleys, sent from Athens to second the former ten; A supply of 20. Sail
from Athens.
for fear lest the Corcyraeans (as it also fell out) should be overcome, and
those ten Galleys of theirs be too few to defend them. The Corinthians fall
off.
When the Corinthians therefore had sight of these Athens, and more in number
then they were, by little and little they fell off. But the Corcyraeans
(because the course of these Galleys was unto them more (viz.) more behind
their backs.
out of sight) descryed them not, but wondered why the Corinthians rowed a
Stern; till at last some that saw them, said they were Enemies; and then
retired also the Corcyraeans. For by this time it was dark, and the
Corinthians had turned about the heads of their Galleys, and dissolved
themselves. And thus were they parted, and the Battle ended in night.

The Corcyraeans lying at Leucimna, these twenty Athenian Glaucon, the son of
Leagrus, and Androcides, the son of Leogorus; passing through the midst of
the floating Carcasses, and wrecke, soon after they were descryed, arrived at
the Camp of the Corcyraeans in Leucimna. The Corcyraeans at first, (being
night) were afraid they had been Enemies, but knew them afterward; so they
anchored there.

The next day, both the thirty Galleys of Athens, The Corcyraeans offer Battle
again.
and as many of Corcyra as were fit for service, went to the Haven in Sybota,
where the Corinthians lay at Anchor, to see Corinthians, when they had put off
from the Land, and arranged themselves in the wide Sea, stood quiet, not
meaning of their own accord to begin the Battle* both for that they saw the
supply of fresh Galleys from Athens, and for many difficulties that happened to
them, both about the safe custody of their Prisoners aboard, and also for that
being in a desert place, their Galleys were not yet repaired; but took
thought rather how to go home, for fear lest the Athenians, having the Peace
for already broken, in that they had fought Athenians, certain men, without
privilege of Heralds, for to ^ound them, and to say in this manner.

Men of Athens, You do unjustly to begin the War, The Corinthians
expostulate with the Athenians, to ^ound their purpose.
and violate the Articles: For whereas we go about to right us on our
Enemies, you stand in our way, and bear Arms against us. If therefore you be
resolved to hinder our going against Corcyra, or whatsoever place else we
please, dissolve the Peace, and laying hands first upon us that are here, use
us as Enemies.

Corcyraeans, as many of the Army as heard them, cried out immediately, to
take and kill them. But the Athenians made answer thus*

Men of Peloponnesus, Neither do we begin the War, The answer of the
Athenians.
nor break the Peace; but we bring aid to these our Confederates, the
Corcyraeans: if you please therefore to go any whither else, we hinder you
not; but if against Corcyra, or any place belonging unto it, we will not suffer
you.

When the Athenians had given them this answer, the Corinthians made ready to
go home, The Corinthians go home* Both the Corcyraeans and Corinthians
challenge the victory, and both set up Trophies.
and set up a Trophie Sybota of the Continent. And the Corcyraeans also, both
took up the wrecke, and bodies of the dead, which carried every way by the
Waves, and the Wind that arose the Sybota the Islands. The victory was thus
challenged on both sides, upon these grounds: The Corinthians did set up a
Trophie, because in the Battle they had the better all day, having gotten more
of the wrecke and dead bodies, then the other, and taken no less then 1000.
Prisoners, and sunk about 70. of the Enemies Galleys. And the Corcyraeans set
up a Trophie, because they had sunk 30. Galleys of the Corinthians, and had,
after the arrival of the Athenians, recovered the wrecke and dead bodies, that
drove to them, Athenians, the Corinthians had rowed a Stern, and went away
from them: and lastly, for that when they went to Sybota, the Corinthians came
not out to encounter them. Thus each side claimed victory.

The Corinthians in their way homeward, took in Anactorium, The Corinthians in
their way home, take Anactorium, and keep ^50. of the best men prisoners,
being Corcyraeans, and use them well.
a Town seated in the mouth of the Gulf of Ambracia, by deceit; (this Town
was common to them, and to the Corcyraeans) and having put into it Corinthians
only, departed, and went home. Of the Corcyraeans 800. Corcyra into the power
of the Corinthians* the greatest part of these, being principal men of the
City. And thus was Corcyra delivered of the War of Corinth, and the Athenian
Galleys went from them. This was the first Cause, that the Corinthians had of
War against the Athenians; namely, because they had taken part with the
Corcyraeans in a Battle by Sea, against the Corinthians, with whom they were
comprised

PRESENTLY after this, it came to pass, that other differences arose between
the Peloponnesians and the Athenians, The second pretext of the War.
to induce the War. For whilst the Corinthians studied to be revenged,
Potidaea suspected.
the Athenians, who had their hatred in jealousy, commanded the Citizens of
Potidaea, a City seated in the Isthmus of Pallene, a Colony of the
Corinthians, Potidaea commanded to give Hostages, and to pull down part of
their Wall.
but confederat^ and tributary to the Athenians, to Pallene, and to give them
Hostages, and also to send away, and no more receive the Epidemiurgi,
(Magistrates so called) which were sent unto them year by year, from Corinth;
fearing lest through the persuasion of King of Macedonia.
Perdiccas, and of the Corinthians, they should revolt, and draw to revolt with
them their other Confederates in Thrace. These things against the Potideans,
the Athenians had precontriued, presently after the Nauall Battle fought at
Corcyra. For the Corinthians and they were now manifestly at difference; and
Perdiccas, who before had Philip and Derdas joined in Arms against him, the
Athenians had made a League with them. And therefore being afraid, he both
sent to Lacedaemon, to negotiate the Peloponnesian War, and also reconciled
himself to the Corinthians, the better to procure the revolt of Potidaea; and
likewise he practiced with the Chalcideans of Thrace, and with the Bottieans,
to revolt with them. For if he could make these confining Cities his
Confederates, with the help of them, he thought his Athenians perceiving, and
intending to prevent the revolt of these Cities, gave order to the Commanders
of the Fleet, (for they were now sending thirty Galleys, The Athenians give
order to the Generals they were sending against Perdiccas, to secure their
Cities in those parts.
with a thousand men of Arms, under the command of Archestratus, the son of
Lycomedes, and ten others into the Territories of Perdiccas) both to receive
Hostages of the Potideans, and to demolish their Walls; and also to have an
eye to the neighboring Cities, that they revolted not. The Potidaeans Athens,
to try if they could persuade the people not to make any alteration amongst
them; by other Ambassadors, whom they sent along with the Ambassadors of
Corinth to Lacedaemon, The Potidaeans seek the protection of the
Lacedaemonians.
dealt with the Lacedaemonians at the same time, if need required, to be ready
to revenge their quarrel. When after long solicitation at Athens, and no good
done, the Fleet was sent away against them, no less then against Macedonia;
and when the Magistrates of Lacedaemon had promised them, if the Athenians went
to Potidaea, to invade Attica, then The revolt of Potidaea, Bottiea, and
Chalcid^^a, from the Athenians.
the Chalcideans and Bottieans, all mutually sworn in the same Conspiracy. For
Perdiccas had also persuaded the Chalcideans, Olynthus, and that one City to
make strong: And unto those that removed, gave part of his own, and part of
the Territory of Maydonia, about the Lake Bolbe, to live on, so long as the
War against the Athenians should continue. So when they had demolished their
Cities, and were gone up higher into the Country, they prepared themselves to
the War.

The Athenian Fleet, finding Potidaea and other Cities already lost, go into
Macedonia.
The Athenian Galleys, when they arrived in Thrace, found Potidaea and the other
Cities, already revolted. And the Commanders of the Fleet conceiving it to be
impossible, Perdiccas and the Towns revolted, set sail again for Macedonia,
against which they had been at first sent out, and there staying, joined with
Philip, and the brothers of Derdas, that had invaded the Country from above.

In the mean time, after Potidaea was revolted, and whilst the Athenian Fleet
lay on the Coast of Macedonia, The Corinthians send their Forces to Potidaea to
defend it.
the Corinthians, fearing what might become of the City, and making the danger
their own, sent unto it, both of their own City, and of other
Peloponnesians, which they Archers, darters, and the like, that wore not Armor
on their bodies, and were called (...), naked.
light armed. The charge of these was given to Aristaeus, the son of
Adimantus, for whose sake most of the Voluntaries of Corinth went the Voyage:
(for he had been ever a great Favorer of the Potidaeans.) And they arrived
in Thrace, after the revolt of Potidaea, forty days.

The news of the revolt of these Cities, was likewise quickly brought to the
Athenian people; who hearing withal of the Forces sent unto them, under
Aristaeus, sent forth against the places revolted, The Athenians send forces
against Potidaea.
2000. men of Arms, Callias, the Son of Calliades. These coming first into
Macedonia* found there the former thousand, Therme, after called Thessalonica,
now Salonichi.
(who by this time had taken Therme, and were now besieging the City of Pydna;)
and staying, helped for a while to besiege it with the rest. But shortly after,
they took composition; and having made a or scarce honorable.
necesary League with Perdiccas, (urged thereto by the affairs of Potidaea,
and the arrival there of Aristaeus) departed from Macedonia. Veria.
Thence coming to Berrhoea, they attempted Potidaea by Land. They were of
their own number 3000. men of Arms, besides many of their Confederates; and
of Macedonians that had served with Philip and Pausanias 600. Horsemen. And
their Galleys, 70. in number, sailing by them along the Coast, by moderate
Iournies, came in three days to Gigonus, and there encamped.

The Potidaeans and the Peloponnesians under Aristaeus, The Athenians and those
with Aristaeus, prepare themselves for Battle.
in expectation of the coming of the Athenians, lay now encamped in the
Isthmus, near unto Olynthus, and had the Aristaeus, and of the Horse, to
Perdiccas: (for he fell off again presently from the Athenians, and having
left Iolaus Governor in his place, took part with the Potidaeans.) The
purpose of Aristaeus was, to have the body of the Army with himself within
the The Isthmus of Pallene, where they were.
Isthmus, and therewith to attend the coming on of the Athenians, and to have
the Chalcideans and their Confederates without the Isthmus, and also the 200.
Horse under Perdiccas, to stay in Olynthus, and Athenians were past by, to come
on their backs, and to encloze the Enemy betwixt them. But Callias the
Athenian General, and the rest that were in Commission with him, sent out
before them their Macedonian Horsemen, and some few of their Confederates to
Olynthus, to stop those within from making any sally from the Town, and then
dislodging, marched on toward Potidaea. When they were come on as far to as
the Isthmus, and saw the Enemy make ready to fight, they also did the like,
and not long after, they joined Battle. That wing wherein was Aristaeus
Corinthians and others, put to flight that part of their Enemies that stood
opposite unto them, and followed execution a great way. But the rest of the
Army of the Potidaeans and Peloponnesians were by the Athenians defeated, and
fled into the City. The Victory falls to the Athenians.
And Aristaeus, when he came back from the Execution, was in doubt what way
to take, to Olynthus, or to Potidaea. In the end, he resolved of the shortest
way, and with his Soldiers about him, ran as hard as he was able into
Potidaea, and with much ado got in at the Peer, through the Battle began,
they that should have seconded the Potideans from Olynthus, (for it is at most
but 60. Furlongs off, and in sight) advanced a little way to have aided them;
and the Macedonian Horse opposed themselves likewise in order of Battle, to
keep them back. But the Athenians having quickly gotten the Victory, and the
Standards being taken down; they retired again, they of Olynthus, into that
City; and the Macedonian Horsemen, into the Army of the Athenians. So that
neither side had their Cauallery at the Battle. After the Battle, the
Athenians erected a Trophie, and gave truce to the Potideans, Potideans and
their friends, there dyed somewhat less then 300. and of the Athenians
themselves 150. with Callias, one of their Commanders.

The Athenians begin to besiege Potidaea.
Presently upon this, the Athenians raised a Wall before the City, on the part
toward the Isthmus, which they kept with a Garrison, but the part to
Pallene-ward, they left unwalled. For they thought themselves too small a
number, both to keep a guard in the Isthmus, and withal to go over and
fortify in Pallene, fearing lest the Potidaeans Athens understood that
Potidaea was unwalled on the part toward Pallene, not long after they sent
thither 1600. men of Arms, under the Conduct of Phormio, The Athenians send
Phormio with 6000. men of Arms, to Potidaea.
the Son of Asopius: who arriving in Pallene, left his Galleys at Aphytis,
and marching easily to Potidaea, wasted the Territory as he passed through.
And when none came out to bid him Battle, he raised a Wall before the City,
on that part also that looks toward Pallene. Thus was Potidaea on both sides
Potidaea straightly besieged on all sides.
and also from the Sea, by the Athenian Galleys, that came up and rode before
it.

Aristeus, seeing the City enclosed on every side, and without hope of safety,
save what might come from Peloponnesus, or some other unexpected way, gave
advice to all but 500. taking the opportunity of a Wind, The advice of
Aristaeus, to carry all the people but 500. men out of the City, that their
victual might the better hold out, refused.
to go out by Sea, that the provision might the longer hold out for the rest;
and of them that should remain within, offered himself to be one. But when
his counsel took not place, being desirous to settle their business, and
make Aristaeus gets out of the City* unseen of the Athenians.
he got out by Sea, unseen Athenian Guard, And staying in Chalcidica, slew
certain of the City of Sermyla, by ambushment.
and staying amongst the Chalcideans, amongst other actions of the War, laid
an Ambush before Sermyla, and slew many of that City, and solicited the
sending of aid from Peloponnesus. Phormio wastes the Territories of the
Chalcideans and Bottieans.
And Phormio, after the Siege laid to Potidaea, having with him his 1600. men
of Arms, wasted the Territories of the Chalcideans and Bottieans, and some
small Towns he took in.

These were the Quarrels between the Peloponnesians and the Athenians. The
Corinthians quarrelled the A^heni^ans, for besieging Potidaea, and in it, the
men of Corinth and Peloponnesus. The Athenians quarrelled the Peloponnesians,
for causing their confederate and tributary City to revolt; and for that they
had come thither, and openly fought against them in the behalf of Potidaea.
Nevertheless the War brake not openly forth as yet, and they yet abstained
from Arms; for this was but a particular action of the Corinthians.

BUT when Potidaea was once besieged, The solicitation of the War by the
Corinthians, and other Confederates of the Lacedaemonians.
both for their men's sakes that were within, and also for fear Lacedaemon; and
thither also they went themselves, with clamours and accusations, against the
Athenians, that they had broken the League, and wronged the Peloponnesians. The
Aeginetae, though not openly by Ambassadors, for fear of the Athenians,
Complaints exhibited against the Athenians in the Council of Sparta.
yet privily instigated them to the War as much as any; alleging that they
were not permitted to govern themselves according to their own Laws, as by
the Articles they ought to have been So the Lacedaemonians having called
together the Confederates, and whosoever else had any injustice to lay to the
charge of the Athenians, in the ordinary Of the Ephori, and those that had the
Soueraignety, that is to say, before the Aristocratie.
Council of their own State commanded them to speak. Then presented every
one his accusation; and amongst the rest, the Megareans, besides many other
their great differences, laid open this especially, That contrary to the
Articles, they were forbidden the Athenian Markets and Havens. Last of all, the
Corinthians, when they had suffered the Lacedaemonians to be incensed first by
the rest, came in, and said as follows.

THE ORATION OF THE Ambassadors of CORINTH.
MEn of Lacedaemon, your own fidelity, both in matter of estate and
conversation, makes you the less apt to believe us, when we accuse others of
the contrary. And hereby you gain indeed a reputation of equity, but you have
less experience in the affairs of Foreign States. For although we have
oftentimes foretold you, that the Athenians would do us a mischief; yet from
time to time when we told it you, you never would take informatio^ of it; but
have suspected Athenians been injured, and by you neglected. If the Athenians
lurking in some obscure place, had done these wrongs unto the Grecians, we
should then have needed to prove the same before you, as to men that knew it
not. But now what cause have we to use long discourse, when you see already
that some are brought into servitude, and that they are contriuing the like
against others, and especially against Corcyra, and holden it from us by force,
nor have besieged Potidaea, whereof the one was most commodious for any action
against Thrace; and the other had brought unto the Peloponnesians a most fair
Navy. And of all this, you are your selves the authors, in that you suffered
them, upon the end of the Persian War, to fortify their City, and again
afterward to raise their Long Walls, whereby you have hitherto deprived of
their liberty, not Deliuerers of Greece, [as you do.] And for all that, we are
hardly yet come together, and indeed not yet, with any certain resolution what
to do. For the question should not have been put, Whether, or not, we have
received injury, but rather, in what manner we are to repair it. For they
that do the wrong, having consulted upon it beforehand, use no delay at all,
but come upon them whom they mean to oppress, whilst they be yet irresolute.
Athenians have incroached (Lacedaemonians) you are the only men of all Greece,
that sitting still, defend others, not with your Forces, but with promises; and
you are also the only men, that love to pull down the power of the Enemy,
not when it begins, but when it is doubled. You have indeed a report to be
sure; but yet it is more in fame that, then in fact. For we our selves know,
that the Persian came against Peloponnesus, from the Athenians, who are not as
the Medes, far off, but hard at band; choosing rather to defend your selves
from their invasion, then to invade them; and by having to do with them when
their strength is greater, to put your selves upon the chance of Fortune. And
yet we know, that the Barbarians own error, and (in our War against the
Athenians) their own ouersights, more then your assistance, was the thing that
gave us victory. For the hope of your aid, has been the destruction of some,
that relying on you, made no preparation for themselves by other means. Yet
expostulation is with friends that err, but accusation, against enemies that
have done an injury. Besides, if there be any that may challenge to
exprobrate his neighbor, we think our selves may best do it, especially on
so great quarrels as these, whereof you neither seem to have any feeling, nor
to consider what manner of men, and how different from you in every kind the
Athenians be, that you are to contend withal: For they love innovation, and
are swift to devise, and also to execute what they resolve on. But you on the
contrary are only apt to save your own; not devise any thing They again are
bold beyond their strength, adventurous above their own reason, and in danger
hope still the best: Whereas your actions are ever beneath your power, and you
distrust even what your judgment assures; and being in a danger, never think
to be delivered. They are stirrers, you studiers: they love to be abroad, and
you at home the most of any. For they make account by being abroad to add to
their estate; you, if you should go forth against the State of another, would
think to impair your own. They, when they overcome their enemies, advance
the farthest, and when they are overcome by but their minds, when they would
serve the State, are right their own. Lacedaemon) that this City, your
Adversary, be such, as we have said; yet you still delay time; not knowing,
that those only are they, to whom it may suffice for the most part of their
time to sit still, who (though they use not their power to do injustice) yet
bewray a mind unlikely to swallow injuries; but placing equity belike in this,
that you neither do any harm to others, nor receive it, in defending of your
selves. But this is a thing, you hardly could attain, though the States about
you were of Athenian Customs, through much experience, are more new to you,
then yours are to them. Here therefore give a Period to your slacknesse, and by
a speedy invasion of Attica, as you promised, relieve both Potidaea, and the
rest: Peloponnesus may not by your leading,

Thus spoke the Corinthians.

The Athenian Ambassadors (who chanced to be residing in Lacedaemon, The
Athenian Ambassadors, residing in Lacedaemon, upon their business, desire to
make answer to the Oration of the Corinthians.
upon their business) when they heard of this Oration, thought it fit to
present themselves before the Lacedaemonians, not to make Apology for what
they were charged with by the other Cities, but to show in general, that it
was not fit for them in this case to take any sudden resolution, but further
time to consider. Also Lacedaemonians, saying, That they also, if they might
have leave, desired to speak in the Assembly; who willed them to come in: And
the Athenians went into the Assembly, and spoke to this effect.

THE ORATION OF THE Ambassadors of ATHENS.
THough our Embassage was not to this end, that we should argue against our
Confederates, but about such other Affairs as the City was pleased to employ
us in; yet having heard of the great exclamation against us, we came into the
Court, not to make answer to the criminations of the Cities (for to plead
before you here, were not to plead before the Judges either of them Persian,
and such as you your selves know as well as we, those, though it be tedious
to hear them ever objected, we must of necessity recite. For when we did
them, we commemoration. And we shall make recital of them, not by way of
deprecation, Barbarian in the Fields of Marathon, but also afterward, when he
came again, being unable to resist him by Land, embarked our selves, every
man that was able to bear Arms, and gave him Battle amongst the rest, by
Sea, at Salamis; which was the cause that kept him back from sailing to
Peloponnesus, and laying it waste City after City: for against so many
Galleys, you were not able to give each other mutual succor. And the greatest
proof of this is the Persian himself, who when his Fleet was overcome, and
that he Grecians, was embarked in their Fleet, we conferred to the same, the
three things of most advantage; namely, the greatest number of Galleys, the
most prudent Commander, and the most lively courage. (For of 400. Galleys in
the whole, our own were few less then two thirds) and for Commander,
Themistocles, who was the principal cause that the Battle was fought in the
Of Salamis.
straight, whereby he clearly saved the whole business, and whom, though a
Stranger, you your selves have honored for it, more then any man that came
unto you; The Athenians, at the coming in of the Persian, when they put
themselves into their Galleys, left their City to the Army of the Persians by
Land, and sent their Wives and children into Aegina, mis, and Traezena.
being, and putting our selves into danger, for a City, hopeless ever to be
again; saved both you (in part) and our selves. But if we had joined with the
Persian, fearing (as others did) to have our Territories wasted; or afterward,
as men lost, durst not have put our selves into our Galleys, you must not have
fought with him by Sea, because your Fleet had been too small; but his
affairs had succeeded Lacedaemon) we deserve Grecians, for our courage at that
time, and for our prudence, and for the dominion we hold, as we now undergo.
Which dominion we obtained not by violence, but because the Confederates, when
your selves would not stay out the relics of the War against the Barbarian,
came in, and entreated us to take the command, of their own accord. So that at
first we were forced to advance our Dominion to what it is, out of the nature
of the thing it self; as chiefly for fear, next for honor, and lastly for
profit. For when we had the envy of many, and had reconquered some that had
already revolted, and seeing you were no more our friends, as you had
Lacedaemon) have command over the Cities of Peloponnesus, and order them to
your best advantage: and had you, That is, when Pausanias, King of Lacedaemon,
pursuing the Relics of the Persian War, through his pride and insolent
Command, procured the hatred of the Confederates so far, as the Lacedaemonian
State calling (...) home, they put themselves under the leading of the
Athenians.
when the time was, by staying it out, been envied in your Command, as we
know well, you would have been no less heavy to the Confederates, then we,
you must have been constrained to rule imperiously; or to have fallen into
danger. So that, though overcome by three the honor, fear, and profit, we
have both accepted the dominion delivered us, and refuse again to surrender
it, we have therein done nothing to be wondered at, nor beside the manner of
men. Nor have we been the first in this kind, but it has been ever a thing
fixed, for the weaker to be kept under by the stronger. Besides; we took the
government upon us, as esteeming our selves worthy of the same; and of you also
so esteemed, till having computed the commodity, you now fall to allegation of
equity; a thing which no man that had the occasion to atchieue anything by
strength, ever so far preferred, as to divert him from his profit. Those men
are worthy of been used to converse with us upon equal terms, if they lose
any Medes dominion, they bore it, but think ours to be rigorous. And good
reason; for to men in subjection, the present is ever the worst estate.
Insomuch as you Meaning the Jmperious and tyranicall ^ommand of Pausanias.
did for a while, when you were their Commanders against the Medes. For not
only your own institutions are different from those of others, but also when
any one of you comes abroad [with charge,] he neither uses those of yours, nor
yet those of the rest of Greece. Deliberate therefore of this a great while, as
of a matter of great importance; and do not upon the opinions and criminations
of others, procure your own trouble. Consider before you enter, how unexpected
the chances of War be: for a long War

Thus spoke the Athenians.

After the Lacedaemonians had heard both the complaints of the Confederates
against the Athenians, and the Athenians Answer, The Lacedaemonians amongst
themselves take counsel how to proceed.
they put them every one out of the Court, and consulted of the business
amongst themselves. And the opinions of the greatest part concurred in this,
That the Athenians had done unjustly, and ought speedily to be warred on: But
Archidamus their King, a man reputed both wise

THE ORATION OF ARCHIDAMVS.
MEN of Lacedaemon, both I my self have the experience of many Wars, and I
see you of the same age with me, to have the like; insomuch as you cannot
desire this War, either through inexperience (as many do) nor yet as
apprehending it to be profitable or safe. And whosoever shall temperately
consider the War we now deliberate of, will find it to be no small one.
For though in respect of the Peloponnesians, and our neighbor States, Greece
besides; and that have many Confederates, paying them Tribute; against such, I
say, why should we lightly undertake the War? And since we are unfurnished,
whereon relying, should we make such haste to it? On our Navy? But therein we
are too weak. And if we will provide and prepare against them, it will require
time. On our money? But therein also we are more too weak; for neither has
the Athenians have the spirit not to be slaves to their earth, nor as men
without experience, to be astonished at the War. And yet I do not advise
that we should stupidly suffer our Confederates to be wronged, and not
apprehend the Athenians in their plots against them; but only, not yet to take
up Arms, but to send and expostulate with them, making no Greeks and
Barbarians, such as in any place we can get, of power either in shipping or
Athenians, take unto them, not Grecians only, but also Barbarians for their
safety) and withal to set forth our own. If they listen to our Ambassadors,
best of all; if not, then two or three years passing over our heads, being
better appointed, we may war upon them, if we will. And when they see our
preparation, and hear words that import no less, they will perhaps relent the
sooner; especially, having their grounds unhurt, and consulting upon
commodities extant, and not yet spoiled. For we must think their Territory
to be nothing but Peloponnesians, and also more difficult. For though
accusations, as well against Cities, as private men, may be cleared again, a
war for the pleasure of some, taken up by all, the success whereof cannot
be foreseen, can hardly with honor be Athenians, Potidaea, send about that
wherein the Confederates say they are injured; and the rather, because they be
content to refer the cause to Judgment: And one that offers himself to
Judgment, may not lawfully be invaded, as a doer of injury, before the
judgment be given; and prepare withal for the War; so shall you take the
most profitable counsel for your selves, and the most formidable to the Enemy.

Thus spoke Archidamus.

But Sthenelaidas, then one of the Ephori, stood up last of all, and spoke to
the Lacedaemonians in this manner: THE ORATION OF STHENELAIDAS.
FOr my part, I understand not the many words used by the Athenians; for though
they have been much in their own praises, yet they have said nothing to the
contrary, but that they have done injury to our Confederates, and to
Peloponnesus. And if they carried themselves well against the Medes, when time
was, and now ill against us, they deserve a double punishment, because they are
not good at the wrongs done to our Confederates, or defer to repair
Athenians, nor to be defended with words; (for they are not hurt in words) but
to be aided with all our power, and with speed. Let no man tell me, that after
we have once received the injury, we ought to deliberate. No, it belongs
rather to the doers of injury, to spend time in consultation. Wherefore (men
of Lacedaemon) decree the War, as becomes the dignity of Sparta; and let
not the Athenians grow yet greater, nor let us betray our Confederates, but in
the name of



Having thus spoken, being himself Ephore, he put it to the question in the
Assembly of the Lacedaemonians; and saying afterward, that he could not
discern whether was the greater cry (for they used there to give their votes
viua voce, and not with (...). Properly lapillus, Calculus. A little stone or
ball, which he that gave his voice, put into a Box, either on the affirmative
or negative part, as he pleased. The Athenians used Beans, white and black.
The Venetians now use Balls, and the distinction is made by the Box inscribed
with yea and no.
Balls) and desiring that it might be evident that their minds were inclined
most to the War, he put it unto them again, and said, To who^soeuer of you
it seems that the Peace is broken, and that the Athenians have done unjustly,
let him arise, and go yonder. And withal he showed them a certain place: And
to whomsoever it seems otherwise, The Lacedaemonians by question conclude
that the Athenians had broken the Peace.
So they arose, and the Room was divided, wherein far the greater number
were those, that held the Peace to be broken.

Then calling in the Confederates, they told them, that for their own parts,
their sentence was, That the Athenians had done them wrong; But yet they
desired to have all their Confederates called together, and then to put it to
the question again, that if they would, the War might be decreed by Common
consent. This done, their Confederates went home, and so did also Athenians,
when they had dispatched the business they came about. This Decree of the
Assembly, that the Peace was broken, was made in the foureteenth year of those
thirty years, for which a Peace had been formerly concluded, Negroponte.
after the actions past in Euboea.

The true cause of this War being the fear the Lacedaemonians had of the
power of Athens, the Author digresseth, to show how that power grew first up.
THE LACEDAEMONIANS gave Sentence, that the Peace was broken, and that War was
to be made, not so much for the words of the Confederates, as for fear the
Athenian greatness should still Greece was Athenians came to the
administration of those affairs, by which they so raised themselves, was this:

After that the Medes, overcome by Sea and Land, The means by which the
Athenians came to have the command of the common Forces of Greece against the
Persian, by which they rai^ed their Empire.
were departed, and such of them as had escaped by Sea to A Prom^^torie in
(...) the (...) of Xerxes ^leet was def^ated, the same day (...) Landforces
were (...) def^ated by Pausanias (...)* with the slaughter of M^^donius their
General, and (...) most their whole (...) of 300000. men.
Mycale, were there also utterly overthrown, Leotychides King of the
Lacedaemonians, then Commander of the Grecians at Mycale, with their
Confederates of Peloponnesus, went home: But the Athenians with their
Confederates of Ionia, and the Hellespont, as many as were already revolted
from Of Persia.

The Athenians return to their City.


King, staid behind, and besieged Sestus, holden then by the Medes, and when
they had layne before it all the Winter, they took it, abandoned by the
Barbarians; and after this they set sail from the Hellespont, every one to his
own City. And the (...), the State. That is, they made Athens again the
Seat of their government, whereas before it was in the Fleet and Camp still
removing.

They repair their City, and wall it.


body of the Athenians, as soon as their Territory was clear of the
Barbarians, went home also, and fetched thither their Wives and Children, and
such goods as they had, from the places where they had bin put out to keep, and
went about the reparation of their City and Walls. For there were yet standing
some pieces of the Persians had reserved for their own lodgings. The
Lacedaemonians hearing what they went about, The Lacedaemonians advise them to
the contrary for their own ends, pretending the Common good.
sent thither their Ambassadors, partly because they would themselves have
been glad, that neither the Athenians, nor any other had had Walls; but
principally, as incited thereto by their Confederates, (who feared not only the
greatness of their Navy, which they had not before, but also their courage
showed against the Persians) and entreated them, not to Peloponnesus had them
yet standing: Not discovering their meaning, and the jealousy they had of the
Athenians; but pretending this, that if the Barbarian returned, he might find
no fortified City, to make the Seat of his War, as he did of Thebes: and
that Peloponnesus was sufficient for the^ all, whereinto to retire, and from
whence to withstand the War. But the Athenians, Themistocles advises them to
build on.
by the advice of Themistocles, when the Lacedaemonian Ambassadors had so
said, they spoke of, to Lacedaemon. Now Themistocles willed Lacedaemon for one,
His subtilty in deluding the Lacedaemonians.
and that as speedily as they could; but such as were chosen Ambassadors with
him, not to send away presently, but to stay them till the Walls were so
raised, as to fight upon them from a sufficient height; and that all the men in
the City, The building hastened.
in the mean time, both they, and their Wives and Children, sparing neither
private nor public edifice, that might advance the work: but pulling all
down whatsoever, should help to raise it. When he had thus instructed them,
adding, that he would himself do the Lacedaemon, Themistocles goes to
Lacedaemon Ambassador.
he took his Journey. And when he came to Lacedaemon, he went not to the
State, but delaying the time, excused himself; and when any of those that were
in Office, asked him why he did not present himself to the State, answered,
That he stayed for his fellow-Ambassadours, who upon some business that fell
out, were left behind, but he expected them very shortly, and wondered they were
not come already. Hearing this, they gave credit to Themistocles, for the love
they bore him; but when others coming thence, averred plainly, that the Wall
went up, and that He advises the Lacedaemonians to send Ambassadors, to see
if the Wall went up, or not.
Themistocles, when he saw this, wished them not to be led by reports, but
rather to send thither some of their own, such as were honest men, and having
informed themselves, would relate the truth. Which they also did. He sends
Letters to Athens secretly, to have those Ambassadors stayed, till the return
of himself and his fellows from Lacedaemon.
And Themistocles sends privily to the Athenians, about the same men, to take
order for their stay, with as little appearance of it as they could, and not to
dismiss them, till their own Ambassadors were returned. (For by this time
were arrived those that were joined Abronychus, the son of Lysicles, and
Aristides, the son of Lysimachus, and brought him word that the Wall was of a
sufficient height.) For he feared lest the Lacedaemonians, when they knew the
truth, would refuse to let them go. The Athenians therefore kept there those
Ambassadors, according as it was written to them to do. And hearing that the
Walls were finished, he justifies it.
Themistocles coming now to his audience before the Lacedaemonians, said
plainly, That the City of Athens was already walled, and that sufficiently,
for the defense of those within: And that if it shall please the
Lacedaemonians, upon any occasion to send Ambassadors unto them, they were to
Greece. For when they thought it best to quit their City* and put themselves
into their Galleys, he said they were bold to do it, without asking the advice
of them. And in Common Counsel, the advice of the Athenians was as good as the
advice of them: And now at this time their opinion is, that it will be best,
both for themselves in particular, and for all the Confederates in common, that
their City should be walled. For that in strength unequal, men cannot alike
and equally advise for the common benefit of Greece. Therefore (said he)
either must all the The Lacedaemonians when they heard him, The Lacedaemonians
dissemble their dislike.
though they made no show of being angry with the Athenians, (for they had not
sent their Ambassadors to forbid them, but by way of advice, to admonish them
not to build the Wall; besides they bare them affection then, for their courage
shown against the Medes) yet they were inwardly offended, because they missed
of their will. And the Ambassadors returned home of either side, without
complaint. The Walls of Athens built in haste.
Thus the Athenians quickly raised The Walls of Athens made of Chapels and
Tombs. Cor* Nepos, in vita Themist.
Sepulchers, and polished Stones were piled together amongst the rest. For the
circuit of the City was set every way further out, and therefore hastening,
they took alike whatsoever came next to hand. Themistocles likewise persuaded
them to build up the rest of This was before a Village, and now made the
Athenian Arsenall.
Peiraeus, (for it was begun in the year that himself was The Governor of
the City for that year.
Archon Athens) as conceiving the place both beautiful, in that it had three
natural Havens, and that being now Seamen, it would very much conduce to the
enlargement of their power. For he was indeed the first man that durst tell
them, that they ought to take upon them the command of the Sea, Themistocles
author to the Athenians of assuming the dominion of the Sea, and of fortifying
Peiraeus.
and withal presently helped them in the obtaining it. By his counsel also it
was, that they built the Wall of that breadth about Piraeus, which is now to be
seen. For two Carts carrying stones, met, and passed upon it one by another.
And yet within together with Iron and Lead. But for height, it was raised The
reason why Themistocles was most addicted to affairs by Sea.
then by Land; and thought that Piraeus was more profitable then the City
above. And oftentimes he would exhort the Athenians, that in case they
Athenians built their Walls, and fitted themselves in other kinds, immediately
upon the departure of the Persians.

Pausanias sent General of the Greeks, to pursue the relics of the Persian
War.
In the mean time was Pausanias the son of Cleombrotus, sent from Lacedaemon,
Commander of the Grecians, with twenty Galleys out of Peloponnesus. With which
went also 30. Sail of Athens, besides a multitude of other Confederates, and
making War on Cyprus, subdued the greatest Constantinople.
Byzantium, which they besieged, and won.

Pausanias growing insolent, the Jonians offended, desire the protection of the
Athenians.
But Pausanias being now grown insolent, both the rest of the Grecians, and
specially the Ionians, who had newly recovered their liberty from the King,
offended with him, came unto the Athenians, and requested them for The Ionians
were all Colonies of the people of Athens
consanguinities sake to become their Leaders, and to protect them from the
violence of Pausanias. The Athenians accepting the motion, applied themselves
both to the defense of these, and also to the ordering of the rest of the
Lacedaemonians sent for Pausanias home, Pausanias sent for home, to answer to
certain accusations.
to examine him of such things as they had heard against him. For great crimes
had been laid to his charge by the Grecians that came from thence; and his
government was rather an imitation of Tyranny, then a Command in War. And it
was his hap to be called home at the same time, that the Confederates, all but
the Soldiers of Peloponnesus, out of hatred to him, had turned Athenians. In
his absence, the Grecians give the Athenians the leading of them.
When he came to Lacedaemon, though Dorcis, Pausanias acquit, but sent General
no more.
and some others with him, with no great Army; whose command the Confederates
refused, and they finding that, The Grecians refuse the command of Dorcis, sent
from Sparta to be their General.
went their ways likewise. And after that, the Lacedaemonians sent no more;
because they feared lest such as went out, would prove the worse for the State,
(as they had seen by Pausanias,) and also because they desired to be rid of
the Persian War, conceiving the Athenians to be sufficient

When the Athenians had thus gotten the Command, by the Confederates own
accord, for the hatred they bare to Pausanias, they then set down an order,
The Athenians assesse their Confederates, for the sustaining of the War*
which Cities should contribute money for this War against the Barbarians,
and which, Galleys. For they pretended to repair the injuries they had
suffered, by laying waste the Territories of the King. And then first came up
amongst the Athenians, the Office of (...).
Treasurers of Greece, who were receivers (...). The original of the Tribute
paid to the Athenians*
Tribute, (for so they called this money contributed.) And the first Tribute
that was taxed, came to 86250. pound sterling.
460. Talents. The Treasury was at Not at Athens, because they would not seem
to challenge a propriety in that money.
Delos, and their meetings were kept there, in the Of Apollo.
Temple.

Now using their authority at first, in such manner, as that the Confederates
lived under their own Laws, and were admitted to Common Council; by the War,
and administration of the common affairs of Greece, from the Persian War to
this, what against the Barbarians, what against their own innouating
Confederates, and what against such of the Peloponnesians Grecian acts before
the invasion of the Persians, or that invasion only. The History of the time
between the Persian and Peloponnesian War, pretermitted by other Writers,
briefly delivered by Thucydides.
Of which number is Hellanicus, who has also touched them in his Attique
History, but briefly, and without exact mention of the times;) and also
because they carry with them a demonstration of how the Athenian Empire grew up.

Cimon, The steps of the Athenians toward their great Dominion.

The Athenians take Lion.


the son of Miltiades, they took Eion, upon the River Strymon, from the
Medes by siege, and carried away the Inhabitants Captives. And Scyros.
Scyros, in the Aegean Sea, inhabited by the Dolopes, the Inhabitants whereof
they also carried away Captives, and planted therein a Colony of their own.
And Carystus.
Likewise they made War on the Caristians, (alone, without the rest of the
Euboeans) and those also after a time, came in by composition. After this they
warred on the revolted Naxians, And Naxus, their Confederate, now Ni^sia.
and brought them in by siege. And this was the first Confederate City, which
contrary to the Ordinance* they deprived of their free estate; though
afterward, as it came to any of their turns, they did the like by the rest.

The cause of reuolts from the Athenians.
Amongst other causes of reuolts, the principal was their failing to bring in
their Tribute, and Galleys, and their refusing (when they did so) to follow the
Wars. For the Athenians exacted strictly, and were grievous to them, by
imposing a necessity of toil, which they were neither accustomed nor willing
to undergo. They were also otherwise not so gentle in their government as they
had been, nor followed the War upon equal terms, and could easily bring
back to their subjection, such as should revolt. And of this the Confederates
themselves Athenians was increased at the cost of their Confederates, and
themselves unprovided, and without means to make War, in case they should
revolt.

The Athenians defeat the Persian, upon the River of Eurymedon.
After this, it came to pass, that the Athenians and their Confederates, fought
against the Medes, both by Land and by Water, upon the River of Eurymedon, in
Pamphylia; Athenians had Victory in both; and took or sunk all the Phoenician
Fleet, to the number of 200. Galleys. After this again happened the revolt of
Thasus, They war on Thasus.
upon a difference about the places of Trade, and about the Mines they
possessed in the opposite parts of Thrace. And the Athenians going thither with
their Fleet, overthrew them in a Battle at Sea, and landed in the Island; But
having about the same time sent 10000. of their own and of their Confederates
people, Strymon, for a Colonie to be planted in a Nine-wayes, now Amphipolis.
They take Amphypolis, and afterward receive a great ouerthr^w at Drabescus
(...) Thrace.
They won the said Nine-wayes, which was held by the Eidonians; but advancing
farther, toward the heart of the Country of Thrace, they were defeated at
Drabescus, a City of the Eidonians, by the whole power of the Thracians, that
were Enemies to this new-built Town of the Nine-wayes. The Thasians in the
mean time, being overcome in diverse Battles, and besieged, sought aid of the
Lacedaemonians, and entreated them to divert the Enemy by an invasion of
Attica: which, unknown to the Athenians, they The Lacedaemonia^^ (...) to
invade (...) hindered by an Earthquake.
but by an Earthquake that then happened, they were hindered. In which
Earthquake, their The Lacedaemonians employed the (...) War, and (...)
husbandry, and (...) works, which was (...) by this k^nd of men, and they
(...) by (...) Helotes, because the first of them so employed* were Captives of
the Town of Helos in Laconia.

Thas^s rendered to the Athenians.


Helotes, and of neighboring Towns the Thuriatae, and Aetheans, revolted, and
seized on Ithome. Most of these Helotes were the posterity of the ancient
Messenians, brought into servitude in former times; whereby also it came to
pass, that they were called all Messenians. Against these had the
Lacedaemonians a War now at Ithome. The Thasians in the third year of the
Siege, rendered themselves to the Athenians, upon condition to raze The
Lacedaemonians, when the War against those in Ithome grew long, The
Lacedaemonians send for aid to the Athenians, in their War against Ithome.
amongst other their Confederates, sent for aid to the Athenians; who also
came with no small Forces, under the command of Cimon. They were sent for
principally, for their reputation in murall assaults, the long continuance of
the Siege, seeming to require men of ability in that kind; whereby they might
perhaps have gotten the place by force. And The first dissension between the
Lacedaemonians and the Athenians.
grew the first manifest dissension between the Lacedaemonians and the
Athenians. For the Lacedaemonians, when they could not take the place by
assault, fearing lest the audacious and innovating humor of the Athenians,
whom withal they esteemed of a The Lacedaemonians were Doreans, the Athenians,
I^nians.
contrary Race, might, at the persuasion of those in Ithome, cause some
alteration, if they staid; dismissed them alone of all the Confederates, not
discovering their jealousy, but alleging, that they had no further need of
their Service. But the Athenians perceiving that they were not sent away The
Athenians being had in suspicion by the Lacedaemonians, join with the Argiues.
made it a heinous matter; and conceiving that they had better deserved at the
Lacedaemonians hands, as soon as they were Lacedaemonians against the Persian,
and became Confederates with their Enemies the Argiues; and then both Argiues
and Athenians took the same Oath, and made the same League with the
Thessalians.

The Helotes in Ithome, after ten years siege, compound, and quit Peloponnesus.
Those in Ithome, when they could no longer hold out, in the tenth year of the
Siege, rendered the place to the Lacedaemonians, upon condition of security to
depart out of Peloponnesus, and that they should no more return; and whosoever
should be taken returning, to be the Slave of him that should take For the
Lacedaemonians had before been warned by a certain answer of the Pythian
Oracle, to let go the Suppliant of Jupiter Ithometes. So they came forth,
they, and their Wives, and their Children. And the Athenians, for hatred they
bore to the Lacedaemonians, The Athenians receive them, and place them in
Naupactus.
received them, and put them into Lepanto.
Naupactus, which City they had lately taken from the Locrians of Ozolae.
Megara reuolteth from the Lacedaemonians to the Athenians.
The Megareans also revolted from the Lacedaemonians, and came to the League of
the Athenians, because they were holden down by the Corinthians, with a War
about the limits of their Territories. Whereupon Megara and Pegae were put into
the hands of Athenians; who built for the Megareans, the long Walls, from the
City to The Haven and Arsenall of Megara.
Nisaea, and maintained them with a Garrison of their own. And from hence it
was chiefly, that the vehement hatred grew of the Corinthians against the
Athenians. Moreover, Inarus, the son of Psammetticus, The Athenians send an
Army into Egypt, to aid the Rebels against the King of Persia.
an African, King of the Africans that confine on Egypt, making War from
Marea, above Pharus, caused the greatest part of Egypt to rebel against the
King Artaxerxes; and when he had taken the government of them Athenians to
assist him; who chancing to be then warring on Cyrus, with 200. Galleys, part
their own, and part their Confederates, left Cyrus, and went to him. And going
from the Sea, up the River of Nilus, after they had made themselves Masters of
the River, and of two parts of the City of Cairo.
Memphis, assaulted the third part, called the White-Wall. Within were of the
Medes and Persians, such as had escaped, and of the Egyptians, such as had not
revolted amongst the rest. The Athenians came also with a Fleet to Halias, The
Athenians fight by Sea, against the Corinthians and Epidaurians.
and landing Corinthians and Epidaurians, and the Corinthians had the Victory.
After that, against the Peloponnesians.
After this, the Athenians fought by Sea against the Fleet of the
Peloponnesians at Some Island (...) Peloponnesus* whose (...) is not now know^^.
Then against the Aeginet^*
Cecryphalea, and the Athenians had the Victory. After this again, the War
being on foot of the Athenians, against the Aeginetae, a great Battle was
fought between them by Sea, upon the Coast of Aegina, the Confederates of both
sides being at the same; in which the Athenians had the Victory; and having
taken 70. Galleys, landed their Army, and besieged the City, under the
Conduct of Leocrates, the son of Straebus. After this, The Corinthians aid
Aegina
the Peloponnesians desiring to aid the Aeginetae, sent over into Aegina it
self three hundred men of Arms, of the same that had before aided the
Corinthians and Epidaurians, and with other Forces, seized on the top of A
ridge of a (...) the entrance into the (...).
Geranea. And the Corinthians, and their Confederates, came down from thence,
into the Territory of Megara; supposing that the Athenians, having much of
their Army absent in Aegina, and in Egypt, would be unable to aid the
Megareans, or if they did, would be forced to rise from before Aegina. But the
Athenians stirred not from Aegina, but those that remained Athens, both young
and old, under the conduct of Myronides, went to Megara; and after they had
fought with doubtful victory, they parted asunder again; with an opinion in
both sides, not to have had the worse in the Action. And the Athenians (who
notwithstanding had rather the better) when the Corinthians were gone away,
erected a Trophie. But the Corinthians having been reviled at their return,
by the ancient men of the City, about 12. days after, came again prepared,
and set up their Trophie likewise, as if the Victory had been theirs.
Heerevpon Athenians sallying out of Megara, The Corinthians receive a great
loss in Megaris.
with a huge shout, both slew those that were setting up the Trophie, and
charging the rest, got the victory* The Corinthians being overcome, went their
way; but a good part of them, being hard followed, and missing their way,
lighted into the enclosed ground of a private man, which fenced with a great
Ditch, had no passage through: which the Athenians perceiving, opposed them at
the place by which they entered, with their men of Arms, and encompassing the
ground with their light armed Soldiers, killed those that Corinthians; but the
rest of their Army got home again. About this time the Athenians began the
building of their long Walls, The Athenians build their long Walls, from both
sides of the City to the Sea.
from the City down to the Sea, the one reaching to the Haven called
Phaleron, the other to Peiraeus. The Phoceans also making War upon Bocum,
Cytinium, and Erineus, Towns that belonged to the The Doreans, the Mother
Nation of the Lacedaemonians, inhabited a little Country on the North side of
Phocis, called Doris, and Terapolis, from the four Cities it contained; of
which those here mentioned were three, and the fourth was Pindus.
Doreans, of whom the Lacedaemonians are descended, and having taken one of
them, The Lacedaemonians, under the conduct of Nicomedes, the son of
Cleombrotus, in the place of Pleistoanactes, son of King Pausanias, who was
yet in minority, sent unto the aid of the Doreans, 1500. men of Arms of their
own, and of their Confederates ten thousand. Phoceans upon composition to
surrender the Town they had taken, they went their ways again. Now, if they
would go home by Sea through the Gulf of Corinth.
Crissaean Gulf, the Athenians going about with their Fleet, would be ready
to stop them; and to pass over Geranea, they thought unsafe, because the
Athenians had in their hands Megara, and Pegae: For Geranea was not only a
difficult passage of it self, but was also always guarded by the Athenians.
They thought good therefore to stay amongst the Boeotians, and Athenians, that
privily solicited them to come to the City, hoping to have put the people out
of government, and to have demolished the Long Walls, then in building. The
Lacedaemonians fight with the Athenians at Tanagra.
But the Athenians, with the whole power of their City, and 1000. Argiues, and
other Confederates, as they could be gotten together, in all 14000. men, went
out to meet them: for there was suspicion that they came thither to depose the
Democracie. There also came to the Athenians certain Horsemen out of Thessaly,
which in the Battle turned to the Lacedaemonians. They fought at Tanagra of
Boeotia, and the Lacedaemonians had the Victory, but the slaughter was great on
both sides. Then the Lacedaemonians entering into the Territories of Megara, and
cutting down the Woods before them, returned home by the way of Geranea and
the Isthmus. Upon the two and sixtieth day after this Battle, the Athenians,
under the conduct of Myronides, The Athenians overthrow the Boeotians at
Oenophyta, [that is to say, the Vineyards] and subdue Boeotia and Phocis.
made a Journey against the Boeotians, and overthrew them at Oenophyta, and
brought the Territories Boeotia and Phocis under their obedience; and withal
razed Tanagra, and took of the wealthiest of the Locrians of Opus, 100.
Hostages; and finished also at the same time, their long Walls, at home. After
this, Aegina also yielded to the Athenians, on these conditions, Aegina yielded
to the Athenians.
That they should have their Walls pulled down, and should deliver up their
Galleys, and pay their taxed tribute for the time to come. Also the Athenians
made a Voyage about Peloponnesus, The Athenians sail round Peloponnesus, and
waste it.
wherein they burnt the Arsenall of the Lacedaemonians Navy, took A City of
Corinthians, near the River Tuenas.
Chalcis, a City of the Corinthians; and landing their Forces in Sycionia,
overcame in fight those that made head against them. All this while the
Athenians stayed Egypt, and saw much variety of War. First the Athenians
were Masters of Egypt. And the King of Persia sent one Megabazus, a Persian,
with money to Lacedaemon, to procure the Peloponnesians to invade Attica, and
by that means to draw the Athenians out of Egypt. But when this took no
effect, and money was spent to no purpose, Megabazus returned with the money he
had left, into Asia. And then was Megabazus the son of Zopirus, a Persian,
sent into Egypt, with great Forces, and coming in by Land, The end of the
Athenians Forces in Egypt.
overthrew the Egyptians and their Confederates Grecians out of Memphis, and
finally enclosed them in the I Will of Prosopis; There he besieged them a year
and a half, till such time as having dreined the Channel, and turned the
Water another way, he made their Galleys lie aground, and the Island for the
most part Continent, and so came over, and won the Island with Land-Souldiers.
Thus was the Army of the Grecians lost, after six years War; and few of
many passing through Africa, saved themselves in Cyrene: but Egypt returned to
the obedience of the King, except only Amyrtaeus, that reigned in the Fennes,
for him they could not bring in, both because the Fennes are great, and the
people of the Fennes, of all the Egyptians the most warlike. But Inarus, King
of the Africans, and Author of all this stir in Egypt, was taken by treason,
and crucified. A supply of Athenians going to Egypt, defeated by the forces of
the King.
The Athenians moreover had sent fifty Galleys more into Egypt, for a supply
of those that were there already; which putting in at Mendesium, one of the
mouths of Nilus, knew nothing of what had happened to Phoenician Fleet, lost
the greatest part of their Galleys, and escaped home again Athenians, and
their Confederates into Egypt.

Also Orestes the son of Echecratidas, King of the Thessalians, driven out of
Thessaly, persuaded the Athenians to restore him: The Athenians invade Thessaly
And the Athenians, taking with them the Boeotians and Phocaeans, their
Confederates, made War against Famous for the Battle betwe^ne Iul* Caesar,
and Cn. Pompeius.
Pharsalus, a City of Thessaly; and were Masters of the Field, as far as
they strayed not from the Army, (for the Th^ssalian Horsemen kept them from
straggling) but could not win the City, nor yet perform any thing else
Orestes with them. Not long after this, a thousand Athenians went aboard the
Galleys that lay at Pegae, (for Pegae was in the hands of the Athenians) under
the command of Pericles the son of Xantippus, and sailed into Sicyonia, and
landing, put to flight such of the Sicyonians as made head; The Athenians under
Pericles besiege Oeniades.
and then presently took up forces in Achaea; and putting over, made War on
Oenias, a City of Acarnania, which they besieged; nevertheless they took it
not, but returned home.

Truce for 5. year between the Athenians and Peloponnesians.
Three years after this, was a Truce made between the Peloponnesians and
Athenians for five years; and the Athenians gave over the Grecian War, and
with 200. Galleys, part their own, and part their Confederates, under the
conduct of Cimon, made War on Cyprus. Of these, there went 60. Sail into
Egypt, The Athenians war on Cyprus.
sent for by Amyrtaeus, that reigned in the Fennes, and the rest lay at the
Siege of Citium. dies.
But Cimon there dying, and a Famine arising in the Army, they left Citium,
and when they had passed Salamine in Cyprus, fought at once both by Sea and
Land, against Phoenicians, Cyprians, and Cilicians and having gotten victory in
both, returned home, and with them the rest of their Fleet, The Holy War.
now come back from Egypt. After this, the Lacedaemonians took in hand the
War, called the Holy War; and having won the Temple at Delphi, delivered
the possession thereof to the Delphians. But the Athenians afterward, when the
Lacedaemonians were gone, came with their Army, and regaining it, delivered
the possession to the Phocaeans. Some space of time after this, the Outlawes of
Boeotia, being seized of Orchomenus and Chaeronea, Boeotia, the Athenians made
The Athenians recover Chaeronea, taken by the Boeotian Outlawes.
with a thousand men of Arms of their own, and as many of their Confederates
as severally came in, under the conduct of Tolmidas, the son of Tolmaeus. And
when they had taken Chaeronea, they carried away the Inhabitants Captives, and
leaving a Garrison in the City, departed. In their return, those Outlawes
that were in Orchomenus, together with the Locrians of Opus, and the Euboean
Outlawes, and others of the same Faction, set upon them at Coronea, The
Athenians defeated at Coronea by the Outlawes, lose Boeotia.
and ouercomming the Athenians in Battle, some they slew, Athenians
relinquished all Boeotia, and made peace, with condition to have their
Prisoners released. So the Outlawes and the rest, returned, and lived again
under their own Laws. Euboea reuolteth from the Athenians.
Not long after, revolted Euboea from the Athenians; and when Pericles had
already passed over into it with the Athenian Army, there was brought him
news, Megara reuolteth*
that Megara was likewise revolted, and that the Peloponnesians were about to
invade Attica, and that the Megareans had slain the Athenian Garrison, except
only such as fled into Nisaea. Megareans, when they revolted, had gotten to
their aid, the Corinthians, Epidaurians, and Sicyonians. Wherefore Pericles
forthwith withdrew his Army from Euboea; and the Lacedaemonians afterward
brake into Attica, and wasted the Country about Eleusine, and Thriasium, under
the conduct of Pleistoonax, the son of Pausanias, King of Lacedaemon, and
came no further on, but so went away. After which the Athenians passed again
into Euboea, and totally subdued it; the Hestiaeans they put quite out, Euboea
subdued by the Athenians.
taking their Territory into their own hands; but ordered the rest of Euboea,
according to composition made. Being returned from Euboea, within a while
after, they made a Peace with the Lacedaemonians and their Confederates, for
thirty years, Peace for 30. years, between the Athenians and Peloponnesians.
and rendered Nisaea, Achaia, Pegae, and Troezene, (for these places the
Athenians held of theirs) to the Peloponnesians. In the sixth year of this
Peace, fell out the War between the Samians and Milesians, concerning
Priene; and the Milesians being put to the worse, came to Athens, and exclaimed
against the Samians; wherein also certain private men of Samos it self, took
part with the Milesians, out of desire Athenians went to Samos with a Fleet of
forty Galleys, The Athenians war upon Samos.
and set up the Democratie there, and took of the Samians 50. Boys, Lemnos,
S^alimine.
and set a Guard upon them, they came home. But certain of the Samians (for
some of them, not enduring the popular government, were fled into the
Continent) entering into a League with the mightiest of them in Samos, and with
Pissuthnes, the son of Hystaspes, who then was Governor of Sardis, and
leuying about 700. auxiliary Soldiers, passed over into Samos in the evening,
and first set upon the popular Faction, and brought most of them into their
power, and then stealing their Hostages out of Lemnos, they revolted, and
delivered the Athenian Guard, and Pissuthnes, and withal prepared to make
War against Miletus. With these also revolted the Byzantines. The Athenians,
when they heard of these things, sent to Samos 60. Galleys, 16. whereof they
did not use, (for some of them went into Caria, to observe the Fleet of the
Phoenicians, and some to fetch in succors from Chius and Lesbos;) but with the
44. that remained, under the command of Pericles and 9. others, fought with 70.
Galleys of the Samians, (whereof Miletus; and the Athenians had the Victory.
After this came a supply of forty Galleys more from Athens, Si^. Mitilene.
and from Chios and Lesbos 25. With these having landed their men, they
overthrew the Samians in Battle, and besieged the City; which they enclosed
with a triple Wall, and shut it up by Sea with their Galleys. But Pericles
taking with him 60. Galleys out of the Road, made haste toward Caunus and
Caria, upon intelligence of the coming against them of the Phoenician Fleet.
For Stesagoras with five Galleys, was already Samos, and others out of other
places, to meet the Phoenicians. In the mean time, the Samians coming
suddenly forth with their Fleet, and falling upon the Harbor of the Athenians,
which was unfortified, sunk the Galleys that kept watch before it, and
overcame the rest in fight; insomuch as they became Masters of the Sea near
their Coast, for about fourteen days together, importing and exporting what
they pleased. But Pericles returning, shut them up again with his Galleys; and
Athens a supply of forty Not the Writer of the History.
Thucydides, Agnon, and Phormio, and twenty with Tlepolemus and Anticles; and
from Chios and Lesbos, forty more. And though the Samians fought against these
a small battle at Sea, yet unable to hold out any longer, in the ninth month
of the Siege, Samos yielded to the Athenians.
they rendered the City upon composition: Namely, to demolish their Walls; to
give Hostages; to deliver up their Navy; and to repay the money spent by the
Athenians in the War, at days appointed. And the Byzantines also yielded,
with condition to remain subject to them, in the same manner as they had been
before their revolt.

Now not many years after this, The business about Corcyra and Potidaea,
before related.
happened the matters before related, of the Corcyraeans and the Potidaeans,
and whatsoever other intervenient pretext of this War. These things done by
the Graecians, one against another, or against the Barbarians, came to pass
all within the compass of fifty years, at most, from the time of the
departure of Xerxes, to the beginning of this present War: Between the
Persian and Peloponnesian War, fifty years.
In which time, the Athenians both assured their Government over the
Confederates, and also much enlarged their own particular Lacedaemonians saw,
and opposed not, save now and then a little, but (as men that had ever before
been slow to War without necessity, and also for that they were hindered
sometimes with domestique War) for the most part of the time stirred not
against them; till now at last, when the power of the Athenians was advanced
manifestly indeed, and that they had done injury to their Confederates; they
could forbear no longer, but thought it necessary to go in hand with the
War with all diligence, and to pull down, if they could, the Athenian
Lacedaemonians themselves decreed, That the Peace was broken, and that the
Athenians had done unjustly. And also having sent to Delphi, and enquired of
Apollo, whether they should have the better in the War, or not; The Oracle
consulted by the Lacedaemonians, encourages them to the War.
they received (as it is reported) this Answer: That if they warred with their
whole power, they should have victory, and that himself would be on their
side, both called and uncalled.

Now when they had assembled their Confederates again, they were to put it to
the question amongst them, Whether Consultation of the Peloponnesians in
general, whether they should enter into a War, or not.
And the Ambassadors of the several Confederates coming in, and the Council
set, as well the rest spoke what they thought fit, most of them Athenians of
injury, and desiring the War; as also the Corinthians, who had before
entreated the Cities, every one severally to give their Vote for the War,
fearing lest Potidaea should be lost before help came, being then present,
spoke last of all to this effect.

THE ORATION OF THE Ambassadors of CORINTH.
COnfederates, we can no longer accuse the Lacedaemonians, Athenians, need not
be taught to beware of them; yet it were good for those that dwell up in the
Land, and not as we, in places of traffic on the Sea side, to know, that
unless they defend those below, they shall with a great deal the more
difficulty, both carry to the Sea, the commodities of the Athenians, we will
also in due time lay it down. And it is for many reasons probable, that we
shall have the victory. First, because we exceed them in number: and next,
because when we go to any action intimated, we shall be all of one All Land
Soldiers, all of one manner of Arming and discipline.
fashion. And as for a Navy, wherein consists the strength of the Athenians,
we shall provide it, both out of every ones particular wealth, and with the
money at Delphi and Olympia. For taking this at interest, we shall be able to
draw from them their foreign Mariners, by offer of greater wages: for the
Forces of the Athenians, are rather mercenarie then domesticke. Whereas our
own power is less obnoxious Athenians Athenians take not our money from us,
and even with that do us mischief. We have also many other ways of War;
as the revolt of their Confederates, which is the principal means of
lessening their revenue; Though this be here said in the person of a
Corinthian, yet it was never thought on by any of that side, till Alcibiades
put it into their heads, when he revolted from his Country.
the building of Forts in their Territory, and many other things which one
cannot now foresee. For the course of War is guided by nothing less then by
the points of our account, but of it self contriueth most things upon the
occasion. Athenians are a match for us all at once, and one City after
another, too strong for us. Insomuch that unless we oppose them jointly, and
every Nation and City set to it unanimously, they will overcome us asunder,
without labor. And know, that to be vanquished (though it trouble you to hear
it) brings with it no less then manifest servitude: which, but to mention as a
doubt, as if so many Cities could suffer Peloponnesus. For it must then be
thought, that we are either punished upon merit, or else that we endure it
out of fear, and so appear degenerate from our Greece has been restored;
whereas we for our parts, assure not so much as our own; but claiming the
reputation of having deposed Tyrants in the several Cities, suffer a Tyrant
City to be established amongst us. Wherein we know not how we can avoid one of
these three great faults, Foolishness, Cowardice, or Negligence. For
certainly, you avoid them not, by imputing it to that which has done most
men hurt, Contempt of the Enemy: for Contempt, because it has made too many
men miscarry, has gotten the name of Foolishness. But to what end should we
object matters past, more then is necessary to the present, labor for the
future. For it is peculiar to our Country to attain honor by labor; and
though you be now somewhat advanced in honor and power, you must not therefore
change the custom; for there is no reason that what was gotten in want, should
be lost by wealth. But we should confidently go in hand with the War, as
for many other causes, so also for this, that both the God has by his Oracle
advised us thereto, and promised to be with us himself: and also for that the
rest of Greece some for fear, and some for profit, are ready to take our
parts. Nor are you they that first break the Peace, (which the God, in as much
as he does encourage us to the War, judges violated by them) but you fight
rather in defense of the same. For not he breaks the Peace, that takes
revenge, but he that is the first invader^ So that, Seeing it will be every
way good to make the War, and since in common we persuade the same; and
seeing also that both to the Cities, and to private men, it will be the most
profitable course, put off no longer, neither the defense of the Potidaeans,
who are Doreans, and besieged (which was wont to be contrary) by Ionians, nor
the recovery of the liberty of the rest of the Grecians. For it is a case that
admits not delay, when they are some of them (Confederates) you are now at a
necessity, and that this is the best advice. And therefore give your Votes for
the War, not fearing the present danger, but coveting the long Peace
proceeding from it. (For though by war grows the confirmation of Peace, yet
for love of ease to refuse the war, does not likewise avoid the danger. But
making account, that a Tyrant City set up in Greece, is set up alike over all,
and reigns over some already, and the rest in intention, we shall bring it
again into order by the war; and not Grecians out of servitude. Thus said
the Corinthians.

The Lacedaemonians, The War decreed by all the Confederates.
when they had heard the opinion of them all, brought the (...). The fashion it
seems, as now in some places, to prsent a Box or Vrne, and a little Ball, or
stone or bean, to him that gave his Vote, to the end he might put his Ball
into the part of the Vrne that was for affirmation or negation, as he saw cause.
Balls to all the Confederates present, in order, from the greatest State to
the least; And the greatest part gave their Votes for the War. Now after the
War was decreed, though it were impossible for them to go in hand with it
presently, because they were unprovided, and every State thought good without
delay, severally to furnish themselves of what was necessary, yet there passed
not fully a year in this preparation, before Attica

IN THE MEAN TIME, The Lacedaemonians send Ambassages to the Athenians, about
expiation of Sacriledges, only to pick better quarrels for the War.
they sent Ambassadors to the Athenians, with certain Criminations, to the
end that if they would give ear to nothing, they might have all the pretext
that could be, for raising of the War. And first the Lacedaemonians, by
their Ambassadors to the Athenians, required them to Excommunication extending
also to posterity.
banish such as were under curse of the Goddess Minerua, for Pollution of
Sanctuary. Which Pollution was thus. There had Cylon an Athenian, a man that
had been Victor in the Olympian exercises, of much Nobility and power amongst
those of old time, and that had married the Daughter of Theagenes, a Megarean,
in those days Tyrant of Megara. To this Cylon, asking counsel at Delphi, the
God answered, That on the greatest Festival day, he should seize the
Cittadell of Athens. He therefore having gotten Forces of Theagenes, and
persuaded his Friends to the Enterprise, seized on the Cittadell, at the time
of the Olimpicke Holidayes in Peloponnesus, with intention to take upon him the
Jupiter to be the greatest; and to touch withal on his Particular, in that he
had been Victor in the Olympian exercises. But whether the Feast spoken of,
were The Oracles were always obscure, that evasion might be found to salve
their credit; and whether they were the imposture of the Devil, or of men,
which is the more likely, they had no presention, nor secure wise conjecture of
the future.
meant to be the greatest in Attica, or in some other place, neither did he
himself consider, nor the Oracle make manifest. For there is also amongst the
Athenians the Diasia, which is called the greatest Feast of Jupiter Meilichius,
and is celebrated without the City; wherein, in the confluence of the whole
people, many men offered Sacrifices* not of living Creatures, but Images of
living creatures, made of paste.
such as was the fashion of the Natives of the place. But he, supposing he
had rightly understood the Oracle, laid hand to the enterprise; and when the
Athenians heard of Athenians wearied with the Siege, went most of them away,
and left both the Guard of the Cittadell, The Governors or Rulers of the City.
and the whole business to the nine Archontes, with absolute authority to
order the same, as to them it should seem good. For at that time, most of the
afaffaires of the Commonweal were administered by those 9. Archontes. Now
those that were besieged with Cylon, were for want both of victual and Water,
in very evil estate; and therefore Cylon, and a Brother of his, fled privily
suppliants, by the of Minerua.
Altar that is in the Cittadell: And the Athenians, to whose charge was
committed the guard of the place, raising them, upon promise to do them no
harm, put them all to the Sword. The Lacedaemonians that (...) ra^gne of
Codrus (...) Athens, and were defected, some of them being ent^ed the City,
could not get aw^y, but sat at those (...), and were di^missed safe, but some
of them slain as they (...).
Also they had put to death some of those that had taken Sanctuary at the
Altars of the (...). Eumenides.
Severe Goddesses, as they were going away. And from this, the Athenians, both
themselves and their posterity, were (...).
accursed and sacrilegious persons. Hereupon the Athenians banished those that
were under the curse: and Cleomenes, a Lacedaemonian, together with the
Athenians, in a Sedition banished them afterward again: and not only so, but
dis-enterred and cast forth the bodies of such of them as were dead.
Nevertheless there returned of them afterward again; and there are of their
race in the City unto this day. This Pollution therefore the Lacedaemonians
required them to purge their City of. Principally forsooth, as taking part
with the Gods; but knowing withal, Pericles the son of Xantippus, was by the
Mothers side one of that Race. For they thought, if Pericles were banished, the
Athenians would the more easily be brought to yield to their desire.
Nevertheless, they hoped not so much, that he should be banished, as to
bring him into the envy of the City, as if the misfortune of him, were in
part the cause of the War. For being the most powerful of his time, and
having the sway of the State, he was in all things opposite to the
Lacedaemonians, not suffering the Athenians to give them the least way,
Pericles always adverse to the Lacedaemonians.
but

Athenians required the Lacedaemonians to banish such as were guilty of breach
of Sanctuary at Toenarus. For the Lacedaemonians, The (...) Lacedaemonians to
expiate the violation of (...) also on their parts.
when they had caused their Helot^s* Suppliants in the Temple of Neptune at
Toenarus, to forsake Sanctuary, slew them. For which cause, they themselves
think it was, that the great Earthquake happened afterward at Sparta.

Also they required them to purge their City of the pollutio^ of Sanctuary, in
the Temple of Pallas Chalcioeca, The occasion and manner of the death of (...)
in the Temple of (...) Chalcioeca*
which was thus: After that Pausanias the Lacedaemonian was recalled Spartans
from his charge in Hellespont, and having bin called in question by them, was
absolved, though he was no more sent abroad by the State, yet he went again
into Hellespont, in a Gallie of Hermione, as a private man, without leave of
the Lacedaemonians, to the Grecian War, as he gave out, but in truth to
negotiate with the King, as he had before begun, aspiring to the
Principality of Greece. Now the benefit that he had laid up with the King, and
the beginning of the whole business, was at first from this: When after his
return from Cyprus he had Byzantium, when he was there the first time, (which
being holden by the Medes, there were taken in it, some near to the King, and
of his kindred) unknown to the rest of the Confederates, he sent unto the
King those near ones of his which he had taken, and gave out, they were run
away. This he practiced with one Gongylus, Pausanias practices with the King
of Persia against the State of Greece,
and Eretrian, to whose charge he had committed both the Town of Byzantium,
and the Prisoners. Also he sent Letters unto him, which Gongylus carried,
wherein, as was afterward known, was thus written.

The Letter of Pausanias to the King.
PAVSANIAS, General of the Spartans, being desirous to do thee a courtesy,
sends back unto thee these men, whom he has by Arms taken prisoners: And
I have a purpose, if the same seem also good unto thee, to take thy Daughter
in marriage, and to bring Sparta and the rest of Greece, into thy subjection.
These things I account my self able to bring to pass, if I may communicate my
counsels with thee. If therefore any of


These were the Contents of the Writing. Xerxes being Artabazus the son of
Pharnaces, to the Sea side, with commandment to take the government of the
Province of Dascylis, and to dismiss Megabates, that was Governor there
before: and withal, gives him a Letter to Pausanias, which he commanded him
to send over to him with speed to Byzantium, and to show him the Seal, and
well and faithfully to perform, whatsoever in his affairs, he should by
Pausanias be appointed to do. Artabazus, after he arrived, having in other
things done as he was commanded, sent over the Letter, wherein was written
this answer.

The Letter of Xerxes to Pausanias.
THVS says King Xerxes to Pausanias: For the men which thou have saved, and
sent over the Sea unto me, from Byzantium, thy benefit is laid up in our
House, indelebly registered for ever: And I like also of what thou have
propounded: And let neither night nor day make thee remiss in the performance
of what thou have promised unto me. Neither be thou hindered Artabazus, a good
man, whom I have sent unto thee, do boldly both mine and thine own business;
as shall be most fit, for the dignity and honor of us both.


Pausanias grows proud upon the receipt of these Letters.
Pausanias having received these Letters, whereas he was before in great
authority, for his conduct at Plataea, became now many degrees more elevated;
and endured no more to live after the accustomed manner of his Country, but
Byzantium, after the fashion of Persia; and when he went through Thrace, had a
Guard of Medes and Egyptians, and his Table likewise after the Persian manner.
Nor was he able to conceal his purpose, but in trifles made apparent
beforehand, the greater matters he had conceived of the future. He became
moreover difficult of access, and would be in such choleric passions toward
all men indifferently, that no man might endure to approach him; which was also
none of the least causes why the Confederates turned from him to the Athenians.
When the Lacedaemonians heard of it, they called Hermione, it appeared that he
continued still in the same practices; and after he was forced out of
Byzantium by siege of the Athenians, returned not to Sparta, but news came,
that he had seated himself at Colonae, in the Country of Troy, practicing
still with the Barbarians, and making his abode there for no good purpose: Then
the Ephori forbore no longer, but sent unto him a public Officer, with the
Scytale, properly a Staff; here, a form of Letter, used by the
Lacedaemonians, in this manner; they had two round staves of one bigness,
whereof the State kept one, and the man whom they employed abroad, kept the
other; and when they would write, they wrapped about it a small thong of
Parchment; and having thereon written, took it off again, and sent only that
thong, which wrapped likewise about the other staff, the letters joined
again, and might be read. This served in stead of Cyfre. It seems Pausanias
retained his Staff, from the time he had charge at Byzantium.
Scytale, commanding him not to Sparta the second time. And first he was by the
Ephori committed to ward; (for the Ephori have power to do this to their King,)
but afterward procuring his enlargement, he came forth, and exhibited
himself to Justice, against such as had any thing to allege against him. And
though the Spartans had against Plistarchus the Son of Leonidas being King,
and as yet in minority, Pausanias, who was his Cousin german, had the tuition
of him: yet by his licentious behavior, and affectation of the Barbarian
customs, he gave much cause of suspicion, that he meant not to live in the
equality of the present State. They considered also, that he differed in
manner of life, from the discipline established: amongst other things, Tripode
at Delphi, Pausanias his ambition, in dedication of the Tripode at Delphi.
which the Grecians had dedicated, as the best of the spoil of the Medes, he
had caused to be inscribed of himself in particular, this Elegiaque Verse:
PAVSANIAS, Greek General,
Having the Medes defeated,
To Phoebus in record thereof,



But the Lacedaemonians then presently defaced that inscription Tripode, and
engraued thereon by name, all the Cities that had joined in the overthrow of
the Medes, and dedicated it so, This therefore was numbered amongst the offenses
of Pausanias, and was thought to agree with his present design, so much the
rather, for the condition he was now in. They had information further,
Pausanias accused of practice with the Helotes.
that he had in hand some practice with the Helotes: and so he had: For he
promised them, not only manumission, but also freedom of the City, if they
would rise with him, and cooperate in the whole business. But Helotes, would
they proceed against him, but kept the custom which they have in their own
cases, not hastily to give a peremptory Sentence against a Spartan, without
unquestionable proof. Till at length (as it is reported) purposing to send
over to Artabazus his last Letters to the King, he was bewrayed unto them by a
man of Argilus, in time past, his (...), taken both in good and bad sense, for
a man with whom another man (...) in love.
Minion, and most faithful to him: who being terrified with the cogitation,
that not any of those which had been formerly sent, had ever returned, got
Pausanias, (to the end that if his jealousy were false, or that he should
need to alter any thing in the Letter, it might not be discovered) and opened
the Letter, He sends Letters to the King, which are opened by the way.
wherein (as he had suspected the addition of some such clause) he found
himself also written down to be murdered. The Ephori, when these Letters
were by him shown unto them, though they believed the matter much more then
they did before, yet desirous to hear somewhat themselves from Pausanias his
own mouth; (the man being upon design gone to Taenarus Ephori; and Pausanias
coming to him, and asking the cause of his taking Sanctuary*) they plainly
heard the whole matter. For the man both expostulated with him, for what he
had written about him, and from point to point discovered all the practice:
saying, that though he had never boasted unto him these and these services
concerning the King, he must yet have the honor, as well as many other of his
servants, Pausanius, by the art of the Ephori, made to betray himself.
to be slain. And Pausanias himself

Now the Ephori, when they had distinctly heard him, for that time went their
way, and knowing now the certain truth, intended to apprehend him in the
City. It is said, that when he was to be apprehended in the Street, He
flies into Sanctuary
he perceived by the countenance of one of the Ephori coming toward him,
what they came for: and when (...). Both the Temple* and the ground
consecrated, wherein stand to the Temple, Al^^, and ed^fices for the ^se of
their Religion.
Close of the Temple of Pallas Chalciaeca, and got in before they ouertooke
him. Now the (...). The Temple or Church of the Goddess.
Temple it self was hard by, and entering into a House belonging to the Temple,
to avoid the injury of the open air, there staid. They that pursued him,
could not then overtake him: but afterward they took off the roof and the
doors of the house, and watching a time when he was within, beset the House,
and mured him up, and leaving a Guard there, famished him. When Caeada, a pit
near Lacedaemon.
Caeada, where they use to cast in Malefactors: yet afterward they thought
good to bury him in some place thereabouts: But the Oracle of Delphi commanded
the Lacedaemonians afterward, both to remove the Sepulcher from the place where
he dyed, (so that he lies now in the entry of the Temple, as is evident by the
inscription of the Pillar) Chalciaeca, for that one. Whereupon they set up two
brazen Statues, and dedicated the same unto her for Pausanias. Now the
A^henians (the God himself having judged this a Pollution of Sanctuary)
required the Lacedaemonians to banish out of their City, such as were touched
with the same.

At the same time that Pausanias came to his end, Themistocles in the same
Treason.
the Lacedaemonians by their Ambassadors to the Athenians, accused
Themistocles, for that he also had medized together Pausanias, having
discovered it by proofs against Pausanias, and desired that the same
punishment might be likewise inflicted upon him. Whereunto consenting, (for A
kind of banishment, wherein the Athenians wrote upon the shell of an Oyster
the name of him they would banish: used principally against great men, whose
power or faction they feared might breed alteration in the State: and was but
for certain years.

Themistocles, pursued by the Athenians and Peloponnesians, flies to Corcyra.


Ostracisme, and though his ordinary residence was at Argos, he traveled to
and fro in other places of Peloponnesus,) they sent certain men in company of
the Lacedaemonians, who were willing to pursue him, with command to bring him
in, wheresoever they could find him. But Themistocles having had notice of it
beforehand, flies out of Peloponnesus into Corcyra, to the people of which
City, he had formerly been beneficial. But the Corcyraeans alleging that
they durst not keep him there, for fear of displeasing both the Lacedaemonians
Athenians, convey him into the opposite Continent: and being pursued by the men
thereto appointed, asking continually which way he went, he was compelled at
a straight, to turn in unto Admetus, King of the Molossians, Thence is put
over to the maine Land, and goes to the King of the Melossions.
his enemy. The King himself being then from home, he became a suppliant to
his Wife, and by her was instructed, to take their (...). Cornelius Nepos in
the life of Themistocles, says it was their daughter.
Son with him, and sit down at the Altar of the House. When Admetus not long
after returned, he made himself known to him, and desired him, that though
he had opposed him Athens, not to revenge it on him now, in the time of his
flight: saying, that being now the weaker, he must needs suffer under the
stronger; whereas noble revenge is of equals, upon equal terms: and that he
had been his Adversary but in matter of profit, not of life; whereas, if he
delivered him up (telling him withal, for what, and by whom he was followed)
he deprived him of all means of saving his life. Admetus having heard him,
bade him arise, together with his Son, whom he held as he sat: which is the
most submisse supplication that is.

Not long after came the Lacedaemonians and the Athenians, and though they
alleged much to have him, yet he delivered him not, but sent him away by Land
to Pydna, Thence he is conveyed to Pydna.
upon the The Aegean Sea.
other Sea (a City belonging to King of Macedonia.
Alexander) because his purpose was to go to the Of Persia.
King: where finding a Ship bound for Ionia, he embarked, and was carried by
foul weather upon the the Fleet of the Athenians, that besieged Naxus. Being
afraid, he discovered to the Master (for he was unknown) who he In danger
to be cast upon the Athenians Fleet at Naxus, he makes himself known to the
Master of the Ship.
and for what he fled, and said, that unless he A^henians, he arrived
afterward at Ephesus. He arriueth at Ephesus.
And Themistocles having liberally rewarded him with money, (for he received
there, both what was sent him from his friends at Athens, and also Argos,) he
took his journey upwards, in company of a certain Persian of the The
Low Countries of Asia lying to the Aegean Sea.
Low Countries, and sent Letters to the King Artaxerxes, the Son of Xerxes
newly come to the Kingdom, wherein was written to this purpose: His Letter to
Artaxerxes.
I THEMISTOCLES am coming unto thee, who, of all the Grecians, as long as I
was forced to resist thy Father (writing here, how he had forewarned him of
the Grecians departure out of Salamis, and ascribing the then not breaking of
the Bridge, falsely unto himself.) and at this time to do thee many other
good services, I present my self, persecuted by the Grecians for thy
friendships sake. But I desire to have a years respite, that I may declare
unto thee the cause of my coming my self.




The King, as is reported, wondered what his purpose might be, and commanded
him to do as he had said. In this time of respite, he learned as much as he
could of the Language and fashions of the place; and a year after coming to
the Court, he was great with the King, more then ever had been any Grecian
before; both for his former dignity, and the hope of Greece, which he promised
to bring into his subjection; but especially for The praise of Themistocles.
For Themistocles was a man, in whom most truly was manifested the strength of
natural judgment, wherein he had something worthy His death.
But falling sick, he ended his life: some say he dyed voluntarily by
Poison, because he thought himself unable to perform what he had promised
to the King. His monument is in There is another City of that name in Greece.
Magnesia in Asia, in the Market place: for he had the government of that
Country, the King having bestowed upon him Magnesia, which yielded him fifty
Talents by year for his Cornelius Nepos in the life of Themistocles, says
that the King gave him these Cities with these words, Magnesia to find him
bread, Lampsacus wine, and Myus meat.
bread; and Lampsacus for his Wine, (for this City was in those Myus for his
meat. His bones are said, by his Kindred to have been brought home by his
own appointment, and buried in Attica, unknown to the Athenians: for it was
not lawful to bury one there, that had fled for Treason. These were the ends
of Pausanias the Lacedaemonian, and Themistocles the Athenian, the most famous
men of all the Grecians of their time. And this is that which the
Lacedaemonians did command, and were commanded, in their first Embassage,
touching the banishment of such as were

AFTER THIS, they sent Ambassadors again to Athens, The Athenians by
Ambassadors command the abrogation of the Act against the Megareans.
commanding them to leuy the Siege from before Potidaea, and to suffer Aegina
to be free; but principally, and most plainly telling them, that the War
should not be made, in case they would abrogate the Act concerning the
Megareans. By which Act, they were forbidden both the Fayres of Attica, and all
Ports within the Athenian dominion. But the Athenians would Megareans, for
having tilled holy ground, and vnset-out with bounds: and for receiving of
their Slaves that revolted. But at length, when the last Ambassadors from
Lacedaemon were arrived, namely, Rhamphias, Melesippus, and Agesander, The last
Ambassadors from Lacedaemo^, require the Athenians to lay down their dominion.
and spoke nothing of that which formerly they were wont, but only this, That
the Lacedaemonians desire that there should be Peace, which may be had, if you
will suffer the Grecians to be governed by their own Laws. The Athenians
consult what to answer.
The Athenians called an Assembly, and propounding their opinions amongst
Megareans, ought not to stand in their way to Peace, but to be abrogated. And
Pericles the son of Xantippus, the principal man, at that time, of all
Athens, and most sufficient both for speech and action, gave his advice in such
manner as follows.


MEN of Athens, I am still not only of the same opinion, not to give way to
the Peloponnesians (notwithstanding, I know that men have not the same passions
in the War it self, which they have when they are incited to it, but change
their opinions with the events) but also I see, that I must now advise the same
things, or very near to what I have before delivered. And I require of you,
with whom my counsel shall take place, that Lacedaemonians, both formerly, and
especially now, take counsel how to do us mischief, is a thing manifest. For
whereas it is said, [in the Articles] that in our mutual controversies, we
shall give and receive trials of Judgment, and in the mean time, either
clear themselves of their accusations, by War rather then by words:
Potidaea, and to restore the Aeginetae to the liberty of their own Laws, and
to abrogate the Act concerning the Megareans. And they that come last, command
us to restore all the Grecians to their liberty. Now let none of you conceive
that we shall go to War for a trifle, by not abrogating the Act concerning
Megara, (yet this by them is pretended most, and that for the abrogation of it,
the War shall stay;) nor retain a scruple in your minds, as if a small
matter moved you to the War: for even this small matter contains the trial
and constancy of your resolution. Peloponnesians are (...).
men that live by their labor, without money, either in particular, or in
common stock. Besides, in long Wars, and by Sea, they are without
experience; for that the Wars which they have had one against another, have
been but short, through poverty; and as live by their labor.
such men can neither man their Fleets, nor yet send out their Armies by Land
very often; because they must be far from their own wealth, and yet by that
be maintained; and be besides barred the use of the Sea. It must be a (...).
stock of money, not forced Peloponnesians and their Confederates, though for
one Battle they be able to stand out against all Greece besides, yet to
maintain a War against such as have their preparations of another kind,
they are not able; in as much as not having one and the same counsel, they can
speedily perform nothing upon the occasion; and having equality of Of the
Peloponnesians and their Confederates, some were Doreans* some Aeolians, some
Boeotians.
races, every one will press his particular Persian war, yet have not
attained it fully. How then should husbandmen, not Seamen, whom also we will
not suffer to apply themselves to it, by lying continually upon them with so
great Fleets, perform any matter of value? Indeed, if they should be opposed
but with a few Ships, they might adventure, encouraging their want of
knowledge, with store of men; but awed by many, they will not stir that way;
and not applying themselves to it, (...).
by; but requiring rather, that whilst it is a learning, nothing else should
be done on the by. But say they should take the money at Olympia and Delphi,
and therewith, at greater wages, go about to draw from us the Strangers
employed in our Fleet; this indeed, if going aboard both our selves, and those
that dwell amongst us, we could not match them, were a dangerous matter. But
now, we can both do this, and (which is the principal thing) we have
Steeresmen, and other necessary men for the Greece. Besides that, not any of
these Strangers, upon trial, would be found content to fly his own Country,
and That is, of victory by Sea, where they were to be employed.
hope of victory, for a few days increase of wages, take part with the other
side. In this manner, or like to this, seems unto me to stand the case of
the Peloponnesians: Whereas ours is both free from what in theirs I have
reprehended, and has many great advantages besides. If they invade our
Territory by Land, we shall invade theirs by Sea. And when we have wasted
part of Peloponnesus, and they all Attica, yet shall theirs be the greater
loss. For they, unless by the sword, can get no other Territory in stead of
that we shall destroy: Whereas for us, there is other Land, both in the
Islands, and Continent: For the dominion of the Sea is a great matter. Consider
but this; If we dwelt in the Islands, whether Peloponnesians, far more in
number then our selves; (for though we give them an overthrow, we must fight
again with as many more: and if we be overthrown, we shall lose the help
of our Confederates, which are our strength; for when we cannot war upon
them, they will revolt) nor bewail ye the loss of Fields or Houses, but of
men's bodies: for men may acquire these, but these cannot acquire men. And if I
thought I should prevail, I would advise you to Peloponnesians, that you will
never the sooner obey them for such things as these. There be many other things
that give hope of victory, ( Thucydides has his mind here, upon the Defeat in
Sicily, which fell out many years after the death of Peric^^^ ^hereby it
seems, (...) his speech more to what Pericles might have said, then to what he
did say. (...) also ^e professes in general of his course in setting down
Speeches. Besides, he makes Pericles here to answer point by point to the
Oration of the Corinthians at Lacedaemon, as if he had been by, when it was
delivered: and uses the same manner in all opposite Orations.
in case you do not, whilst you are in this War, strive to enlarge your
dominion, and undergo other voluntary dangers; for I am afraid of our own
errors, more then of their designs,) but they shall be spoken of at another
time, in prosecution of the war it self. For the present, let us send away
these men with this Answer: That the Megareans shall have the liberty of our
Fayres and Ports, if the Lacedaemonians will also make no banishment of us nor
of our Confederates, as of Strangers. For neither our Act concerning Megara,
nor their banishment of Strangers, is forbidden in the Articles. Also, that we
will let the Grecian Cities be free, if they were so when the Peace was made;
and if the Lacedaemonians will also give leave unto their Confederates, to use
their freedom, not as shall serve the turn of the Lacedaemonians, but as they
themselves shall every one think good. Also, that we will stand to Judgment
according to the Articles, and will not begin the War, For this is both
just, Medes, did from less beginnings, nay abandoning the little they had, by
wisdom rather then Fortune, by courage rather then strength, both repel the
Barbarian, and advance this State to the height it now is at. Of whom we ought
not now to come short, but rather to revenge us by all means upon our enemies,
and do

Thus spoke Pericles.

The Athenians liking best of his advice, decreed as he would have them,
answering the Lacedaemonians according to his direction, both in particular as
he had spoken, and generally, That they would do nothing on command, The
Answer of the Athenians to the Ambassadors of Lacedaemon.
but were ready to answer their accusations upon equal terms, by way of
arbitrament. So the Ambassadors went home, and after these, there came no more.

These were the Quarrels and differences on either side, Epidamnus and Corcyra.
Nevertheless, there was still commerce betwixt them, and they went to each
other without any Herald, though not without jealousy. For the things that had
passed, were but the confusion of the Articles, and matter of the War to
follow.

FINIS.
THE SECOND BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF THVCYDIDES.
The principal Contents.
The entry of the Theban Soldiers into Plataea, by the Treason of some within.
Their repulse and slaughter. The irruption of the Peloponnesians into Attica.
The wasting of the Coast of Peloponnesus by the Athenian Fleet. The Public
Funeral of the first slain. The second invasion of Attica. The Pestilence in
the City of Athens. The Ambraciotes war against the Amphilochi. Plataea
assaulted. Besieged. The Peloponnesian Fleet beaten by Phormio, before the
Straight of the Gulf of Crissa. The same Fleet repaired, and reinforced and
beaten again by Phormio, before Naupactus. The attempt of the Peloponnesians
on Salamis. The fruitless expedition of the Thracians against the Macedonians.
This in the first 3. years of the War.

THE War between the Athenians Peloponnesians begins now, THE FIRST YEAR
OF THE WAR.
from the time they had no longer commerce one with another without a Herald,
and that having once begun it, they warred without intermission. And it is
written in order by Summers and Winters, according as from time to time the
several matters came to pass.

Euboea, was concluded for thirty years, lasted fourteen years; but
Priest^sse of Juno. By whose Priesthood they reckoned their years.
Chrysis, in Argos: Aenesias being the Ephore at Sparta, and Pythadorus Archon
of Athens, having then The Athenians began their years about the Summer
So^^^ce.

Plataea surprised by the Thebans by Treason.


two months of his government to come, in the sixth month after the Battle
at Potidaea, and in the beginning of the Spring, three hundred and odd
Thebans, led by Pythangelus the Son of Philides, and Diemporus, the son of
Oenotoridas, Peto (...). There were 11. of (...) in all, and had the (...)
command of the Boeotians in their Wars, (...).
Boeotian Rulers, about the first Watch of the night, entered with their Arms
into Plataea, a City of Boeotia, and Confederate of the Athenians. They were
brought in, and the Gates opened unto them, by Nauclides and his Accomplices, men
Plataea, that for their own private ambition, intended both the destruction of
such Citizens as were their enemies, and the putting of the whole City under
the subjection of the Thebans. This they negotiated with one Eurymachus, the
Son of Leontiadas, one of the most potent men of Thebes. For the Thebans
foreseeing the War, desired to praeoccupate Plataea, (which was always at
variance with them) whilst there was yet Peace, and the War not openly on
foot. By which means, they more (...). The Thebans execute not the design of
the Traitors.
making a stand in their Arms in the Market place, did not (as they that gave
them entrance would have had them) fall presently to the business, and enter
the Houses of their Adversaries, but resolved rather to make favorable
Proclamation, and to induce the Cities to composition and friendship. And the
Herald proclaimed, But offer composition.
That if any man, according to the ancient custom of all the Boeotians, would
enter into the same league of War with them, he should come, and bring his
Arms to supposing the City by this means, would easily be drawn to their
side. The Plataeans, when they perceived that the Thebans were already entered,
The Plataeans accept it.
and had surprised the City, through fear, and opinion that more were entered
then indeed were, (for they could not see them in the night) came to
composition, and accepting the condition, rested quiet, and the rather, for
that they had yet done no man harm. But whilst that these things were
treating, The Plataeans take heart.
they observed that the Thebans were not many, and thought that if they should
set upon them, Plataean Commons A^henians. Wherefore it was thought fit to
undertake the matter; and they united themselves, by digging through the Common
Walls, between house and house, And unite themselves by digging through the
Common Walls of their Houses.
that they might not be discovered as they passed the Streets. They also placed
Carts in the Streets (without the Cattle that drew them) to serve them in
stead of a Wall; and every other thing they put in readiness, as they
severally seemed necessary for the present enterprise. When all things
according to their means, were ready, they marched from They assault the
Thebans.
and came quickly up to hand-stroakes. And the Thebans seeing this, and finding
they were deceived, cast themselves into a round figure, and beat them back in
that part where the assault was made: Plataeans themselves charged them with a
great clamor, and their Wives also and Families shouted, and screeched from
the Houses, and withal threw stones and Tyles amongst them; the night having
been also very wet, they were afraid, and turned their backs, and fled here
and there about the City; The Thebans fly, but cannot get out.
ignorant for the most part, in the dark and dirt, of the ways out, by which
they should have been saved (for this accident fell out upon the change of the
Moon) Plataean shut up again, with the head of a Iaueline, which he thrust
into the Staple, in stead of a bolt: so that this way also their passage was
stopped. As they were chased up and down the City, some climbed the Walls,
and cast themselves out, and for the most part dyed; some came to a desert Gate
of the City, and with a thing was soon discovered: others again were slain,
The Thebans penned up in a House, which they entered into, by mistaking the
door for the City Gate.
But the greatest part, and those especially who had cast themselves before
into a Ring, happened into a great Edifice, adjoining to the Wall, the doors
whereof being open, they thought had been the Gates of the City, and that
there had been a direct way through to the other side. The Plataeans seeing
them now pend up, consulted whether they should burn them as they were, by
firing the House, or else resolve of some other punishment. At length, both
these, and all the rest of the Thebans that were straggling in the City, They
yield to discretion
agreed to yield themselves and their Arms to the Plataeans, at discretion.
And this success had they that entered into Plataea.

The whole power of Thebes come to rescue their Fellows.
But the rest of the Thebans, that should with their whole power have been
there before day, for fear the surprise should not succeed with those that
were in, came so late with their aid, that they heard the news of what was
done, by the way. Now Plataea is from Thebes, 70. Furlongs, and they marched
the slowlier, for the rain which had fallen the same night. For the River
Asopus Thebans understood how things had gone, they lay in wait for such of
the Plataeans as were without: The Thebans seek to intercept the Plataeans in
the Villages.
(for there were abroad in the Villages, both men, and household stuff, as was
not unlikely, the evil happening unexpectedly, and in time of peace;)
desiring, if they could take any Prisoners, to keep them for exchange for The
Plataeans send to the Thebans, to be gone, and promise to release their
prisoners.
This was the Thebans purpose. But the Plataeans, whilst they were yet in
Council, suspecting that some such thing would be done, and fearing their
case without, sent a Herald unto the Thebans, whom they commanded to say, That
what they had already done, attempting to surprise their City in time of
Peace, was done wickedly, and to forbid them to do any injury to those
without, and that otherwise they would kill all those men of theirs that they
had alive; which, if they would withdraw their forces out of their Territory,
they would Thus the Thebans say, and that Plataeans did swear it. But the
Plataeans confess not that they promised to deliver them presently, but upon
treaty, if they should agree, and deny that they swore it. Upon this the
Thebans went out of their Territory; The Thebans go off, and the Plataeans
fetch in their men and goods, and kill their prisoners.
and the Plataeans, when they had speedily taken in whatsoever they had in the
Country, immediately slew their Prisoners. They that were taken were 180. and
Eurymachus, with whom the Traitors had practiced, was one. When they had done,
they sent a Messenger to Athens, and gave truce to the Thebans to fetch away
the bodies of their dead,

The news of what was done, coming straightway to Athens, they instantly laid
hands on all the Boeotians then in Attica, and sent an Officer to Plataea, to
forbid their further proceeding with their Theban Prisoners, The Athenians lay
hands on such Boeotians as were in Attica.
till such time as they also should have advised of the matter: for they were
not yet advertised of their putting to death. For the first Messenger was sent
away when the Thebans first entered the Town; and the second, when they were
overcome, Athenians when they sent, knew not what was done, and the Officer
arriving, found that the men were already slain. After this, the Athenians
sending an Army to Plataea, victualled it, and left a Garrison in it, and
took thence both the Women and Children, They victual Plataea, and put a
Garrison into it, and take out their unnecessary people.
and also such men as were unserviceable for the War.

This action falling out at Plataea, and the Peace now clearly dissolved, the
Athenians prepared themselves for War; Lacedaemonians and their Confederates;
intending on either part to send Ambassadors to the Preparation of both sides
for the War.
King, and to other Barbarians, wheresoever they had hope of succors; and
contracting Leagues with such Cities as were not under their own command. The
of Persia.
Lacedaemonians, besides those Galleys which they had in Italy and Sicily, of
the Cities that took part with them there, were ordered to furnish, The
Lacedaemonian League, or Lacedaemonian party, not particularly that State.
proportionably to the greatness of their several Cities, so many more, as
the whole number might amount to 500. Sail, and to provide a Sum of money
Athenians, coming but with one Gally at once, till such time as the same
should be ready. The Athenians Peloponnesus, as Corcyra, Cephalonia, Acarnania,
and Zacynthus, knowing that as long as these were their friends, they might
with the more security make War round about upon the Coast of Peloponnesus.

Neither side conceived small matters, but put their whole strength to the
War. And not without reason. For all men in the beginnings of enterprises,
are the most eager. Besides, there were then in Peloponnesus many young men,
Athens, who for want of experience, not unwillingly undertook the War. And
not only the rest of Greece stood at gaze, to behold the two principal States
in Combat, Prophecies and Oracles p^eceding the War.
but many (...) Prophecies in Prose.
Prophecies were told, and many (...), Sung. For those Prophec^es which the
Oracles delivered by their Priests, were in verse, and were not called (...),
but (...).
sung by the Priests of the Oracles, both in the Cities about to war, and in
others.

There was also a little before this, an Earthquake in Delos, which in the
memory of the Grecians, never shook before; and was interpreted for, and
seemed to be a sign of what was to come afterward to pass. The affections
of the Grecians to wards the combatant States.
And whatsoever Lacedaemonians; and the rather, for that they gave out, they
would recover the Grecians liberty. And every man, both private and public
person, endeavored as much as in them lay, both in word and deed to assist
them; and thought the business so much hindered, as himself was not present at
it. In such passion were most men against the Athenians; some for desire to be
delivered from under their government, and others for fear of falling into

The Confederates of the Lacedaemonians.
But the Confederates of either party, which they had when they began it, were
these: The Lacedaemonians had all Peloponnesus within the Isthmus, except the
Argiues and Achaeans: (for these were in amity with both, save that the
P^llenians at first, only of all Achaia, took their part; but afterward all
the rest did so likewise) and without Peloponnesus, the Megareans, Locrians,
Boeotians, Phocaeans, Ambraciotes, Leucadians, and Anactorians. Of which the
Corinthians, Leucadians found Shipping. The Boeotians, Phocaeans, and Locrians,
Horsemen; and the rest of the Cities, Footmen. And these were the Confederates
of the Lacedaemonians. The Athenian Confederates were these: The Chians, The
Confederates of the Athenians.
Lesbians, Plataeans, the Messenians in Naupactus, most of the Acarnanians, the
Corcyraeans, Zacynthians, and other Cities their Tributaries amongst those
Nations. Also that part of Caria which is on the Sea Coast, and the Doreans
adjoining to them, Ionia, Hellespont, the Cities bordering on Thrace, all the
Islands from Peloponnesus to Crete on the East, Cyclades, except Melos and
Thera. Of these the Chians, Lesbians, and Corcyraeans found Galleys, the rest
Footmen and money. These were their Confederates* and the preparation for the
War on both sides.

The Lacedaemonians, after the business of Plataea, sent Messengers presently
up and down Peloponnesus, and to their Confederates without, to have in
readiness their Forces, and such things as should be necessary for a
Foreign expedition, as intending the invasion of Attica. The Lacedaemonians
(...) meet in the Isthmus, invade Attica.
And when they were all ready, they came to the Rendezuous Isthmus, at a day
appointed, two thirds of the Forces of every City. When the whole Army was
gotten together, Archidamus, King of the Lacedaemonians, General of the
Expedition, called together the Commanders of the several Cities, and such as
were in authority, and most worthy to be present, and spoke unto them as
follows.

THE ORATION OF ARCHIDAMVS.
MEn of Peloponnesus, and Confederates, The Oration of Archidamus in the
Council of War, in the Army of the League.
not only our Fathers have had many Wars, both within and without
Peloponnesus, but we our selves also, such as are any thing in years, have
been sufficiently acquainted therewith; yet did we never before set forth
with so great a preparation as at this present. And now, not only we are a
numerous and puissant Army that invade* but the State also is puissant, that
is invaded by us. We have reason therefore to show our selves, neitheir worse
then our Fathers, nor short of the opinion conceived of our selves. For all
Greece, is up at this Commotion, observing us: and through their hatred to the
Athenians, do wish that we may accomplish whatsoever we intend. And therefore
though we seem to invade Athenians somewhat more then in others; for they
think themselves worthy to have the command of others, and to invade and waste
the territory of their neighbors, rather then to see their neighbors waste
theirs. Wherefore, as being to War against a great City, and to procure,
both to your Ancestors and your selves, a great fame, either good or bad, as
shall be the event; follow your Leaders in such sort, as above all things you
esteem of order and watchfulness. For there is nothing in the world more
comely, nor more safe, then when many men are seen to observe one and the same
order.

Archidamus having thus spoken, and dismissed the Council, Archidamus sends
before him an Ambassador to the Athenians.
first sent Melesippus, the Son of Diacritus, a man of Sparta, to Athens, to
try if the Athenians, seeing them now on their journey, would yet in some
degree remit of their obstinacy. And tryes all other means to right his
Country, before War.
But the Athenians neither received him into their City, nor presented him to
the State: for the opinion of Pericles had already taken place, not to receive
from the Lacedaemonians neither Herald nor Ambassador, as long as their Army
was abroad. Therefore they sent him The Ambassadors from Archidamus conv^yed
back without Conference.
and send their Ambassadors from thence. They sent with him also certain
persons, to conuoy him out of the Country, to the end that no man should
confer with him: who when he came to the limits, and was to be dismissed,
uttered these words: This day is the beginning of much evil unto the Grecians:
and so departed.

When he returned to the Camp, Archidamus marches forward.
Archidamus perceiving Boeotians with their appointed part, and with Horsemen,
aided the Peloponnesians; but with the rest of their Forces, went and wasted
the Territory of Plataea.

Whilst the Peloponnesians were coming together in the Isthmus, and when they
were on their March, before they brake into Attica, Pericles the son of
Xantippus, (who with nine others was General of the Athenians) when he saw
they were about to break in, suspecting that Archidamus, Pericles imagining
Archidamus might spare his grounds, promises, if he did, to give them to the
State.
or by command of the Lacedaemonians, to bring him into jealousy (as they had
before for his sake commanded the excommunication) might oftentimes leave his
Lands untouched, told the Athenians beforehand in an Assembly, The speech of
Pericles to the Assembly at Athens, touching the means of the War, etc.
That though Archidamus had been his guest, it was for no ill to the State,
and howsoever, if the Enemy did not waste his Lands and Houses, as well as the
rest, that then he gave them to the Commonwealth. And therefore desired That
for this he might not be suspected. Also he advised them concerning the
business in hand, the same That they should make preparation for the War,
and receive their goods into the City; that they should not go out to Battle,
but come into the City, and guard it. That they should also furnish out their
Navy, wherein consisted their power, and hold a careful hand over their
Confederates, telling them, how that in the money that came from these, lay
their strength, and that the Victory in War consisted wholly in Counsel, and
store of money. Further, he bade them be confident, The Treasure of the
people of Athens.
in that there was yearly coming in to the State, from the Confederates, for
Tribute, besides other revenue 600. Talents, of our money about 112500. pounds.
600. Talents, and remaining yet then in the Citadell 6000 Talents, of our
money about 1125000. pounds.
6000. Talents of silver coin. (for the greatest sum there had been, was
9700. Talents, 1818750. pounds sterling.
10000. Talents, wanting 300. out of which was taken that which had been
expended upon Potidaea.) Besides the uncoined gold and silver of private and
public Offerings; and all the dedicated Vessels, belonging to the Shows and
Games, and the spoils of the Persian, and other things of that nature, which
amounted to no less then 500. Talents. 93750. pound.
500. Talents. He added further, that much money might be had out of other
Temples without the City, which they might use; And if they were barred the
use of all these, they might yet use the ornaments of gold about the Minerua.
Goddess her self; and said, that the Image had about it, the weight of The
weight of 40. Talents in gold, at 3. (...) ounce, coins to 9000. pound.
40. Talents of most pure Gold, and he said, they were to make restitution of
the like quantity again. Thus he encouraged them, touching matter of money.
Men of Arms he said they had 13000. besides the 16000. that were employed for
the guard of the City, and upon the Walls, (for so many at the first kept
watch at the coming in of the Enemy, young and old together, and Strangers
that dwelt amongst them, as many as could bear Arms.) For the length of the
Phalerian Wall, The length of the walls to which the Watchmen were appointed.
to that part of the circumference of the Wall of the City where it joined, was
Long Walls and the Phalerian) was 43. Furlongs: and the length of the
Long-Walles down to Piraeus, (of which there was a Watch only on the outmost)
was 40. Furlongs: and the whole compass of Piraeus, together with Munychia,
was 60. Furlongs, (whereof that part that was watched, was but half.) He said
further, they had of Horsemen, accounting Archers on horseback, Their Galleys.
1200, and 1600. Archers, and of Galleys fit for the Sea, Athenians, when the
invasion of the Peloponnesians was first in hand, and when the war began.
These and other words spoke Pericles, as he used to do, for demonstration,
that they were likely to outlast this War.

The Athenians fetch in their Wives and Children and substance into the City.
When the Athenians had heard him, they approved of his words, and fetched into
the City their Wives and Children, and the furniture of their houses, pulling
down the very Timber of the houses themselves. Their sheep and Oxen they sent
over into Euboea, and into the Islands over

This custom was from great antiquity, The Athenians (...) to live in the
Country.
more familiar with the Athenians, then any other of the rest of Greece. For in
the time of Cecrops, and the first Kings, down to Theseus, the Inhabitants of
Attica had their several (...).
Bourghes, and therein their (...). Guild-Hal^es, pla^es where those that
adm^nistred the State did meet: where also some, for honors cause and
service, were a lowed diet, and wherein Vesta was worshipped, and a light
continually b^rne^; ^o that* some thence derive the name, making (...) quasi
(...).
Common-Halles, and their Governors; and, unless they were in fear of some
danger, went not together to the King for advice, but every City administered
their own affairs, and deliberated by themselves. And Eleusinians, who joined
with Eumolpus against King of the Athenians* Theseus first brought the
inhabitants of Attica to make Athens their capital City.
Erectheus. But after Theseus came to the Kingdom, one who besides his
wisdom, was also a man of very great power; he not only set good order in
the Country in other respects, but also dissolved the Councels and
Magistracies of the rest of the Towns; and assigning them all one Hall, and
one Councell-house, brought them all to cohabite in the City that now is; and
constrained them, enjoying their own as before, to Not that they must needs
dwell in it, but make it the seat of the government, and pay their duties to
it. This caused the City to grow both populous and potent, because now the
whole Nation united into one City, made use of the Sea, which divided they
could not have done.
use this one for their City, which (now, Theseus so delivered to posterity.
And from that time to this day, the Athenians keep a holiday at the public
charge to the Minerua.
Goddess, and call it Cohabitation.
Synaecia. That which is now the Cittadell, and the part which is to the South
of the Cittadell, was before this time the City. An argument whereof is this,
That the Temples of the Gods are all set either in the Cittadell it self; or,
if without, yet in that quarter. As, that of Jupiter Olympius, and of Apollo
Pythius, and of Tellus, and of Bacchus in Lymnae, (in honor of There were in
Athens 3. Bacchanals; whereof this of Bacchus in Limnae, [ that is, in the
Marishes] was principal; another were the Rural Bacchanals, and the third the
City Bacchanals.
Bacchanals were celebrated on the twelfth day of the month of This Month
fell about ou^ January, and was the second of their Winter quarter.
Anthesterion, according as the Ionians, who are derived from Athens, do still
observe them) besides other ancient Temples situate in the same part.
Moreover, they served themselves with water for the best uses, of the
Fountain, which, now the Nine-pipes, built so by the Tyrants, was formerly,
when the Springs were open, called Calliroe, and was near. And from the old
custom, before Marriages, and other holy Rites, they ordain the use of the
same water to this day. And the Athenians still called the City.

The (...) remove (...) the Borough (...) into the City, unwillingly.
The Athenians therefore had lived a long time, governed Persian War, to live
in the Country with their whole families; and also especially* for that since
the Persian War, they had already repaired their Houses and furniture)
unwilling to remove. It pressed them likewise, and was heavily taken, besides
their Houses, to leave the Altars, Chapels, Household gods.
things that pertained to their Religion, (which, since their old form of
government, were become patriall,) and to change their manner of life, and
Athens thronged with the coming in of the Country.
After they came into Athens, there was habitation for a few, and place of
retire, with some friends or kindred. But the greatest part seated themselves
in the empty places of the City, and in Temples, and in all the Chappells of
the Men (...) to be gotten between ^ Deity, (...) a Mortal, (...) as exceed
the (...) men (...) many deg^^es in Magnanimity.
Heroes, (saving in such as were in the Cittadell, and the (...), a Temple in
A^hens, used with great rel^g^on.
Eleusinium, and other places strongly shut up.) The Pelasgicum, a place by the
Cittadell, where the Pelasgians once fortified themselves, against the
Athenians, and for that cause there was la^d a curse upon the habitation of it.
Paus. in Atticis.

An old Prophecy against dwelling in the Pelasgicu^.


Pelasgicum also, under the Cittadell, though it were a thing accursed to dwell
in it, and forbidden by the end of a verse in a Pythian Oracle, in these words,
-- Best is the Pelasgicon was nevertheless for the present necessity
inhabited. And in my opinion, this Prophecy now fell out contrary to what was
looked for. For the unlawful dwelling there, caused not the calamities that
befell the City, but the War caused the necessity of dwelling there: which
War the Oracle not naming, foretold only, that it should one day be
inhabited unfortunately. Many also furnished the Turrets of the Walls, and
whatsoever other place they could any of them get. For when they Long-Walles
divided amongst them, and inhabited there, and in most parts of Piraeus.
Withal they applied themselves to the business of the War, The Athenians
make ready 100. Galleys to send about Peloponnesus.
leuying their Confederates, and making ready a hundred Galleys to send about
Peloponnesus. Thus were the Athenians preparing.

The Peloponnesians Army assault Oenoe, a frontier Town of Attica, in vain.
The Army of the Peloponnesians marching forward, came first to Oenoe, a Town
of Attica, the place where they intended to break in; and encamping before it,
prepared Oenoe lying on the Confines between Attica and Boeotia, was walled
about, and the Athenians kept a Garrison in it for defense of the Country,
when at any time there should be War. For which cause they made preparation
for the assault of it, and also spent much time about it otherwise.

And Archidamus for this was not a little taxed, Archidamus taxed of
backwar^nesse, and favor to the Athenians.
as thought to have bin both slow in gathering together the forces for the
War, and also to have favored the Athenians, in that he encouraged not the
Army to a forwardness in it. And Isthmus, and his slownesse in the whole
journey, was laid to his charge, but especially his delay at Oenoe. For in this
time the Athenians retired into the City: whereas it was thought, that the
Pelopo^nesians marching speedily, might but for his delay, have taken them all
without. So passionate was the Army of Archidamus, for his stay before Oenoe.
But expecting that the Athenians, whilst their Territory was yet unhurt, would
relent, and not endure to see it wasted, for that cause (as it is reported) he
held his hand. But after, when they had assaulted Oenoe, and tried all means,
but could not take it, and seeing the Athenians sent no Herald to them, then at
length arising from thence, about 80. days after that which happened to the
Thebans that entered Plataea, the Summer, and Corn being now at the highest,
they fell into Attica; led by Archidamus, the son of Zeuxidamus, Archidamus
with his Army enters into Attica.
King of the Lacedaemonians. And when they had pitched their Camp, they fell
to wasting of the Country, first about Eleusis, and then in the plain of
Thriasia; and put to flight a few Athenian Horsemen, at the Brooks called
Rheiti. After this, leaving the Aegaleon on the right hand, they passed through
Cecropia, till they came unto Acharnas, And comes to Acharnas, and stays there
long, cutting down their Corn and Trees.
which is the greatest town in all Attica, of those that are called Burroughes.
Demoi; and pitching there, both fortified their Camp, and staid a great while
wasting the Country thereabout.

Archidamus was said to have staid so long at Acharnas, The Design of
Archidamus in staying so long at Acharnas.
with his Army in Battle array, and not to have come down all the time of
his invasion, into the Champaigne, with this intention. He hoped that the
Athenians flourishing come forth against him, and not endured to see their
fields Thriasia, he thought good to try if they would come out against him
lying now at Acharnas. Besides, the place seemed unto him commodious for the
Army to lie in; and it was thought also that the Acharnans being a great piece
of the City (for they were 3000. men of Arms) would not have suffered the
spoiling of their Lands, but rather have urged all the rest to go out and
fight. And if they came not out against him at this invasion, they might
hereafter more boldly, both waste the Acharnans, after they should have lost
their own, would not be so forward to hazard themselves for the goods of
other men: But there would be thoughts of Sedition in one toward another in
the City. These were the cogitations of Archidamus, whilst he lay at Acharnas.

The Athenians, as long as the Army of the Enemy lay about Eleusis, and the
Fields of Thrius, and as long as they had any hope it would come on no further,
(remembering Plistoanax the son of Pausanias, King of Lacedaemon, when 14.
years before this War, he entered Attica with an Army of the
Peloponnesians, as far as Eleusis, and Thriasia, retired again, and came no
further; for which he was also banished Sparta, as thought to have gone back
for money) they stirred not. But when they saw the Army now at Acharnas, but
60. Furlongs from the City, then they thought it no longer to be endured; and
when their Fields were wasted (as it was likely) in their sight, (which the
younger sort had never seen before, nor Persian War) it was taken for a
horrible matter; and thought fit, by all, especially by the youth, to go out,
and not to endure it any longer. And holding Councels apart one from another,
The Athenians hardly contain themselves from going out to fight.
they were at much contention, some to make a sally, and some to hinder it. And
the Priests of the Oracles, giving out Prophecies of all kinds, every one made
the interpretation according to the sway of his own affection. But the
Acharnans conceiving themselves to be no small part of the Athenians, were
they that whilst their own Lands were wasting, Pericles, remembering nothing
of what he had formerly admonished them; but reviled him, for that being their
General, he refused to lead them into the Field, and imputing unto him the
cause of all their evil: but Pericles seeing them in passion for their present
loss, and ill advised, and being confident he was in the right touching not
sallying, assembled them not, nor called any Council, for fear lest being
together, they might upon passion rather then judgment commit some error: But
looked to the guarding Phrygij a small Skirmish, between one troop of Horse of
the Athenians (with whom were also the Thessalians) and the Horsemen of the
Boeotians; A Skirmish between^ the Athenian and Boeotian Horse.
wherein the Athenians and Thessalians had not the worse, till such time as the
Boeotians were aided by the coming in of their men of Arms, and then they
were put to flight, and a few of Athenians and Thessalians slain; whose bodies
notwithstanding they fetched off the same day, without leave of the Enemy: and
the Peloponnesians the next day erected a Trophie. This aid of the Thessalians
was upon an ancient League with the Athenians, and consisted of Larissaeans,
Pharsalians, Parasians, Cranonians, Peirasians, Gyrtonians, Pheraeans. The
Leaders of the Larissaeans, were Polymedes and Aristonus, men of contrary
factions in their City. Of the Pharsalians, Meno. And of the rest, out of the
several Cities, several Commanders.

Peloponnesians seeing the Athenians would not come out to fight, dislodging
from Acharnas, Archidamus remoues from Acharnas.
wasted certain other Villages, between the Hills Parnethus, and Brelissus.

Whilst these were in Attica, The Athenians send 100. Galleys to infest the
Seacoast of Peloponnesus.
the Athenians sent the hundred Galleys which they had provided, and in them
1000. men of Arms, and 400. Archers, about Peloponnesus; the Commanders
whereof were Charcinus, the son of Xenotimus; Proteus, the son of Epicles;
and Socrates, the son of Antigenes: who thus furnished, weighed Anchor, and
went their way.

Peloponnesians, The Peloponnesians go home.
when they had stayed in Attica as long as their provision lasted, went home
through Boeotia, not the way they came in; but passing by Oropus, wasted the
Peiraice which is of the tillage of the Oropians, Subjects to the People of
Athens; and when they were come back into Peloponnesus, they disbanded, and
went every man to his own City.

The Athenians set by 1000 Talents and 100. Galleys, for defense against an
invasion by Sea.
When they were gone, the Athenians ordained Watches both by Sea and Land, such
as were to continue to the end of the War. And made a Decree, to take out a
thousand Talents of the money in the Cittadell, and set it by, so as it might
not be spent, but the charges of the War be borne out of other moneys; and
made it capital for any

The Athenians that were with the 100. Galleys about Peloponnesus, and with
them the Corcyraeans with the aid of 50. Sail more, and certain others of
the Confederates The Athenians assault Methone.
landed at Methone, a Town of Laconia, and assaulted it, as being but weak,
and few men within. But it chanced that Brasidas, the son of Tellis, a
Spartan, had a Garrison in those parts, and hearing of it, succored those of
the Town with 100. men of Arms: wherewith running through the Athenian Army,
dispersed in the Fields, directly toward the Town, he put himself into
Methone; Brasidas defends it.
and with the loss of few of his men in the passage, Sparta, in this War.
The Athenians putting off from thence, sailed along the Coast, and put in at
Pheia, of Elis, where they spent two days in wasting the Country, and in a
Skirmish overthrew 300. choice men of the lower Elis, together with other
Eleans thereabouts, that came forth to defend it. But the Wind arising, and
their Galleys being tossed by the weather, in a harbourlesse place, the most of
them imbarqued, and sailed about the Promontory called Icthys, into the Haven
Pheia. They take Pheia, a Town of Elis.
But the Messenians and certain others that could Pheia, and rifled it: and
when they had done, the Galleys that now were come about took them in, and
leaving Pheia, put forth to Sea again: by which time a great Army of Eleans
was come to succor it; but the Athenians were now gone away, and wasting some
other Territory.

About the same time the Athenians sent likewise thirty Galleys about That
Locris (...) chief City (...) where the Locri (...).
Locris, which were to serve also for a Watch about Euboea. Of these,
Cleopompus the son of C^inias had the conduct, and landing his Soldiers in
diverse Thronium, of which he took Hostages; and overcame in fight at Alope,
the Locrians that came out to aid it.

The same Summer, the Athenians put the Aeginetae, man, The inhabitants of
Aegina removed by the Athenians.
woman, and child, out of Aegina, laying to their charge, that they were the
principal cause of the present War. And it was also thought the safer course
to hold Aegina, being adjacent to Peloponnesus, with a Colonie of their own
people; and not long after they sent Inhabitants into the Aeginetae were thus
banished, the Lacedaemonians gave them Thyraea to dwell in, And received by the
Peloponnesians.
and the occupation of the Lands belonging unto it, to live on; both upon
hatred to the Athenians, and for the benefits received at the hands of the
Aeginetae, in the time of the Earthquake, and insurrection of their Helotes.
This Territory of Thyraea, is in the border between Argolica and Laconica* and
reaches to the Sea side. So some of them were placed there, and the rest
dispersed into other parts of Greece.

Also the same Summer, Eclipse of the Sun and Stars discerned.
(...). The first day of the month, according to the Moon, in (...): for
though their (...), yet was it not so exact, as (...) the M^one changed often
on the first day.
on the first day of the Month,

The same Summer also the Athenians made Nymphodorus the son of Pythos, of
the City of Abdera, The Athenians seek the favor of Sytalces* King Thrace,
and Perdi^^^s, King of Macedon^a.
(whose Sister was married to Sitalces, and that was of great power with him)
their That is, the man at whose house, and by whom any publ^ke person was to be
entertained that came from Athens to Abdera.
Host, though before they took him for an Enemy, and sent for him to Athens,
hoping by his means Sitalces the son of Teres, King of Thrace, into their
League. This Teres, the Father of Sitalces, was the first that advanced the
Kingdom of the Odrysians, above Thrace. For much of Thrace consists of free
States; And See the Table of Tereus and Procne in Ouids Meta^*
Tereus that took to wife (out of Athens) Procne the Daughter of Pandion, was
no kin to this Teres, nor of the same part of Thrace. But that Tereus was of
the City of Daulia, in the Country now called Phocis, then inhabited by the
Thracians. (And the fact of the Women concerning It^s was done there; and by
the Poets, where they mention the Nightingall, that Bird is also called
Daulias. And it is more likely that Pandion matched his Daughter with this man
for vicinity, and Odrysae.) And Teres, which is also another name, was the
first that seized on the Kingdom of Odrysae. Now Sitalces, this man's son,
the Athenians got into their League, that they might have the Towns lying on
Thrace, and King of Macedon.
Perdiccas to be of their party. Nymphodorus, when he came to Athens, made
this League between them and Sytalces, and caused Sadocus, the son of
Sitalces, Sadocus the Son of Sitalces, King of Thrace, made a Citi^en of
Athens.
to be made free of Athens, and also undertook to end the War in The War
about Potidaea.
Thrace. For he would Sitalces to send unto the Athenians, a Thracian Army of
Horsemen and Targettiers. He likewise reconciled Perdiccas to the Athenians,
and procured of him the restitution of Therme. And Perdiccas presently aided
the Athenians and Phormio* in the War against the Chalcideans. Thus were
Sitalces, the son of Teres, King of Thrace, and Perdiccas the son of
Alexander, King of Macedonia, made Confederates with the Athenians.

The Athenians take Solium and (...), and the I Will of Cephalonia.
The Athenians being yet with their hundred Galleys about Peloponnesus, took
Solium, a Town that belonged to Corinthians, and put the Palirenses only of
all the Acarnani^ns, into the possession both of the Town and Territory
Having also by force taken Astacus, from the Tyrant Euarchus, they drove him
thence, and joined the place to their League. From thence they sailed to
Cephalonia, and subdued it without battle. This Cephalonia is an Island lying
over against Acarnania, and Leucas, and has in it these four Cities, the
Pallenses, Cranij, Samei, and Pronaei. And not long after returned with the
Fleet to Athens.

About the end of the Autumn of this Summer, the Athenians, The Athenians
invade Megaris.
both themselves, and the Strangers that dwelt Pericles the son of Xantippus,
invaded the Territory of Megara. And those Athenians likewise that had been
with the hundred Galleys about Peloponnesus, in their return (being now at
Aegina) hearing that the whole power of the City was gone into The Territory
of Megara.
Megaris, went and joined with them. The Athenians greatest Army.
And this was the greatest Army that ever the Athenians had together in one
place before; the City being now in her strength, and the Plague not yet
amongst them; (For the Athenians of themselves were no Potidaea) and the
Strangers that dwelt amongst them, and accompanied them in this invasion, were
no fewer then 3000. men of Arms more, besides other great numbers of
light-armed Soldiers. And when they had wasted the greatest part of the
Country, they went back to Athens. And afterward, year after year, during
this War, the Athenians often invaded Megaris, The Athenians duly once a
year invade Megaris.
sometimes with their Horsemen, and sometimes with their whole Army, until
such time as they had won The Arsenall of Megara*
Nisaea.

Atalante, an Island lying upon the Locrians of Opus, desolate till then, for a
Garrison against Thieves, which passing over from Opus, and other parts of
Locris, might annoy Euboea. The end of the first Summer.
These were the things done this Summer, after the retreat of the
Peloponnesians out of Attica.

The Winter following, Euarchus of Acarnania, Euarchus the Tyrant recouereth
Astacus.
desirous to return to Astacus, prevails with the Corinthians, to go
thither with 40. Galleys, and 1500. men of Arms, to re-establish him; to which
he hired also certain other Euphamidas the son of Aristonymus, Timoxenes the
son of Timocrates, and Eumachus the son of Chrysis. When they had
re-established him, they endeavored to draw to their party some other places on
the the Seacoast of Arcanania, but missing their purpose, they set sail
homeward. As they passed by the Coast of Cephalonia, they disbarqued in the
Territory of the Cranij, where, under color of Composition, they were
deceived, and lost some part of their Forces. For the assault made Cranij,
being unexpected, they got off, with much ado, and went home.

The same Winter the Athenians, according to their ancient The manner of the
Athenians, in ^urying the ^ones of the first slain in the (...).
in this manner: Having set up a Tent, they put into it the (...) was when a
(...), and the (...) after was only of (...) bones, or (the powder of (...))
his ashes.
bones of the dead, three days before the Funeral, and every one brings
Offerings, Incense, and (...) of burial.
whatsoever he thinks good to his To his own friends slain.
own. When the day comes of carrying them to their burial, certain Cypress
Coffins are carried along in Carts, for every Tribe one, in which are the bones
of the men of every Tribe by themselves. There is likewise borne an empty
Hearse covered over, for such as appear not, nor were found amongst the rest
The Ceramicum.
Suburbs of the City, (in which place they have ever interred all that dyed in
the Wars, except those that were slain in the Fields of Marathon; who,
because their virtue was thought extraordinary, were therefore buried
there-right) and when the earth is thrown over By the first slain in the
(...) understood either the first every year in the (...) War, or else the
several actions of this great War, are counted as several Wars, and (...)
the first slain in any of them, had the honor of this burial.
whole time of the War, whenever there was occasion, they observed the
same. For these first, the man chosen to make the Oration, was Pericles, the
son of Xantippus, who when the time served, going out of the place of burial
into a high Pulpit* to be heard the further off by the multitude THE FUNERAL
ORATION made by PERICLES.
THough most that have spoken formerly in this place, have commended the man
that added this Oration to the Law, as honorable for those that dye in the
Wars; yet to me it seems sufficient, that they who have showed their
valor by action should also by an action have their honor, as now you see
they have, in this Barbarians, or Grecians, in their Wars against us, amongst
you that are well acquainted with the sum, to avoid prolixity, I will pass
over. But by what institutions we arrived at this* by what Democracie. Wherein
though there be an equality amongst all men in point of Law, for their private
controversies; of his (...), A part. But here he means a part or family in the
Common wealth. Carping secretly at the Lacdaemonians, that had none came to the
supreme Office, but the Heracleides.
House, but of his virtue, and is not put back through poverty, He glanceth
again at the Lacedaemonians, because they ever looked sowrely on soft and
loose behavior.
censorious looks, which though they be no punishment, yet they grieve. So
that conuersing one with another for the private without offense, we stand
chiefly in fear to transgress against the public; and are obedient always
to those that govern, and to the Laws, and principally to such Laws as are
written for protection against injury, and such unwritten, as The Athenians
had Sacrifices and Games, public or private, for every day of the year.
with a decent pomp and furniture of the same by private men; by the daily
delight whereof, we expel sadness. We have this further, by the greatness
of our City, that all things, from all parts of the Earth are imported hither;
whereby we no less familiarly enjoy the commodities of all other Nations, then
our own. Then in the studies of War, we excel our Enemies in this: we
leave aur City open to all men, nor was it ever seen, that by This is spoken
with envy toward the Lacedaemonians that prohibited Strangers to dwell
amongst them.
banishing of strangers, we denied them Lacedaemonians invade not our dominion
by themselves alone, but with the aid of all the rest. But when we invade our
neighbors, though we fight in hostile ground, against such as in their own
ground, fight in defense of their own substance, yet for the most part we get
the victory. In Athens no man so (...) but was a State^man. So S. Luke, Act.
7.2^. All the Athe^ians (...) time in (...) and telling of (...) Character
(...) without employment.
knowledge of State matters, even in those that labor with their hands. For we
only, think one that is utterly ignorant therein, to be a man not that
meddles with nothing, but that is good for nothing. We likewise, weigh what we
undertake, and apprehend it Grecians* and that the men here, have every one in
particular, his person disposed to most diversity of actions, and yet all with
grace and decency. And that this is not now, rather a bravery of words, upon
He magnifies the Ath^nian power a^oue that which the (...) had at Troy, which
needed Homer to make it (...), but this power ^^uld seem great by Trophies and
real monuments of their actions.
and which needs not either a Homer to praise it, or any other such, whose
Poems may indeed for the present, bring delight, but the trut^ set up eternal
Monuments on all sides, both of the evil we have done Grecians, as they do in
these; the present revolution of these men's lives seeming unto me an argument
of their virtues, noted in the first act thereof, and in the last confirmed.
For even such of them as were worse then the rest, do nevertheless deserve
that for their valor shown in the Wars for defense of their Country, they
should be preferred before the rest. For having by their good actions
abolished the memory of their evil, they have profited the State thereby, more
then they have hurt it by their private behavior. Yet there was none of these,
that preferring the further fruition of his wealth, was thereby Children*
happiness of others, wherein you also when time was, rejoiced your selves,
shall so often bring into your remembrance (for sorrow is not for the want of a
good never tasted, but for the privation of a good we have been used to) yet
such of you as are of the age to have children, may bear the loss of
aemulation. For every man uses to praise the dead; so that The children of
such as were the first slain in an^ War, were kept at the charge of the
City, till they came to man's estate.
and further, their children shall be maintained till they be at man's estate,
at the charge of the City, which has therein propounded both to these, and
them that live, a profitable Garland in their matches of valor. For where the
rewards of virtue are greatest, there live the worthiest men. So now having
lamented every one his own, you may be gone. Such was the Funeral made this
Winter, which ending, ended the first year of this War.



THE SECOND YEAR.
In the very beginning of Summer, the Peloponnesians, and Confederates, with two
thirds of their forces, as before invaded Attica, The second invasion of
Attica, by the Lacedaemonians.
under the conduct of Archidamus, the son of Zeuxidamas, King of Lacedaemon,
and after they had encamped themselves, wasted the country about them.

They had not been many days in Attica, when the plague first began amongst
the Athenians, The plague at Athens.
said also to have seized formerly on diverse other parts, as about Lemnos, and
elsewhere; but so great a plague, and mortality of men, was never remembered to
have happened in any place before. For at first, neither were the Physicians able
to cure it, Gods, and enquiries of Oracles, and whatsoever other means they
used of that kind, proved all unprofitable; insomuch as subdued with the
greatness of the evil, they gave them all over. It began (by report) first,
in that part of Aethiopia that lies upon Egypt, It began in Aethiopia.
and thence fell down into Egypt and Afrique, and into the greatest part of
the Territories of the of Persia.
King. It invaded Athens on a Pyraeus; insomuch as they reported that the
Peloponnesians had cast poison into their Wells, The Peloponnesians supposed
to have poisoned their Wells
for Springs there were not any in that place. But afterward it came up into
the high City, and then they dyed a great deal faster. Now let every man
Physician, or other, concerning the ground of this sickness, whence it
sprung, and what causes he thinks able to produce so great an alteration,
speak according to his own knowledge, for my own part, I will deliver but
the manner of it, and lay open only such things, as one may take his mark by,
to discover the same The Author sick of this disease.
and seen others sick of the same. This year, by confession of all men, was
of all other, for other diseases, most free and healthful. If any man were
sick before, The description of the Disease.
his disease turned to this; if not, yet suddenly, without any apparent cause
preceding, and being in perfect health, they were taken first with an extreme
ache in their heads, redness and inflammation of the eyes; and then inwardly,
Ache of the head.
their throats and tongues, grew presently bloody, Redness of the eyes. Sore
throat. Unsavory breath.
and their breath noisome, and unsavory. Upon this, followed a sneezing and
(...). near taken for the stomach.
stomach, it caused vomit, Vomitings.
and with great torment came up all manner of bilious purgation that Physicians
ever named. Most of them had also the Hickeyexe, which brought with it a strong
convulsion, and in some ceased quickly, Hickyexe.
but in others was long before it gave over. Their bodies outwardly to the
touch, were neither very hot nor pale, but reddish liuid, Extreme heat of
their bodies.

Liuid pustules.


and beflowred with little pimples and whelkes; but so burned inwardly,
Insatiate thirst.
being still, from ease, and power to sleep, as far as ever. As long as the
disease was at the height, Want of sleep.
their bodies wasted not, but resisted the torment beyond all expectation,
insomuch, as the most of them either dyed of their inward After 7. or 9. days,
death.
whilst they had yet strength, or if they escaped that, then the disease
falling down into their bellies, (...) in the belly.
and causing there great exulcerations, ^
(...) of the parts where the diseases brake out.
for breaking out both at their privy members, and at their fingers and toes,
many with the loss of these escaped. There were also some that lost their
eyes, and many that presently upon their recovery, Oblivion of all things done
before their sickness.
were taken with such an oblivion of all things Birds and Beasts perished that
red on Carcasses.
that use to feed on humane flesh, though many men lay abroad unburied, either
came not at them, or tasting perished. An argument whereof as touching the
birds, is the manifest defect of such foul, Want of attendance.
some for want of attendance, and some again with all the care and Physic
that could be used. Nor was there any, to say, certain medicine, that applied
Deiection of mind.
the deiection of mind, in such as found themselves beginning to be sick (for
they grew presently desperate, and gave themselves over without making any
resistance) as also their dying thus like sheep, infected by mutual
visitation, for the greatest mortality proceeded that way. For if men forbore
to visit No man sick of it mortally the second time.
For this disease never took any man the second time, so as to be mortal. And
these men were both by others counted happy, and they also themselves, through
excess of present joy, conceived a kind of light hope, never to die of any
other sickness hereafter. Besides the present affliction, the reception of
the country people, and of their substance into the City, oppressed both
them, and much more the people themselves that so came in. For having no
houses, but dwelling at that time of the year in Men dyed in the streets.
and dying men lay tumbling one upon another in the streets, and men half
dead, about every Conduit through desire of water. The Temples also where they
dwelt in Tents, were all full of the dead that died within them; for oppressed
with the violence of the Calamity, and not knowing what to do, men grew
careless both of holy, and profane things alike. And the Laws which they
formerly used touching Funerals, were all now broken; every one burying where
he could find Disorder in their Funerals.
For when one had made a Funeral A pile of wood, which when they had laid the
Corpse on it, they fired, and afterward buried the bones.
Pile, another getting before him, would throw on his dead, and give it fire.
And when one was in burning, another would come, and having cast thereon him
whom he carried, go his way again. Licentiousness of life justified.
And the great licentiousness, which also in other kinds was used in the
City, began at first from this disease. For that which a man before would
dissemble, and not acknowledge to be done for voluptuousness, worth nothing,
inheriting their estates; insomuch as they Neglect of Religion and Law.
Neither the fear of the Gods, nor Laws of men, awed any man. Not the former,
because they concluded it was alike to worship or not worship, Athenians being
fallen, were much oppressed; having not only their men killed by the Disease
within, but the enemy also laying waste their Fields and Villages without.
Predictions called to mind.
In this sickness also, A Dorique War shall fall,
And a great (...).
Plague withal.


An ambiguous Prophe^i^ expounded by the event.
Now were men at variance about the word, some saying it was not (...), (.i. the
Plague) that was by the Ancients, mentioned in that verse, but (...), (.i.
Famine.) But Dorique War, and with it a Famine, they are like to recite the
Verse accordingly. There was also reported by such as knew, a certain answer
given by the Oracle to the Lacedaemonians, when they enquired whether they
should make this War, or not, That if they warred with all their power, they
should have the Victory, and that the Apollo, to whom the Heathen attributed
the immission of all epidemicke or ordinary diseases.
God himself would take their parts: and thereupon they thought Peloponnesians
were no sooner entered Attica, but the sickness presenlty began, and never came
into Peloponnesus, to speak of, but reigned principally in Athens, and in such
other places afterward as were most populous. And thus much of this Disease.

After the Peloponnesians had wasted the Champaigne Country, they fell upon
the Territory called by the Sea (...)*
Paralos, as far as to the Mountain Laurius, where the Athenians had Silver
Mines, and first wasted that part of it which looks toward Peloponnesus, and
then that also which lies Andros and Euboea: and Pericles, who was also then
General, was still of the same mind he was of in the former invasion, that
the Athenians ought not to go out against them to battle.

Whilst they were yet in the Plain, Pericles with 100. (...) Athenians, about
(...).
and before they entered into the Maritime Country, he furnished an hundred
Galleys to go about Peloponnesus, and as soon as they were ready, put to Sea.
In these Galleys he had four thousand men of Arms; and in Vessels then
purposely first made to carry Horses, three hundred Horsemen. The Chians
Lesbians joined likewise with him with fifty Galleys. This Fleet of the
Athenians, when it set forth, left the Pelopo^nesians still in Paralia, and
coming before Epidaurus, a City of Peloponnesus, they wasted much of the
Country therabout, and assaulting the City, had a hope to take it, though it
succeeded not. Leaving Epidaurus, they wasted the Territories about, of
Traezene, Halias, and Hermione, places all on the Seacoast of Pelopo^nesus.
Putting off from hence, they came to Prasiae, a small maritime City of
Laconica, and both wasted the Territory about it, and took and razed
Peloponnesians not now in Attica, but gone back.

All the while the Peloponnesians were in the Territory of the Athenians, and
the Athenians abroad with their Fleet, The Peloponnesians depart out of Attica.
the sickness, both in the Army and City, destroyed many, in so much as it
was said, that the Peloponnesians, fearing the sickness (which they knew to
be in the City, both by fugitives, and by seeing the Athenians burying their
dead) went the sooner away out of the Country. And yet they stayed there
longer in this invasion, then they Attica almost forty days.

The Athenian Fleet returned from Peloponnesus, go^ to Potidaea with ill
success, by reason of the sickness.
The same Summer, Agnon the son of Nicias, and Cleopompus Clinias, who were
joint Commanders with Pericles, with that Army which he had employed before,
went presently and made War upon the Chalcid^ans of Thrace, and against
Potidaea, which was yet besieged. Arriving, they presently applied Engines, and
tried all means possible to take it; but neither the taking of the City, nor
any thing else, succeeded worthy so great preparation. For the sickness
coming amongst them, afflicted them mightily indeed, and even devoured the
Army. And the Athenian Soldiers which were there before, and Agnon. As for
Phormio, and his 1600. they were not now amongst the Chalcideans; and Agnon
therefore came back with his Fleet, having of 4000 men in less then 40.
days, lost 1050. of the plague. But the Soldiers that were there before,
staid upon the place, and continued the siege of Potidaea.

After the second invasion of the Peloponnesians, the Athenians (having their
fields now the second time wasted, The Athenian people vexed at once both with
the War and Pestilence, grow impatient toward Pericles.
and both the sickness, and war, falling upon them at once) Pericles, as if
by his means they had been brought into these calamities, and desired
earnestly to compound with the Lacedaemonians, to whom also they sent certain
Ambassadors, but they returned without effect. And being then at their wits
end, they kept a stir at Pericles. And he, seeing them vexed with their
present calamity, and doing all those things which he had before expected,
called an Assembly (for he was yet General) with intention to put them again
into heart, and asswaging their passion, to reduce

THE ORATION OF PERICLES.
YOur anger toward me, comes not unlooked for, (for the causes of it I know)
and I have called this Assembly therefore, to remember you, and reprehend you
for those things, wherein you have either been angry with me, or given way to
your adversity, without safety. As for the toil of the War, that it may
perhaps be long, Grecians, most of the Grecians were our subjects; That we have
abidden the greatest Wars against them, both universally and singly, And have
inhabited the greatest and wealthiest City, Now this, he with the quiet life
will condemn, the active man will aemulate, and they that have not attained to
the like, will envy. But to be hated, and to displease, is a thing that
happens for the time to whosoever he be that has the command of others; and
he does well that undergoes hatred, for matters of great consequence. For the
hatred lasts not, Lacedaemonians, nor let them know that the evil present
does any way afflict you; for they whose minds least feel, and whose actions
most oppose a calamity, both amongst States, and private persons are the best.

In this speech did Pericles endeavor to appease the anger Athenians toward
himself, and withal to withdraw their thoughts from the present affliction;
But they, though for the State in general, they were won, and Lacedaemonians
no more, but rather inclined to the War, yet they were every one in
particular, grieved for their several losses. The poor, because entering the
War with little, they lost that little, and the rich, because they had lost
fair possessions, together with goodly houses, and costly furniture in them,
in the Country; but the greatest matter of all was, that they had War in
stead of Peace. Pericles fined in a sum of money.
And altogether, they deposed not their anger, till they had first fined him in
a sum of money. Nevertheless, not long after, (as is the fashion of the
Athens at the greatest in the time of Pericles.
and was a faithful watchman of it, and in his time it was at the greatest.
And after the War was on foot, it is manifest that he therein also foresaw
what it could do. The death of Pericles.
He lived after the War began, two years Plutarch says, he dyed of the
Plague.
death. For he told them, that if they would be quiet, and look to their Navy,
and during this War, seek no further dominion, nor hazard the City it
self, they should then have the upper hand. But they did contrary in all, and
in such other things besides, as seemed not to concern the War, managed the
State, according to their private ambition and covetousness, pernitiously both
for themselves, and their Confederates. What succeeded well, the honor and
profit of it, came The commendation of Pericles.
and for bribes, manifestly the most incorrupt, he freely controuled the
multitude, and was not so much led by them, as he led them. Because (having
gotten his power by no evil Arts) he would not humor them in his speeches,
but out of his authority, durst anger them with contradiction. Therefore
whenever he saw them out of season insolently bold; he would with his
Orations Democraticall, but in fact, A government of the principal Man. But
they that came after, being more equal amongst themselves, and affecting every
one to be the chief, applied themselves to the people, and let go the care of
the Commonwealth. From whence, amongst many other errors, as was likely in a
great and dominant City, proceeded also the voyage into Sicily, which was not
so much upon mistaking those whom they went against, as for want of knowledge
in the Sicily, and having lost, besides other ammunition, the greatest part of
their Navy, and the City being then in sedition, yet they held out 3 years,
both against their first enemies, and the Sicilians with them, and against most
of their revolted Confederates besides, and also afterward against Cyrus Kings
son, who took part with, and sent money to the Peloponnesians, to maintain
their Fleet; and never shrunk till they had overthrown themselves with
private dissentions. So much was in Pericles above other men at that time, that
he could foresee by what means the City might easily have out-lasted the
Peloponnesians in this War.

The Lacedaemonians and their Confederates, The Lacedaemonians War against
Zacynthus.
made War the same Summer with 100 Galleys, against Zacynthus, an Island lying
over against Elis. Z^nt^.
The Inhabitants whereof Achaeans of Peloponnesus, but Confederates of the
people of Athens. There went in this Fleet, 1000 men of Arms, and Cnemus a
Spartan for Admiral, who landing, wasted the greatest part of the Territory.
But they of the Island not yielding, they put off again, and went home.

In the end of the same Summer, Aristaeus of Corinth, The Lacedaemonian
Ambassadors taken by the Athenian Ambassadors in Thrace and went to Athens.
and Anaristus, Nicolaus, Pratodemus, and Timagoras of Tegea, Ambassadors of
the Lacedaemonians, and Polis of Argos, a private man, as they were traveling
into Asia to the King, to Thrace in their way, and came unto Sitalces the son
of Teres, with a desire to get him also, if they could, to forsake Athens, and
to send his forces to Potidaea, which the Athenian Army now besieged, and not
to aid the Athenians any longer: and withal to get leave to pass through his
Country to the other side of Hellespont, to go, as they intended, to
Pharnabazus, the son of Pharnaces, who would conuoy them to the King. But the
Ambassadors of Athens, Learchus, the son of Callimachus, and Ameiniades the
son of Philemon, then resident with Sitalces, persuaded Sadocus the son of
Sitalces, who was now a Citizen of Athens, to put them into their hands, that
they King, and do hurt to the City, whereof he himself was now a member.
Whereunto condiscending, as they iourneyed through Thrace, to take ship to
cross the Hellespont, A (...) act of Sadocus, to gratify the Athenians,
beca^^^ they had made him free of (...) City.
he apprehended them before they got to the ship, by such others as he sent
along with Learchus, and Ameiniades, with command to deliver them into their
hands; And they, when they had them, sent them away to Athens. When they came
thither, the Athenians fearing Aristaeus, lest escaping, he should do them
further mischief, (for he was manifestly the author of all Potidaea, and
about Thrace) the same day put them all to death, The Athenians put them to
death.
vniudged, and desirous to have spoken, and threw them into the Pits, thinking
it but just, to take revenge of the Lacedaemonians that began it, and had
slain and thrown into Pits, the Merchants of the Athenians, and their
Confederates, whom they took sailing in (...) ships of the round form of
building* for the use of Merchants, not for the use of War, as were Galleys,
and other Vessels of the long form of building.
Merchants ships, about the Coast of Peloponnesus. For in the beginning of the
War, the Lacedaemonians slew, as enemies, whomsoever they took at Sea,
whether Confederates of the Athenians, or neutrall, all alike.

About the same time, in the end of Summer, the Ambraciotes, The Ambraciotes
war on Acarnania.
both they themselves, and diverse Barbarian Nations by them raised, made War
against Argos of Amphilochia, and against the rest of that Territory. The
quarrel between them and the Argiues, arose first from hence. This Argos and
the rest of Amphilochia, was planted by Amphilochus the son of Amphiraus,
after the Trojan War; who at his return, misliking the then State of Argos,
built this City in the Gulf of Ambracia, and called it Argos, after the name
of his own Country. And it was the greatest Amphilochia. Ambraciotes,
bordering upon Amphilochia. And then they first learned the Greek language now
used, from the Ambraciotes, that lived among them. For the rest of the
Amphilochians, were Barbarians. Now the Ambraciotes in process of time, drove
out the Argiues, and held the City by themselves. Whereupon the Amphilochians
submitted themselves to the Acarnanians, and both together called in the
Athenians, who sent 30 Galleys to their aid, and Phormio for General. Phormio
being arrived, took Argos by assault, and making slaves of the Ambraciotes,
put the Town into the joint possessions of the Amphilochians and Acarnanians;
and this was the beginning of the League between the Athenians and
Acarnanians. The Ambraciotes therefore deriuing their hatred to the Argiues
from this their captivity, came in with an Army partly of their own, and
partly raised amongst the Chaonians, and other neighboring Barbarians now in
this War. And coming to Argos, were masters of the field; but when they
could not take the City by The end of the second Summer.
went every Nation to his own. These were the Acts of the Summer.

In the beginning of Winter, the Athenians sent 20 Galleys about Peloponnesus,
under the command of Phormio, who coming to lie at Lepanto.
Naupactus, guarded the passage that none might go in, or out, from Corinth,
and the Crissaean Gulf. And other 6 Galleys, under the Conduct of Melesander*
they sent into Caria, and Lycia, as well to gather tribute in those parts, as
also to hinder the Peloponnesian Pirates, lying on those Coasts from molesting
the Navigations (...).
Merchant-ships as they expected to come to them from Phaselis, Phoenicia, and
that part of the Continent. But Melesander landing in Lycia, with such forces
of the Athenians and their Confederates, as he had aboard, was overcome in
battle, and slain, with the loss of a part of his Army.

The same Winter, Potidaea rendered to the Athenians.
the Potidaeans unable any longer to endure the siege, seeing the invasion of
Attica by the Peloponnesians, could not make them rise, and seeing their
victual failed, and that they were forced, amongst diverse other Xenophon the
son of Euripedes, Hestiodorus, the son of Aristoclidas, and Phaenomachus,
Callimachus, the Athenian Commanders that lay before the City, to give the
same into their hands. And they, seeing both that the Army was already
afflicted by lying in that cold place, and that the State had already spent
375000. pound sterling.
2000. Talents upon the Siege, accepted of it. The conditions agreed on, were
these: To depart, they and their Wives and Children, and their auxiliar
Soldiers, every man with one suit of clothes, and every woman with two; and
to take with them every one a certain sum of money for his charges by the
way. Hereupon a Truce was granted them to depart* and Chalcideans, and others
to other places, as they could get to. But the people of Athens called the
Commanders in question, for compounding without them; conceiving that they
might have gotten the City to discretion. And sent afterward a Colonie to
Potidaea of their own Citizens. These were the things done in this Winter. And
so ended the second year of this War, written by Thucydides.

THE THIRD YEAR.
The next Summer, the Peloponnesians and their Confederates came not into
Attica, but turned their Arms against Plataea, The siege of Plataea.
led by Archidamus the son of Zeuxidamus, King of the Lacedaemonians, who
having pitched his Camp was about to waste the Territory thereof. But the
Plataeans sent Ambassadors presently unto him, with words to this effect:
Archidamus, and you Lacedaemonians, you do neither justly, nor worthy your
selves and Ancestors, in making War upon Plataea. For Pausanias of
Lacedaemon, the son of Cleombrotus, The Plataeans speech to Archidamus.
having (together with such Grecians as were content to undergo the danger of
the battle that was fought in this our Territory) delivered all Greece from
the slavery of the when he offered Sacrifice in the Market place of Plataea,
to Jupiter the deliverer, called together all the Confederates, and granted to
the Plataeans this privilege; That their City and Territory should be free:
That none should make any unjust War against them, nor go about to subject
them; and if any did, the Confederates then present, should to their utmost
ability, revenge their quarrel. These privileges your Fathers granted us for
our valor, and zeal in those dangers. But now do you the clean contrary;
for you join with our greatest enemies, the Thebans, to bring us into
subjection. Therefore Plataea, nor violate those Oaths; but that you suffer us
to enjoy our liberty in such sort as was allowed us by Pausanias.

The Plataeans having thus said, Archidamus replied, and said thus. Men of
Plataea, If you would do as ye say, The Answer of Archidamus to the Plataeans.
you say what is just. For as Pausanias has granted to you, so also be you
free; and help to set free the rest, who having been partakers of the same
dangers then, and being comprised in the same oath with your selves, are now
brought into subjection by the Athenians. And this so great preparation and
War is only for the deliverance of them, and others: Thus said Archidamus.
And the Ambassadors of Plataea, when they had heard him returned to the City,
and having communicated his answer to the people, brought word again to
Archidamus, The reply of the Plataeans.
That what he had advised, was impossible for them to perform, without leave
of the Athenians, in whose keeping were their wives and children; and that they
feared also, for the whole City, lest when the Lacedaemonians were gone, the
Athenians should come and take the custody of it out of their hands; or that
the Thebans comprehended in the oath of receiving both sides, should again
attempt to surprise it. But Archidamus to encourage them, made this answer: The
answer of Archidamus to their reply.
Deliver you unto us Lacedaemonians, your City and your houses, show us the
bounds of your Territory, give us your trees by tale, and whatsoever else can
be numbered, and depart your selves whither you shall think good, as long as the
War lasts, and when it shall be ended, we will deliver it all unto you
again: in the mean time, we will keep them as deposited, and will cultiuate
your ground, and pay you rent for it,

Hereupon the Ambassadors went again into the City, and having consulted with
the people, made answer, That they would first acquaint the Athenians with it,
The Plataeans reply again, and desire to know the pleasure of the people of
Athens.
and if they would consent, they would the^ accept the condition: till then,
they desired a suspension of arms, and not to have their Territory wasted.
Upon this he granted them so many days truce as was requisite for their
return, and for so long, forbore to waste their Territory. When the Plataean
Ambassadors were arrived at Athens, and had advised on the matter with the
Athenians, The Athenians message to the Plataeans.
The Athenians say thus: That neither in former times, since we were their
Confederates, did they eu^r abandon us to the injuries of any,

When the Ambassadors had made this report, the Plataeans resolved in their
councels, not to betray the Athenians, but rather to endure, if it must be,
the wasting of their Territory before their eyes, and to suffer whatsoever
misery could befall them; and no more to go forth, but from the Walls to make
this Answer: The Plataeans last answer to Archidamus from the Wall.
That it was impossible for them to do as the Lacedaemonians had required.
Archidamus the King, first made a protestation to the Gods and Heroes of the
Country, Archidamus protestation.
saying thus: All ye Gods and Heroes, protectors of Plataeis, be witnesses,
that we neither invade this Territory, wherein our Fathers, after their vows
unto you, overcame the Medes, and which you made propitious for the Grecians to
fight in, unjustly now in the beginning; because they have first broken the
League they had sworn: nor what we shall further do will be any injury,
because, though we have offered many and reasonable conditions, they have yet
been all refused. Assent ye also to the punishment of the beginners of injury,

Having made this protestation to the Gods, he made ready his Army for the
War. And first having felled Trees, he therewith made a Palizado about the
Town, that none might go out. A mount raised against Plataea.
That done, he raised a Mount against the Wall, hoping with so great an Army
all at work at once, to have quickly taken it. And having cut down Wood in
the Hill Cithaeron, they built a Frame of Timber, and watled it about on either
side, to serve in stead of Walls, to keep the Earth from falling too much
Lacedaemonians that commanded the Mercenaries of the several Cities, and had
the charge of the work. The Plataeans raise their Wall higher against the
mount, by a frame of Timber, in which they laid their Brickes.
The Plataeans seeing the Mount to rise, made the frame of a Wall with Wood,
which having placed on the Wall of the City, in the place where Plataeans used
also this device; they brake a hole in their own Wall, where the Mount joined,
The Plataeans device to draw the earth from the Mount through the Wall. The
Peloponnesians remedy that evil.
and drew the earth from it into the City. But the Peloponnesians, Plataeans
excluded here, The Plataeans fetch the earth away from under the Mount by a
Mine.
gave over that Plot, and digging a secret mine, which they carried under the
mount from within the City by conjecture, fetched away the earth again, and
were a long time undiscovered; so that still casting on, the Mount grew still
less, the earth being drawn away below, and settling over the part where it
was voyded. The Plataeans nevertheless, fearing The Plataeans make another
Wall within that which was to the Mount.
and beginning at both ends of it, where the Wall was low, built another Wall
in form of a Crescent, inward to the City, that if the great Wall were taken,
this might resist, and put the Enemy to make another Mount; and by coming
further in, to be at double pains, and withal, more encompassable with shot.
The Peloponnesians, together with the raising of their Mount, The
Peloponmesians assault the Wall with Engines.
brought to the City their Engines Plataeans into great fear; and others to
other parts of the Wall, The Plataeans defense against the Engines.
which the Plataeans partly turned aside, by casting Ropes about them, and
partly with great beams, which being hung in long iron chains, by either end
upon two other great beams, ^etting over, and enclining from above the Wall,
like two horns, they drew up to them athwart, and where the Engine was about
to light, slacking the chains, and letting their hands Peloponnesians seeing
their Engines auailed not, and thinking it hard to take the City by any The
Peloponnesians throw Faggots and fire into the Town, from the Mount.
Having therefore brought Faggots, they cast them from the Mount, into the
space between it and their new Wall, which by so many hands was quickly
filled; and then into as much of the rest of the City, as at that distance
they could reach: and throwing amongst them fire, together A great Fire.
as the like was never seen before, made by the hand of man. For as for the
woods in the Mountains, the trees have indeed taken fire, but it has bin by
mutual attrition, and have flamed out of their own accord. But this fire was a
great one, and the Plataeans that had escaped other mischiefs, wanted little
of being consumed by this. For near the Wall they could not get by a great
way: and if the Wind had been with it (as the enemy hoped it might) they could
never have escaped. It is also reported, Peloponnesians, when they failed
likewise of this, retayning a part of their Army, and dismissing the rest,
enclosed the City about with a Wall; dividing the circumference thereof to the
charge of the several Cities. There was a Ditch both within and without it,
out of which they made their Brickes; and after it was finished, which was
about the In the beginning of September.

The siege laid to Plataea.


rising of Arcturus, they left a guard for one half of the Wall, (for the
other was Boeotians) and departed with the rest of their Army, and were
dissolved according to their Cities. The Plataeans had before this, sent their
Wives and Children, and all their unserviceable men to Athens. The rest were
besieged, being in number, of the Plataeans themselves, 400. of Athenians, 80.
and 100 Women to dress their meat. These were all when the Siege was first
laid, and not one more, neither free nor bond in the City. In this manner was
the City besieged.

The same Summer, at the same time that this Journey Plataea, the Athenians
with 2000. men of The Athenians send an Army against the Chalcidaeans.
made War upon the Chalcideans of Thrace, and the Bottiaeans* when the Corn
was at the highest, under the conduct of Xenophon the son of Eurypides, and
two others. These coming before Spartolus in Bottiaea, destroyed the Corn,
and expected that the Town should have bin rendered by the practice of some
within. But such as would not have it so having sent for aid to Olynthus
before, there came into the City for safeguard thereof, a supply both of men of
Arms, and other Soldiers from thence. And these issuing forth Spartolus, the
Athenians put themselves into order of Battle under the Town it self. The
men of Arms of the Chalcideans, and certain auxiliaries with them, were
overcome by the Athenians, and retired within Spartolus. And the Horsemen of
the Chalcideans, The Athenians foughten with by the Chalcideans a^ Spart^lus.
and their light-armed Soldiers, overcame the Horsemen, and light-armed of the
Athenians; but they had some few Targettiers besides, of the Territory called
Chrusis. When the Battle was now begun, came a supply of other Targettiers
from Olynthus, which the light armed Soldiers of Spartolus perceiving,
Chalcidean Horse, and this new supply, charged the Athenians afresh. The
Athenians hereupon retired to two companies they had left with the Carriages;
and as often as the Athenians charged, the Chalcideans retired; and when the
Athenians retired, the Chalcideans charged them with their shot. Especially the
Chalcidean Horsemen rode up, and charging them where they thought fit, forced
the Athenians in extreme affright, to turn their backs, and chased them a
Athenians fled to Potidaea, and having afterward fetched away the bodies of
their dead upon truce, returned with the remainder of their Army, to Athens.
Four hundred and thirty men they lost, and their chief Commanders all three.
And the Chalcideans and Bottiaeans, And overthrown, with the loss of 3.
Commanders.
when they had set up a Trophie, and taken up their dead bodies, disbanded and
went every one to his City.

Not long after this, the same Summer, The Ambraciotes invade Acarnania,
together with the Lacedaemonians.
the Ambraciotes and Chaonians, desiring to subdue all Acarnania, and to make
it revolt from the Athenians, persuaded the Lacedaemonians Acarnania; saying,
that if they aided them both with a Fleet, and a Land Army Acarnanians of the
Sea-cost being thereby disabled to assist the rest, having easily gained
Acarnania, they might be Masters afterward both of Zacynthus and Cephalonia,
and the Athenians hereafter less able to make their voyages about
Peloponnesus; and that there was a hope besides to take Naupactus. The
Peloponnesians assenting, sent thither Cnemus, who was yet Admiral, with his
men of Arms, in a few Galleys immediately; and withal sent word to the Cities
about, as soon as their Galleys were ready, to sail with all speed to Leucas.
Now the Corinthians Ambraciotes, as being their own Colony. And the Galleys
which were to go from Corinth, Sicyonia, and that part of the Coast, were now
making ready; and those of the Leucadians, Anactorians, and Ambraciotes, were
arrived before, and stayed at Leucas for their coming. Cnemus and his 1000.
men of Arms, when they had crossed the Sea vndiscryed of Phormio, who
commanded the 20. Athenian Galleys that kept watch at Naupactus, Lepanto.
presently prepared for the War by Land. He had in his Army, of Grecians, the
Ambraciotes, The Army of the Ambraciotes and their Confederates.
Leucadians, Anactorians, and the thousand Peloponnesians he brought with him;
and of Barbarians, a thousand Chaonians, who have no King, but were led by
Photius and Nicanor, which two being of the Families eligible had now the
annual government. With the Chaonians came also the Thesprotians, they also
without a King. The Molossians, and Antitanians were led by Sabylinthus,
protector of Tharups their King, who was yet in minority. The Paraueans were
led by their King Oraedus; and under Oroedus, served likewise, by permission of
Antiochus their King, a Orestians. Also Perdiccas sent thither, unknown to the
Athenians, a thousand Macedonians; but these last were not yet arrived. With
this Army began Cnemus to march, without staying for the Fleet from Corinth.
And passing through Argia, they destroyed Limnaea, a Town unwalled. They go
toward Stratus. Stratus the greatest City of Acarnania.
From thence they marched toward Stratus, the greatest City of Acarnania;
conceiving that if they could take this first, the rest would come easily in.
The Acarnanians seeing a great Army by Land was entered their Country already,
and expecting the enemy also by Stratus, but guarded every one Phormio. But he
answered them, that since there was a Fleet to be set forth from Corinth, he
could not leave Naupactus without a guard. The Peloponnesians and their
Confederates, with their Army divided into three, marched on toward the City
of the Stratians, to the end that being encamped near it, if they yielded not
on parley, they might presently assault the Walls. So they went on, the
Chaonians and other Barbarians in the middle; the Leucadians, and Anactonians;
and such others as were with these, on the right hand* Cnemus, with the
Peloponnesians and Ambraciotes on the left; each Army at great distance, and
sometimes out of sight one of another. The Grecians in their march, Wariness
of the Grecians.
kept their order, and went warily on, till they had gotten a convenient place
to encampe in. Rashness of the Chaonians.
But the Chaonians confident of themselves, and by the inhabitants of that
Continent accounted most warlike, had not the patience to take in any ground
for a Camp, but carried furiously on, together with the rest of the
Barbarians; thought to have taken the Town by their clamor, and to have the
Action ascribed Stratus, aware of this, whilst they were yet in their way, and
imagining, Stratagem of the Stratians.
if they could overcome these, thus divided from the other two Armies, that the
Grecians also would be the less forward to come on, placed diverse* Ambushes
not far from the City, and when the enemies approached, fell upon them, both
from the City, and from the Ambushes at once, and putting them into affright,
slew many of the Chaonians upon the place: And the rest of the Barbarians
seeing these to shrink, staid no longer, but fled outright. Grecian Armies had
knowledge of this Skirmish, because they were gone so far before, to choose
(as they then thought) a commodious place to pitch in. But when the Barbarians
came back upon them running, they received them, and joining both Camps
together, stirred no more for that day. And the Stratians assaulted them not,
for want of the aid of the rest of the Acarnanians, but used their slings
against them, and troubled them much that way. For without their men of Arms,
there was no stirring for them. And in this kind the Acarnanians

When night came, Cnemus withdrew his Army to the River Anapus, from Stratus
80. Furlongs, and fetched off Oeniades was come in of it self, he made his
retreat thither, before the Acarnanians should assemble with their succors;
The Peloponnesians and Ambraciotes retire without effect.
and from thence went every one home. And the Stratians set up a Trophie of the
Skirmish against the Barbarians.

Phormio with 20 Galleys of Athens, overcomes 47 of the Peloponnesian Galleys.
In the mean time the Fleet of Corinth, and the other Confederates, that was to
set out from the Crissaean Gulf, and to join with Cnemus, to hinder the lower
Acarnanians from ayding the upper, came not at all; but were Phormio, and those
twenty Athenian Galleys that kept watch at Naupactus, about the same time that
the Skirmish was at Stratus. For as they sailed along the shore, Phormio waited
on them till they were out of the straight, intending to set upon them in the
open Sea. And the Corinthians and their Confederates went not as to fight by
Sea, but furnished rather for the Land-seruice in Acarnania; and never thought
that the Athenians with their twenty Galleys, durst fight with theirs, that
were seven and forty. Nevertheless, when they saw that Athenians, as
themselves sailed by one shore, kept over against them on the other, and that
now when they went off from Patrae in Achaia, to go over to Acarnania in the
opposite Continent, the Athenians came toward them from Chalcis, and the River
Euenus, and also knew that they had come to anchor there the night before, they
found they were then to fight of necessity, directly against the mouth of the
Straight. The Commanders of the Fleet were such as the Cities that set it
forth, had severally appointed; but of the Corinthians, these; Machon,
Isocrates, The order of the Peloponnesian Galleys.
Agatharchidas. The Peloponnesians ordered their Fleet in such manner, as they
made thereof a Circle, as great as, without leaving the spaces so wide as for
the Athenians to pass through, they were possibly able; with the stemmes of
their Galleys outward, and sternes inward, and into the midst thereof,
received such small Vessels as came with them; and also five of their swiftest
Galleys, the which were at narrow passages to come forth in whatsoever part the
Enemy should charge.

The order of the Athenian Galleys, and the Stratagem of Phormio.
But the Athenians with their Galleys ordered one after Phormio had before
forbidden them to fight, till he himself had given them the signal. For he
hoped that this order of theirs would not last long, as in an Army on Land, but
that the Galleys would fall foul of one another, and be troubled also with the
smaller vessels in the midst. And if the wind should also blow out of the
Gulf, in expectation whereof he so went round them, and which A set wind which
blow every morning there from the East, caused, as it seems, by the approach
of the Sun^^.
usually blew there every morning, he made account they would then instantly
be Peloponnesians being already contracted into a narrow compass, were both
ways troubled, by the wind, and withal by their own lesser vessels that
encumbred them; and when one Gallie fell foul of another, and the Mariners
labored to set them clear with their poles, and through the noise they made,
keeping off, and reuiling each other, heard nothing, neither of their charge,
nor of Athenians charging, drowned first one of the Admiral Galleys, and
diverse others after it, in the several parts they assaulted; and brought them
to that pass at length, that not one applying himself to the fight, The
Peloponnesians fly.
they fled all toward Patrae and Dyme, Cities of Achaia. The Athenians, after
they Molychrium; and when they had there set up a Trophie, and consecrated one
Gallie to Neptune, they returned with the rest to Naupactus. The Peloponnesians
with the remainder of their Fleet, went presently along the Coast of Cyllene,
the Arsenall of the Eleans; and thither, after the Battle at Stratus, came
also Cnemus, from Leucas, and with him those Galleys that were there, and with
which this other Fleet should have been joined.

Preparation for another fight.
the Lacedaemonians sent unto Cnemus to the Fleet, Timocrates, Brasidas, and
Lycophron to be of his Council, with command to prepare for another better
fight, Athenians, with their own short study in these businesses. And therefore
they sent these men thither in passion: who being arrived with Cnemus,
intimated to the Cities about, to provide their Galleys, and caused those they
had before, to be repaired. Phormio likewise sent to Athens, to make Crete.

Twenty sail of Athenians, sent to aid Phormio, stay in Crete.
For Nicias a Cretan of Gortys, the public Host of the Athenians, had persuaded
them to a voyage against Cydonia, telling them they might take it in, being now
their Enemy. Polichnitae, that bordered upon the Cydonians. Therefore with
these Galleys he sailed into Crete, and together with the Polichnitae, wasted
the Territory of the Cydonians; where also, by reason of the Winds, and weather
unfit to take Sea in, he wasted not a little of his time.

In the mean time, whilst these Athenians were Wind-bound in Crete, The
Peloponnesians sail by the Coast of Panormus.
the Peloponnesians that were in Cyllene, in order of Battle sailed along the
Coast to Panormus of Achaia, to which also were their Landforces come to aid
them. Phormio likewise sailed by the shore to Rhium Molychricum, and anchored
without it, with twenty Galleys, the same he had used in the former Battle.
Now this Rhium was of the Athenians side, and the other Rhium in Peloponnesus,
lies on the opposite shore, distant from it at the most but seven furlongs of
Sea; and these two make the mouth of the Crissaean Gulf. The Peloponnesians
therefore came to an anchor at Rhium of Achaia, with 77. Galleys, not far
from Panormus, where they left their Land Forces. After they saw the Athenians,
and had lain six or seven days one Peloponnesians not intending to put off
without Rhium into the wide Sea, for fear of what they had sufferd by it
before; nor the other to enter the Straight, because to fight within, they
thought to be the Enemies advantage. At last, Cnemus, Brasidas, and the other
Commanders of the Peloponnesians, desiring to fight speedily, before a new
supply should arrive from Athens, called the Soldiers together, and seeing the
most of them to be fearful through their former defeat, and not forward to
fight again, encouraged them first with words to this effect.

THE ORATION OF CNEMVS.
MEn of Peloponnesus, If any of you be afraid of the Battle at hand, for the
success of the Battle past, his fear is without ground. For you know, we
were inferior to them then in preparation, and set not forth as to a fight at
Sea, but rather to an expedition by Land. Fortune likewise crossed us in many
things; and somewhat we miscarried by unskillfulness: so his order, not
forsaking the place assigned him. And for us, we Thus did the Commanders
encourage the Peloponnesians.

Phormio doubts of the courage of his Soldiers.
And Phormio, he likewise doubting that his Soldiers were but faint-hearted,
and observing they had consultations apart, and were afraid of the multitude of
the enemies Galleys, thought good, having called them together, And encourages
them.
that being Athenians, they ought not to decline, any number of Galleys
whatsoever, of the Peloponnesians; yet when he saw that the sight of the enemy
present had dejected them, he thought fit to revive their courage, and
Athenians, said thus.

THE ORATION OF PHORMIO.
Soldiers, having observed your fear of the enemies number, I have called you
together, not enduring to see you terrified with things that are not terrible.
For first, they have prepared this great number, and odds of Galleys, for that
they were overcome before, and because they are even in their own opinions too
weak for us. And Lacedaemonians, who are the leaders of the Confederates,
bring them to fight, for the greatest part (in respect of the opinion they have
of us) against their wills. For else they would never have undertaken a new
Peloponnesian Nauies, or to bring the fear of the Sea nearer home to the
Athenians. Again, let me Thus did Phormio also encourage his Soldiers.

The Peloponnesians, The stratagem of the Peloponnesians.
when they saw the Athenians would not enter the Gulf* and Straight, desiring
to draw them in against their wills, weighed Anchor, and betime in the morning
having arranged their Galleys by four and four in a rank, sailed along their
own Coast, within the Gulf, leading the way, in the same order as they had
lien Phormio, thinking them going to Naupactus, should for safeguard Athenians
might not be able to get beyond that wing of theirs, and avoid the impression,
but be enclosed by their Galleys on both sides. Phormio, fearing (as they
expected) what might become of the Town now without guard, as soon as he saw
them from Anchor, against his will, and in extreme haste, went aboard, and
sailed along the Shore, with the Land forces of the Messenians, The
Peloponnesians give the onset.
marching by to aid him. The Peloponnesians, when they saw them sail in one
long File, Athenians, hoping to have intercepted them every Gallie. But of
those, the eleven foremost, avoiding that wing, and the turn made by the
Peloponnesians, got out into the open Sea. The rest they intercepted, and
driving them to the Shore, sunk them.

The men, as many as swamme not out, they slew, and the Galleys, some they tied
to their own, and towed Messenian succors on Land, entering the Sea with their
Arms, got aboard of some of them, and fighting from the Deckes, recovered them
again, after they were already towing away. And in this part, the
Peloponnesians had the victory, and overcame the Galleys of the Athenians. Now
the 20 Galleys that were their right wing, gave chase to those eleven Athenian
Galleys, which had avoided them when they turned, and were gotten into the open
Sea. These flying Naupactus, arrived there before the enemies, all save one,
and when they came under the Temple of Apollo, turned their beak heads, and
put themselves in readiness for defense, in c^se the enemy should follow them
to the Land. But the Peloponnesians as they came after, were Singing the hymn
of victory.
Paeanizing, as if they had already had the victory; and one Gallie which was
of Leucas, being far before the rest, gave chase to one Athenian Gallie, that
was behind the rest of the Athenians. Now it chanced that there lay out into
the Sea, a certain Ship at Anchor, to which the Athenian Leucadian Gallie that
gave her chase, and sunk her. Upon this unexpected and unlikely accident they
began to fear, and having also followed the chase, as being victors,
disorderly, some of them let down their Oars into the water, and hindered the
way of their Galleys (a matter of very ill consequence, seeing the enemy was so
near) and staid for more company. And some of them through ignorance of the
Coast, ran upon the Shelues. The Athenians seeing this, took heart again,
and together with one clamor, set upon them; The Athenians have the victory.
because of their present errors committed, and their disarray; but turned,
and fled to Panormus* from whence at first they set forth. The Athenians
followed, and took from them six Galleys, that were hindmost, and recovered
their own which the Peloponnesians had sunk by the Shore, and tied a stern
of theirs. Of the men, some they slew, and some also they took alive. In the
Leucadian Gally that was sunk near the ship, was Timocrates, a Lacedaemonian,
who, Timocrates a Lacedaemonian Commander slays himself.
when the Gally was lost, run himself through with his sword, and his
Naupactus. The Athenians falling off, erected a Trophy in the place from whence
they set forth to this victory, and took up their dead, and the wrack, as much
as was on their own shore, and gave truce to the enemy to do the like. The
Peloponnesians also set up a Trophy, as if they also had had the victory, in
respect of the flight of those Galleys which they sunk by the Shore; and the
Gally which they had taken, they consecrated to Neptune, in Rhium of Achaia,
hard by their Trophy. After this, fearing the supply which was expected Athens,
they sailed by night into the Crissaean Gulf, and to Corinth, all but the
Leucadians. And those Athenians, with twenty Galleys out of Crete, that should
have been with Phormio before the battle, not long after the going away of
the Galleys of Peloponnesus, arrived at Naupactus; And the Summer ended. The
end of the third Summer.


But before, the Fleet gone into the Crissaean Gulf, and to Corinth, was
dispersed. Cnemus, and Brasidas, and the rest of the Commanders of the
Peloponnesians, The Peloponnesians resolve to attempt the surprise of Piraeus.
in the beginning of Winter, instructed by the Megareans, thought good to
Piraeus, the Haven of the Athenians. Now it was without guard, or bar, and
that upon very good cause, considering how much they exceeded others It may be
hence gathered, that in the Galleys of old, there was but one man to one Oar.
his Oar, his Cushion, and (...), a piece of Leather wherein their Oar turned.
one Thong for his Oar to turn in, should take his way by Land from Corinth,
to the other Sea, that lies to Athens, and going with all speed to Megara,
lanch forty Galleys out of Nisaea, the Arsenall of the Megareans, which then
were there, and sail presently into Piraeus. For at that time, there neither
stood any Galleys for a watch before it, nor was there any imagination, that
the enemies would on such a sudden come upon them. For they durst not have
Nisaea, and set Sail, not now toward Piraeus, as they intended, The
Peloponnesians dare not execute their design, but turn to Salamis.
fearing the danger, and a wind was also said to have risen, that hindered them,
but toward a Promontory of Salamis, lying out toward Megara.

Now, there was in it, a little Fort, and underneath in the Sea, lay three
Galleys that kept watch, to hinder the impor^ation and exportation of any
thing, to or from the Megareans. This Fort they assaulted, and the Galleys they
towed empty away after them. And being come upon the Salaminians unawares,
wasted also other parts of the Island.

By this time the fires Fires lifted up, if they were sti^l, signified friends
coming, if waued, enemies. Scholiastes.
signifying the coming of enemies, were lifted up toward Athens, and
affrighted them more then any thing that had happened in all this War. For
they in the City thought the enemies had been already in Piraeus. And they in
Piraeus thought the City of the Salaminians had been already taken, and that
the enemy would instantly come into Piraeus. Which, had Athenians, as soon as
it was day, came with the whole strength of the City, into Piraeus, and
lanched their Galleys, and imbarking in haste, and tumult, set sail toward
Salamis, leaving for the guard of Piraeus, an Army of Foot. The Peloponnesians
upon notice of those succors, having now overrun most of Salamis, and taken
many prisoners, and much other booty, Budorus, Nisaea. And somewhat they feared
the more, for that their Galleys had lain long in the water, and were subject
to leaking. And when they came to Megara, they went thence to Corinth again by
Land. The Athenians likewise, when they found not the Enemy at Salamis, went
home; and from that time forward, looked better to Piraeus, both for the
shutting of the Ports, and for their diligence otherways.

About the same time, The King of Thrace makes War on the King of Macedon.
in the beginning of the same Winter, Sytalces an Odrysian, the son of Teres,
King of Thrace, made War upon Perdiccas the son of Alexander King of
Macedonia, and upon the Chalcideans bordering on Thrace; upon two promises; one
of which he required to be performed to him, and the other he was to perform
himself. For Perdiccas had promised somewhat unto him, for reconciling him to
the Athenians, who had formerly oppressed him with War, and for not restoring
his Brother Philip to the Kingdom, that was his Enemy, which he never paid
him; And Sytalces himself had couenanted with the Athenians, when he made
League Chalcideans of Thrace. For these causes therefore he made this
Expedition; and took with him both Amyntas, the son of Philip, (with purpose
to make him King of Macedonia) and also the Athenian Ambassadors then with him
for that business, and Agnon the Athenian Commander. For the Athenians ought
also to have joined with him against the Chalcideans, both with a Fleet, and
with as great Landforces as they could provide.

Odrysians, he levied first those Thracians that inhabit on this side the
Mountains Aemus and Rhodope, as many as were of his own dominion, down to
the shore of the Euxine Sea, and the Hellespont. Then beyond Aemus he levied
the Getes, and all the Nations between Ister and the Euxine Sea. The Getes,
and people of those parts, are borderers upon the Scythians, and furnished as
the Scythians are, all Archers on Horseback. He also drew forth many of those
Scythians that inhabit the Mountains, and are free-States, all Swordmen, and
Dij, the greatest part of which are on the Mountain Rhodope; whereof some he
hired, and some went as Voluntaries. He levied also the Agrianes, and Leaeans,
and Paeonia, in his own Dominion. These are the utmost bounds of his Dominion,
extending to the Graeans and Leaeans, Nations of Paeonia, and to the River
Strymon; which rising out of the Mountain Scomius, passes through the
Territories of the Graeans and Leaeans* The description of Thrace.
who make the bounds of his Kingdom toward Paeonia, and are subject only to
their own Laws. But on the part that lies to the Triballians, who are also a
free people, the Treres make the bound of his Dominion, and the Tilataeans.
These dwell on the North side of the Scomius, and reach Westward, as far as
to the River Oscius, which comes out of the same Hill Nestus and Hebrus does;
a great and desert Hill adjoining to Rhodope.

The Dimension of the Dominion of the Odrysians by the Sea side, is from the
City of the Abderites, to the mouth of Ister in the Euxine Sea; and is, the
nearest way, four days, and as many nights Sail for a A ship that uses
only Sails, of the round form of building, and serving for burden, in
distinction to Galleys, and all other vessels of the long form of building,
serving for the Wars.
round Ship, with a continual fore-wind. By Land likewise, the nearest way, it
is from the City Abdera, to the mouth of Ister,

Now for the Continent; from Byzantium to the Leaeans, and to the River Strymon
(for it reaches this way farthest into the maine Land) it is for the like
Footman, thirteen days journey. The Tribute they received from all the
Barbarian Nations, and from the Cities of Greece, in the reign of Seuthes,
(who reigned after Sitalces, and made the most of it) was in gold and silver,
by estimation, 75000. pound sterling.
400. Talents by year. And Presents of gold and silver came Odrysian Nobility
about him. For they had a custom, which also was general to all Thrace,
contrary to that of the Kingdom of Persia, to receive rather then to give: and
it was there a greater shame to be asked and deny, then to ask and go
without. Nevertheless they held this custom long, by reason of their power:
for without gifts, there was nothing to be gotten done amongst them. So that
this Kingdom Europe, that lie between the The Adriatique Sea.
Ionian Gulf, and the Euxine Sea, it was, for revenue of money, Mar Maggiore.
and other wealth, the mightiest; though indeed for strength of an Army, and
multitudes of Soldiers, the same be far short of the Scythians: For there is
no Nation, The great power of the Scythians.
not to say of Europe, but neither of Asia, that are comparable to this, or
that as long as they agree, are able, one Nation to one, to stand against the
Scythians: and yet in matter of counsel and wisdom in the present occasions
of life, they are not like to other men.

Sitalces therefore, King of this great Country, prepared his Army, and when
all was ready, set forward, and marched toward Macedonia. First, through his
own Dominion; then over Cercine, a desert Mountain dividing the Sintians from
the Paeonians, over which he marched the same way himself had formerly made
with Timber, when he made War against the Paeonians. Passing this Mountain,
out of the Country of the Odrysians, they had on their right hand the
Paeonians, and on the left, the Sintians and Maedes, and beyond it, they came
to the City of Doberus Paeonia. His Army, as he marched, diminished not any
way, except by sickness, but increased, by the accession of many free Nations
of Thrace, that came in uncalled, in hope of Booty. Insomuch as the whole
number is said to have amou^ted to no less then 150000. men. Whereof the most
were foot, the Horse being a third part, or thereabouts. And of the Horse, the
greatest part were the Odrysians themselves, and the next most, the Getes. And
of the Foot, those Swordmen, a free Nation, that came down to him out of the
Mountain Rhodope, were most Doberus, they made ready to fall in, from the
Hills side, into the lower Macedonia, the dominion of Perdiccas. For there are
in Macedonia, the Lyncestians, and the Helimiotes, and other High-land Nations,
who though they be Confederates, and in subjection to the other, yet have
their several Kingdoms by themselves. But of that part of the now Macedonia
which lies toward the Sea, Alexander, The beginning of the Kingdom of
Macedonia. The Macedonian Kings descended of the Temenidae, a Family in Argos,
of the Peloponnesians.
the Father of this Perdiccas, and his Ancestors, the Temenidae, Argos, were
the first possessors, and reigned in the same; having first driven out of
Pieria the Pierians, (which afterward seated themselves in Phagres, and other
Strymon, at the foot of Pangeum; From which cause, that Country is called the
Gulf of Pieria to this day, which lies at the foot of Pangeum, and bends
toward the Sea) and out of that which is called Bottia, the Bottiaeans, that
now border upon the Chalcideans. They possessed besides a certain narrow
portion of Paeonia, near unto the River of Axius, reaching from above down to
Pella, and to the Sea. Beyond Axius they possess the Country called Mygdonia,
as far as to Strymon, from whence they have driven out the Eidonians.
Furthermore Eordians out of the Territory, now called Eorda, (of whom the
greatest part perished, but there dwell a few of them yet about Physca) and the
Almopians out of Almopia. The same Macedonians subdued also other Nations, and
hold them yet, as Anthemus, Grestonia, and Bisaltia, and a great part of the
Macedonians themselves. But the whole is called Macedonia, and was the Kingdom
of Perdiccas the son of Alexander, when Sitalces came to invade it. The
Macedonians retire into their walled towns.
The Macedonians unable to stand in the Field against so huge an Army, retired
all within Archelaus the son of Perdiccas, when he came to the kingdom,
Archelaus the son of Perdiccas, the ninth King of Macedon, of the Family of
the Temenidae.
who then also laid out the high ways straight, and took order both for
matter of War, as Horses and Arms, and for other provision, better then all
the other 8. Kings that were before him. The Thracian Army arising from
Doberus, invaded that Territory first, which had been the Principality of
Philip, and took Eidomene by force; but Gortynia, Atalanta, and some other
Amyntas the son of Philip, who was then in the Army. They also assaulted
Europus, but could not take it. Then they went on further into Macedonia, on
the part that lies on the right hand of Pella, and Cyrrhus; but within these,
into Bottiaea and Pieria they entered not, but wasted Mygdonia, Grestonia, and
Anthemus. Now the Macedonians had never any intention to make head against them
with their Foot, but sending out their Horsemen, which they had procured from
their Allies of the higher Macedonia, they assaulted Thracian Army, in such
places, where few against

After this, Sitalces and Perdiccas come to a conference about the motives of
the War.
Sitalces gave way to a conference with Perdiccas, touching the motives of this
War. And forasmuch as the Athenians were not arrived with their Fleet,
Sitalces would have made the Journey) but had sent Ambassadors to him with
Presents, he sent a part of his Army against the Chalcideans and Bottiaeans,
wherewith having compelled them within their walled Towns, he wasted and
destroyed their Territory. Whilst he stayed in these parts, The Grecians, at
the coming of this Army, stand upon their Guard, fearing they were called in
by the Athenians to subdue them.
the Thessalians Southward, and the Magnetians, and the rest of the Nations
subject to the Thessalians, and all the Grecians as far as to Thermopylae, were
afraid he would have turned his Forces upon them, and stood upon their guard.
And Northward those Thracians rhat inhabit the Champaigne Country beyond
Strymon, namely the Panaeans, Odomantians, Droans, and Dersaeans, all of them
free-States, were afraid of the same. He gave occasion also to a rumor, that
he meant to lead his Army against all those Grecians that were enemies to the
Athenians, as called in by them to that purpose, by virtue of their League. But
whilst he stayed, he wasted the Chalcidean, Bottiaean, and Macedonian
Territories; and when he could not effect what he came for, and his Army both
wanted victual, and was afflicted wtih the coldness Seuthes the son of
Spardocus, his cousin German, and of greatest authority next himself,
persuaded him to make haste away. Seuthes, corrupted by Perdiccas, persuades
Sitalces to return.
Now Perdiccas had dealt secretly with Seuthes, and promised him his Sister in
marriage, and money with her: and Sitalces at the persuasion of him, after the
stay of full thirty days, whereof he spent eight in Chalcidea* retired with his
Army, with all speed, into his own Kingdom. And Perdiccas shortly after gave
to Seuthes his Sister Stratonica in marriage, as he had promised. This was the
issue of this Expedition of Sitalces.

The same Winter, Phormio puts suspected persons out of Stratus and Corontae.
after the Fleet of the Peloponnesians was dissolved, the Athenians that were
at Naupactus, under Phormio, sailed along the Coast to Astacus, and disbarking,
marched into the inner parts of Acarnania. He had in his Army, 400. men of
Arms that he brought with him in his Galleys, and 400. more Messenians. With
these he put out of Stratus, Corontae, and other places, all those whose
fidelity he thought doubtful. And when he had restored Cynes the son of
Theolytus to Corontae, they returned again to their Galleys. For they thought
they should not be able to make War against the Oeniades, (who only of all
Acarnania are the Athenians Achelous, The course of the River Achelous.
springing out of the Mountain Pindus, and running through Dolopia, and
through the Territories of the Agraeans, and the Amphilochians, and through
most part of the Champaigne of Acarnania, passing above by the City of Stratus,
and falling into the Sea by the City of the Oeniades, which also it moateth
about with Fens, by the abundance of Water, makes it hard lying there for an
Army in time of Winter. Also most of the Islands Echinades lie just over against
Oenia, hard by the mouth of Achelous* And the River being a great one,
continually The Fable of Alcmaeon.
and but small ones. It is reported, that Apollo by his Oracle did assign this
place for an habitation to Alcmaeon the son of Amphiraus, at such time as
Mother; telling him, That he should never be free from the terrors that
haunted him, till he had found out, and seated himself in such a Land, as when
he slew his Mother, the Sun had never seen, nor was then Land, because all
other Lands were polluted by him. Hereupon being at a Nonplus, as they say,
with much ado he observed this ground congested by the River Achelous, and
thought there was enough cast up to Oeniades, he reigned there, and named the
Country after the name of his son Acarnas. Acarnania whence so called.
Thus goes the report, as we have heard it concerning Alcmaeon. But Phormio and
the Athenians leaving Acarnania, and returning to Naupactus, in the very
beginning of the Spring, came back to Athens, and brought with them such
Galleys as they had taken, and the Freemen they had taken Prisoners, in their
fights at Sea, who were again set at The end of the third year of the War.
So ended that Winter, and the third Year of the War written by THVCYDIDES.

THE THIRD BOOK
The principal Contents.
Attica invaded by the Peloponnesians. The Mitylenians revolt, and are received
by the Peloponnesians at Olympia, into their league. The Athenians send Paches
to Mitylene to besiege it. Part of the besieged Plataeans escape Mitylene,
armed by the Nobility for a sally on the enemy, deliver the town to the
Athenians. The residue of the Plataeans yield to the besiegers, and are put to
the sword. The proceedings upon the Mitylenians, and their punishment. The
sedition in Corcyra. Laches is sent by the Athenians into Sicily. And Nicias
into Melos. Demosthenes fights against the Aetolians unfortunately; and
afterward against the Ambraciotes fortunately. Pythadorus is sent into Sicily,
to receive the Fleet from Laches. This in other three

THe Summer following, THE FOVRTH YEAR.
the Peloponnesians, and their Confederates at the time when Corn was at the
highest, The Peloponnesians invade Attica.
entered with their Army into Attica, under the Conduct of Archidamus, the son
of Zeuxidamus, King of the Lacedaemonians, and there set them down, and wasted
the Athenian horsemen, as they were wont, fell upon the enemy where they
thought fit, and kept back the multitude of

The Revolt of Lesbos.
After the Peloponnesians were entered Attica, Lebsos immediately, all but
Methymne, revolted from the Athenians; which though they would have done before
the War, and the Lacedaemonians would not then receive them, yet even now
they were forced to revolt Pontus, as Archers, and Victual, and whatsoever
else they had sent for.

The intention of the Lesbians to revolt, discovered to the Athenians.
But the Tenedians, with whom they were at odds, and the Methymnians, and of
the Mitylenians themselves, certain particular men, upon Faction, being
Athenians, made known unto them, that the Lesbians were forced to go all into
Mitylene; that by the help of the Lacedaemonians, and their Kindred the
Boeotians, they hastened all manner of provision necessary for a Revolt, and
that unless it were presently prevented, all Lesbos would be lost.

The Athenians (afflicted with the Disease, and with the War now on foot, and
at the hottest) thought it a dangerous matter, that Lesbos, which had a Navy,
and was of strength entire, should thus be

But after, when they had sent Ambassadors to Mitylene, and could not persuade
them to dissolve themselves, and undo their preparation, they then feared the
worst, and would have prevented them. The Athenians send 40. Galleys to Lesbos.
And to that purpose, suddenly sent out the 40. Galleys made ready for
Pelopo^nesus with Cleippedes and 2. other Commanders. For they had bin Apollo
Maloeis to be Mitylenians were accustomed to come all out of the Town; and
they hoped, making haste, to take them there unawares. And if the attempt
succeeded, it was well; if not, they might command the Mitylenians to deliver
up their Galleys, and to demollish their Walls; or they might make War
against them, if they refused. So these Galleys went their way. And ten
Galleys of Mitylene which then chanced to be at Athens, The Athenians imprison
such of Mitylene as were at Athens, and stay their Galleys.
by virtue of their League to aid them, the Athenians stayed, and cast Athens
into Euboea by Sea, and then by Land to Geraestus, and finding there a Ship
ready to put off, having the Wind favorable, arrived in Mitylene, three days
after he set forth from Athens, and gave them notice of the coming of the
Fleet. Hereupon they not only went not out to Malo^^s, as was expected, but
also stopped the gappes of their Walls and Ports, where they were left
unfinished, and placed guards to defend them.

Athenians, not long after, arrived, and saw this, the Commanders of the Fleet
delivered to the Mitylenians what they had in charge, which not harkened unto,
they presently fell to the War. The Mitylenians unprovided, and compelled to
a War on such a sudden, put out some few Galleys before the Haven to fight:
but being driven in again by the Galleys of Athens, they called to the
Athenian Commanders to parley; desiring, if they could, upon reasonable
conditions, to get the Galleys for the present sent away.

Athenian Commander allowed the Conditions, The Athenians give the Mitylenians
time to purge themselves at Athens.
he also fearing they should be too weak to make War against the whole
Island.

When a cessation of Arms was granted, the Mitylenians amongst others, sent to
Athens* one of those that had given inteligence there of their Design, and had
repented him after of the same, to try if they could persuade them to withdraw
their Fleet from them, as not intending any innovation. The Mitylenians sent to
Lacedaemon for aid.
Withal they sent Ambassadors at the same time to Lacedaemon, undiscovered
Athenians, which was riding at Anchor in This Malea seems not to be the
Promontory of Malea, according to the Scoliast, which lies to the South of
^itylene, but some other nearer place, and on the North side of the City.
Malea, to the North of the City; being without any confidence of their
success at Athens. Lacedaemon, negotiated the sending of aid from thence. The
Mitylean Ambassadors speed not at Athens.
But when their Ambassadors were come back from Athens, without effect, the
Mitylenians, and the rest of Lesbos, save only Methymne, (for these, together
with the Imbrians, Lemnians, and some few other their Confederates, aided the
Athenians) prepared themselves for the War. And the Mitylenians with the
whole strength of the City, made a sally upon the Athenian Camp, They sally
out upon the Athenians, but without success.
and came to a Battle; wherein though the Mitylenians had not the worse, yet
Peloponnesus. They lie still, expecting help from Peloponnesus.
For there were now come into the City, one Meleas a Laconian, and Hermiondas
a Theban, who having bin sent out before the revolt, but unable to arrive
before the coming of the Athenian Fleet, secretly, after the end of the
Battle, entered the Haven in a Gally, and persuaded them to send another Gally
along with them, with other Ambassadors to Sparta; The Athenians send for the
aids of their Confederates.
which they did. But the Athenians Mitylenians cessation, called in their
Confederates, who because they saw no assurance on the part of the Lesbians,
came much sooner in then it was thought they would have done; and riding at
Anchor to the South of the City, fortified two Camps, on either side one, and
brought their Galleys before both the Ports, and so quite excluded the
Mitylenians from the use of the Sea. As for the Land, the Athenians held so
much only as lay near their Camps, which was not much; And the Mitylenians
and other Lesbians, that were now come to aid them, were Masters of the rest.
For Malea served the Athenians Mitylene.

The Athenians send Asopius the son of Phormio, with 20. Galleys about
Peloponnesus.
About the same time of the same Summer, the Athenians sent likewise thirty
Galleys into Peloponnesus, under the conduct of Asopius the son of Phormio.
For the Acarnanians had desired them to send some son or kinsman of Phormio
for General into those parts. These, as they sailed by, Laconia, and then
sending Athens, Asopius himself with twelve Galleys went on to Lepanto.
Naupactus. And afterward having raised the whole power of Acarnania, he made
War upon the Oeniades, and both entered with his Galleys into the River of
Achelous, and with his Landforces wasted the Territory. But when the Oeniades
would not yield, he disbanded his Landforces, and sailed with his Galleys to
Leucas, and landed his Soldiers on the Territory of Neritum; but in going off,
was by those of the Country that came out to defend it, and by Asopius slain.
both himself and part of his Company slain. And having upon truce received
from the Leucadians their dead bodies, they went their ways.

Now the Ambassadors of the Mitylenians, The Mitylenian Ambassadors sent to
Lacedaemon, are appointed to attend the general Assembly of the Grecians at
Olympia.
that went out in the first Gally, having been referred by the Lacedaemonians
to the general meeting of the Grecians at Olympia, to the end they might
determine of them, together with the rest of the Confederates, went to Olympia
accordingly. It was that Olympiade 88.
Olympiade wherein Dorieus of Rhodes

THE ORATION OF THE Ambassadors of MITYLENE.
MEN of Lacedaemon, and Confederates, We know the received custom of the
Grecians: For they that take into League such as revolt in the Wars, and
relinquish a Athenians it is not so. Nor let any man think the worse of us,
for that having been honored by them in time of peace, we have now revolted
in time of danger. For the first point of our speech, especially be neither
firm friendship between man and man, nor any communion Athenians, it was
first made, when you gave over the Medan War, and they remained to prosecute
the relics of that business: Yet we entered not such a League, as to be
their helpers in bringing the Grecians into the servitude of the Athenians; but
to set free the Grecians from the servitude of the Medes. And as long as they
led us as equals, we followed them with much zeal; but when we saw they
Medes, and led us to the subiugation of the Confederates, we could not then but
be afraid. And the Confederates through the multitude of distinct Councels,
unable to unite themselves for resistance, fell all but our selves and the
Chians into their subjection; and we having still our own Laws, and being in
name a free State, followed them to the Wars; but so, as by the examples of
their former actions, we held them not any longer for faithful Leaders. For it
was not probable, when they had subdued those, whom together with us they took
into league, but that, when they should be able, they would do the like also
by the rest. It is true that if we were now in liberty all, we might be the
better assured, Men of Lacedaemon and Confederates, we have revolted; the which
are both Boeotians invited us to it, we presently obeyed. Wherein we thought
we made a double revolt, one from the Grecians, in ceasing to do them
mischief with the Athenians, and helping to set them free; and another from
the Athenians, in breaking first, and not staying to be destroyed by them
hereafter. But this revolt of ours has Athenians being both with the
likeness, and their great expenses consumed, and their Navy divided, part upon
your own Coasts, and part upon ours, it is not likely they should have many
Galleys spare, in case you again this Summer invade them, both by Sea and
Land; but that they should either be unable to resist the invasion defend the
Territory of another. For though Lesbos seem remote, Attica, but there, from
whence comes the profit to Attica. This profit is the revenue they have from
their Confederates; which if they subdue us, will still be greater. For neither
will any other revolt, and all that is ours will accrue unto them; and we
shall be worse handled besides, then those that were under them before. But
aiding us with diligence you shall both add to your league a City, that has
a great Navy (the thing you most stand in need of) and also easily overthrow
the Athenians by subduction of their Confederates; because every one will then
be more confident to come Grecians have reposed in you, and of the presence of
Jupiter Olympius, in whose Temple here, we are in a manner suppliants to you,
receive the Mitylenians into league, and aid us. And do not cast us off, who,
(though, as to the exposing of our persons, the danger be our own) shall bring
a common profit to all Greece, if we prosper, and a more common detriment to
all the Grecians, if through your inflexiblenesse we miscarry. Be you therefore
men, such as the Grecians esteem you, and our fears require In this manner
spoke the Mitylenians,

The Mitylenians taken into the Lacedaemonian league.
And the Lacedaemonians, and their Confederates, when they had heard, and
allowed their reasons, decreed not only a League with the Lesbians, but also
again to make an invasion into Attica. And to that purpose, the Lacedaemonians
appointed their Confederates there present, to make as much speed as they could
with two parts of their forces, into the Isthmus; And they themselves being
first there, The Lacedaemonians prepare for the invasion of Attica, both by Sea
and Land.
prepared Engines in the Isthmus for the drawing up of Galleys, with intention
to carry the Navy from Corinth Athens, and to set upon them both by Sea and
Land. And these things diligently did they. But the rest of the Confederates
assembled but slowly, being busied in the gathering in of their fruits, and
weary of Warfare.

The Athenians perceiving all this preparation to be made, upon an opinion of
their weakness, and desirous to let them see they were deceived, as being able
without Lesbos, easily to master one Fleet that Peloponnesus, The Athenians to
make show of their power, and to deter the enemy from their enterprise, send
100 Galleys, not so much to waste Peloponnesus, as to confute the opinion which
the Lesbian Ambassadors had put into the Lacedaemonians of their weakness.
manned out 100 Galleys, and embarked therein generally, both Citizens (except
those of the degree of A degree estimated by their wealth, as if one should
say, men that had 500 Chaldrons reue^ue, as they reckon in Scotland.
Pentacosiomedimni, and Horsemen, such as kept a Horse to serve the State, and
were valued at 300 Chaldrons.
Horsemen) and also strangers that dwelt amongst them; And sailing to the
Isthmus, made a show of their strength, and landed their Soldiers in such
parts of Peloponnesus, as they thought fit. When the Lacedaemonians saw things
so contrary to their expectation, they thought it false, which was spoken by
the Lesbian Ambassadors; and esteeming the action difficult, seeing their
Confederates Peloponnesus by the Athenians, went home again; and afterward
prepared to send a Fleet to Lesbos, and intimated to the Cities rateably to
furnish 40 Galleys, and appointed Alcidas, who was to go thither with them,
for Admiral. And the Athenians, when they saw the Peloponnesians gone, went
likewise home with their hundred Galleys.

About the time that this Fleet was out, The greatness of the Athenian Navy,
and occasion of their great expense of money.
they had surely Attica, Euboea, and Salamis, and another 100 were about
Peloponnesus* besides those that were at Potidaea and in other places. So that
in one Summer, they had in all, 250 Sail. And this, together with Potidaea,
was it, that most exhausted their treasure. For the (...), A man and Arms had
double pay for himself and for a servant.
men of Arms that besieged the City, had each of them two drachmaes a day,
one for himself, and another for his man, Phormio and came away before the
Town was won. And the Galleys had all the same pay. In this manner was their
money consumed, and so many Galleys employed, the most indeed that ever they
had manned at once.

About the same time that the Lacedaemonians were in the Isthmus, the
Mitylenians marched by Land, The Mitylenians go with a power to Methymne,
hoping to have it betrayed.
both they and their auxiliaries, against Methymne, in hope to have had it
betrayed unto them; and having assaulted the City, when Antissa, Pyrrha, and
Eressus; and after they had settled the affairs of those places, and made
strong their walls, returned Methymneans likewise made War upon Antissa, but
beaten by the Antissians* and some auxiliaries that were with them, they made
haste again to Methymne, with the loss of many of their Soldiers. But the
Athenians being aduertized hereof, and understanding that the Mitylenians were
masters of the Land, and that their own Soldiers there were not enough to keep
them in, sent thither, about the beginning of Autumn, Paches, The Athenians
send Paches ^^th 1000 men of Arms to Mitylene.
the son of Epicurus, with 1000 men of Arms, of their own City, who
supplying the place of Rowers Mitylene, and ingirt it with a single wall. Save
that in some places, stronger by Nature then the rest, they only built
Turrets, and placed guards in them. So that the City was every way strongly
besieged, both by Sea and Land; And the Winter began.

The end of the fourth Summer.
The Athenians standing in need of money for the Siege, both contributed
themselves, and sent thither 37500 pound sterling.
200 Talents of this their first contribution, and also dispatched Lysicles,
and 4 others with 42 Galleys, to levy money amongst the Confederates. But
Lysicles, after he had been to and Myus, through the Plains of Maeander in
Caria, as far as to the hill Sandius, was set upon there by the Carians and
Anaetians, and himself with a great part of his Soldiers, slain.

The escape of 212 men out of Plataea, through the works of the enemy.
The same Winter the Plataeans (for they were yet besieged by the
Peloponnesians, and Boeotians) pressed now with want of Victual, and hopeless
of relief from Athens, and no other means of safety appearing, took
Counsel, both they, and the Athenians that were besieged with The^^etus the
son of Timidas, a Soothsayer, and Eupolpidas the son of Daemachus, one of
their Commanders. But half of them afterward, by one means or other, for the
greatness of the danger, shrunk from it again. But 220 or thereabouts,
voluntarily persisted, to go out, They make the length of their Ladders by
conjecture upon counting the Lays of Brick.
in this manner. They made them Ladders, fit for the height of the enemies
wall; the wall they measured by the Lays of Brick, on the part toward the
Town. Plataea
A. the mount of earth Cast up by the Peloponnesians. B. The wall built inwards
by the Plataeans to frustrate the effect of the mount C. The work of the
Peloponnesians. D. The place where the Plataean go over. E. The ditch with out,
full of water



As for the Wall of the Peloponnesians, it was thus built. The description of
the fortification of the Peloponnesians about Plataea.
It consisted of a double Circle, one toward Plataea, and another outward, in
case of an assault from Athens. Peloponnesians kept their Watch. The
description of the Plataeans going over the Enemies Walls.
The Plataeans, after they were ready, and had attended a tempestuous night,
and withal Moonelesse, went out of the City, and were conducted by the same
men that were the Authors of the Attempt. And first they passed the Ditch that
was about the Town, and then came up close to the up, led by Ammeas, the son
of Coraebus, who was the Plataeans taking hold of the Battlements, threw down
a Tyle, which made a noise in the fall; and presently Plataeans that were left
in the City, came forth withal, and assaulted the Wall of the Peloponnesians,
on the opposite part to that where their men went over. So that though they
were all in a tumult in their several places, yet not any of them that
watched, durst stir to the aid of the rest, nor were able to conjecture what
had happened. But There is no mention of these 300. where the Author relates
the laying of the siege: But it must be understood.
those three hundred that were appointed to assist the Watch upon all occasions
of Thebes. But then the Plataeans likewise, held out many other fires from the
Wall of the City, which for that purpose they had before prepared, to render
the fires of the Enemy insignificant, and that the Thebans apprehending the
matter otherwise then it was, might forbear to send help, till their men were
over, and had recovered some place of safety.

In the mean time, those Plataeans, which having scaled the Wall first, and
slain the Watch, were now masters of both the Towers, not only guarded the
passages, by standing themselves in the entries, but also applying Ladders from
the Wall to the Towers, and conueying many men to the top, kept the enemies
off with shot, both from above and below. In the mean space, the greatest
number of them having reared to the Wall many Ladders at once, and beaten down
the Battlements, passed quite over between the Towers, and ever as any of
Plataeans that were on the further brinke of the Ditch, discerned them the
better from out of the dark, and aimed their Arrows and Darts at their most
Plataeans the less discernable. Insomuch as these last passed the Ditch,
though with difficulty and force. For the Water in it was frozen over, though
not so hard as to bear, but watrie, and such as when the Wind is at East,
rather then at North: and the Snow which fell that night, together with so
great a Wind as that was, had very much increased the Water, which they waded
through, with scarce their heads above. But yet the greatness of the storm was
the principal

From the Ditch, the Plataeans, in troop, took the way toward Thebes,
leaving on the left hand the Temple of Juno, built by Androcrates, both for
that they supposed, they would least suspect the way that led to their Enemies,
and also because they saw the Peloponnesians with their lights pursue that way,
which by Mount Cithaeron, and the Oake-heads, led to Athens. The Plataeans,
when they had gone 6. or 7. Furlongs, forsook the Theban way, and turned into
that which led toward the Mountain, to Erythrae, Hysiae, and having gotten
the Hills, escaped through to Athens, being 212. persons of a greater number:
for some of them returned into the City, before the rest went over; and one of
their Archers was taken upon the Ditch without. And so the Peloponnesians gave
over the pursuit, and returned to their places. But the Plataeans that were
within the City, knowing nothing of the event, and those that turned back
having told them, that not a man escaped, as soon as it was day, sent a Herald
to entreat a Truce, for the taking up of their dead bodies; Plataea passed
through the Fortification of their Enemies, and were saved.

^alaethus a Lacedaemonian, enters secretly into Mitylene, and confirms them
with hope of speedy aid.
About the end of the same Winter, Salaethus a Lacedaemonian, was sent in a
Gallie to Mitylene, and coming, first to Pyrrha, and thence going to Mitylene
by Land, entered the City by the dry channel of a certain Torrent, which had
a passage through the Wall of the Athenians, undiscovered. And he told the
Magistrates, that Attica should again be invaded, and that the 40. Galleys
which were to aid them, were coming; and that himself was sent before, both
to let them know it, and withal to give order in the rest of their affairs.
Hereupon the Mitylenians grew confident, and hearkened less to composition
with the Athenians. And the Winter ended, and the fourth year of this War
written by Thucydides.

THE FIFTH YEAR.
In the beginning of the Summer, after they had sent Alcidas away with the It
should be 40. Attica the fourth time invaded.
42. Galleys, whereof he was Admiral, unto Mitylene, both they and their
Confederates invaded Attica; to the end, that the Athenians troubled on both
sides, might the less send supply against the Fleet now gone to Mitylene. In
this Expedition, Cleomenes was General, in stead of Pausanias the son of
Plistoanax, who being King, Pausanias King of Lacedaemon.
was yet in minority, and Cleomenes was his Lesbos, which by this time they
supposed to have been arrived, they went abroad, and destroyed most part of
the Country. But when nothing succeeded according to their hopes, and seeing
their Corn failed, they retired again, and were dissolved according to their

The Mitylenians in the mean time, seeing the Fleet came not from
Peloponnesus, but delayed the time, and their victuals failed, were constrained
to make their composition with the Athenians, Salaethus arms the Commons for a
Sally. They mutiny, and give up the Town.
upon this occasion. Salaethus, when he also expected these Galleys no longer,
armed the Commons of the City, who were before unarmed, with intention to have
made a Sally upon the Athenians; but they, as soon as they had gotten Arms,
no longer obeyed Athenians.

Those that managed the State, perceiving this, and unable to hinder it,
knowing also their own danger, in case they were excluded out of the
composition, they all jointly agreed to yield the City to Paches, and his
Army; with these conditions, To be proceeded withal at the pleasure of the
people of Athens; and to receive the Army into the Mitylenians should send
Ambassadors to Athens, about their own business: And that Paches till their
return, should neither put in bonds, nor make Slave of, nor slay any
Mitylenian. This was the effect of that composition. But such of the
Mitylenians as had principally practiced with the Lacedaemonians, being afraid
of themselves, Some of the Mitylenians fearing the worst, take Sanctuary.
when the Army was entered the City, durst not trust to the Conditions agreed
on, but took Sanctuary at the Altars. But Paches having raised them, Whom
Paches persuades to rise.

And sends them to be in custody at Tenedos.


upon promise to do them no injury, sent them to Tenedos, to be in custody
there, till the people of Athens should have resolved what to do. After this,
he sent some Galleys to Antissa, and took in that Town, and ordered the
affairs of his Army as he thought convenient.

In the mean time, The voyage of Alcidas with 40 Galleys into Ionia*
those 40 Galleys of Peloponnesus which should have made all possible haste,
trifled away the time about Peloponnesus* and making small speed in the rest of
their Navigations, arrived at Delos, unknown to the Athenians at Athens. From
thence sailing to Icarus and Myconum, they got first intelligence of the loss
of Mitylene. Alcidas with his Fleet, at Embatus is assured of the loss of
Mitylene.
they went thence to Embatus in Erythraea. It was about the seventh day after
the taking of Mitylene, that they arrived at Embatus, where understanding the
certainty, they went to counsel, about what they were to do upon the present
occasion and Teutiaplus an Elean, delivered his opinion to this effect.

Alcidas, The advice of Teutiaplus in the Council of War.
and the rest that have command of the Peloponnesians in this Army, it were not
amiss, in my opinion, to go to Mitylene, as we are, before advice be given of
our arrival. (For in all probability, we shall find the City, in respect they
have but lately won their land Soldiers are dispersed, some in one house, and
some in another, Thus said he, but prevailed not with Alcidas. The advice of
certain Outlawes of Ionia and Lesbos.
And some others, Fugitives of Ionia, and those Lesbians that were with him in
the Fleet, gave him That seeing he feared the danger of this, he should seize
some City of Ionia, or Cume in Aeolia, that having some Town for the seat of
the War, they might from thence, force Ionia to revolt, whereof there was
hope, because the Ionians would not be unwilling to see him there. And if they
could withdraw from the Athenians this their great revenue, and withal put
them to maintain a Fleet against them, it would be a great exhausting of their
treasure. They said besides, that they thought they should be able to get
Pissuthnes, to join with them in the War.

The cowardly resolution of Alcidas.
But Alcidas rejected this advice likewise, inclining rather Mitylene, they were
best to return speedily into Peloponnesus. Whereupon putting off from Embatus,
he sailed by the Shore to Myonnesus of the Teians, and there slew most of the
prisoners he had taken by the way. He kills his prisoners.
After this he put in at Ephesus, and thither came Ambassadors to him from
the Samians of Anaea, The Samians sharply reprehend him.
and told him, that it was but an ill manner of setting the Grecians at
liberty, to kill such as had not lift up their hands against him, nor were
indeed enemies to the Peloponnesians, but Confederates to Athenians by
constraint. And that unless he gave over that course, he would make few of the
enemies, his friends; but many now friends, to become his enemies. Wherefore
upon these words of the Ambassadors, he set the Chians, and some others, all
that he had left alive, at liberty. For when men saw their Fleet, they never
fled from it, but came unto them as to Athenians; little imagining that the
Athenians being masters of the Sea, the Peloponnesians durst have put over to
Ionia.

From Ephesus, Alcidas went away in haste, indeed fled; Alcidas makes have
from Ephesus homeward.
Salaminia, and the The names of two Gall^es of Athens.
Paralus, Athens,) whilst he lay at Anchor about Claros, and fearing to be
chased, kept the wide Sea, meaning by his good will, to touch no Land, till he
came into Peloponnesus. But the news of them came to Paches from diverse
places, especially from Erythraea: for the Cities of Ionia being unwalled, were
afraid extremely, lest the Peloponnesians sailing by, without intention to
stay, should have pillaged them as they passed. But the Salaminia and the
Paralus having seen him at Claros, brought the news themselves. Paches
pursues the Peloponnesians, and is glad he over takes them not.
And Paches thereupon made great haste after, and followed him as far as
Latmos Jn distinction to Latmus the Mountain. But I can find no mention of
th^^ Latmus the Island in any of the Geographers.
the Island: but when he saw he could not reach him, he came back again; and
thought he had a good turn, seeing he could not overtake those Galleys upon
the wide Sea, that the same were not compelled, by being taken in some place
near Land, to fortify themselves, and so to give him occasion with guards and
Galleys, to attend them.

As he came by, in his return, he put in at Notium, Paches restores Notium
to the Colophonians, driven out by sedition.
a City of the Colophonians, into which the Colophonians came The City of
Colophon, 2. miles higher into the Land.
Town above, through their own sedition, was taken by Itamanes and the
Barbarians. (This Town was taken at the time when Attica was the second time
invaded by the Peloponnesians.) They then that came down, and dwelt in Notium,
falling again into sedition, the one part having procured some forces,
Arcadians and Barbarians of Pissuthnes, kept them in a part of the Town, which
they had severed from the rest with a Wall, and there, with such of the
Colophonians of the high Town, as being of the Medan faction, entered with
them, Paches. He, when he had called out Hippias, Captain of the Arcadians
that were within the said wall, Paches parlieth with Hippias.
with promise, if they should not agree, to set him safe and sound within the
Wall again; and Hippias was there-vpon come to him; committed him to custody,
but without bonds; and withal assaulting the Wall on a sudden, when they
expected not, took it, and slew as many of the Arcadians and Barbarians
Hippias in again, according as he had promised. But after he had him there,
His equivocation with Hippias whom he put to death contrary to promise.
laid hold on him, and caused Notium to the Colophonians, excluding only such
as had Medized. Afterward the Athenians sent Governors to Notium of their
own, and having gathered together the Colophonians out of all Cities
whatsoever, seated them there under the Law of the Athenians.

Paches, when he came back to Mieylene, took in Pyrrha and Eressus; Paches
takes Pyrrha, and Eressus.

He apprehendteh Salaethus in Mitylene.


and having found Salaethus the Lacedaemonian hidden in Mitylene, apprehended
him, and sent him, together with those men he had put in custody at Tenedos,
Athens. He likewise sent away the greatest part of his Army, and with the
rest stayed, and settled the State of Mitylene, and the rest of Lesbos as he
thought convenient.

The Athenians slay Salaeth^^ (...) to (...) the siege of (...).
These men, and Salaethus with them, being arrived at Athens, the Athenians slew
Salaethus presently, though he made them many offers, and amongst other, to
get the Army of the Peloponnesians to rise from before Plataea, (for it was
yet besieged) but upon the rest they went to Council; and in their passion
decreed to put them to death; Mitylene that were of age, and to make slaves of
the Women and children: The cruel decree of the Athenians in their passion
against the Mityleans.
laying to their charge the Revolt it self, in that they revolted not, being
in subjection as others were: And withal the Peloponnesian Fleet, which durst
enter into Ionia to their aid, had not a little aggrauated that Commotion. For
by that, it seemed that the Revolt was not made without much premeditation.
They therefore sent a Gally to inform Paches of their Decree, with command to
put the Mitylenians presently to death. The Athenians repent of their decree,
and consult anew.
and began to consider what a great and cruel Decree it was, that not the
Authors only, but the whole City should be destroyed. Which when the
Ambassadors of the Mitylenians, that were there present, and such Athenians as
favored them understood, they wrought with those that bare office, to bring
the matter again into debate; wherein they easily prevailed, forasmuch as to
them also it was well known, that the most of the City were desirous to have
means to consult of the same anew. The Assembly Cleon also, the son of
Cleaenetus, Cleon most popular, and most violent,
who in the former Assembly had won to have them killed, being of all the
Citizens most violent, and with the people at that time far the most
powerful, stood forth, and said in this manner.

THE ORATION OF CLEON.
I Have often on other occasions thought a Democratie incapable Mitylenians.
For through your own mutual security and opennesse, you imagine the same also
in your Confederates, and consider not, that when at their persuasion you
commit an error, or relent upon compassion, you are softened thus, to the
danger of the Commonwealth, not to the winning of the affections of your
Confederates. Nor do you consider, that your government is a Tyranny, and
those that be subject to it, are against their wills so, and are plotting
continually against you, and obey you not for any good turn, which to your
own detriment you shall Mitylenians in question again, and thereby cause
delay, which is the advantage only of them that do the injury. For the
sufferer by this means comes upon the doer Mitylenians, are good for us, or
that our calamities are any damage to our Confederates. For certainly he must
either trust in his eloquence, to make you believe, that that which was
decreed, was not decreed, or moved with lucre, must with some elaborate speech
endeavor to seduce you. Now of such matches [of eloquence] as these, the City
gives the prizes to others, but the danger that thence proceeds, she her
self sustaineth. The nature of the multitude in counsel, lively set forth.
you your selves are the cause, by the evil institution of these matches, in
that you use to be spectators of words, and hearers of actions, beholding
future actions in the words of them that speak well, as possible to come to
pass; and actions already past, in the Orations of such as make the most of
them, and that with such assurance, as if what you saw with your eyes, were not
more certain, then what you hear related. You are excellent men for one to
deceive with a speech of a new strain, but backward to follow any tried
advice: slaves to strange things, contemners of things usual. You would every
one chiefly give the best advice, but if you cannot, then you will Mitylenians
have done us more injury, then ever did any one City. Aggrauation of the
Revolt of the Mitylenians.
For those that have revolted through the ouer-hard pressure of our government,
or that have been compelled to it by the enemy, I pardon them; but they that
were Ilanders, and had their City walled, so as they needed not fear our
Enemies, but only by Sea; in which case also they were armed for them with
sufficient provision of Galleys; and they that were permitted to have their
own Laws, and whom we principally honored, and yet have done thus; what
have they done but conspired against us, and rather warred upon us, then
revolted from us, (for a revolt is only of such as suffer violence) and
Mitylenians, then to the rest of our Confederates; for then they had never come
to this degree of insolence. For it is natural to men to contemn those that
observe them, and to have in admiration such as will not give them way. Now
therefore let them be punished according Few, are alike with them culpable of
the Revolt. Have also in consideration, your Confederates; And if you inflict
the same punishment on them that revolt upon compulsion of the Enemy, that you
do on them that revolt of their own accord, who think you will not revolt,
though unwillingly, but wittingly conspired against us; whereas it Pity,
Delight in plausible speeches, and Lenity. As for Pity, it is just to show it
on them that are like us, and will have pity again; but not upon such as not
only would not have had pity upon us, but must also of necessity have been
our enemies for ever hereafter. And for the Rhetoricians that delight you with
their Orations, let them play their prizes in matters of less weight, and not
in such Meaning that the Orators are bribed and hired to give counsel to the
Commonwealth, according to the desire of other States.
have. Lastly for Lenity, it is to be used toward those that will be our
friends hereafter, rather then toward such, as being suffered to live, will
still be as they are, not a jot the less our enemies. In sum I say only
this, that if you follow my advice, you shall do that, which is both just in
respect of the Mitylenians, and profitable for your selves; whereas if you
decree otherwise, you do not gratify them, but condemn your selves. For if
these have justly revolted, you must unjustly have had dominion over them. Nay
To this purpose spoke Cleon.

After him, Diodotus the son of Eucrates, who also in the former Assembly
opposed most the putting of the Mitylenians to death, stood forth, and spoke as
follows.

THE ORATION OF DIODOTVS.
I Will neither blame those who have propounded the business of the
Mitylenians, to be again debated, nor commend those that find fault with often
consulting in affairs of great importance. But I am of opinion that nothing is
so contrary to good counsel as these two, haste and anger: whereof the one is
ever accompanied with madness, and the other with want of judgment. And
whosoever maintains, that words are not instructers to deeds, either he is
not wise, or does it upon some private interest of his own. Not wise, if he
think that future and not apparent things, may be demonstrated otherwise then
by words: Interessed, if desiring to carry an ill matter, and knowing that a
bad cause will not bear a good speech, he go about that can be given, yet
through envy, for this uncertain opinion of his Mitylenians, nor to accuse any
man. For we Cleon contendeth, that it will be profitable for the future, to
put them to death, in that it will keep the rest from rebelling, I, contending
likewise for the future, affirm the contrary. And I desire you not to reject
the profit of my advice, for the fair pretexts of his, Mitylenians, may
quickly perhaps win your consent. We plead not iudicially with the
Mitylenians, so as to need arguments of equity, but we consult of them, which
way we may serve our selves of them to our most advantage hereafter. I say
therefore, that death has been in States, ordained for a punishment of many
offenses, and those not so great, but far less then this. Yet encouraged by
hope, men hazard themselves. Nor did any man ever yet enter into a practice,
which he knew he could not go through with. And a City when it reuolueth,
supposes it self to be better furnished, either of themselves, or by their
Confederates, Hope and Desire, work this effect in all estates. And this as
the Leader* that as the companion; this contriuing the enterprise, that
suggesting the success, are the cause of most crimes that are committed. And
being least discerned, are more mischievous, then evils seen. Besides these
two, Fortune also puts men forward as much as any thing else. For presenting
her self sometimes unlooked for, she provoke some to adventure, though not
provided, as they ought for the purpose; and specially Cities; because they
venture Cleon prescribes, what City, think you, would not provide it self
better, then this did; and endure the siege to the very last, if to compound
late, and soon be all one? And how can it be but detriment to us, to be at
charge of long sieges, through their obstinacy, and when we have taken a City,
to find it exhausted, and to lose the revenue of it for the future? And this
revenue is the only strength we have against our enemies. We are not then to
be exact Judges in the punition of offenders, but to look rather how by their
moderate punishment, we may have our Confederate Cities, our own actions. But
we to the contrary, when w^ ^ecouer a Cleon, how much you shall offend
likewise in this other point. For in all your Cities, the Commonalty are now
your friends, and either revolt not with the few, or if they be compelled to it
by force, they presently turn enemies to them that caused Mitylenians, which
did neither partake of the revolt, and as soon as they were armed, presently
delivered the City into your hands, you shall first do unjustly to kill such
as have done you service, and you shall effect a work besides, which the great
men do every where most desire. For when they have made a City to revolt,
they shall have the people presently on their side; you having foreshewne them
by the example, that both the guilty and not guilty must undergo the same
punishment.

Whereas indeed, though they were guilty, yet we ought to dissemble it, to the
end that the only party, now our friend, may not become our enemy. And for
the assuring of our dominion, I think it far more profitable, voluntarily to
put up an injury, then justly to destroy such as we should not. And that
same, both Justice and profit of revenge, alleged by Cleon, can never possibly
be found together in the same thing.

You therefore, upon knowledge that this is the best course, Compassion, or
Lenity (for neither would I, have you won by that) but upon consideration of
what h^th been advised, be ruled by me, and proceed to judgment at your
own leisure, against those whom Paches has sent hither as guilty, and suffer
the rest to enjoy their City. For that will be both good for the future, and
also of present terror to the enemy. For he that consulteth wisely, is a
sorer enemy, then he that assaulteth with the strength of action unadvisedly.

Thus spoke Diodotus.

Athenians were at contention which they should decree; and at the holding up
of hands, they were both sides almost equal: The Senten^^ (...) A Gallie sent
(...) the former, with a Sentence of mercy. The speed o^ this latter Gal^^e to
overtake the former that carried the Decree of death.
but yet the sentence of Diodotus prevailed. Whereupon they presently in haste
sent away another Gallie, lest not arriving before the former, they should
find the City already destroyed. The first Gallie set forth before the
second, a day and a night. But the Mitylenian Ambassadors having furnished
this latter with Wine and Barley Cakes, and promised The Commons of (...) very
near (...).
whereas the former proceeded in the manner before mentioned, arrived indeed
first, but only so much, as Paches had read the Sentence, and prepared
Mitylenians to the danger.

But those whom Paches had sent home, as most culpable of the Revolt, the
Athenians, as Cleon had advised, Above a thousand principal authors of the
Revolt executed.
put to death; being in number somewhat above a thousand.

They also razed the Walls of Mitylene* and took from them all their Galleys.
After which they imposed on Lesbians no more Tribute, but having divided their
land, (all but that of the Methymnaeans) into 3000 parts, 300 of those parts,
of the choicest Land, they consecrated to the Gods. And for the rest, they sent
men by lot out of their own City to possess it, of whom the Lesbians at the
rent of 6 pound 5 shillings sterling*
two Minae of Silver yearly, upon a Lot, had the Land again to be husbanded
by themselves. The Athenians took in all such Towns also, as the Mitylenians
were Masters of in the Continent; which were afterward made Subjects to the
People of Athens. Thus ended Lesbos.

The same Summer, after the recovery of Lesbos, Nicias takes Mino^, an ^^land
ad^^cen to (...).
the Athenians, under the conduct of Nicias, the son of Niceratus, Minoa, an
Island adjacent to Megara. For the Megareans had built a Tower in it, and served
themselves of the Island for a place of Garrison. But Nicias desired that the
Athenians might keep their Watch upon Megara, in that Island, as being nearer,
and no more at Budorus and Salamis; to the end that the Peloponnesians might
not go out thence with their Galleys, vndiscryed, nor send out Pirates, as
they had formerly done, and to prohibit the importation of all things to the
Megareans by Sea. Wherefore when he had first taken two Towers Nisaea, with
Engines applied from the Sea, and so made a free entrance for his Galleys,
between the Island and the firm Land, he took it in with a Wall also from the
Continent, in that part where it might receive aid by a bridge over the
Marshes; for it was not far distant from the maine Land. And, that being in
few days finished, he built a Fort in the Island it self, and leaving there a
Garrison, carried the rest of his Army back.

The Plataeans yield the City.
It happened also about the same time of this Summer, Plataeans having spent
their Victual, and being unable longer to hold out, yielded their City in
this manner to the Peloponnesians. The Peloponnesians assaulted the Walls, but
they within were unable to fight. Whereupon the Lacedaemonian Commander,
perceiving their weakness, The Lacedaemonians refuse to take Plataea by force,
but w^ll have it by voluntary surrender.
would not take the place by force, (for he had command to that purpose from
Lacedaemon, to the end that if they should ever make peace with the Athenians,
with conditions of mutual restitution of such Cities as on either side had
been taken by War, Plataea, as having Lacedaemonians, and take them for
their Judges, with power to punish the offenders, but none without form of
Justice. So said the Herald: and they (for they were now at the weakest)
delivered up the City accordingly. So the Peloponnesians gave the Plataeans
food for certain days, till the Judges, which were five, should arrive from
Lacedaemon. And when they were come, no Unjust proceeding of the Lacedaemonians.
Whether they had done to the Lacedaemonians, and their Confederates in this
War, any good service? But the Plataeans having sued to make their answer
more at large, and having appointed Astymachus the son of Asopolaus, and
Lacon the son of Adimnestus (who had been heretofore the Host of the
Lacedaemonians) for their Speakers, said as follows.

THE ORATION OF THE PLATAEANS.
MEn of Lacedaemon, relying upon you, we yielded up our City, not expecting to
undergo this, but some more Legal manner of proceeding, and we agreed not to
stand to the judgment of others, (as now we do) but of your selves only;
conceiving we should so obtain the better justice. But now we fear we have
been deceived in both. For we have reason to suspect, both that the trial is
capital, and you the Judges partial. Gathering so much, both from that, that
there has not been presented any accusation, to which we might answer, and
also from this, that the Thebans, and withal make mention of our services
done, both to you, and to the rest of Greece, and make trial, if by any means
we can persuade you. As to that short interrogatory, Whether we have any way
done good in this present War to the Lacedaemonians and their Confederates,
or not? If you ask us as enemies, we say, that if we have done them no good,
we have also done them no wrong. Peace, and in the War against the Medes, we
behaved our selves one, we brake not first, and in the other, we were the only
Boeotians that joined with you for the delivery of Greece. For though we dwell
up in the land* yet we fought by Sea at Artemisium, and in the battle, fought
in this our own territory we were with you; and whatsoever dangers the Grecians
in those times underwent, we were partakers of all, even beyond our strength.
And unto you Lacedaemonians, in particular, when Sparta was in greatest
affright, after the Earthquake, upon the Rebellion of the Helotes, and seazing
of Ithome, we sent the third part of our power to assist you, which you have no
reason to forget. Such then we showed our Thebans, we sought league of you,
you rejected us, and bade ws go to the Athenians that were nearer hand, your
selves being far off. Nevertheless, you neither have in this War, nor were
to have suffered at our hands any thing that mis became us. And if we denied to
revolt from the Athenians, when you bade us, we did you no injury in it. For
they both aided us against the Thebans, when you shrunk from us; and it was
now no more any honesty to betray them. Especially having been well used by
them, and we our selves having sought their league, and been made denizens You,
or the Athenians have the leading of the Confederates, if evil be done, not
they that follow are culpable, but you that lead to the evil. The Thebans have
done us many other injuries; but this last, which is the cause of what we now
suffer, you your selves know what it was. For we avenged us but justly of those
that in time of Peace, and upon the day of our Nouiluniall Sacrifice, had
surprised our City; and by the Law of all Nations it is lawful to repel an
assailing enemy; and therefore Judges of the Truth, but respecters only of
your profit. And yet if the Thebans seem profitable to you now, we, and the
rest of the Grecians were more profitable to you then, when you were in greater
danger. For though the Thebans are now on your side, when you invade others;
yet at that time when the Barbarian came in to impose servitude on all, they
were on his. It is but Justice, that with our present offense (if we have
committed any) you compare our forwardness then; which you Grecian that durst
oppose his valor to Xerxes power; and when they were most commended, not that
with safety helped to further his invasion* but that adventured to do what was
most honest, though with danger. But we being of that number, and honored for
it amongst the first, are afraid lest the same shall be now a cause of our
destruction, as having chosen rather to follow the Athenians justly, then you
profitably. But you should ever have the same opinion, in the same case; And
think this only to be profitable, that doing what is useful for the present
occasion, you reserve withal a constant acknowledgement of the virtue of It
does not appear by any thing in the time of this (...), that the
Lacedaemonians deserved any reputation for Iust^ce, but cont^^^^ly they appear^
by this (...) other actios, not to (...) ^^teemed of justice at ^ll (...) their
own interest or passion.
honest dealing, to the most of the Grecians. Now if you shall decree otherwise
then is just, (for this judgment of yours is conspicuous) you that be praised,
against us, that be not blamed, take heed that they do not dislike, that good
men should undergo an unjust sentence though at the hands of better men; or
that the spoil of us that have done the Grecians service, should be dedicated
in their Temples. For it will be thought a horrible matter, that Plataea should
be destroyed by Lacedaemonians, and that you, whereas your Fathers in honor of
our valor, inscribed the name of our City, on the Tripode should now blot it
out of all Greece, to gratify the Thebans. For we have proceeded to such a
degree of calamity, that if the Medes had prevailed, we must have perished
then; and now the Thebans have overcome us again in you, who were before our
greatest friends* and have put us to two great hazzards, one before, of
famishing if we yielded not, and another now, of a Capital sentence. And we
Plataeans, who even beyond our strength have been zealous in the defense of the
Grecians, are now abandoned and left vnreleeued by them all. But we beseech you
for those gods sakes, in whose names once we made mutual league, and for our
valors sake shown in the Grecians, to be moved toward us, and (if at the
persuasion of the Thebans, you have determined ought against us,) to change
your minds, and reciprocally to require at the hands of the Thebans, this
courtesy, that whom you ought to spare, they would be contented not to kill,
and so receive an honest benefit, in recompense of a wicked one, and not to
bestow pleasure upon others, and receive wickedness upon your selves in
exchange. For though to take away our lives be a matter quickly done yet to
make the infamy of it cease, will be work enough. For being none of your
enemies, but welwillers, and such as have entered into the War upon
constraint, you cannot put our own voluntary submission, and with hands vpheld
(and it is Grecians, not to put such to death) besides that, we have from time
to time been beneficial to you. For look upon the sepulchers of your Fathers,
whom slain by the Medes, and buried in this Territory of ours, we have yearly
honored at the public charge, both with Vestments and other Rites; and of
such things as our Land has produced, we have offered unto them the first
fruits of it all, as friends in an amicable Land, and Confederats use to do,
to those that have formerly been their fellows in Arms. But now by a wrong
sentence, you shall do the contrary of this. For consider this: Pausanias, as
he thought, enterred these men in amicable Plataeis, make Thebais, what do you
but leave your Fathers and kindred deprived of the honors they now have, in an
hostile Territory, and amongst the very men that slew them? And moreover, put
into servitude that soil whereon the Grecians were put into liberty? and make
desolate the Temples wherein they prayed, when they prevailed against the
Medes? and destroy the Patriall sacrifices which were instituted by the
Builders and Founders of the same?

These things are not for your glory, men of Lacedaemon, nor Greece, and wrong
your progenitors, nor to destroy us that have done you service, for the hatred
of another, when you have received no injury from us your selves. But to spare
our lives, to relent, to have a moderate compassion, in contemplation, not
only of the greatness of the punishment, but also of who we are, that must
suffer, and of the uncertainty where calamity may light, and that undeservedly;
which we, (as becomes us, and our need compels us to do) cry aloud unto
the common gods of Greece to persuade you unto; producing the oath sworn by
your Fathers, to put you in mind; and also we Thebans, nor to let their
greatest friends be betrayed into the hands of their greatest enemies;
remembering the^ of that day, upon which, though we have done glorious acts in
their company, yet we are in danger at this day of most miserable suffering.
But to make an end of speaking (which is, as necessary, so most bitter to men
in our case, because the hazard of our lives comes so soon after,) for a
conclusion we say, that it was not to the Thebans that we rendered our City
(for we would rather have dyed of Famine, the most Men of Lacedaemon, not
only, not to deliver us Plataeans, who have been most zealous in the service
of the Grecians, especially being Sanctuary men, out of your own hands, and
your own trust, into the hands of our most mortal Enemies the Thebans, but
also to be our saviors, and not to destroy us utterly, you that set at liberty
all other Grecians. Thus spoke the Plataeans.

Thebans, fearing lest the Lacedaemonians might relent at their Oration, stood
forth, and said, that since the Plataeans had had the liberty of a longer
speech (which they thought they should not) then for answer to the question was
necessary, they also desired to speak, and being commanded to say on, spoke to
this effect.

THE ORATION OF THE THEBANS.
Plataea last of all the Cities of Boeotia, together with some other Boeotians,
that transgressed the common ordinance of the Country, when they should have
been compelled to their duty, they turned unto the Athenians, and together
with them did us many evils, for which they likewise suffered as many from us.
But when the Barbarian invaded Greece, then, say they, that they of all the
Boeotians only also, Medized not. And this is the thing wherein they both
glory most themselves, and most detract Athenians did not. Nevertheless when
the Athenians afterward invaded the rest of the Grecians, in the same kind
then Boeotians, they only Atticized. But take now into your consideration
withal, what form of government we were in both the one and the other, when
we did this. For then had we our City governed, neither by an Oligarchy,
with Laws common to all, nor by a Democratie, but the State was managed by a
Few with authority absolute, then which there is nothing more contrary to
Laws, and moderation, nor more approaching unto Tyranny. And these Few, hoping
yet further, if the Medes prevailed, to increase their own power, kept the
people under, and furthered the coming in of the Barbarian. And so did the
whole City; but it was not then Master [but were at the will of others.] But
when the Medes were gone, and our City had Laws, consider now, when the
Athenians attempted to subdue all Greece, and this Territory of ours with the
rest, wherein through sedition they had gotten many places already, whether by
giving them Battle at Coronea, and defeating them, we delivered not Boeotia
from servitude then, and do not also now with much zeal assist you in the
asserting of the rest, and find not more Horses, and more provision of War,
then any of the Confederates besides. And so much be spoken by Grecians have
been rather wronged by you, and that you are more worthy of all manner of
punishment. You became, you say, Confederates and Denizens of Athens, for to
be righted against us; against us then only the Athenians should have come
with you, and not you with them have gone to the invasion of the rest;
especially, when if the Athenians would have led you whither you would not, you
had the League of the Lacedaemonians, made with you against the Medes, which
you so often object, to have resorted unto; which was sufficient not only to
have protected Athenians. And you say it had been a dishonest thing, to have
betrayed your benefactors. But it is more dishonest, and more unjust by far,
to betray the Grecians universally, to whom you have sworn, then to betray the
Athenians alone; especially when these go about to deliver Greece from
subjection, and the other to subdue it. Besides, the requital you make the
Athenians is not proportionable, nor free from dishonesty; for you, as you say
your selves, brought in the Athenians Grecians sake, that you alone of all the
Boeotians, medized not, but because the Athenians did not; yet now, you that
would do as the Athenians did, and contrary to what the Grecians did, claim
favor of these, for what you did for the others sake. But there is no reason
for that; But as you have chosen the Athenians, so let them help you in this
trial. And produce not the Oath of the former League, as if that should save
Athenians to subdue the Aeginetae* and others, then hindered them from it. And
this you not only did voluntarily, and having Laws, the same you have now,
and none forcing you to it, as there did us, but also rejected our last
inuitation, (a little before the shutting up of your City) to quietness and
neutrality. Who can therefore more deservedly be hated of the Grecians in
general, then you, that pretend honesty to their ruin? And those acts wherein
formerly, as you say, you have been beneficial to the Grecians, you have now
made apparent Athenians you have walked in the way of injustice. And thus much
we have laid open touching our inuoluntary Medizing, and your voluntary
Atticizing. And for this last injury you charge us with, namely the unlawful
inuading of your City in time of peace, and of your New-moone Sacrifice, we do
not think, no not in this action, that we have offended so much as you your
selves. For though we had done unjustly, if we had assaulted your City, or
wasted your Territory as enemies, of our own accord, yet when the prime men of
Boeotia, did of their own accord call us in, wherein lies the injury then?
For they that lead transgress, rather then they that follow. But as we
conceive, neither they nor we have transgressed at all. But being Citizens, as
well as you, and having more to hazard, they opened their own Gates, and
took us into the City as Friends, not as Enemies, with intention to keep the
ill-affected from being worse, and to do right to the good. you into one body
with the rest of your kindred; and not to engage Boeotia, he should come to us.
And you came willingly at first, and were quiet; but afterward when you knew
we were but few, (though we might seem to have done somewhat more then was fit
to do, without the consent of your multitude) you did not by us, as we did by
you, first innouate nothing in fact, and then with words persuade us to go
forth again, but contrary men of Lacedaemon, been thus large, both for your
sakes, and ours. For yours, to let you see, that if you condemn them, it will
be no injustice; for ours, that the equity of our revenge may the better
appear. Be not moved with the recital of their virtues of old (if any they
had) which though they ought to help the wronged, should double the punishment
of such as commit wickedness, because their offense does not become them. Nor
let them fare ever the better for their lamentation, or your compassion,
Coronea, in bringing Boeotia to your Confederation, and partly alive and now
old, and deprived of their children, make far iuster supplication to you for
revenge. And pity belongs to such as suffer undeservedly, but on the
contrary, when men are worthily punished, (as these are) it is to be rejoiced
at. And for their present want of friends, they may thank themselves. For of
their own accord they rejected

Maintain therefore (ye Lacedaemonians) the Law of the Grecians, against
these men that have transgressed it* and give unto us, that have suffered
contrary to the Law, the just recompense of our alacrity in your service. And
let not the words of these, give us a repulse from you. But set up an example
to the Grecians, by presenting unto these men, a trial, not of words, but of
facts; which if they be good, a short narration of them will serve the turn;
if ill, count Orations do but veyle them. But if such as have the authority,
as you have now, would collect the matter to a head, and according as any man
should make answer thereunto, so proceed to sentence, men would be less in the
search of fair speeches, wherewith to excuse the foulness of their actions.
Thus spoke the Thebans.

And the Lacedaemonian Judges, The Lacedaemonians proceed with their question.
conceauing their Interrogatory Namely, whether they had received any benefit
by them or not, in this present War, (For they had indeed entreated the both at
other times, according to the ancient league of Pausanias, after the Medan
War, to stand neutrall and also a little before the Siege, the Plataeans had
rejected their proposition of being common friend to both sides, according to
the same league) taking themselves in respect of these their just offers, to be
now discharged of the league, and to have received evil at their hands, caused
them one by one to be brought forth, and having asked Whether they had any way
benefited the Lacedaemonians, and their Confederates in this present War, or
not? as they answered, Not, led them aside and slew them, not exempting any. Of
the Plataeans themselves they slew no less then 200; Of Athenians, The
Plataeans are put to death.

25 Athenians slain with them.


who were besieged with them, 25. The Women they made slaves* and the Thebans
assigned the City for a year, or thereabouts, for an habitation to such
Megareans, as in sedition had been driven from their own, and to all those
Plataeans, which living, were of the Theban faction. Plataea pulled down.
pulling it all down to the very foundation, they built a Hospital in the
place, near the Temple of Juno, of 200 foot diameter, with chambers on
Plataeans buildings. And of the rest of the stuff, that was in the City wall,
as Brass and Iron, they made Bedsteds, and dedicated them to Juno, to whom
also they built a stone Chapel of 100 foot over. The Land they confiscated,
and set it to farm afterward for ten years to the Thebans. So far were the
Lacedaemonians alienated from the Plataeans, The Lacedaemonians in their
sentence upon the Plataeans, have more respect to their own profit, then to
the merit of the cause.
especially, or rather altogether for the Thebans sake, whom they thought
useful to them in the War now on foot. So ended the Plataea, in the
fourscore and thirteenh year after their league made with the Athenians.

The 40 Galleys, with Alcidas, come weather-beaten home.
The 40 Galleys of Peloponnesus, which having been sent to aid the Lesbians,
fled, as has been related, through the wide Sea, chased by the Athenians, and
tossed by storms on the Coast of Crete, came thence dispersed, into
Peloponnesus, and found thirteen Galleys, Leucadians, and Ambraciotes, in the
Haven of Cystene, with Brasidas the son of Tellis, come thither to be of
counsel with Alcidas. For the Lacedaemonians, seeing they failed of Lesbos,
determined with Corcyra, which was in sedition, (there being but twelve
Athenian Galleys about Naupactus) to the end they might be there before, the
supply of a greater Fleet should come from Athens. So Brasidas and Alcidas
employed themselves in that.

The sedition of Corcyra occasioned by the Captives that came from Corinth.
The sedition in Corcyra, began upon the coming home of those Captives, which
were taken in the battles by Sea, at Epidamnus, and released afterward by the
Corinthians, at the ransom, as was voyced, of eighty talents, for which they
had given security to their Hosts; but in fact, for Corinthians, Who persuade
the renouncing of their league with Athens.
that they would put Corcyra into their power. These men going from man to man,
solicited the City to revolt from the Athenians. And two Galleys being now
come in, one of Athens, another of Corinth, with Ambassadors from both those
States, the Corcyreans upon audience of them both, decreed to hold the
Athenians for their Confederates, on Articles agreed on; but withal to remain
friends to the Peloponnesians, as they had formerly been. There was one
Pithias, voluntary Host of the Athenians, and that had bin principal
Magistrate Athenians. He again, Pithias, one of the Athenian faction, accused*
and absolved, accuses some of the other faction.
being acquit, called in question, five of the wealthiest of the same men,
saying, they had cut (...) Stakes; either for Vine props, which are particulary
called (...) or for other profane use.
certain Stakes in the ground, belonging to the Temples both of Jupiter, and
of Alcinus, upon every of which, there lay a penalty of a Of our money about 15
shillings 7 pence halfe-penny.
Stater. And the cause going against them, they took Sanctuary in the Temples,
to the end, the sum being great, they might pay it by portions, as they
should be taxed. But Pithias (for he was also of the Senate) obtained that the
Pithias, as long as he was a Senator, would cause the people to hold for
friends and foes, the same that were so to the Athenians, conspired with the
rest, and armed with Daggers, suddenly brake into the Senate house, Pithias and
others slain in the Senate.
and slew both Pithias and others, as well private men as Senators, to the
number of about sixty persons; only a few of those of Pithias his faction,
escaped into the Athenian Gallie that lay yet in the Harbor. When they had
done this, and called the Corcyreans to an Assembly, they told them, that what
they had done, was for the best, and that they should not be now in bondage to
the Athenians. And for the future they advised them to be in quiet, and to
receive neither party, with more then one Gallie at once; and to take them for
enemies, if they were more. And when they had spoken, forced them to decree it
accordingly. They also presently sent Ambassadors to Athens, both to show that
it was fit for them to do what they had done, and also to dissuade such
Corcyreans as were fled thither of the other

When these arrived, the Athenians apprehended both the Ambassadors themselves,
as seditious persons, and also all those Corcyreans whom they had there
prevailed with; and sent them to custody in Aegina. In the mean time, upon the
coming in of a Gallie of Corinth, with Ambassadors from Lacedaemon, those
that managed the State, assailed the Commons, and overcame them in fight. The
Lacedaemonian faction assail the Commons.
And night coming on, the Commons fled into the Citadell, of the Haven called
the Hallaique Haven. But the Nobility

The next day they skirmished a little with Arrows, Darts, Stones, and the
like missile weapons.
shot, and both parts sent abroad into the Villages to solicit the slaves with
promise of liberty, to take their parts. And the greatest part of the slaves
took part with the Commons; and the other side had an aid of 800 men, from
the Continent.

The Commons overcome the O^gar^hicalls.
The next day but one they fought again, and the people Few began to fly about
twilight, and fearing lest the people should even with their shout take the
Arsenall, and so come on and put them to the sword, to stop their passage,
set fire on the houses in circle about the Market place, and upon others near
it. Much goods of Merchants was hereby burnt, and the whole City, if Corinthian
Gallie stole away, and most of the auxiliaries, gat over privily into the
Continent.

The next day Nicostratus, the son of Diotrephes, an Athenian Commander, came
in with 12 Galleys, and 500 Messenian men of Arms, from Naupactus, and both
negotiated a reconciliation, and induced them (to the end they might agree) to
condemn ten of the principal authors of the Athenians to esteem friends and
enemies, the same the Athenians did. When he had done this, he would have been
gone, but the people persuaded him before he went, to leave behind him, five of
his Galleys, the better to keep their adversaries from stirring, and to take
as many of theirs, which they would man with Corcyreans, and send with him. To
this he agreed, and they made a List of those that should imbarke, consisting
altogether of their Athens, took Castor and Pollux; But Nicostratus
endeavored to raise them, and spoke to them* to put them into courage: but
when he could not prevail, the people (arming themselves on pretense, that
their diffidence to go along with Nicostratus proceeded from some evil
intention) took away their Arms out of their houses, and would also have
killed some of them, such as they chanced on, if Nicostratus had not hindered
them.

Others also when they saw this, took Sanctuary in Juno, and they were in all
above four hundred. But the people fearing some innovation, got them by
persuasion to rise, and conueying them into the Island that lies over against
the Temple of Juno, sent them their necessaries thither.

The Sedition standing in these terms, Alcidas and the Peloponnesia^s arrive
and fight at Sea against the Corcyraeans.
the fourth or fifth day after the putting over of these men into the Island,
arrived the Peloponnesian Fleet from Cyllene, where, since their voyage of
Ionia, they had lain at Anchor, to the number of three and fifty sail.
Alcidas had the command Brasidas came with him as a Counselor. And having
first put in at Sybota, a Haven of the Continent, they came on the next morning
by break of day toward Corcyra.

The Corcyraeans being in great tumult and fear, both of the Seditious within,
and of the invasion without, made ready threescore Galleys, and still as any of
them were manned, sent them out against the Enemy; whereas the Athenians had
advised them to give leave to them to go forth first, and then the Corcyraeans
to follow after Peloponnesians seeing their confusion, opposed themselves to
the Corcyraeans with twenty Galleys only, the rest they set in array against
the twelve Galleys of Athens, whereof the Salaminia and the Paralus were two.

The Corcyraeans having come disorderly up, and by Athenians, fearing the
Enemies number, and doubting to be environed, would never come up to
Peloponnesians afterward had put their Fleet into a circular figure, they then
went about and about it, endeavoring to put them into disorder; which they that
were fighting against the Corcyraeans perceiving, and fearing such another
chance as befell them formerly at Naupactus, went to their aid, and uniting
themselves, came upon the Athenians all together.

But they retyring, rowed a stern, intending that the Corcyraeans should take
that time to escape in; they themselves in the mean time going as leasurely
back as was possible, and keeping the enemy still a head. Such was this
Battle, and it ended about Sunset.

The Corcyraeans fearing lest the Enemy in pursuit of their Victory, should
have come directly against the City, or take aboard the men which they had put
over into the Island, or do them some other mischief, fetched back the men
into the Temple of Juno again, and

But the Peloponnesians, though they had won the Battle, yet durst not
invade the City, but having taken thirteen of the Corcyraean Galleys, went
back into the Continent from whence they had set forth. The next day they came
not unto the City, no more then before, although it was in great tumult and
affright: and though also Brasidas (as it is reported) advised Alcidas to it,
Alcidas a coward.
but had not equal authority; but only landed Soldiers at Leucimna, and
wasted their Territory.

In the mean time the people of Corcyra, fearing extremely, lest those Galleys
should come against the City, not only conferred with those in Sanctuary, and
with the rest, about how the City might be preserved, but also induced some of
them to go aboard. For notwithstanding the sedition, they manned 30. Galleys,
in expectation that the Fleet of the enemy should have entered. But the
Peloponnesians having been wasting of their Fields, till Corcyraeans had
notice by fires of threescore Athenian Galleys coming toward them from Leucas,
Threescore sail of Athenians come to aid the Corcyraea^ Commons.
which the Athenians, upon intelligence of the Sedition, and of the Fleet to
go to Corcyra under Alcidas, had sent to aid them, under the conduct of
Eurymedon, the Son of Thucles.

The Peloponnesians therefore, as soon as night came, The Peloponnesians
depart with their Fleet*
sailed speedily home, keeping still the shore, and causing their Galleys to
be carried over at the Isthmus of Leucas, that they might not come in sight,
as they went about. People of Corcyra hearing of the Attique Galleys, coming
in, and the going off of the Peloponnesians, brought into the City those that
came with Nicostratus.
Messenians, which before were without, and appointing the Galleys which they
had furnished, to come about into the Hillaique Haven, whilst accordingly they
went about, The people, upon the coming in of the Athenians, most cruelly put
to death whomsoever they can of the contrary Faction.
slew all the contrary Faction they could lay hands on; and also afterward
threw ouer-boord, out of the same Galleys, all those they had before persuaded
to imbarque, and so went thence. And coming to the Temple of Juno, they
persuaded 50. of Eurymedon stayed there with his 60. Galleys, the Corcyraeans
did nothing but kill such of their City as they took to be their Enemies,
laying to their charge a practice

Amongst whom, Description of the behavior of the people in this sedition.
some were slain upon private hatred, and some by their debtors, for the money
which they had lent them. All forms of death were then seen, and (as in such
cases it usually falls out) whatsoever had happened at any time, happened also
then, and more. For the Father slew his Son; men were dragged out of the
Temples, and then slain hard by; and some immured in the Temple of Bacchus,
dyed within it. So cruel was this Sedition; and seemed so the more, because it
was of these Greece, as a man may say, was in commotion; and quarrels arose
every where between the Patrons of the Commons, that sought to Athenians, and
the Few, that desired to bring in the Lacedaemonians. Now in time of peace,
they could have had no pretense, nor would have been so forward to call them
in; but being War, and Confederates to be had for either party, both to
hurt their Enemies, and strengthen themselves, such as desired alteration,
easily got them to come in. And many and heinous things happened in the Cities
through this Sedition, which though they have been before, and shall be ever,
as long as humane nature is the same, yet they are more calm, and of (...),
changes of the (...) of things.
several coniunctures. For in peace and prosperity, as well Cities as private
men, are better minded, because they be not plunged into necessity of doing
any thing against their will* but War taking away the affluence of daily
necessaries, is a most violent Master, and conformeth most men's passions to the
present occasion. The Cities therefore being now in Sedition, and those that
fell into it later, having heard what had been done in the former, they far
exceeded the same in newness of conceit, both for the art of assailing, and
for the The manners of the seditions.
The received value of names imposed for signification of things, was changed
into arbitrary: For inconsiderate boldness, was counted true hearted
manliness; provident deliberation, a hansome fear; modesty, the cloak of
cowardice; to be wise in every thing, to be lazy in every thing. A furious
suddenness was reputed a point of valor. To re-aduise for the better
security, was held for a fair pretext of tergiuersation. He that was fierce,
was always trusty; and he that contraried such a one, was suspected. He that
The uniting of Companies under certain Laws, for the more profitable
mannaging of their Trades and arts, seems to have been in use then, as now.
Societies were not made upon prescribed By oath.
divine Law, as by the communicatio^ of guilt. And what was well advised of
their adversaries, they received with an eye to their actions, to see whether
they were too strong for them, or not, and not ingenuously. To be revenged was
in more request, then never to have received injury. And for Oaths (when any
were) of reconcilement, being administered in the present for necessity, were of
force to such as had otherwise no desire of rule, out of Avarice and Ambition,
and the zeal of (...) properly that spite which reigns in two adversaries
whilst they contend, or eagerness in striving.
contention from those two proceeding. political equality of the multitude*
the other the moderate Aristocratie, though in words they seemed to be servants
of the Public, they made it in effect but the Prize of their contention. And
striving by whatsoever means to overcome, both ventured on most horrible
outrages, and prosecuted their reuenges still further, without any regard of
Justice, or the public good, but limiting them, each Faction, by their own
appetite: and stood

Thus was wickedness on foot in every kind, throughout Greece, by the occasion
of their sedition. Sincerity (whereof there is much in a generous nature) was
laughed down. And it was far the best course, to stand diffidently In
seditions and confusion, they that distrust their wits, suddenly use their
hands, and defeat the Stratagems of the more subtle sort.
had the best success; for both their own defect, and the subtilty of their
adversaries, putting them into a great fear to be overcome in words, or at
least in pre-insidiation, by their enemies great craft, they therefore

In Corcyra then were these evils for the most part committed first; and so
were all other, which either such men as have been governed with pride, rather
then modesty, by those on whom they take revenge, were like to commit in taking
it; or which such men as stand upon their delivery from long poverty, out of
covetousness (chiefly to have their

And the common course of life being at that time confounded in the City; the
nature of man, which is wont even against Law to do evil, gotten now above
the Law, showed it self with delight, to be too weak for passion, too strong
for justice, and enemy to all superiority. Else Corcyraeans first of all other
Grecians, toward one another in the City. And Eurymedon and the Athenians The
Athenian Fleet goes away.


500. of the Nobility that escaped, seize on such places as belonged to the
Corcyraeans in the Continent.
such of the Corcyraeans as had fled (for there escaped about 500. of them)
having seized on the Forts in the Continent, impatronized themselves of their
own Territory on the other side, and from thence came over and robbed the
Ilanders, and did them much hurt; and there grew a great Famine in the City.
They likewise sent Ambassadors to Lacedaemon and Corinth, concerning their
reduction; and when they could get nothing done, having gotten boats, and some
auxiliary soldiers, They come over and fortify themselves in Istone.
they passed, a while after, to the number of about 600. Istone, and having
there fortified themselves with a Wall, infested those within, and were masters
of the Territory.

In the end of the same Summer, The Athenians send 20. Galleys into Sicily, in
pretense to aid the Leontines, but with intention to hinder the coming of
corn from thence into Peloponnesus, and to spy out the possibility of subduing
that Island.
the Athenians sent twenty Galleys into Sicily, under the command of Laches the
son of Melanopus, and Chariadas the son of Euphiletus: For the Syracusians
and the Leontines were now warring against Syracusians were all the Dorique
Cities, (except the Camarinaeans) which also in the beginning of this War
were reckoned in the League of the Lacedaemonians, but had not yet aided them
in the War. The Confederates of the Leontines, were the Chalcidique Cities,
together with Camarina. And in Italy, the Locrians were with the Syracusians;
but the Rhegians, according to their consanguinity, took part with the
Leontines. Now the Confederates of the Leontines, in respect of their ancient
alliance with the Athenians, as also Ionians obtained of the Athenians, to send
them Galleys; for that the Leontines were deprived by the Syracusians of the
use both of the Land and Sea. And so the People of Athens sent aid unto them,
pretending propinquity, but intending, both to hinder the transportation of
Corn from thence into Peloponnesus, and also to taste the possibility of taking
the States of Sicily into their own hands. These arriving at Rhegium in Italy,
joined with the Confederates, and began the War; The end of the fifth
Summer.
and so ended this Summer.

The Plague again at Athens.
the Sickness fell upon the Athenians again (having in deed never totally
left the City, though there was some intermission, and continued above a year
Athenians, or empaired their strength more then it. For the number that dyed of
it, of men of Arms enrolled, were no less then 4400. and Horsemen, 300. of
the other multitude, innumerable. There happened also at the same time many
Earthquakes, both in Athens, and in Euboea, and also amongst the Boeotians; and
in Boeotia, chiefly at Orchomenus.

The Athenians invade the Lipareans, and Islands called the Isles of Aeolus.
The Athenians and Rhegians that were now in Sicily, made War the same Winter
on the Islands called the Islands with thirty Galleys. For in Summer it was
impossible to War upon them for the shallowness of the Water. These Islands
are inhabited by the Lipareans, who are a Colonie of the Cnidians, and dwell in
one of the same Islands, no great one, called Lipara, and thence they go forth,
and husband the rest, which are Dydime, Strongyle, and Hiera. The Inhabitants
of those places have an opinion, that in Hiera, Vulcan exercises the craft of
a Smith. For it is seen to send forth abundance of fire in the day time, and
of Smoke in the night. These Islands (...). There are in Thucidides mentioned
(...) and (...), (...) later is the (...) of ^he ^nhabitan^s of Sicily (...)
general, the form^r, ^re one^y thos^ that (...) that name anciently (...)
Italy, and coming over into Sicily, gave that name to the Island.
Siculi, and Messanians, but were Confederates of the Syracusians. When the
Athenians had wasted their Fields, and saw they would not come in they put off
again and went to Rhegium. And so ended this Winter, and the fifth year of
this War, written by Thucydides.

The next Summer, the Peloponnesians and their Confederates came as far as
the Isthmus, ^HE SIXTH YEAR.
under the conduct of Agis the Son of Archidamus, intending to have invaded
Attica; but by reason of the many Earthquakes that then

About the same time, ( Euboea being then troubled with Earthquakes) the Sea
came in at Orobiae, Earthquakes about Euboea, and inundations.
on the part which then was Land, and being impetuous withal, ouerflowed most
part of the City, whereof part it covered, and part it washed down, and made
lower in the return; so that it is now Sea, which before was Land. And the
People, as many as could not prevent it by running up into the higher ground,
perished. Another inundation like unto Atalanta, on the Coast of Locris
Opuntians, and carried away part of the Athenians Fort there, and of two
Galleys that lay on dry Land, it brake one in pieces.

Also there happened at Peparethus a certain rising of the water, but it brake
not in. And a part of the Wall, the (...).
Towne-house, and some few houses besides, were overthrown by the Earthquakes.
The natural cause of Inundation given by the Author.
The cause of such inundation, for my part, I take to be this; that the
Earthquake, where it was very great, did there send off the Sea, and the Sea
returning on a sudden, caused the Water to

The same Summer, diverse others, as they had several occasions, made War in
Sicily. So also did the (...).
Sicilians amongst themselves, and the Athenians with their Confederates. But I
will make mention, only of such most memorable things, as were done either by
the Confederates there with the Athenians, or against the Athenians by the
Enemy.

Charaeades the Athenian General being slain by the Syracusians, Laches, who
was now sole Commander of the Fleet, together with the Confederates, made War
on Mylae, a Town belonging to Messana. The Athenians win Mylae.
There were in Mylae two companies of Messanians in Garrison, the which also
laid a certain Ambush for those that came up from the Fleet. But the Athenians
and their Confederates, both put to flight those that were in ambush, with the
slaughter of the most of them, and also assaulting their Fortification, forced
them on composition, both to render the Messana. After this, upon the approach
of the Athenians and their Confederates, the Messanians compounded likewise,
And Messana.
and gave them Hostages, and such other security as was requisite.

The same Summer, The Athenians send Demosthenes with 30. Galleys about
Peloponnesus.
the Athenians sent thirty Galleys about Peloponnesus, under the command of
Demosthenes the son of Antisthenes, and Proclus the son of Theodorus; and
60. Galleys more, with 2000. men of Arms, commanded by Nicias the son of
Niceratus, And Nicias with 60. Galleys into the Island of Melos.
Melos. For the Athenians, in respect that the (...). The Melians men^ioned a
little after this, are not Ilanders, nor terme^ (...), but (...).
Melians were Ilanders, and yet would neither be their Subjects, nor of their
League, intending to subdue them. Melos, and sailed to Oropus, in the opposite
Continent.

Being there arrived within night, the men of Arms left the Galleys, and
marched presently by Land to Tanagra in Boeotia. To which place, upon a sign
given, the Athenians that were in the City of Athens, The Army of Nicias, and
another Army from the City of Athens, meet upon a sign given, at Tanagra in
Boeotia.
came also forth with their whole Forces, led by Hipponnicus the son of
Callias, and Eurymedon the son of Thucles, and joined with them; and pitching
their Camp, spent the Tanagra, and lay there the night following.

They overcome the Tanagrians in battle.
The next day they defeated in Battle, such of the Tanagrians as came out
against them, and also certain succors sent them from Thebes; and when they
had taken up the Arms of those that were slain, and erected a Trophie, they
returned back, the one part to Athens, the other to their Fleet. And Nicias
with his 60. Galleys, having first sailed along the Coast of Locris, and wasted
it, came home likewise.

The Lacedaemonians build the City Heraclea.
About the same time, the Peloponnesians erected the Colonie of Heraclea in
Trachinia, with this intention: The (...), A people of Thessaly, near the
Melian Gulf.
Melians in the whole contain these three parts: Paralians, Hi^rans, and
Trachinians. Of these the Trachinians being afflicted with War from the
Oeteans their borderers, thought at first to have joined themselves to the
Athenians; but fearing that they would not be faithful unto them, they sent
to Lacedaemon; choosing for their Ambassador Tisamenus. And the Dorians, who
are the Mother Nation to the Lacedaemonians, sent their Ambassadors Oeteans.

Upon audience of these Ambassadors, the Lacedaemonians concluded to send out
a Colonie, both intending the reparation of the injuries done to the
Trachinians and to the Doreans; and conceiving withal, that the Town would
stand very commodiously, The commodious seat (...) this new City for the War.
for their War with the Athenians; inasmuch as they might thereby have a
Navy ready, where the passage was Euboea; and it would much further Thrace.
And they had their mind wholly bent to the building of the place.

First therefore they asked counsel of the Oracle in Delphi; and the Oracle
having bidden them do it, they sent Inhabitants thither, both of their own
people, and of the neighbors about them, and gave leave also to any that
would, to go thither, out of the rest of Greece, save only to the Ionians,
Achaians, and some few other Nations.

Lacedaemonians, Leon, Alcidas, and Damagon: who taking in it hand, built the
City which is now called Heracl^a* from the very Foundation; being distant
from Thermopylae forty Furlongs, and from the Sea twenty. Also they made
houses for Galleys to lie under, beginning close to Thermopylae, against the
very straight, to the end to have them the more defensible.

The Athenians, when this City was peopled, were at first afraid, and thought
it to be set up especially against Euboea; because from thence to Ceneum, a
Promontory of Euboea, the passage is but short. But it fell out afterward
otherwise then they imagined; for they had no great harm by it. The reason
whereof was this: That the Thessalians who had the Towns of those parts in
their power, and upon whose ground it was built, The Thessalians infest the new
City with continual War, for fear they should be too great.
afflicted these new planters with a continual War, till they had worn them
out, though they were many indeed in the beginning, (for being the foundation
of the Lacedaemonians, every one went thither boldly, conceiving the City to
be Lacedaemon, undid the business, The severity of the Lacedaemonians
government dispeopled the City of Heraclea, and frighted men from it.

The Lacedaemonians always severe, not always just.


and dispeopled the City by frighting most men away, for that they governed
severely, and sometimes also unjustly, by which means their neighbors more
easily prevailed against them.

The same Summer, Demosthenes warreth on Leucas.
and about the same time that the Athenians stayed in Melos, those other
Athenians that were in the thirty Galleys about Peloponnesus, slew first
certain Garrison Soldiers in Ellomenus, Leucadia, by Ambushment. But
afterward with a greater Fleet, and with the whole power of the Acarnanians
(who followed the Army, all (but the Oeniades) Zacynthians, and Cephalonians,
and fifteen Galleys of the Corcyraeans, made War against the City it self
of Leucas. The Leucadians, though they saw their Territory wasted by them,
both without the Isthmus, and within, (where the City of Leucas stands, and
the Temple of Apollo) yet they durst not stir, because the number of the
Enemy was so great. And the Acarnanians entreated Demosthenes the Athenian
General to Wall them up, conceauing that they might easily be expugned by a
Siege, and desiring to Demosthenes inuadeth Aetolia at the persuasion of the
Messenians.
But Demosthenes was persuaded at the same time by the Messenians, that seeing
so great an Army was together, it would be honorable for him to invade the
Aetolians, principally, as being Enemies to Naupactus; and that if these were
subdued, the rest of the Continent thereabouts would easily be added to the
Athenian dominion. For they alleged, that though the Nation of the Aetolians
were great and Warlike, yet their habitation was in Villages unwalled, and
those at great distances; and were but light-armed, and might therefore with no
great difficulty be all subdued, before they could unite themselves for
defense. Apodotians, next, the Ophionians, and after them the Eurytanians,
which are the greatest part of Aetolia, of a most strange language, and that
are reported to eat raw flesh; for these being subdued, the rest would easily
follow.

The ambition of Demosthenes, the chief cause of his unfortunate Enterprise in
Aetolia.
But he, induced by the Messenians, whom he favored, but especially because
he thought, without the Forces of the People of Athens, with the Confederates
only of the Continent, and with the Aetolians, to invade Boeotia by Locri
Ozolae, and so to Cytinium of Doris, having Pernassus on the right hand, till
the descent thereof into the Territory of the Phocaeans, (which people, for the
friendship they ever bore to the Athenians, would, he thought, be willing to
follow his Army, and if not, might be forced) and upon the Phocaeans bordereth
Boeotia. Putting off therefore with his whole Army, against the minds of the
Acarnanians, from Leucas, he sailed unto Solium by the shore, and there having
communicated Acarnanians, when they would not Leucas, he himself with the rest
of his Army, Cephalonians, Zacynthians, and 300. Athenians, the Soldiers of
his own Fleet, (for the fifteen Galleys of Corcyra were now gone away) warred
on the Aetolians, having Oeneon, a City of Locris, for the seat of his War.
Now these Locrians called Ozolae, were Confederates of the Athenians, and were
to meet them with their whole power in the heart of the Country. For being
Confiners on the Aetolians, and using the same manner of arming, it was thought
it would be a (...). The whole consecrated ground wherein the Temple stood,
not the Church only. Hesiod the Poet said to have dyed in this Temple of
Jupiter Nemeius.
Temple of ^upiter Nemeius, (wherein the Poet Hesiodus is reported by them that
dwell thereabout to have dyed, foretold by an Oracle, that he should dye in
Nemea) in the morning betimes he dislodged, and marched into Aetolia.

The first day he took Potidania, the second day, Potidania. Crocylium.
Tichium.
Crocylium, the third, Tichium. There he stayed, and sent the Eupolium in
Locris. For he purposed, when he had subdued the rest, Ophionei.
to invade the Ophionians afterward, (if they submitted not) in his return to
Naupactus.

But the Aetolians knew of this preparation when it was first resolved on; and
afterward, The Aetolians unite against the invasion of Demosthenes.
when the Army was entered, they were united into a mighty Army to make head.
Insomuch as that the furthest off of the Ophionians, that reach out to the
Melian Gulf, Bomians. Callians.
the Bomians and Callians came in with their aids.

Messenians gave the same advice to Demosthenes that they had done before; and
alleging that the Conquest of the Aetolians would be but easy, willed him
to march with all speed against them, Village after Village, and not to stay
till they were all united, and in order of Battle against him, but to attempt
always the place which was next to hand. He, persuaded by them, and confident
of his fortune, because nothing had crossed him hitherto, without tarrying for
the Locrians that should have come in with their aides, (for his greatest want
was Aegitium, Aegitium.
which approaching, he won by force, the men having fled secretly out, and
encamped themselves on the Hills above The Aetolians give Demosthenes a great
overthrow.
But the Aetolians, (for by this time they were come with their Forces to
Aegitium) charged the Athenians and their Confederates, and running down upon
them, some one way, some another, from the Hills, plied them with their Darts.
And when the Army of the Athenians assaulted them, they retired; and when it
retired, they assaulted. So that the Fight for a good while, was nothing but
alternate chase and retreat; and the Athenians had the worst in both.

Nevertheless, as long as their Archers had Arrows, and were able to use
them, (for the Aetolians, by reason they were not armed, were put back still
with the shot) they held out. But when upon the death of their Captain, the
Archers were dispersed, and the rest were also wearied, having a long time
continued the said labor of pursuing and retyring, and the Aetolians
continually afflicting them with their Darts, they were forced at length to
fly; and lighting into Hollowes without issue, and into places they were not
acquainted withal, were destroyed. For Chromon a Messenian, who was their
Guide for the ways, was slain. And the Aetolians pursuing them still with
Darts, slew many of them quickly, whilst they fled, being swift of foot, and
without Armor. But the most of them missing their way, and entering into a
Wood, which had no passage through, the Aetolians set it on fire, and burnt it
about them.

All kinds of shifts to fly, and all kinds of destruction were that day in the
Army of the Athenians. Such as remained, with much ado, got to the Sea, and
to Oeneon, Locris, from whence they first set forth.

There dyed very many of the Confederates, and a hundred and twenty men of
Arms of the Athenians; that was their number, and all of them able men. These
men of the very best dyed in this War: Procles also was there slain, one of
the Generals. When they had received the bodies of their dead from the
Aetolians under truce, and were gotten again to Naupactus, they returned with
the Fleet to Athens. Demosthenes afraid to come home.
But they left Demosthenes about Naupactus, and those parts, because he was
afraid of the Athenian for the loss that had happened.

The Athenian Fleet in Si^^^y sail to Locris, and take Peripolium.
the Athenians that were on the Coast of Sicily, sailed unto Locris, and
landing, overcame such as made head; and took in Peripolium, situate on the
River Halex.

The same Summer, The Aetolians and Peloponnesians make a journey against
Naupactus.
the Aetolians having sent their Ambassadors, Telephus an Ophionian, Boryades,
an Eurytanian, and Tisander an Apodotian, to Corinth and Lacedaemon, persuaded
them to send an Army against Naupactus, for that it harbored the Athenians
against them. And the Lacedaemonians, toward the end of Autumn, sent them
three Heraclea, the new-built City of Trachinia. The General of the Army was
Eurylochus a Spartan, with whom These are afterward called Macarius and
Menedatus.
Massarius and Menedatus went also along, Spartans likewise.

When the Army was assembled at Delphi, Eurylocus sent a Herald to the
Locrians of Ozolae, both because their way lay through them to Naupactus, and
also because he desired to make them revolt from the Athenians. Of all the
Locrians, the Amphissians cooperated with him most, Phocaeans. And they first
giving Hostages, induced others, (who likewise were afraid of the coming in of
the Army) to do the like: the Myonians first, being their neighbors, (for
this way is Locris of most difficult access) then the Ip^aeans, Messapians,
Tritaeans, Challaeans, Tolophonians, Hessians, and the O^antheans. All these
went with them to the War. The Olpaeans gave them Hostages, but followed not
the Army. But the Hyeans would give them no Hostages, till they had taken a
Village of theirs called Poli^.

When every thing was ready, and he had sent the Hostages away to Cytinium in
Doris, he marched with his Army toward Naupactus, through the Territory of
the Locrians. And as he marched, he took Oeneon, a Town of theirs, and
Eupolium, because they refused to yield unto him.

When they were come into the Territory of Naupactus, the Aetolians being there
already to join with them, they wasted the Fields about, and took the
Suburbs of the Molychrium, a Colonie of the Corinthians, but subject to the
People of Athens, and took that. Now Demosthenes the Athenian, Aetolian
business, he abode about Naupactus) having been praeaduertised of this Army,
and being afraid to lose the City, went amongst the Acarnanians, and with much
ado, because of his departure from before Leucas, Demosthenes relieueth
Naupactus.
persuaded them to relieve Naupactus, and they sent along with him in his
Galleys 1000 men of Arms; which entering were the preservation of the City; for
there was danger, the walls being of a great compass, and the defendants few,
that else they should not have been able to make them good. Eurylochus, and
those that were with Peloponnesus, but to Aeolis, now called Calydon, and to
Pleuron, and other places thereabouts, and also to Proschion in Aetolia. For
the Ambraciotes coming to them, persuaded them to undertake, together with
themselves, the enterprise against Argos, and the rest of Amphilochia, and
Acarnania, saying withal, that if they could overcome these, the rest of that
Continent would enter into the league of the Lacedaemonians. Whereunto
Eurylochus Aetolians, lay quiet in those parts with his Army, till such time,
as the Ambraciotes being come with their forces before Argos, he should have
need to aid them. The end of the sixth Summer.
And so this Summer ended.

The Athenians in Sicily assault Nessa.
The Athenians that were in Sicily, in the beginning of Winter, together with
the Grecians of their league, and as many of the (...).
Siculi, as having obeyed the Syracusians by force, or being their Confederates
before, had now revolted, warred jointly against Nessa; rather Inessa. The
Inhabytants he calls Inessaei. lib. 6.
Nessa, a town of Sicily, the Citadell whereof, was in the hands of the
Syracusians; and they assaulted Syracusians that were in the Cittadell, sallied
out upon the Confederates, that retired later then the Athenians; and charging
put a part of the Army to flight, and killed, not a few.

After this, Laches, and the Athenians, Landed sometime at Locris; and overcame
in battle, by the River Caicinus, about 300 Locrians, who with Proxenus the
son of Capiton, came out to make resistance; and when they had stripped them
of their Arms, departed.

Delos hallowed.
The same Winter also, the Athenians hallowed the I Will Delos, by the admonition
indeed of a certain Oracle. For Pisistratus also the Tyrant, hallowed the same
before, not all, but only so much as was within the prospect of the Temple.
But now they hallowed it all over in this manner. They took away all
Sepulchers whatsoever, of such as had dyed there before; and for the future,
made an Edict, that none should be suffered to dye, An Edict, that none should
be suffered to be borne or dye in Delos.
nor any Woman to bring forth child in the Island; but when they were near the
time, either of the one or the other, they should be carried over into Rhenea.

Rhenea is so little a way distant from Delos, that Polycrates the Tyrant of
Samos, who was once of great power by Sea, and had the dominion of the other
Islands, when he won Rhenea, dedicated the same to Apollo of Delos, tying it
unto Delos with a Chain. Rhenea an Island, (...) and dedicated to (...) of
Delos.

The Athen^ans (...) the quinqueniall (...) at Delos.


And now after the hallowing of it, the Athenians instituted the keeping* every
fifth year, of the D^lian Games.

There had also in old time been great concourse in Delos, both of Ionians,
and of the Ilanders round about. Ionians do now the Games at Ephesus.

There were likewise Matches set of bodily exercise, and of Music; and the
Cities did severally set forth Dances. Which things to have been so, is
principally declared by Homer, in these Verses of his Hymn to Apollo.

But thou, Apollo, Hom. Him. ad Apoll. (...) 146:
take most delight*
Delos. There assemble in thy sight,
The long coat Ions with their Children dear,
And venerable Bedfellowes; and there,
In Matches set, of Buffets, Song, and Dance,
Both show thee pastime, and thy Name advance.
That there were also Matches of Music, and that men resorted thither to
contend therein, he again makes manifest in these Verses of the same Hymn.
For after he has spoken of the Delian Dance of the Women,

Hom Hymn. ad Apoll. ver. ^65.
But well: let Phoebus and Diana be
Propitious; and farewell you each one;
But yet remember me when I am gone:
And if of earthly men you chance to see
Any toiled Pilgrim, that shall ask you, Who,
O Damsels, is the man that living here,
Was sweet'st in Song, and that most had your ear?
Then all, with a joint murmur, thereunto
Make answer thus; A man deprived of seeing,
In th'lle of Sandy Chios is his being.
So much has Homer witnessed touching the great meeting, and solemnity
celebrated of old, in the I Will of Delos. And the Ilanders, and the Athenians,
since that time, have continued still to send Dancers along with their
Sacrificers, but the Games, and things of that kind were worn out, as is
likely, by adversity. Till now that the Athenians restored the Games, and added
the Horse-race, which was not before.

The Ambraciotes and Peloponnesians make War against the Acarnanians and
Amphilochians unfortunately.
The same Winter the Ambraciotes, (according to their Eurylochus) when they
retained his Army, made War upon Argos in Amphilochia, with three thousand
men of Arms, and inuading Argia, they took Olpae, They take Olpae.
a strong Fort on a Hill by the Seaside, which the Acarnanians had fortified,
and used for the place of their common meetings, for matters of Justice, and is
distant from the City of Argos, which stands also on the Seaside, about
twenty five furlongs. The Acarnanians with part of their Forces, came to
relieve Argos, and with rest they encamped in that part of Amphilochia which is
called Crenae, to watch the Peloponnesians Eurylochus, that they might not
pass through to the Ambraciotes without their knowledge; and sent to
Demosthenes, who had been Leader of the Athenians in the expedition against
the Aetolians, to come to them, and be their General. The Acarnanians make
Demosthenes their General.


They sent also to the twenty Athenian Galleys, that chanced to be then on the
Coast of Peloponnesus, under the Conduct of Aristoteles, the son of
Timocrates, and Ierophon, the son of Antimnestus. The Ambraciotes at Olpae,
send to the Ambraciotes at home, to come to their aid.
In like manner the Ambraciotes Olpae, sent a messenger to the City of
Ambracia, willing them to come to their aid with their whole power; as fearing
that those with Eurylochus would not be able to pass by the Acarnans, and so
they should be either froced to fight alone, or else have an unsafe Retreat.

But the Peloponnesians that were with Eurylochus, as soon as they understood
that the Ambraciotes were come to Olpae, dislodging from Proschion, went with
all speed to assist them. And passing over the River Achelous, marched through
Acarnania, (which, by reason of the aids Argos, was now disfurnished,) on
their right hand they had the City of Stratus, and that Garrison; on the left,
the rest of Acarnania. Having past the Territory of the Stratians, they marched
through Phytia, and again by the utmost limits of Medeon, then through
Lim^aea, then they went into the Territory of the Agraea^^; which are out of
Acarnania, and their friends, and getting to the Hill Thiamus, which is a
desert Hill, they marched over it, and came down into Argia, when it was now
night; and passing between the City of the Argiues, and the Acarnans the
Wells, came unseen, and joined with the Ambraciotes at Olpae.

When they were all together, they sat down about break of day, at a place
called Metropolis, and there encamped. And the Athenians not long after with
their 20. Galleys, arrived in the Ambracian Gulf, to the aid of the Argiues.
To whom also came Demosthenes with 200. Messenian men of Arms, and threscore
Athenian Archers. The Galleys lay at Sea, before the Hill upon which the Fort
of Olpae stands. But the Acarnanians, and those Amphilochians (for the
greatest part of them the Ambraciotes kept back by force) that were come
already together at Argos, prepared themselves to give the Enemy Battle,
Demosthenes chosen General.
and chose Demosthenes with their own Commanders, for General of the whole
League. He, when he had brought them up, near unto Olpae, there encamped.
There was between them a great Hollow; and for five days together, they
stirred not; but the sixth day both sides put themselves into array for the
Battle. The Army of the Peloponnesians reached a great way Demosthenes,
fearing to be encompassed, placed an Ambush in a certain hollow way, and fit
for such a Demosthenes with the Messenians, and those few Athenians that were
there, The Battle between the Ambraciotes and Acarnanian^.
stood in the right Wing; and the Acarnanians (as they could one after another
be put in order) and those Amphilochian Darters which were present, made up
the other. The Peloponnesians Ambraciotes were ranged promiscuously, except
only the Mantineans, who stood together, most of them in the left Wing, but
not in the utmost part of it, for Eurylochus and those that were with him, made
the extremity of the left Wing against Demosthenes, and the Messenians.

When they were in fight, and that the Peloponnesians with that Wing
ouer-reached, and had encircled the right Wing of their Enemies, those
Acarnanians that lay in Ambush, coming in at their backs, charged them, and
The Ambraciotes and Peloponnesians fly.
in such sort as they endured not the first brunt; and besides, caused the
greatest part of the Army through affright to run away. For when they saw
that part of it defeated, which was with Eurylochus, which was the best of
their Army, they were a great deal the more afraid. And the Messenians that
were in that part of the Army with Demosthenes, pursuing them, dispatched the
greatest part of the execution. But the Ambraciotes that were in the right
Wing, on that part, had the Victory, and chased the Enemy unto the City of
Argos; but in their Retreat, when they saw that the greatest part of the Army
was vanquished, the rest of the Acarnanians setting upon them, they had much
ado to recover Olpae in safety; and many of them were slain, whilst they
ran into it out of array, and in disorder. Save only the Mantineans; for
these made a more orderly Retreat then any part of the Army. And so this
Battle ended, having lasted till the Evening.

The next day, called before Menedatus and Massarius.
Menedaius, (Eurylochus and called before Menedatus and Massarius.
Macarius being now slain) taking the Command upon him, Attique Galleys by
Sea; or if he should depart, how he might do it safely, had speech with
Demosthenes, and the Acarnian Captains, both about a Truce for his departure,
and for the receiving of the bodies of the slain. And they delivered unto them
their dead; and having erected a Trophie, took up their own dead, which were
about three hundred; but for their departure they would make no Truce openly,
nor to all: but secretly, Demosthenes, with his Acarnanian Mantineans, and with
Menedaius, and the rest of the Peloponnesian Captains, and men of most worth,
to be gone as speedily as they could; with purpose to disguard the
Ambraciotes, Demosthenes suffers the principal Peloponnesia^s to retire from
Olpae secretly; to disgard the Ambraciotes of their aid, and procure the
Peloponnesians the hatred of the Nations thereabouts.
and multitude of mercenary Strangers, and withal to use this as a means to
bring the Peloponnesians into hatred with the Grecians of those parts, as men
that had treacherously advanced their particular interest. Accordingly they
took up their dead, and buried them as fast as they could; and such as had
leave, consulted secretly touching

Demosthenes and the Acarnanians had now intelligence, Denosthenes sends part
of his Army to lie in Ambush by the ways by which the Ambraciote supplies
were to come from the City*
that the Ambraciotes from the City of Ambracia, according to the message sent
to them before from Olpae, (which was, that they should bring their whole power
through Amphilochia to their aid) were already on their March, (ignorant of
what had passed here) to join with those at Olpae. And hereupon he sent a part
of his Army presently forth, to beset the ways with Ambushment, and to
preoccupate all places of strength, and prepared withal, to

In the mean time, the Mantineans, The Mantineans retire from Olpae.
and such as had part in the Truce, going out, on pretense to gather
Pot-hearbs, and Firewood, stole away by small numbers, and as they went, did
indeed gather such things as they pretended to go forth for; but when they
were gotten far from Olpae, they went faster away. The Ambraciotes go after
them, and are slain to the number of 200.
But the Ambraciotes, and others that came forth in the same manner, but in
greater troops, seeing the others go quite away, were eager to be gone
likewise, and ran outright, as desiring Acarnanians at first thought they
had gone all without Truce alike, and pursued the Peloponnesians, and threw
darts at Man^ineans* and Peloponnesians, and slew the Ambraciotes only. And
there was much contention, and ignorance, of which was an Ambraciote, and which
a Peloponnesian. So they slew about 200 of them, The rest escape to Salynthius,
King of the Agraeans.
and the rest escaped into Agraeis, a bordering Territory, where Salynthius
King of the Agraeans, and their friend, received them.

Demosthenes goes out to meet the supply of Ambraciotes that came from the
City.
The Ambraciotes, out of the City of Ambracia, were come Idomene. Idomene are
two high hills, to the greater whereof, came first undiscovered that night, they
whom Demosthenes had sent before from the Camp, and seized it. But the
Ambraciotes got first to the lesser, and there encamped the same night.
Demosthenes after Supper, in the twilight, marched forward with the rest of the
Army, one half whereof himself took with him, for the assault of the Camp,
and the other half he sent about through the Mountains of Amphilochia.

The Ambraciotes surprised in their lodgings.
And the next morning before day, he invaded the Ambraciotes, Demosthenes had
placed the Messenians on purpose in the foremost ranks, and commanded them to
speak unto them as they went, in the Dorique Dialect, and to make the
Sentinels secure; Especially, seeing their faces could not be discerned, for it
was yet night. Wherefore they put the Army of the Ambraciotes to flight, The
Ambraciotes put to flight.
at the first onset, and slew many upon the place. The rest fled as fast as
they could toward Amphilochians being well acquainted with their own
Territory, and armed but lightly, against men in Armor, unacquainted, and
utterly ignorant which way to take; they light into hollow ways, and to the
places forelayed with Ambushes, and perished. And having been put to all manner
of shift for their lives, some fled toward the Sea, and when they saw the
Galleys of Athens sailing by the Shore, (this accident concurring with their
defeat,) swamme to them, and chose rather in their present fear, to
Barbarians, Amphilochians. The Ambraciotes with this loss, came home a few of
many in safety to their City. And the Acarnanians having taken the spoil of
the dead, and erected their Trophies, returned unto Argos.

The next day there came a Herald from those Ambraciotes which fled from Olpae,
into Agraeis; to demand leave to carry away the bodies of those dead, which
were slain after the first battle, when, without Truce, they went away
together with the Mantineans, and with those that had Ambraciotes, that came
from the City, he wondered at the number. For he knew nothing of this last blow,
but thought they had been the Armors of those with them. Then one asked him,
what he wondered at, The conference of the Herald from the Ambraciotes in
Agraeis, with one of Demosthenes his Army, about the number of the slain.
and how many he thought were slain. For he that asked him the question,
thought, on the other side, that he had been a Herald, sent from those at
Idomene. And he answered, about 200. Then he that asked, replied, and said,
Then these are not the armours of them, but of above a thousand. Then, said he
again, they belong The other answered, yes, if you fought yesterday in
Idomene. But we fought not yesterday at all, but the other day in our retreat.
But we yet fought yesterday with those Ambraciotes that came from the City to
aid the rest. When the Herald heard that, and knew that the aid from the
City was defeated, he burst out into Aimees, and astonished with the
greatness of the present loss, forthwith went his way, without his errand,
and required the dead bodies no further. For this loss was greater then in the
like number of days happened to any one Greece, in all this War. I have not
written the number of the slain, because it was said to be such, as is
incredible, for the quantity of the City. But this I know, The Acarnanians will
not let the Athenians subdue the Ambraciotes utterly, because they thought the
Ambraciotes better neighbors then the Athenians.
that if the Acarnanians, and Amphilochians, as Demosthenes, and the Athenians
would have had them, would have subdued Ambracia, they might have done it even
with the shout of their voices; but they feared now, that if the Athenians
possessed it, they would prove more troublesome Neighbors unto them then the
other.

After this, having bestowed the third part of the spoils Athenians, they
distributed the other two parts according to the Cities. The Athenians part was
lost by Sea. For those 300 complete Armors which are dedicated Attica, were
picked out for Demosthenes himself, and he brought them away with him. His
return was withal the safer for this action, after his defeat in Aetolia.
And the Athenians that were in the twenty Galleys returned to Naupactus.

The Acarnanians, and Amphilochians, when the Athenians, and Demosthenes were
gone, granted Truce at the City of the Oeniades to those Ambraciotes and
Peloponnesians that were fled to Salynthius, and the Agraeans, to retire, the
Oeniades being gone over to Salynthius, League for 100 years between the
Ambraciotes and Acarnanians.
and the Agraeans likewise. And Acarnanians, and Amphilochians made a league
with the Ambraciotes for an hundred years, upon these conditions. That neither
the Ambraciotes, with the Acarnanians, should make War against the
Peloponnesians, nor the Acarnanians with the Ambraciotes, against the
Athenians. That they should give mutual aid to one another Country. That
the Ambraciotes should restore, whatsoever Towns or bordering fields they held
of the Amphilochians,; and that they should at no time aid Anactorium, which
was in hostility with the Acarnanians. And upon this composition, the
Corinthians sent a Garrison of about 300 men of Arms of their own City to
Ambracia, under the Conduct of Xenoclides the son of Euthycles; who with much
difficulty passing through Epiru^, at length arrived. Thus passed the business
in Ambracia.

The Athenian Fleet in Sycily, invade Himeraea.
The same Winter the Athenians that were in Sicily, invaded Himeraea by Sea,
aided by the (...).
Sicilians that invaded the skirts of the same by Land. They sailed also to the
Islands of Aeolus. Returning afterward to Rhegium, they Pythodorus, Pythodorus
sent to take the Fleet from Laches.
the son of Isolochus, with certain Galleys, come to receive charge of the
Fleet commanded by Laches. For the Sicilian Confederates had sent to Athens,
and persuaded the people, to assist them with a greater Fleet. For though the
Syracusians were masters by Land, yet seeing they hindered them, but with few
Galleys from the liberty of the Sea, they made preparation, and were gathering
together a Fleet, with intention to resist them. And the Athenians furnished
out forty Galleys to send into Sicily, conceiving that the War Pythodorus,
one of the Commanders, they sent presently away with a few of those Galleys,
and intended to send Sophocles the son of Sostratides, and Eurymedon the
son of Toucles, with the greatest number afterward. But Pythodorus having
now the Command of Laches his Fleet, sailed in the end of Winter, unto a
certain Garrison of the Locrians, which Laches had formerly taken, and
overthrown in a Battle there by the Locrians, retired.

The same Spring, there issued a great (...), a stream of fire; and was a kind
of melted stone, gushing out of the sides of the Mountain.
stream of Fire Aetna, The fire breaks out of and Aetna, burns the Fields
of Catana,
as it had also done in former times, and burned part of the Territory of the
Cataneans, that dwell at the Foot of Aetna, which is the highest Mountain of
all Sicily. From the last time that the fire brake out before, to this time, it
is said to be fifty years. And it has now broken out thrice in all, since
Sicily was inhabited by the Grecians. These were the things that came to pass
this Winter. And so ended the sixth year of this War, written by THVCYDIDES.

THE FOVRTH BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF THVCYDIDES.
The principal Contents.
The Athenians take and fortify Pylus in Laconia. The Lacedaemonians, to
recover it, put over 400. of their best men into the Island Sphacteria: whom the
Athenians, having overcome the Lacedaemonian Fleet, do there besiege. The
Athenians and Syracusians fight in the Straight of Messana. Cleon engages
himself rashly to take or kill the Lacedaemonians in Sphacteria within 20.
days, and by good fortune performs it. The Sedition cease in Corcyra.
Nicias invadeth Peloponnesus. The Sicilians agreeing, take from the Athenians
their pretense of sailing upon that Coast with their Fleet. The Athenians take
Nisaea, but fail of Megara. The overthrow of the Athenians at Delium. The
Cities on the Confines of Thrace, upon the coming of Brasidas, revolt to the
Lacedaemonians. Truce for a year. And this in three years more of the same
War.

THE SEVENTH YEAR.
when Corn began to be in the ear, ten Galleys of Syracusae, and as many
of Locris, went to Messena in Sicily, Messina.
called in by the Citizens themselves, and took it; Messana reuolteth from the
Athenians.
and Messa^a revolted from the Athenians. This was done by the practice chiefly
of the Syracusians, that saw the place to be commodious for invasion of
Sicily, and feared lest the Athenians their War, might come with greater
forces into Sicily, Locrians, as being in hostility with the Rhegians, and
desirous to make War upon them on both sides. ^
The Locrians had now also entered the Lands of the Rhegians with their whole
power; both because they would hinder them from assisting the Messenians and
because they were solicited thereunto by the banished men of Rhegium, that
were with them. Rheggi^.
For they of Rhegium had been long in Sedition, and were unable for the
present to give them Battle, for which cause, they the rather also now invaded
them. Locrians withdrew their Landforces, but their Galleys lay still at the
guard of Messana, and more were setting forth, to lie in the same Harbor, to
make the War on that side.

The (...) invasion of (...).
About the same time of the Spring, and before Corn was at full growth, the
Peloponnesians and their Confederates, under the Conduct of Agis the son of
Archidamus, King of the Lacedaemonians, invaded Attica, and there lay and
wasted the Country about.

The Athenians send forty Galleys into Sicily.
And the Athenians sent forty Galleys into Sicily, the same Eurymedon and
Sophocles. For Pythodorus, who was the third in that Commission, was arrived in
Sicily before. Whom to put in by the way at Corcyra, being full (...)
sedition, the Outlawes holding the Field, and the Commons, the C^tie.
To these they gave commandment also, to take order as they went by, for the
state of those Corcyraeans that were in the City, and were pillaged by the
Outlawes in the Mountain: and threescore Galleys of the Peloponnesians were
gone out, to take part with those in the Mountain; who* because there was a
great Famine in the City, thought they might easily Demosthenes also (who ever
since his return out of Acarnania had lived privately) they gave authority, at
his own request, to make use of the same Galleys, if he thought good so to
do, about Peloponnesus.

Demosthenes urges to put (...) at Pylus.
As they sailed by the Coast of Laconia, and had intelligence that the
Peloponnesian Fleet was at Corcyra already, Eurymedon and Sophocles hasted to
Corcyra; but Demosthenes willed them to put in first at Pylus, and when they
had done what was requisite there, then to proceed in their Pylus by a Tempest
that then arose by chance. ^
And presently Demosthenes required them to fortify the place, alleging that
he came with them for no other purpose, and showing how there was great (...)
Timber and Stone, and that the place it self was naturally strong, and desert,
both it, and a great deal of the Country about. For it lies from Sparta
about ^00. Furlongs, in the Territory that belonging once to the Messenians, is
called by che Lacedaemonians, Coryphasion. But they answered him, that there
were many desert Promontories Peloponnesus, if they were minded to put the
City to charges in taking them in. The commodity of Pyl^^.
But there appeared unto Demosthenes a great difference between this place and
other places; because there was here a Haven, and the Messenians, the ancient
Inhabitants thereof, speaking the same language the Lacedaemonians did, would
both be able to annoy them much by excursions thence, and be also faithful
Guardians of the place.

When he could not prevail, neither with the Generals, nor with the
Soldiers, having also at last communicated The Athenians build the Fort of
Pylus.
to Wall in the place of their own accord. And falling in hand with the work,
they performed it, not with iron tools to hew stone, but picked out such
stones as they thought good, and afterward placed them as they would severally
fit. And for Mortar, where it needed, for want of Vessels, they carried it on
their backs, with their bodies enclining forward, so as it might
Lacedaemonians, and to finish the most assaileable parts, before they came to
succor it. For the greatest part of the place was strong by nature, and needed
no fortifying at all.

The Lacedaemonians were that day celebrating a certain Holiday, and when they
heard the news, The Lacedaemonians at home regard the taking of Pylus but
lightly.
did set lightly by it; conceiving, that whenever it should please them to
go thither, they should find them either already in Attica. The Athenians
having in six days finished the Demosthenes with five Galleys to defend it,
and with the rest, hastend on in their course for Corcyra, and Sicily.

The Lacedaemonians army, and (...) take it more to heart.
The Peloponnesians that were in Attica, when they were advertised of the taking
of Pylus, returned speedily home. For the Lacedaemonians, and Agis their King,
took this accident of Pylus to concern their own particular. And the
invasion was withal so early, (Corn being yet green) that the most of them
were scanted with victual; Attica, in all but fifteen days.

The Athenians take Eion in Thrace, and (...) it again.
About the same time Simonides an Athenian Commander, having drawn a few
Athenians together out of the Garrisons, and a number of the Confederates of
those parts, took the City of Eion in Thrace, a Colonie of the Mend^eans,
that was their Enemy, by Treason; but was Chalcideans and Bottiaeans, that
came to succor it, and lost many of his Soldiers.

When the Peloponnesians were returned out of Attica, they of the City of
Sparta, The Lacedaemonians by Sea and Land, seek to recover Pylus.
and of other the next neighboring Towns, went presently to the aid of
Pylus; but the rest of the Lacedaemonians came slowlier on, as being newly
come from the former Expedition. Nevertheless they sent about, to the Cities
of Peloponnesus, to require their Pylus; and also to their threescore Galleys
that were at Corcyra. Which, transported over the Isthmus of Leucas* arrived at
Pylus, unseen of the Athenian Galleys lying at Zacynthus. Z^nte.
And by this time their Army of foot was also there. Whilst the Peloponnesian
Galleys were coming toward Pylus, Demosthenes sends to call back the fleet
to help him.
Demosthenes sent two Galleys secretly to Eurymedon and the Athenian Fleet at
Zacynthus, in hall haste, to tell them, that they must come presently to him,
for as much as the place was in danger to be lost. And according as
Demosthenes his message Lacedaemonians in The Lacedaemonians prepare themselves
to assault the Fort.
being a thing built in haste, and not many men within it. And because they
expected the coming of the Athenian Fleet from Zacynthus, they had a purpose,
if they took not the Fort before, to bar up the entries of the Harbor. For
the Island called Sphacteria, lying just before, The situation of the I Will
Sphacteria.
and very near to the place, makes the Haven safe, and the entries straight;
one of them* nearest to Pylus, and to the Athenian Fortification, admitting
passage for no more but two Galleys Athenia^s putting men into it, should make
War upon them from thence, they carried over men of Arms into the same, and
placed others likewise along the Athenians at their coming should find the
Island their Enemy, and no means of landing in the Continent. For the Coast of
Pylus it self, without these two entries, being to the Sea harbourlesse, would
afford them no place from whence to set forth to the aid of their fellows.
And they, in all probability, might by siege, without battle by Sea, or other
danger, win the place, seeing there was no provision of Victual within it,
and that the Enemy took it but on short preparation. The Lacedaemonians put
over 420 men of Arms, besides their servants into the I Will Sphacteria, over
against Pylus.
Having Helotes that were with them. And their Captain was Epitadas the son
of Molobrus,

Demosthenes, Demosthenes prepares himself to keep the Lacedaemonia^^ from
landing on the shore.
when he saw the Lacedaemonians bent to assault him, both from their Galleys,
and with their Army by Land, prepared also to defend the place And when he
had drawn up his Galleys, all that were left him, unto though bad ones, and
for the greatest part made of Osiers. Arms. Those they had, they took out of
a Peiraticall Boat, of thirty Oars, and a (...).
Light-horseman of the Messenians, which came by by chance. And the men of
Arms of the Messenians were about 40. which he made use of amongst the rest.
The greatest part therefore, both of armed and unarmed, he placed on the parts
of the Wall toward the Land, which were of most strength, and commanded them to
make good the place against the Landforces, if they assaulted it; and he
himself, with Athenians think they should ever have been mastred with
Galleys, which caused them to make the place to the Sea-ward the less strong;
and if the Peloponnesians should by force come to land, they made no other

THE ORATION OF DEMOSTHENES to his Soldiers.
YOU that participate with me in the present danger, let not any of you in
this extremity, go about to seem wise, and reckon Athenians, and by
experience of disbarking against others, know, that if a man stand it out, and
do not, for fear of the sowsing of a Wave, or the menacing approach of a
Gallie, give

Upon this exhortation of Demosthenes, The Athenians take heart.
the Athenians took better heart, and went down, and arranged themselves
close by the Sea. The Lacedaemonians assault the Fort by Land, and seek to
force landing from their Galleys.
And the Lacedaemonians came and assaulted the Fort, both with their Army by
Land, and with their Fleet, consisting of three and forty Thrasymelidas, the
son of Cratesicles, a Spartan; and he made his approach where Demosthenes had
before expected him. So the Athenians were assaulted on both sides, both by Sea
and by Land.

The Peloponnesians dividing their Galleys into small numbers, because they
could not come near with many at once, and resting between, assailed them by
turns; using all possible valor, and mutual encouragement, to put the
Athenians back, and gain the Fort.

Brasidas: The valor of Brasidas.
For having the Command of a Gallie, and seeing other Captains of Galleys, and
Steeresmen (the place being hard of access) when there appeared sometimes
possibility of putting ashoare, to be afraid, and tender of breaking their
Galleys, he would cry out unto them, saying, They did not well, for sparing of
Wood, to let the Enemy fortify in their Country. And to the Lacedaemonians
he gave advice, to force landing with the breaking of their Galleys; and
prayed the Confederates, that in requital of many benefits, they would not
stick to bestow their Galleys at this time upon the Lacedaemonians, and
running them ashoare, to use any means whatsoever to Land,

Thus he urged others; and having compelled the Steeresman of his own Gallie
to run her ashore, he came to the (...), Ladders or Plankes to disbarke by*
Brasidas swouneth by reason of his wounds.
Ladders, but attempting to get down, was by the Athenians put back, and
after he had received many wounds, swouned, and falling upon the (...). For^*
the place on the outside of the Gally for So^ldiers to stand and fight on,
between the Rowers and the water.
ledges of the Gallie, his Buckler tumbled over into the Sea, which brought to
Land, the Athenians took up, and used afterward Athenians not boudging, they
could not do it. So that at this time Fortune came so much about, that the
Athenians fought from the Land, Laconique Land, against Lacedaemonians in
Galleys; and the Lacedaemonians from their Galleys, fought against the
Athenians, to get landing in their own now hostile Territory. For at that time
there was an opinion far spread, that these were rather Land-men,

The Lacedaemonians, after three days assault, without effect, give over that
course.
This day then, and a part of the next, they made sundry assaults, and after
that gave over. And the third day they sent out some Galleys to Asine, for
Timber, wherewith to make Engines; hoping with Engines to take that part of the
Wall that looks into the Haven; which, though it were higher, yet the landing
to it was easier.

The Athenian Fleet return from Zacynthus, to aid the Athenians in Pylus.
In the mean time arrive the forty Athenian Galleys Zacynthus; for there were
joined with them certain Galleys of the Garrison of Naupactus, and four of
Chios. And when they saw both the Continent and the Island full of men of Arms,
and that the Galleys that were in the Haven would not come forth, not knowing
where to cast Anchor, they sailed for the present to the I Will Prote, being
near, and desert, and there lay for that night.

The next day, after they had put themselves in order, they put to Sea again,
with purpose to offer them Peloponnesians neither came out against them, nor
had stopped up the entries of the Haven, as they had before determined, but
lying still on the shore, manned out their Galleys, and prepared to fight, if
any entered, in the Haven it self, which was no small one. The Athenians
understanding this, came in violently upon them, at both the mouths of the
Haven* The Athenians overcome Peloponnesian fleet in the Haven of Pyl^s
and most of the Lacedaemonian Galleys, which were already set out, and opposed
them, they charged, and put to flight. And in following Lacedaemonians
perceiving, and extremely grieved with the loss, because their fellows were
hereby intercepted in the Island, came in with their aid from the Land, and
entering armed into the Sea, Lacedaemonians out of eagrenesse, and out of fear,
did (as one may say) nothing else but make a Sea Fight from the Land; and the
Athenians, who had the victory, and desired to extend their present fortune to
the utmost, made a Land-fight from their Galleys. But at length, having
Lacedaemonians recovered all their Galleys, save only those which were taken
at the first onset. When they were on both sides retired to their Camps, the
Athenians erected a Trophie, delivered to the Enemy their dead, and possessed
the wrecke, and immediately went round the Island with their Galleys* keeping
watch upon it, The Athenians getting the victory beseege the men cut off from
the army, in the Island.
as having intercepted the men within it. The Peloponnesians in the mean time,
that were in the Continent, and were by this time assembled there with their
succors Peloponnesus, remained upon the place at Pylus.

As soon as the news of what had passed was related Sparta, they thought fit,
in respect the loss was great, to send the Magistrates down to the Camp, to
determine, The Magistrates of Sparta come to view the state of the Camp, and
conclude these to send to Athens about peace.
upon view of the state of their present affairs there, what they thought
requisite to be done. These, when they saw there was no possibility to relieve
their men, and were not willing to put them to the danger either of suffering
by Famine, or of being forced by multitude, concluded amongst themselves, to
take Truce with the Athenian Commanders, as far as concerned the particulars
of Pylus, Truce between the Armies, till Ambassadors might be sent to Athens.
if they also would be content, and to send Ambassadors Athens, about
agreement, and to endeavor to fetch off their men as soon as they could. The
Athenian Commanders accepting the proposition, the Truce was made, in this
manner.

The Articles of the Truce.
THAT the Lacedaemonians should deliver up, not only those Galleys wherein
they fought, but also bring to Pylus, and put into the Athenians hands,
whatsoever Vessels of the Out of this and other places i^ appears, that the
sh^^ping of those times was of two forms, long and round The long, which
principally used the Oar, served for the Wars; the round, which used only
the sail, served for Merchants uses and transportation of prou^sion. Of the
first sort were all Galleys* whether of one, two, three, or more (...) of
Oars; of the latter were the Ships called (...).
long form of building were any where else in Laconia.

That they should not make any assault upon the Fort, neither by Sea nor Land.
That the Athenians should permit the Lacedaemonians that were in the Continent,
to send over to those in the Island, a portion of ground corn, agreed on, to
wit, to every one two Attique a Choenix* a measure of about three pintes of
ours.
Choenickes of Meal, and two (...), a quarter of a Choenix.
Cotyles of Wine, and a piece of Flesh; and to every of their servants half
that quantity.

That they should send this, the Athenians looking on, and not send over any
Vessel by stealth.

That the Athenians should nevertheless continue garding of the Peloponnesian
Army neither by Land nor Sea.

That if either side transgressed in any part thereof, the truce was then
immediately to be void, otherwise to hold good till the return of the
Lacedaemonian Ambassadors from Athens.

That the Athenians should convoy them in a Gallie unto Athens, and back. That
at their return the Truce should end, and the Athenians should restore them
their Galleys, in as good estate as they had received them.

Thus was the Truce made, and the Galleys were delivered Athenians, to the
number of about threescore: and the Ambassadors were sent away; who arriving
at Athens, said as follows.

THE ORATION OF THE LACEDAEMONIAN Ambassadors.
MEN of Athens, the Lacedaemonians have sent us hither, con^erning our men in
the Island, to see if we can persuade you to such a course, as being most
profitable for you, Breuity of speech was so customary and natural to the
Laconians, that it grew to a proverb.
fashion with us, where few words suffice, there indeed not to use many; but
yet to use more, when the occasion requires that by words we should make
plain that which is to be done in actions of importance. But the words we
shall use, we pray you to receive, not with the mind of an Enemy, nor as if
we went about to instruct you, as men ignorant, but for a remembrance to you,
of what you know, that you may deliberate wisely therein. It is now in your
power to assure your present good fortune Grecians, come to you, to ask that,
which before we thought chiefly in our own hands to give. And yet we are
not brought to this through for you, men of Athens, to do with us; and not, if
rejecting our

Whereas, on the contrary, it is in your hands, without danger, to leave a
reputation to posterity both of strength and wisdom. The Lacedaemonians call
you to a Peace, and end of the War, giving you peace, and alliance, and much
other friendship and mutual familiarity, requiring for the same, only those
their men that are in the Island; though also we think it better for both
sides, not to try the chance of War; Whether it fall out that by some
occasion Grecians, who will acknowledge it rather from you, then us. For they
make War, not knowing whether side begun; but if an end be made, (which is
now for the most part in your own hands) the thanks will be yours.

And by decreeing the Peace, you may make the Lacedaemonians your sure friends,
in as much as they call you to it, and are therein not forced, but gratified.
Wherein consider how many Greece, being inferior to us, (...) Greece (...)
Athenians, to tyrannize it.
will honor us in the highest degree. Thus spoke the Lacedaemonians, thinking
that in times past, the Athenians had coueted Peace, and been hindered of it by
them, and that being now offered, they would gladly accept of it.

But they, having these men intercepted in the Island, thought they might
compound at pleasure, and aspired to greater matters. To this, they were set
on, for the most part by Cleon, the son of Cleaenetus, a popular man, at that

That they in the Island ought first to deliver up their Arms, The insolent
demand of the people of (...) by the advice of Cleon.
and come themselves to Athens, and when they should be there, if the
Lacedaemonians would make restitution of Nisaea, and Pegae, and Traezen, and
Achaia, (the which they had not won in War, but had received by former
Treaty, when the Athenian, being in distress, and at that time, in more need
of Peace then now, yielded them up into their hands) then they should have
their men again, and peace should be made, for as

To this answer, they replied nothing, The Lacedaemonians desire to speak
before a private Committee.
but desired that Commissioners might be chosen to treat with them, who by
alternate speaking, and hearing, might quietly make such an agreement, as they
could persuade each other unto. But then Cleon came mightily upon them, saying,
he knew before, that they had no honest purpose, and that the same was now
manifest, in that they refused to speak before the people, but sought to sit
in consultation, only with a few; And willed them, if they had ought to say,
Lacedaemonians finding, that although they had a mind to make Peace with them,
upon this occasion of adversity, yet it would not be fit to speak in it before
the multitude, lest speaking, and not obtaining, they should incur Viz for
buying Peace at the cost of the Confederates subjection, for the thing they
durst not propound before the people was (...), that by the amity of these two
gr^a^ states the rest of Greece would be forced to serves (...)* which they
(...) their Oration, as I have noted before.

The Ambassadors return without effect, and the Truce ends The Athenians
cavil, and keep the Galleys of the Lacedaemonians.


calumny with their Confederates, and seeing withal, that the Athenians would
not grant what they sued for, upon reasonable conditions, they went back
again without effect.

Upon their return, presently the Truce at Pylus was at an end, and the
Lacedaemonians, according to agreement, demanded Athenians, laying to their
charge, an assault made upon the Fort, contrary to the Articles, and other
matters of no great importance, Lacedaemonians denying it, and protesting this
detention of their Galleys for an injury, went their ways, and betook
themselves to the War. The War at Pylus goes on.
So the War at Pylus was on both sides renewed with all their power.

The Athenians went every day about the Island with two Galleys, one going one
way, another, another way, and lay at Anchor about it every night with their
whole Fleet, Athens also, there came a supply of thirty Galleys more, to guard
the Island, so that they were in the whole threescore and ten. And the
Lacedaemonians made assaults upon the Fort, and watched every opportunity that
should present it self, to save their men in the Island.

The Syracusians and Athenians fight in the straight between Messana and
Rhegium. Messana.
Whilst these things passed, the Syracusians, and their Confederates in Sicily,
adding to those Galleys that lay in Garrison at Messana, the rest of the Fleet
which they had Messana, instigated thereto, chiefly, by the Locrians, as
enemies to the Rhegians, (whose Territory they had also invaded with their
whole forces by Land) and seeing the Athenians had but a few Galleys present,
and hearing that the greater number which were to come to them, were employed
in the siege of the Sphacteria.
Island, desired to try with them a Battle by Sea; for if they could get the
better with their Navy, they hoped, lying before Rhegium, both with their
Landforces on the Field side, and with their Fleet by Sea, easily to take it
into Rhegium a Rhegium, being a promontory, and derived from (...), which
signifies to break, makes it probable that Sicily was once a part of Italy,
and there broken of by some Earthquake, but yet Scylla is nearer to Sicily then
Rhegium is.
Promontorie of Italy, and Messana in Sicily lying near together, they might
both hinder the Athenians from lying at Anchor there against them, and make
themselves Masters of the Straight. This Straight is the Sea between Rhegium
and Messana, where Sicily is nearest to the Continent, and is that which is
called Charybdis, here taken for the name of the whole strait, is but a part
near to Messana, between it and Pelo^^^, subject to extraordinary agitation
in stormy weather, but nothing i^ that it was, or was fa^ed to be of old.
Charybdis, where Ulysses is said to have passed through; which, for that it is
very narrow, and because the Sea falls in there, from two great maines, the
Tyrrhene and Sicilian, and is rough, Syracusians and their Confederates, The
Syracusians and (...) fight at Sea.
with somewhat more then 30. Galleys, were constrained in the later end of the
day to come to a Sea Fight, having bin drawn forth about the passage of a
certain Boat, to undertake 16. Galleys of Athens, and 8. of Rhegium; and being
overcome by the Athenians, fell off with the loss of one Gallie, and went
speedily, each side to their own Camp at Messana, and Rhegium; and the night
ouertooke them in the action. After this the Locrians departed out of the
Territory of the Rhegians; and the Fleet of the Syracusians and their a (...)
of Sicily, hard by Messana.
Pelori^, and had their Landforces by them. But the Athenians and Rhegians
came up to them, and finding their Galleys empty of men, fell in amongst them,
and by means of a Grapnel cast in by the Soldiers on shore.
cast into one of their Galleys, they lost that Gallie, but the men swam out.
Upon this the Syracusians went aboard, and whilst they were towed along the
shore toward Messana, the Athenians came up to them again and the Syracusians
* opening themselves, charged first, and sunk another of their Galleys; so the
Syracusians passed on to Messana, having had the better in their passage by the
shore, and in the Sea Fight, which were both together in such manner as is
declared.

The Athenians, The Messanians war on the City of Naxus, and receive a great
loss.
upon news that Camarina should by Archias and his accomplices be betrayed to
the Syracusians, went thither. In the mean time the Messanians with their
whole power, by Land, and also with their Fleet, warred on Naxus a of those
which were founded by the Chalcideans of Greece.
Chalcidique City, and their borderer. The first day having forced the Naxians
to retire within their Walls, they spoiled their fields; the next day they sent
their Fleet about into Acesine, which spoiled the Country as it went up the
River, and with their Landforces assaulted the City. In the mean time many of
the Siculi, Mountainers, came down to their assistance against the Messanians;
which when they of Naxus perceived, they took heart, and encouraging
themselves with an opinion, that the Leontines, and all the rest of the
Grecians their Confederates, had come to succor them, sallied suddenly out of
the City, and charged upon the Messanians, and put them to flight, with the
slaughter of a thousand of their Soldiers, the rest hardly Barbarians fell
upon them, and slew the most part of them in the Highways. And the Galleys
that lay at Messana, not long after, divided Syracusa and Locris.
several homes.

The Athenians and Leontines attempt to take Messana.
Hereupon the Leontines and their Confederates, together with the Athenians,
marched presently against Messana, as being now weakened, and assaulted it, the
Athenians with their Fleet, by the Haven; and the Landforces, at the Wall to
the Field. But the Messanians, and certain Locrians with Demoteles, who after
this loss had been left there in Garrison, issuing forth, and falling
suddenly upon them, put a great part of the Leontines Army to flight, and slew
many; but the Athenians, seeing that, disbarked, Messanians now in disorder,
chased them again into the City. Then they erected a Trophie, and put over to
Rhegium. After this, the Grecians of Sicily warred one upon another, without
the Athenians.

The Athenians are much troubled to watch the Island.
All this while the Athenians at Pylus besieged the Lacedaemonians in the Island;
and the Army of the Peloponnesians in the Continent remained still upon the
place. This keeping of Watch was exceeding painful to the Athenians, in
respect of the want they had, both of Corn and Pylus, and no great one. And
the greatest number turned up the gravel, and drunk such water as they were
The water which is found by digging in the Sea-sands is commonly fresh, being
strained, and so purged of the saltness in the passage of the water through
the sand, but not so good as further off from the Sea.
like to find there. They were also scanted of room for their Camp; and
their Galleys not having place to ride in, they were forced by turns, some to
stay ashore, and others to take their victual, and lie off at Anchor. But
their greatest discouragement was, the time which they had stayed there, longer
then they had thought to have done; for they thought to have famished them The
shift of the Lacedaemonians to relieve the besieged with victual.
The cause hereof were the Lacedaemonians, who had to the people of the
Country about.
proclaimed that any man that would, should carry in Meal, Wine, Cheese, and
all other esculents necessary for a Siege, into the Island, appointing for the
same a great reward of silver: and if any Helote should carry in any thing,
they promised him liberty. Hereupon diverse with much danger, imported
victual; but especially the Helotes, who putting off from all parts of
Peloponnesus, wheresoever they chanced to be, came Helotes were nothing tender
in putting ashoare* for they ran their Galleys on ground, valued at a price
in money, and the men of Arms also watched at all the landing places of the
Island. But as many as made attempt when the weather was calm, were
intercepted. There were also such as could diue, that swam over into the Island
A medicine for hunger and thirst, not meat. Scholiastes.
Poppy, tempred with Honey, and pounded Lintseed: whereof some at the first
passed unseen, but were afterward watched. So that on either part they used
all possible art, one side to send over food, the other to apprehend those that
carried it.

The People of Athens being advertised of the state of their Army, how it was
in distress, The Athenians are angry, that their Army is detained so long in
the siege of the Island.
and that victual was transported into the Island, knew not what they should
do to it, and feared lest Winter should overtake them in their Peloponnesus,
and in a desert place withal, would be a thing impossible, but also that they
should be unable to send forth so many things as were requisite, though it were
Summer; and again, that the parts thereabout being without Harbor, there
would be no place to lie at Anchor in against them, but that the Watch there
ceasing of it self, the men would by that means escape, or in some foul
weather be carried away in the same Boats that brought them meat. But that
which they feared Lacedaemonians seemed to have some assurance of them already,
because they sent no more to negotiate about them. And they repented now, that
they had not accepted of the Peace. Cleon to avoid the envy of hindering the
peace, engages himself ere he was aware, to fetch those that were besieged
in the Island, home to Athens.
But Cleon knowing himself to be the man suspected for hindering the
agreement, said, that they who brought the news, reported not the truth.
Whereupon, they that came thence, aduising them, if they would not believe it,
to send to view the estate of the Army, he and Theogenes were chosen by the
Athenians to view it. But when he saw that he must of force Athenians, seeing
them inclined of themselves, to send Nicias the son of Niceratus, then (...),
The Magistrate to whose authority was committed the leuying and mustering of
Soldiers.
General, upon malice, and with language of reproach. Saying it was easy, if
the Leaders were men, to go and take them there in the Island. And that
himself, if he had the Command, Cleon undertakes to fetch those in the Island
prisoners to Athens.
would do it. But Nicias, seeing the Athenians to be in a kind of tumult
against Cleon, for that Cleon supposing at first that he gave him this leave
but in words, was ready to accept it; but when he knew he would give him the
authority in good earnest, then he shrunk back, and said, that not he, but
Nicias was General; being now indeed afraid, and hoping that he durst not have
given over the office to him. But then, Nicias again bade him do it, and gave
over his Pylus, and called the Athenians to witness it. They (as is the
fashion of the multitude) the more Cleon declined the Voyage, Cleon taken at
his word, would have declined the employment, but cannot
and went back from his word, pressed Nicias so much the more to resign his
his power to leuy Soldiers.
power to him, and cried out upon Cleon to go. Insomuch as not knowing how to
disengage himself of his word, he undertook the Voyage, and stood forth,
saying, that he feared not the Lacedaemonians, and that he would not carry any
man with him out of the City, but only the Lemnians and Imbrians that then
Aenus, and 400. Archers out of other places, and with these, he said, added to
the Soldiers that were at Pylus already, he would within twenty days, either
fetch away the Lacedaemonians alive, or kill them upon the place.

A glorious boast of Cleon well taken.
This vain speech moved amongst the Athenians some laughter, and was heard with
great content of the wiser sort. For of two benefits, the one must needs fall
out; either to be rid of Cleon, (which was their greatest hope) or
Lacedaemonians Athenians had by their voices decreed him the Voyage, he joined
unto himself Demosthenes, one of the Commanders at Pylus, and presently put to
Sea. He made choice of Demosthenes for his Companion, because he heard that
he also, of himself, had a purpose to set his Soldiers a land in the I Will.
For the Army having suffered much by the straightness of the place, and being
rather the besieged, then the besieger, had a great desire to put the matter to
the hazard of a Battle: confirmed The reason why Demosthenes durst not land in
the Island to subdue the besieged by fight.
and (by reason it had lain ever desert) without path, they were before the
more afraid, and thought it the advantage of the Enemy; for assaulting them
out of sight, they might annoy a very great Army that should offer to come
aland. For their errors, being in the Wood, and their preparation could not so
well have been discerned: whereas all the faults of their own Army should
have been in sight. So that the Enemy might have set upon them suddenly, in
Lacedaemonians at hand in the thick Woods, the fewer, and skillful of the
ways, he thought would be too hard for the many and unskillful. Besides,
their own Army being great, it might receive an overthrow before they could
know of it, because they could not see where it was needful to relieve one
another.

These things came into his head, especially from the Aetolia. Which in part
also happened, by occasion of the Woods. But the The Athenian Soldiers.
Soldiers, for want of room, having been forced to put in at the outside of
the Island, to dress their dinners with a watch before them, and one of them
having set fire on the Wood, it burnt on by little and little, and the Wind
afterward rising, the most of it was burnt before they were aware. The wood of
the Island burnt by accident.
By this accident, Demosthenes the better discerning that the Lacedaemonians
were more then he had inagined, having before, by victual sent unto them,
thought them not so Athenians utmost care, and as having better commodity of
landing in the Island, then before he Cleon arriueth at Pylus.
And Cleon, who had sent a Messenger before to signify his coming, came
himself also with those forces which he had required, unto Pylus. When they
were both together, first they sent a Herald to the Camp in the Continent, to
know if they would command those in the Island to deliver up themselves and
their Arms without battle, to be held with easy imprisonment, till some
agreement were made touching the maine War. Athenians for one day held their
hands, but the next day, having put aboard upon a few Galleys, all their men of
Arms, they put off in the night, The Athenians invade the Island:
and landed a little before day on both sides of the Island, both from the
Main, and from the Haven, to the number of about 800 men of Arms, and marched
upon high speed toward the foremost watch of the Island. For thus the
Lacedaemonians lay quartered. In this foremost watch were about thirty men of
Arms. The midst, and euenest part of the Island, and about the water, was
Epitadas their Captain, with the greatest part of the whole number. And
another part of them, which were not many, kept the last guard toward Pylus,
which place to the Sea-ward was on a Cliffe, and least assaileable by Land. For
there was also a certain Fort which was old, and made of chosen, not of hewne
stones, which they thought would stand them in stead in case of violent
retreat. Thus they were quartered. Now the Athenians presently killed those of
the foremost guard, And kill those that were in the first and most remote watch
from Pylus.
(which they so ran to) in their Cabins, and as they were Viz the light-armed.
rest of the Army also landed, out of somewhat more then 70 Galleys, every one
with such Arms as he had; being all that rowed* (except only the Thalamij.
There were three ranks of (...) amongst the Athenians, the uppermost called
Thranitae, the second Zygitae, and the ^ast Thalami^ae, or Thalamij. In the
Gally called a Bir^me, there were no Ze^gi^^^, in a (...) were all 3. ranks,
in a Quadrireme and upwards, all the middle ranks were Zenguae: only the
uppermost were Thranitae, and (...) Thalamitae.
Thalamij) eight hundred Ar^hers; Targuetiers as many; all the Messenians that
came to aid them, and as many of them besides, as held any place about Pylus,
except only the Garrison of the Fort it self* Demosthenes then The Athenians
divide themselves into many troops, against the maine body of the
Lacedaemonian Soldiers.
or against what part to set themselves in battle, and be subject to the shot
of the multitude from every part; and when they should make head against those
that fronted them, be charged behind; and when they should turn to those that
were opposed to their flancks, be charged at once both behind and before. And
which way soever they marched, the light-armed, and such as were meanliest
Demosthenes, both intended his landing at first, and afterward ordered his
forces accordingly in the action. The fight between the Athenians, and the
Lacedaemonians, in the middle of the Island.
Those that were about Epitad^s, who were the greatest part of those in the
Island, when they saw that the foremost guard was slain, and that the Army
marched toward them, put themselves Athenians, with intent to charge them; for
these were opposed to them in front, and the light-armed Soldiers on their
flancks, and at their backs. But they could neither come to join with them,
nor any way make use of their The skill of fighting, a standing fight, was
thought a peculiar virtue of the Lacedaemonians, as the Sea Fight was thought
to the Athenians.
skill. For both the light-armed Soldiers kept them off, with shot from either
side, and the men of Arms advanced not. Where the light-armed Soldiers
approached nearest, they were driven back; but returning, they charged them
afresh, being men armed lightly, and that Lacedaemonians in their Armor, could
not follow them. Thus for a little while they skirmished one against another, a
far off. But when the Lacedaemonians were no longer able to run out after
them, where they charged, these light-armed Soldiers seeing them less earnest
in chasing them, and taking courage chiefly from their sight, as being many
times their number, and having also been used to them so much, as not to think
them now because they were to fight against the Lacedaemonians, had
Lacedaemonians side, for their (...). A kind of quilted Armor, or of Stuff
close beaten like ^^lt.
Iackes now gave Lacedaemonians as they could intercept in their retreat, they
slew; but the most of them recovered the Fort, The Lacedaemonians retire to the
Fort, where the last guard was placed.
and together with the watch of the same, put themselves in order to defend it
in all parts that were subject to assault. The Athenians following, could not
now encompasse and hemme them in, for the strong situation of the place, but
assaulting them in the face, The Athenians assault them there.
sought only how to put them from the wall. And thus they held out a long
time, Lacedaemonians defended themselves easilier now then before, because they
were not now encompassed upon their flancks. When there was no end of the
business, the Captain of the Messenians said unto Cleon, and Demosthenes,
that they spent their labor there in vain, and that if they would deliver
unto him a part of the Archers, and light-armed Soldiers, to Lacedaemonians,
that he might not be discovered; making his approach under the Cliffes of the
Island, where they were continual; In which part, (...) the natural strength
thereof, they kept no watch; Some of the Athenians climb up behind the
Lacedaemonians vn^eene, and appear at their backs.
and with much labor, and hardly unseen, came behind them. And appearing
suddenly from above at their backs, both terrified the Enemies with the sight
of what they Athenians with the sight of what they expected. And the
Lacedaemonians being now charged with their shot both before and behind, were
in the same case (to compare small matters with great) that they were in at
5000. Lacedaemonians, under their King Leonida^, in the Stre^ght ^f Thermopyle,
withstood 300000. Persians, till they were circumuented, and charged both
before and behind, and so all slain. Herod. lib. 7.
Thermopylae. For then they were slain by the Persians, shut up on both sides
in a narrow path. And these now being charged on both sides, could make good
the place no longer, but fighting, few against many, and being weak withal
for want of food, were at last forced to give ground, and the Athenians

But Cleon and Demosthenes, knowing that the more they gave back, the faster
they would be killed by their Army, staid the fight, and held in the
Soldiers, with desire to carry them alive to Athens, in case their spirits
were so much broken, and their courage abated by this misery, as upon
Proclamation made, they would be content to deliver up their Arms. So they
proclaimed, that they should deliver up their Arms and themselves Athenians,
to be disposed of as to them should seem good.

Upon hearing hereof, The Lacedaemonians yield.
the most of them threw down their Bucklers, and shook their hands above
their heads, signifying their acceptance of what was proclaimed. Whereupon a
Truce was made, and they came to treat, Cleon and Demosthenes of one side, and
Styphon the son of Pharax, on the other side. For of them that had Command
there, Epitadas, who was the first, was slain; and Hippagretes, who was chosen
to succeed This manner of s^bordaining diverse Commanders to be chief in
succession* was in those times much used.
Law, in case the others should miscarry. Styphon, and those that were
Lacedaemonians in the Continent, to know what they there would advise them to;
but the Athenians letting none go thence, called for Heralds out of the
Continent; and the question having been twice or thrice asked, the last of the
Lacedaemonians that came over from the Continent, brought them this Answer: The
Lacedaemonians yield up their Arms, and are carried prisoners to Athens.
The Lacedaemonians bid you take advice touching your selves, such as you shall
think good, provided you do nothing dishonourably. Whereupon having
consulted, they yielded up themselves and their Arms; and the Athenians
attended Lacedaemonians sent over a Herald, and took up the bodies of their
dead. The number of the slain, and of the prisoners.
The number of them that were slain and taken alive in the Island, was thus.
There went over into the Island in all, four hundred and twenty men of Arms;
of these were sent away alive, three hundred wanting eight, and the rest
slain. Of those that lived, there were of the City it self of Sparta, one
hundred and Athenians there dyed not many, for it was no standing fight.

The whole time of the siege of these men in the Island, from the fight of the
Galleys, to the fight in the Island, was 72. days; of which, for 20. days,
victual was allowed to be carried to them, that is to say, in the time that
the Ambassadors were away, that went about the Peace; in the rest, they were
fed by such only as put in thither by stealth, and yet there was both Corn
and other Epitadas had distributed it more sparingly then he needed to have
done. So the Athenians and the Peloponnesians departed from Pylus, and went
home both of them with their Armies. And the promise of Cleon, as senseless as
it was, took effect: For within twenty days he brought home the men, as he
had undertaken.

Of all the accidents of this War, this same fell out the most contrary to
the opinion of the Grecians. For they expected that the Lacedaemonians should
never, The yelding of the Lacedaemonians was contrary to the opinion had of
their virtue.
neither by Athenian Confederates, asked one of the prisoners, by way of
insulting, if they which were slain, were valiant men; he answered, that a
Spindle (meaning an Arrow) deserved to be valued at a high rate, if it could
know who was a good man. Signifying, that the slain were such as the Stones
and Arrows chanced to light

After the arrival of the men, the Athenians ordered, The Lacedaemonian
prisoners kept in bonds at Athens, to be made use of in making the peace, or
else upon the first invasion of Attica to be slain.
that they should be kept in bonds, till there should be made some agreement;
and if before that, the Peloponnesians should invade their Territory, then to
bring them forth and kill them. They took order also in the same Assembly, for
the settling of the Garrison at Pylus. And the Messenians of Naupactus, having
sent thither such men of their own as were fittest for the purpose, as to their
native Country, (for Pylus is in that Country which belonged once to the
Messenians) infested Laconia with Robberies, and did them much other mischief,
as being of the same Language.

The Lacedaemonians, not having in times past been acquainted with robberies,
and such War as that, and because their Helotes ran over to the Enemy,
fearing also some greater innovation in the Country, took the matter much to
heart; and though they would not be known of it to the Athenians, yet they
sent Ambassadors, and endeavored to get the restitution both of the Fort of
Pylus, and of their men. But the Athenians aspired to greater matters; Pylus.

Presently after this, the same Summer, Nicias warreth in the Territory of
Corinth with good fortune.
the Athenians with 80. Galleys, 2000. men of Arms of their own City, and 200.
Horse, in boats built for transportation of Horses, made War upon the Territory
of Corinth. There went also with them, Milesians, Andrians, and Carystians of
their Confederates. The General of the whole Army was Nicias the son of
Niceratus, with 2. other in Commission with Chersonesus and Rheitus, on that
shore, above which stands the Hill Solygius, whereon the Dorians in
Corinthians in the City of Corinth, that were then Aeolians, and upon which
there stands now a Village, called also Solygia. From the shore where the
Galleys came in, this Village is distant twenty furlongs, and the City of
Corinth, sixty, and the Isthmus twenty. The Corinthians hearing of their
coming* assemble then forces to hinder their landing.
The Corinthians having long before from Argos had intelligence, that an Army
of the Athenians was coming against them, came all of them with their forces
to the Isthmus, (save only such as dwelt without the Isthmus, and five hundred
Garrison Soldiers, Ambracia and Leucadia) all the rest of military age came
forth, to attend the Athenians, where they should put in. But when the
Athenians had put to shore in the night unseen, and that advertisement thereof
was given them by signs put up into the air, they left the one half of their
Forces in Cenchrea, lest the Athenians should go against Crommyon, and with
the other half made haste to meet them. The Athenians and Corinthians fight.
Battus, one of their Commanders, (for there were two of them present at the
Battle) with one Squadron, went toward the Village of Solygia, being an open
Lycophron with the rest charged the Enemy. And first they gave the onset on
the right wing of the Athenians, which was but newly landed before Chersonesus,
and afterward they charged likewise the rest of the Army. The Battle was
hot, and at hand-stroakes: And the right wing of the Athenians and Carystians
(for of these consisted their utmost Files) sustained the charge of the
Corinthians, and with much ado drove them back. But as they retired, they
came up, (for the place was all rising ground) to a dry Wall, and from thence,
being on A Hymn accustomed to be sung, one before Battle, another after
victory.
Poean, came again close to them; whom when the Athenians abode, the Battle
was again at hand-stroakes. But a certain Band of Corinthians that came in,
to the aid of their own left wing, put the right wing of the Athenians to
flight, and chased them to the Seaside. But then from their Galleys they
turned head again, both the Athenians, and the Carystians. The other part of
their Army continued fighting on both sides, especially the right wing of the
Corinthians, where Lycophron fought against Athenians: for they expected
Athenians would attempt to go to Solygia; so they held each other to it a long
time, neither side giving ground. But in the end (for that the Athenians had
Horse men, which did them great service, seeing the other had none) the
Corinthians were put to flight, The Corinthians are put to ^light.
and retired to the Hill, where they laid down their Arms, and descended no
more, but there rested. In this Retreat, the greatest part of their right wing
was slain, and amongst others, Lycophron, one of the Generals. But the rest of
the Army being in this manner, neither much urged, nor retiring in Athenians
seeing them come no more down to Battle, rifled the dead bodies of the Enemy,
and took up their own, and presently erected a Trophie on the place. That
half of the Corinthians that lay at Cenchrea, to watch the Athenians, that
they went not against Crommyon, saw not this Battle, for the Hill Oneius; but
when they saw the dust, and so knew what was in hand* they went presently to
their aid: so did also the It was said before, that all the Corinthians of
military age were come forth.
old men of Corinth from the City, when they Athenians, when all these were
coming upon them together, imagining them to have been the succors of the
neighboring Cities of Peloponnesus, retired speedily to their Galleys;
carrying with them the booty, and the bodies of their dead, all save two, which
not finding, they left. Being aboard, they crossed over to the Islands on the
other side, and from thence To fetch off the dead by a Herald, was a confession
of being the weaker; but yet Nicias chooses rather to renounce the reputation
of victory, then omit an act of piety. Besides, the people took merua^lously
^ll the neglect of the dead bodies, as may appear by their sentence on the
Captains after the Battle at A^ginusae.
sent a Herald, and fetched away those two dead bodies which they left behind.
There were slain in this battle, Corinthians, two hundred and twelve, and
Athenians,

The Athenians putting off from the Islands, The Athenians waste other parts of
the same Coast.
sailed the same day to Crommyon, in the Territory of Corinth, distant from the
City a hundred and twenty Furlongs: where anchoring, they wasted the Fields,
and stayed all that night. The next day, they sailed along the shore, first to
to the Territory of Epidaurus, whereinto they made some little incursion from
their Galleys; and then went to Methone, between Epidaurus and Troezen, and
there took in the Isthmus of Chersonnesus with a Wall, and placed a Garrison
Troezen, Halias, and Epidaurus; and when they had fortified this place, they
returned home with

The execution of the Corcyraean banished men, and end of that sedition.
About the same time that these things were in doing, Eurymedon and Sophocles,
after their departure from Pylus with the Athenian Fleet, toward Sicily,
arriving at Corcyra, joined with those of the City, and made War upon those
Corcyraeans, which lay encamped upon the Hill Istone, and which, after the
sedition, had come over, and both made themselves masters of the Field, and
much annoyed the City: and having assaulted their fortification, took it. But
the men all in one troop, escaped to a certain high Truce granted to the
banished men, with condition that the same should be void, if any of them
offered to make an escape.
That they should deliver up the Strangers that aided them; and that they
themselves, having rendered their Arms, should stand to the judgment of the
People of Athens. Hereupon the Generals granted them truce, and transported
them to the Island of Ptychia, to be there in custody till the Athenians
should send for them; with this condition, That if any one of them should be
taken running away, then the truce to be broken for them all.

The fraud of the Corcyraeans to entrappe the banished men.
But the Patrons of the Commons of Corcyra, fearing Athenians would not kill
them when they came thither, devise against them this plot. To some few of
those in the Island, they secretly send their friends, and instruct them to say,
as if, forsooth, it were for good will, that it was their best course, with all
speed, to get away, (and withal, to offer to provide them of a Boat) for that
the Athenian Commanders intended verily to deliver them to the Corcyraean
people.

The truce broken, and the outlawes put into the hands of the Commons.
When they were persuaded to do so, and that a Boat was treacherously prepared,
as they rowed away, they Corcyraeans. It did much further this Plot, that to
make the pretext seem more serious, and the agents in it less fearful, the
Athenian Generals gave out, that they were nothing pleased that the men should
be carried home by others, whilst they themselves were to go into Sicily, and
the honor of it be ascribed to those that should conuoy them. The Corcyraeans
take the Outlawes out by scores, and make them pass the Pikes.
The Corcyraeans having received them into their hands, imprisoned them in a
certain Edifice, from whence afterward they took

They had taken out of the Room in this manner, and slain, to the number of
threescore, before they that remained knew it, who thought they were but
removed, and carried to some other place. The outlawes refuse to go out to
execution.
But when they knew the truth, some or other having told them, they then cried
Athenians, and said, that if they would themselves kill them, they should do
it; and refused any more to go out of the Room, nor would suffer, they said,
as long as they were able, any man to come in. But neither had the Corcyraeans
any purpose to force entrance by the door, but getting up to the top of the
House, uncovered the roof, and threw Tyles, and shot Arrows at them. They in
prison defended themselves as well as they could, They kill themselves.
but many also slew themselves with the Arrows shot by the Enemy, by
thrusting them into their throats, and strangled The miserable end of the
banished men, which was also the end of the sedition.
And having continued most part of the night, (for night ouertooke them in the
action) partly strangling themselves, by all such means as they found, and
partly shot at from above, they all perished. When day came, the Corcyraeans
laid them one (...), signifies properly, after the manner that Matts or
Hurdles are platted.
acrosse another in Carts, and carried them out of the City. And of their
Wives, as many as were taken in the Fortification, they made bond-women. In
this manner were the Corcyraeans Istone.
Hill, brought to destruction by the Commons. And thus ended this farre-spred
sedition, for so much as concerned this present War: for of other seditions
there remained nothing worth the relation. And the Athenians being arrived in
Sicily, The Athenians take Anactorium from the Corinthians, and put it into the
hands of the Acarnanians
whither they were at first bound, prosecuted the War there, together with
the rest of their Confederates of those parts.

In the end of this Summer, the Athenians that lay at Naupactus, went forth
with an Army, and took the City of This City belnoged to the Corcyraeans and
Corinthians in common, but a little before this War, the Corinthians carry
away captives the men that were in it, and possess it alone: and those
Corcyraeans wrought the Sedition before related.
Anactorium, belonging to the Corinthians, and lying at Ambracian Gulf, by
Treason. And when they had put forth the Corinthians, the Acarnanians held it
with a Colonie sent thither from all parts of their The end of the seventh
Summer.
And so this Summer ended.

(...), an Ambassador from the King of Per^ia to the Lacedaemonians,
intercepted, and brought to Athens, and his Letters (...).
The next Winter, Aristides the son of Archippus, one of the Commanders of a
Fleet which the Athenians had sent out to gather Tribute from their
Confederates, apprehended (...), in the Town of Eion, upon the River (...)
going from the King to Lacedaemon. When he was brought to Athens, the Athenians
translated his Letters out of the Assyrian Language into Greek, The King of
Persia's Letters to the Lacedaemonians translated into Greek, and read at
Athens.
and read them* wherein* amongst many other things that were written to the
Lacedaemonians, the principal was this, That he knew not what they meant; for
many Ambassadors came, but they spoke not the same things: If therefore they
had any thing to say certain, they should send somebody to him, with this
Persian. But Artaphernes they send afterward away in a Gallie, with
Ambassadors of their own, to Ephesus. And there encountering the news, that
King Artaxerxes, the the son of Xerxes, was lately dead, (for about that time
he dyed) they returned home.

The Chians are suspected, and forced to pull down their new built Walls.
The same Winter also, the Chians demolished their new Wall, by command of the
Athenians, upon suspicion Athenians their faith, and the best security they
could, to the intent they should let them be as they were. Thus ended this
Winter, and the seventh year of this War, written by Thucydides.

THE EIGHTH YEAR.
The next Summer, in the very beginning, at a change of the Moon, the Sun was
eclipsed in part; and in the beginning of the same Month, happened an
Earthquake.

The Lesbian Outlawes make war upon the Athenians dominions, in the Continent
near Lesbos.
At this time, the Mitylenian, and other Lesbian Outlawes, Peloponnesus, and
some which they leauied where they were, seize on Rhoetium, and for two
thousand Phocean Staters, render it again, without doing them other harm.
After this they came with their Forces to Antander, and took that City also
by Treason. They had likewise a Design, to set free the rest of the Cities
called Littorales. Cities situate on the Seashore.
Actaeae, which were in the occupation formerly of the Mitylenians, but subject
to the Athenians: but above all the rest, Antander, which when they had once
gotten, (for Ida was above their heads) they might issue from thence with other
their preparation, and infest Lesbos which was near, and bring into their
power the Aeolique Towns in the Continent. And this were those men preparing.

The Athenians the same Summer, with sixty Galleys, The Athenians led by
Nicias, subdue Cythera, an Island over against Laconia, and inhabited by
Lacedaemonians
2000 men of Arms, and a few horsemen, taking with them also the Milesians,
and some other of their Confederates made War upon Cythera, under the Conduct
of Nicias the son of Niceratus, Nicostratus the son of Diotrephes, Autocles
the son of Tolmaeus. This Now Cerigo.
Cythera is an Island upon the Coast of Laconia, over against Malea. The
Inhabitants be Lacedaemonians, of the same that dwell about them.

And every year there goes over unto them from Sparta a Magistrate called The
Judge of Cythera.
Cytherodices. They likewise sent over men of Arms from time to time, to lie
in Garrison there, and took much care of the place. For it was the place where
their (...), ships of the round form of building. Merchant ships.
ships used to put in from Egypt, and Lib^^, and by which Laconia was the
less infested by Sicilian and Creticke Seas: The Athenians arriving with their
Army, with ten of their Galleys, and 2000 men of Arms of the Milesians, took
a town lying to the Sea, called Scandea, and with the rest of their forces,
having landed in the parts of the Island toward Malea, marched into the City
it self of the Cythereans, lying likewise to the Sea. The Cythereans they
found standing all in Arms prepared for them; and after the battle began, the
Cythereans for The Cythereans yield to Nicias, referring themselves to the
people of Athens for any thing but death.
and afterward compounded with Nicias and his fellow-Commanders, That the The
Athenian people.
Athenians should determine of them whatsoever they thought good, but death.
Nicias had had some conference with certain of the Cythereans before; which
was also a cause that those things which concerned the accord both now and
afterward, were both the sooner, and with the more favor dispatched. The
Athenians remove them from their seats.
For the Athenians did but remove the Cythereans, and that also because they
were Lacedaemonians, Laconia. After this composition, having as they went by
received Scandea, a Town lying upon the Haven, and put a Cythereans, they
sailed to Asine and most of the Towns upon the Seaside. And going sometimes
a-land, and staying where they saw cause, wasted the Country for about seven
days together. The Lacedaemonians though they saw the Athenians had Cythera,
The Lacedaemonians begin to be dejected with their great losses.
and expected withal that they would come to Land, in the same manner, in
their own Territory, yet came not forth with their united forces to resist
them; but distributed a number of men of Arms into sundry parts of their
Territory, to guard it wheresoever there was need, Sphacteria, where their
(...) were taken, and ^arried to Athens.
Island, and the Athenians having gotten Pylus and Cythera, and as being on all
sides encompassed with a busy and unavoidable War; In so much that contrary
to their custom they ordained 400 The Lacedaemonians (...) their armed (...),
or men of Arms, in (...) valor and skill in f^g^t, they gloried much, as a
(...), and as for (...), and light-armed (...) made less (...) such (...) as
were brought in (...) Confederates.
Horsemen, and some Archers. And if ever they were fearful in matter of
War, they were so now, because it was contrary to their own way, to contend
in a Nauall War, and against Athenians, who Sphacteria.
Island, they durst the less to hazard battle; and thought that whatsoever
they should go about, would miscarry, because their minds not used formerly
to losses, could now warrant them nothing. The Athenians waste the Coast of
Laconia.
As the Athenians therefore wasted the Maritime parts of the Country* and
disbarked near any Cortyta, and Aphrodisia, and frighted in, the straggling
rabble of light-armed Soldiers, but when the men of Arms had received them,
it retired again, with the loss of a few whom they also rifled of their
Arms. And the Athenians, after they had erected a Trophie, put off again, and
went to Cythera. From thence they sailed about to Epidaurus, called So called
from (...), a (...), because it is full of (...). Maluasia.
Limera, and Thyrea, which is of the Territory called Cynuria, The Ath^nians
burn Thyrea, slay and make prisoners of all the Inhabitants being Aeginetae.
but is nevertheless the middle border between Argia and Laconia. The
Lacedaemonians possessing this City, gave the same for an habitation to the
Aeginetae, after they were driven out of Aegina, both for the benefit they had
received from them, about the time of the Earthquake, and of the insurrection
of the Helot^s, and also for that being subject to the Athenians, they had
nevertheless gone ever the same way with the Lacedaemonians. When the
Athenians were coming toward them, the Aeginetae left the Wall which
Lacedaemonians had distributed into the several parts of the Country, and
these, though they helped them to build the Fort below, yet would not now enter
with them into the Town, (though the Aeginetae entreated them) apprehending
danger in being coopt up within the Walls; and therefore retiring into the
highest ground, lay still Athenians came in, and marching up, presently, with
their whole Army, won Thyrea, and burnt it, and destroyed whatsoever was in
it. The Aeginetae, as many as were not slain in the affray, they carried
prisoners to Athens; amongst whom Tantalus also, Tantalus a Lacedaemonian
Captain carried prisoner to Athens.
the son of Patroclus, Captain of such Lacedaemonians as were amongst them,
was wounded* and taken alive. They carried likewise with them some few men of
Cythera, whom for safeties sake they thought good to remove into some These
therefore, the Athenians decreed, The Decree of the Athenian people concerning
the Cythereans, the Aeginetae taken in Thyrea, and Tantalus a Lacedaemonian
that was amongst them.
should be placed in the Cyclades. The Aeginetae put to death.
Islands. And that the rest of the Cythereans, at the Tribute of four Talents,
should inhabit their own Territory. That the Aeginetae, as many as they had
taken, (out of former inueterate hatred) should be put to death. And that
Tantalus should be put in bonds amongst those Lacedaemonians that were taken in
the Sphacteria. The Sicilians make a general peace, by the advice of
Hermocrates, and so dismiss the Athenians, that waited to take advantage of
their discord*
Island.

In Sicily the same Summer, was concluded a cessation of Arms, first, between
the Camarinaeans and the Geloans. But afterward the rest of the Sicilians,
assembling by Gela, held a Conference amongst themselves, for making of a
Peace: wherein, after many opinions delivered by men disagreeing, Hermocrates
the son of Hermon, a Syracusian, who also prevailed with them the most, spoke
unto the Assembly, to this effect.

THE ORATION OF HERMOCRATES for Peace.
MEN of Sicily, I am neither of the least City, nor of the most afflicted with
War, that am now to speak, and to Sicily. Touching War, how calamitous a
thing it is, to what end should a man, particularizing the evils thereof, make
a long speech before men that already know it? For neither does the not knowing
of them necessitate any man to enter into War, nor the fear of them, divert
any man from it, when he thinks it will turn to his advantage. But rather it
so falls out, that the one thinks the gain greater then the danger; and the
other prefers danger before present loss. But least they should both the one
and the other do it unseasonably, exhortations unto peace are profitable, and
will be very much worth to us, if we will follow them, at this present. Sicily
in general, now sought to be subdued (at least in my opinion) by the
Athenians. And you ought to think, that the Athenians are more urgent
perswaders of the Peace then any Grecians, the greatest power, lie here with a
few Galleys, to observe our errors, and by a lawful title of alliance,
hansomely to accommdate their natural hostility, to their best advantage. For
if we enter into a War, and call in these men, who are apt enough to bring
their Army in, vn^called, and if we weaken our selves at our own charges, and
withal cut out for them the dominion here, it is likely, when they shall see
us spent, they will sometime hereafter come upon us, with a greater Fleet, and
attempt to bring all these States into their subjection. Sicily, though we the
inhabitants thereof, be insidiated by the Athenians, as one body, is
nevertheless City against City in Sedition within it self. In contemplation
whereof, we ought, man with man, and City with City, to return again into
amity, and with one consent, to endeavor the safety of all Sicily; and not to
have this conceit, that though the The Dorians and Ioni^ans are two Nations,
(...) which almost (...) Greece (...). The Chalcidean^ and Athenians (...) and
the Lacedomonians and most of Peloponi^^^^ were Dorians. (...) that the
Chalcidean^ be thought safe, though (...) Athenians invaded Sicily* but the
Dorians not.
Dorians be the Athenians enemies, yet the The Dorians and Ioni^ans are two
Nations, (...) which almost (...) Greece (...). The Chalcidean^ and Athenians
(...) and the Lacedomonians and most of Peloponi^^^^ were Dorians. (...) that
the Chalcidean^ (...) he thought safe, though (...) Athenians invaded Sicily*
but the Dorians not.
Chalcideans are safe, as being of the race of the Ionians. Chalcideans. For
though they never received any aid by virtue of their League, from the
Chalcideans, yet have they on their part been more forward to help them, then
by the League they were bound unto. Indeed the Athenians, that covet and
meditate these things, are to be pardoned. I blame not those that are willing
to reign, but those that are most willing to be subject. For it is the nature
of man, every where to command such as give way, and to be shye of such
Athenians come not against us out of their own Country, but from theirs here,
that have called them in. And so, not war by War, but all our quarrels
shall be ended by peace, without trouble. And those that have been called in,
as they came with fair pretense to iniure us, so shall they with fair reason
be dismissed by us without their errand. And thus much for the profit that
will be found by aduising wisely concerning the Athenians. hunting after
revenge on such as had done them injury, and others Athenians present, and
taking these for hindrances sufficient, to have made us come short of what we
had severally conceived to effect, let us send away our enemies that houer over
us, and make an eternal peace amongst our selves, or if not that, then a
Truce, at least, for as long as may be, and put off our private quarrels to
some other time. In sum, let us know this, that following my counsel, we
shall every of us have our Cities free, whereby being Masters of our selves, we
shall be able to remunerate according to their merit, such as do us good or
harm. Whereas rejecting it and following the counsel of others, our
contention shall no more be how to be revenged, or at (...).
spite will I look to be followed as absolute in my will, and master of
Fortune, which I cannot command; but will also give way where it is reason. And
so I look the rest should do as well as I; and that of your selves, and not
forced to it by Dorian of another Dorian; and one Chalcidean of another of his
own race, or in sum, any one by another of us being neighbors, and cohabiters
of the same Region, encompassed by the Sea, and all called by one name
Sicilians. Who, as I conceive, will both war when it happens, and again by
common conferences make peace, by our own selves. But when Forrainers invade
us, we shall, if wise, unite all of us to encounter them; in as much as being
weakened singly, we are in danger universally. As for Confederates, let us
never hereafter, call in any, nor Arbitrators. For so shall Sicily attain
these two benefits, Athenians, and of Domestique War for the

Hermocrates having thus spoken, the Sicilians followed his advice, and agreed
amongst themselves, The substance of the conditions of the Peace in Sicily.
Camarana.
That the War should cease, every one retaining what they then presently
enjoyed. And that the Camarinaeans should have Morgantina, paying for the same
unto the Syracusians, a certain sum of money then assessed.

They that were Confederates with the Athenians, calling such of the Athenians
unto them, as were in authority, The Athenians depart Sicily, and their
Commanders punished as suspected to have left Sicily for a bribe.
And the Athenians approving it, they did so; and hereupon the Athenians
departed out of Sicily. The people of Athens, when their Generals came home
banished two, namely Pythadorus and Sophocles; and laid a Fine upon the third,
which was Eurymedon, as men that might have subdued the estates of Sicily, but
had been Nothing was more frequent in the Athenian Assemblies at this time,
then when things went amiss, to accuse one anther of bribery: for it was a
sure way to win favor with the people, who thought that nothing was able to
resist their power.
bribed to return. So great was their fortune at that time, that they thought
nothing could cross them, but that they might have achieved both easy,

The same Summer the Megareans in the City of Megara, pinched both by the
War of the Athenians, The Athenians attempt to take Megara by treason.
who invaded their Territory, with their whole forces, every year twice, and
by their own Outlawes from Pegae, who in a sedition driven out by the Commons,
grievously afflicted them with robberies, began to talk one to another, how it
Commons, The heads of the Commons do hinder the return of the Outlawes plot,
the betraying of the City to the Athenians.
fearing that they with the Commons, by reason of the miseries they were in
should not be able to carry it against the other side, made an offer to
Hippocrates the son of Ariphron* and Demosthenes the son of Aristhenes,
Commanders of the Athenian Army, to deliver them the City, as esteeming that
agreed, The plot laid by the Traitors for the putting of the Athenians into the
Town.
that first, the Athenians should possess themselves Long-walls, (these were
about eight furlongs in length, and reached from the City to Nisaea, their
Haven) thereby to cut of the aid of the Peloponnesians, in Nisaea, in which
(the better to assure Megara to the side) there lay no other Soldiers in
Garrison, but they. And then afterward, that these men, would attempt to
deliver them the City above, which would the more easily succeed, if that were
effected first. The Athenians therefore, after all was done, and said on both
sides, and every thing ready, sailed away by night to This Island lying before
the Haven Nisaea, made the Port, and the Athenians kept in it, an ordinary
Garrison, ever since they took it first, and could see all the Haven, and what
vessels lay in it, but could not enter.
Minoa, an Island of the Megareans, Hippocrates, and satte down in a certain
pit, out of which Bricks had been made for the walls, and which was not far
off. But they that were with the other Commander Demosthenes, light-armed
Plataeans, and others called Peripoli, lay in ambush at the Temple of Mars, not
so far off as the former. And none of the City perceived any thing of this,
but only such as had peculiar care to know the passages of this same night.
The plot of the Traitors, to give the Athenians the Long-wals.
When it was almost day, the Megarean Traitors did thus. They had been
accustomed long, as men that went out for To get booty from the Athenians.
booty, with leave of the Magistrates, Not the Gates of Megara, but the Gates
in the Long-wals near unto Nisaea, as appears by the Narration.
Gates, to carry out a little Boat, (...).
such as wherein the watermen used an Oar in either hand, and to conueigh it
by night, down the Ditch to the Seaside in a Cart; and in a Cart to bring it
back again, and set it within the Gates; to the end that the Athenians which
lay in Minoa, might not know where to watch for them, no Boat being to be seen
in the Haven. At this time was that Cart at the Gates, which was opened
according to custom, as for the To take it in, for it was almost morning.
Boat. And the Athenians, seeing it Plataeans, and Peripoli, The Athenians win
the Longwals.
that were with Demosthenes, ran in, in that same place where the Trophie is
now extant; and fighting presently within the Gates (for those Peloponnesians
that were Those that watched in that part of Nisaea, which was nearest to this
Gate of the Long-wals.
nearest heard the stir) the Plataeans overcame those that resisted, and made
good the Gates for the Athenian

Athenian Soldiers, as they entered, went up every one to the wall, and a few
of the Peloponnesians that were of the Garrison, made head, at first, and
fought, and were some of them slain, but the most of them took their heels;
fearing in the night, both the enem^ that charged them, and also the traitors
of the Megareans that fought against them, apprehending that all the Megareans
in general had betrayed them. It chanced also that the Athenian Herald, of his
own discretion, made Proclamation, that if any Megarean would take part with
the Athenians, he should Peloponnesians heard this, they stayed no longer, but
seriously believing that they jointly warred upon them, fled into Nisaea. As
soon as it was day, the walls being now taken, and the Megareans being in a
tumult within the City, they that had treated with the Athenians, and with
them, the rest* The Traitors give advice to open the Gates and give battle.
as many as were conscious, said it was fit to have the gates opened, and to
go out and give the enemy battle. Now it was agreed on between them, that
when the Of the City it self of Megara.
gates were open, the Athenians should rush in. And that themselves would be
Athens, and 600 horsemen which according to the appointment were to come to
the^, having marched all night, were already arrived. The Treason discovered.
When they had besmeared themselves and were now about the gates one of those
who were privy discovered the co^spiracy to the rest that were not. These
joining their strength, came all together to the gates, denying The Athenians
failing of Megara, take Nisaea, and demolisheth the Long-walls.
The Athenian Co^manders, knowing some cross accident had happened, and that
they could not take the City by assault, fell to Nisaea with a wall, which if
they could take before aid came, they thought Megara would the sooner yield.
Iron was quickly brought unto them from Athens, and Masons, and whatsoever else
was necessary. And beginning ^
wall they had won, when they had built cross over to the other side, from
thence both ways they drew it on to the Sea on either side Nisaea, and having
distributed the wo^^e amongst the Army, as well the Wall as the Ditch, they
served themselves of the stones and brickes of the suburbs, and having felled
trees, and timber, they supplied what was defective, with a strong Palissado;
the houses also themselves of the suburbs, when they had put on battlements,
served them for a fortification. All that day they wrought, the next day about
Evening they had Nisaea, seeing themselves to want victual, (for they had none
but what came day by day from the City above) and without hope that the
Peloponnesians could quickly come to relieve them, conceiving also that the
Megareans were their enemies, compounded with the Athenians on these terms, To
be dismissed every one at a certain ransom in money; to deliver up their
arms; and the Lacedaemonians, both the Captain, and whosoever of them else
was within, to be at discretion of the Athenians. Having thus agreed, they went
out. And the Athenians, when they had Not pulled them down (...) so far, as
(...) to (...) defense to any part of the City (...) to the walls of the City.
broken off the Longwals from the City Megara, and taken in Nisaea, prepared
for what was further to be done. Brasidas the son of Tellis, a Lacedaemonian,
happened at this time to be about Sicyon and Corinth, preparing of an army to
go into Thrace. Brasidas saves Megara from being rendered to the Athenians.
And when he heard of the taking of the Longwals, fearing what might become of
the Peloponnesians in Nisaea, and lest Megara should be won, sent unto the
Boeotians, willing them to meet him speedily with their forces at Tripodiscus
(a village of Megaris, so called, at the foot of the hill Geranea) and marched
presently himself with 2700 men of arms of Corinth, 400 of Phlius, Sicyon,
and those of his own, all that he had yet levied; thinking to have found
Nisaea yet untaken. When he heard the contrary (for he set first toward
Tripodiscus in the night) with 300 men chosen out of the whole army, (...) into
the City.
before news should arrive of his coming, he came unseen of the Athenians
that lay by the Sea side, to the City of Megara, pretending in word, and
intending also in good earnest, if he could have done it, to attempt upon
Nisaea, but desiring to get into Megara to confirm it, and required to be let
in, Nisaea. But the Megarean Factions being afraid, The Pa^rons of the Commons.
one, lest he should bring The Nobility.
other, lest the Commons, out of this very fear, should assault them, whereby
the City (being at battle within it self, and the Athenians lying in wait so
near) would be lost, received him not, but resolved on both sides to sit
still, and attend the success. For both the one faction and the other
expected, that the Athenians, and these that came to succor the City, would
join battle; and then they might with more safety, such as were the favored
side, turn unto them that had the victory. And Brasidas, not prevailing,
Brasidas goes back to Tripodiscus.
went back to the rest of the At Tripodiscus.
Army. Betimes in the morning, arrived Boeotians, having also intended to come
to the aid of Megara, before Brasidas sent, as esteeming the danger to
concern themselves, and were then with their whole forces come forward as
far as Plataea. But when they had received also this message, they were a
great deal the more encouraged; and sent 2200 men of Arms, and 200 horse, to
Brasidas, but went back with the greater part of their Army. The Boeotians
come with their forces, and join with Brasidas.
The whole Army being now together of no less then 6000 men of Arms. And the
Athenian men of Arms lying indeed in good order, about Nisaea, and the Sea
side, Boeotian horsemen came unexpected upon the light-armed Soldiers, and
drove them toward the Sea. The Boeotian, and Athenian hors^ skirmish.
For in all this time till now, there had come no aid at all to the Megareans
from any place. But when the Athenian horse went likewise out to encounter
them, they fought, and there was a battle between the horsemen of either side,
that held long, wherein both sides claimed the victory For the Athenians slew
the General of the Boeotian horse, and some few others, and Nisaea. And having
these dead bodies in their power, they restored them upon truce, and erected a
Trophie. Neuerthe less, in respect of the whole action, neither side went off
with assurance, but parting asunder, the Boeotians went to the Army, and the
Athenians to Nisaea.

After this, Brasidas with his Army, The whole Army on either side, face one
another, but neither side willing to begin.
came down nearer to the Sea, and to the City of Megara; and having seized on
a place of advantage, set his Army in battle array, and stood still. For they
thought the Athenians Megareans stood observing whether side should have the
Victory; and that it must needs fall out well for them both ways; Brasidas if
he saved the Town from the Athenians had ^is end. Therefore by showing him
self ready if the Athenians would not fight, he ga^ned this, that he should
(...) into the town, which (...) all ^e came for, and therefore (...) be
counted Victor.
justly be attributed to them (...), without dust.
without their labor. And next it must fall out well in respect of the
Megareans. For if they should not have come in sight, the matter had not been
any longer in the power of fortune, but they had without all doubt been
presently deprived of the City, as men conquered. Whereas now, if happily, the
Athenians declined battle likewise, they should obtain what they came for The
period is somewhat long, and seems to be one of them that gave occasion to
Dionysius Halicarnasius, to (...) the Authors elocution.
For the Megareans, when the Athenians went out and ordered their Army without
the Long-wals, but yet (because the enemy charged not) stood also still, (their
Commanders likewise, considering that if they should begin the battle, against
a number greater then their own, after the greatest part of their enterprise
was already achieved, the danger would be unequal; For if they should
overcome, they could win but Megara, and if they were vanquished, must lose the
best part of their men of Arms; Whereas the enemy, who out of the whole power,
and Athenians first into Nisaea, and afterward the Peloponnesians to the place
from whence they had set forth; then, I say, the Megareans, such as were the
friends of the Outlawes, The Megareans receive Brasidas and his Army.
taking heart, because they saw the Athenians were unwilling to fight, set open
the Gates to Brasidas as Victor, and to the rest of the Captains Athenians,
being all the while in a great fear) they went to Council. Afterward,
Brasidas, having dismissed his Confederates, to their several Cities, went
himself to Corinth, in pursuit of his former purpose to leuy an Army for
Thrace. Now the Megareans that were in the City, (when the Athenians also were
gone home) all that had chief hand in the practice with the Athenians, The
Megarean Outlawes ^ecalled, and sworn to forget former quarrel.
knowing themselves discovered, presently slipped away; but the rest, after they
had conferred Pegae, upon great oaths administered unto them, no more to
remember former quarrels, but to give the City their best advice.

These, when they came into Office, took a view of the Arms, and disposing
bands of Soldiers in diverse quarters of the City, picked out of their
enemies, and of those that seemed most to have co-operated in the treason with
the Athenians, about a hundred persons; The Outlawes being in authority, put to
death 100 of the adverse faction.
and having constrained the people to give their sentence upon them Because
they should not da^^ but to condemn them, (...) they would not have den^^^
their sentence had past by secret suffrage.
openly, when they were condemned, slew them; and established Oligarchy. And
this change of government, made by a few upon sedition, did nevertheless
continue for a long time after.

The same Summer, The Mitylenian Outlawes lose the City of Antandrus which they
had inten^^d to fortify and make the seat of their War.
when Antandrus was to be furnished by the Mitylenians as they intended,
Demodicus, and Aristides, Captains of certaines Galleys, set forth by the
Athenians to fetch in Tribute, being then about Hellespont (for Lamachus that
was the third in that Commission, was gone with ten Galleys into Pontus) having
notice of the preparation made in that place; and thinking it would be
dangerous Anaea, over against Samos, in which the Samian Outlawes, having
settled themselves, aided the Peloponnesians in matters of the Sea, by sending
them Steersmen, and both bred trouble within the City, and entertained such as
fled out of it, leuyed an Army amongst the Confederates, and marched to it, and
having overcome in fight, those that came out of Antandrus against them,
recovered the place again. And not long after, Lamachus that was gone into
Pontus, Lamachus loses his ten Galleys by a sudden Land-flood, in Pontus.
as he lay at Anchor in the River Calex, in the territory of Heraclea,
Bithynians, (who are Thracians dwelling in Asia, on the other side) to
Chalcedon, a Colony of the Megareans, in the mouth of Pontus Euxinus, by Land,

The same Summer likewise, Demosthenes, Demosthenes goes to Naupactus, upon
design against the Boeotians.
General of the Athenians, with forty Galleys, presently after his departure
out of Megaris, sailed to Naupactus. For certain Boeotian government, and to
turn it into a Democratie, according to the government of Athens, practiced
Hippocrates, to betray unto him the estates of Boeotia: Induced thereunto,
principally by Ptoecdorus a Theban Outlaw. And they ordered the design thus.
The Plot laid between certain Boeotians, and the Athenians, how to bring
Boeotia into the power of the Athenians.
Some had undertaken to deliver up Siphae. (Siphae is a City of the Territory
of Thespiae, standing upon the Sea side, in the Crissaean Gulf) and Chaeronea
(which was a Town that paid duties to Orchomenus, called heretofore
Orchomenus in Minyeia, but now Orchomenus in Boeotia) some others, of
Orchomenus, were to surrender into their hands. And the Orchomenian Outlawes
had a principal hand in Peloponnesus. This Chaeronea is the utmost Town of
Boeotia toward Phanocis in the Country of Phocis, and some Phocians also
dwelt in it. On the other side, the Athenians were to seize on Delium, a place
consecrated to Apollo, in the Territory of Tanagra, on the part toward Euboea.
All this ought to have been done together upon a day appointed, to the end,
that the Boeotians might not oppose them with their forces united, but might be
troubled every one to defend his own. And if the attempt succeeded, and that
they Delium, they easily hoped, though no change followed in the state of the
Boeotians for the present, yet being possessed of those places, and by that
means, continually fetching in prey, out of the Country, because there was
for every one a place at hand to retire unto, that it could not stand long at a
stay; but that the Athenians joining with such of them, as rebelled, and the
Boeotians not having their forces united, they might in time order the State to
their own liking. Thus was the Plot laid.

And Hippocrates himself, with the forces of the City, Toward (...).
march; but sent Demosthenes before, with forty Galleys to Naupactus; to the
end that he should leuy an Army of Acarnanians, and other their Confederates in
these quarters, and sail to Siphae, to receive it by Treason. And a day was
set down betwixt them, on which these things should have been done together.

Demosthenes, when he arrived and found the Oeniades by compulsion of the rest
of Acarnania, entered into the Athenian Confederation, and had himself raised
all the Confederates Salynthius, and Agraeans, and having taken in other places
thereabouts, stood ready when the time should require, to go to Siphae.

About the same time of this Summer, Brasidas marching toward the Cities upon
Thrace, with 1700 men of Arms, when he came to Heraclea in Trachinia, sent a
Messenger before him to his friends at Brasidas passes through Thessalie, with
1500 (...) of Arms, to (...) that deliberated a revolt.
Pharsalus, requiring them to be guides unto him, and to his Army. And when
there were come unto him, Panaerus, and Dorus, and Hippolochidas, and Torylaus,
and S^rophacus, (who was the public Host of the Chalcideans) all which met
him Melitia, a town of Achaia, he marched on. There were other of the
Thessalians also that conuoyed him; and from Larissa, he was conuoyed by
Niconidas a friend of Perdiccas. For it had been hard to pass Thessaly
without a guide, howsoever, but especially with an Army. And to pass through a
neighbor Territory without leave, is a thing that all Grecians alike are
jealous of. Besides, that the people of Thessaly had ever borne good affection
to the Athenians. Insomuch, as if by custom, the government of that Country
had not been (...) (...)
Lordly, rather then a ^
Commonwealth he could never have gone on. For also now as he marched forward,
there met him at the River Enipeus, others of a contrary mind to the former,
that forbad him, and told him that he did unjustly to go on without the common
consent of all. But those that conuoyed him answered, that they would not bring
him through against their wills; but that coming to them on a sudden, they
conducted him as friends. And Brasidas himself said* he came thither a friend,
The soft answer of Brasidas, notwithstanding he was resolved to pass.
both to the country, and to them; and that he bore Arms, not against
Athenians their enemies. And that he never knew of any enmity, between the
Thessalians, and Lacedaemonians, whereby they might not use one another ground;
and that even now he would not go on without their consent; for neither could
he; but only entreated them not to stop him. When they heard this, they went
their ways. And he, by the advice of his guides, Brasidas goes apa^e through
Thessaly.
before any greater number should unite to hinder him, marched on with all
possible speed* staying no whereby the way; and the same day he set forth from
Melitia, he reached Pharsalus, and encamped Apidanus. From thence he went to
Phacium. From thence, into Peraebia. The Peraebians, though subject to the
Thessalonians, set him at Dion, in the Dominion Perdiccas, a little City of the
Macedonians, situate at the foot of Olympus, on the side toward Thessalie. In
this manner, Brasidas ran through Thessalie, before any there could put in
readiness to stop him; and came into the Territory of the Chalcideans, and to
Perdiccas. For Perdiccas, The cause why Perdiccas and the Chalcideans called in
the Lacedaemonians into those parts.
and the Chalcideans, all that had revolted from the Athenians, when they saw
the affairs of the Athenians prosper, had drawn this Army out of
Peloponnesus for fear: the Chalcideans, because they thought the Athenians
would make War on them first, as having been also incited Perdiccas, not that
he was their open enemy, but because he feared the Athenians for ancient
quarrels; but principally because he desired to subdue Arrhibaeus, King of the
Lyncesteans. The cause why the Lacedaemonians so willingly sent an army to them.
And the ill success which the Lacedaemonians in these times had, was a cause
that they obtained an Army from them, the more easily.

For the Athenians vexing Peloponnesus, and their particular By incursions and
forraging the Contry, from Pylus, and the Island Cythera.
Territory Laconia most of all, they thought the best way to divert them, was
to send an Army to the Confederates of the Athenians, so to vex them again.
Perdiccas, and the Chalcideans were content to maintain the Army, having
called it thither to help the Chalcideans in their revolt.And because also
they desired a pretense to send away part of their their servants.
Helotes, for fear they should take the opportunity of the present state of
their affairs, An impious Policy of the Lacedaemonians, in the destroying
their Helotes.
the enemies lying now in Pylus to innouate. For they did also this further.
Fearing the youth, and multitude of their Helotes, (For the Lacedaemonians had
ever many Ordinances, concerning how to Helotes,) they caused Proclamation to
be made, that as many of the^, as claimed the estimation, to have done the
Lacedaemonians best service in their Wars should be made free; feeling them
in this manner, and conceiving that as they should every one out of pride deem
himself worthy to be first made free, so they would soonest also rebel
against the^. And when they had thus preferred about 2000, which also with
Crowns on their heads, went in procession about the Temples, as to receive
their liberty, they, not long after made them away, Brasidas. The rest of the
Army were Mercinaries hired by Brasidas, out of Peloponnesus. But Brasidas
himself the Lacedaemonians sent out, chiefly, because it was his own desire.
Notwithstanding the Chalcideans also longed to have him, as one esteemed also
in Sparta, every way an active man. The praise of Brasidas.
And when he was out, he did the Lacedaemonians very great service. For by
showing himself at that present just, and moderate toward the Cities, he
caused the Lacedaemonians pleased to come to composition (as also they did)
they might have Towns to render and receive reciprocally.

And also long after, after the Sicilian War, the virtue, and wisdom which
Brasidas showed now, to some known by experience, by others, believed upon
from report, was the principal cause that made the Athenian Confederates
affect the Lacedaemonians; For being the The first that went abroad for
Governor into other States, since this War. For fifty years before this
War, Pausanias having the government of the Grecian Confederates, at
Bizantium, behaved himself insolently, and then Cimon an Athenian by the
virtues now praised in Brasidas, got the Confederates to leave the
Lacedaemonians, and affect the Athenians. Brasidas joined with Perdiccas,
marches toward Lincus.
first that went out, and esteemed in all points for a worthy man, he left
behind him an assured hope, that the rest also were like him.

Being now come into Thrace, the Athenians upon notice, thereof, declared
Perdiccas an enemy, as imputing to him this expedition, and reinforced the
Garrisons in the parts thereabouts.

Perdiccas with Brasidas and his Army, together with his own Forces, marched
presently against Arrhibaeus the son of Bromerus, King of the Lyncestheans, a
people of Macedonia, confining on Perdiccas his dominion, both for a quarrel
they had against him, and also as desiring to subdue him.

When he came with his Army, and Brasidas with him, Brasidas refusing to make
War on Arrhibaeus.
to the place where they were to have fallen in, Brasidas told him that he
desired, before he made War, to draw Arrhibaeus by parley, if he could, to a
League with the Lacedaemonians. For the offer of Arrhibaeus.
For Arrhibaeus had also made some proffer by a Herald, to commit the matter to
Brasidas arbitrament. And through the advice of the Chalcideans.
And the Chalcidean Ambassadors Perdiccas, to the end they might have him more
prompt in their own affairs. Perdiccas, when they were at Lacedaemon, had
spoken there, as if they had meant to bring as many of the places about him as
they could, into the Lacedaemonian League. So that Brasidas favored
Arrhibaeus, Gives therein distaste to (...).
for the public good of their own State. But P^rdic^^^^ said that he brought
not Brasidas thither, to be a Judge of his Controversies, but to destroy those
enemies which he should show him. And that it will be an injury, seeing he
pays the half of his Army, for Brasidas to parley with Arrhibaeus.
Nevertheless, Brasidas whether Perdiccas Arrhibaeus, by whom also he was
induced to withdraw his Army. But from that time forward, Perdiccas in stead of
half, paid but a third part of his Army, as conceiving himself to have been
injured.

The same Summer, a little before the Vintage, Brasidas having joined to his
own, Brasidas comes before Acanthus.
the forces of the Chalcideans, marched to Acanthus, a Colony of the Andrians.
And there arose sedition about receiving him, between such as had joined with
the Chalcideans in calling him thither, and the common people. Nevertheless,
for fear of their Brasidas to let him enter alone, and then (after he had said
his mind) to advise what to do amongst themselves. And is received without his
army.
And presenting himself before the multitude, (for he was not vneloquent,
though a Lacedaemonian,) he spoke to this effect.

THE ORATION OF BRASIDAS.
MEN of Acanthus, The reason why the Lacedaemonians have sent me, and this Army
abroad, is to make good what we gave out in the beginning for the cause of our
War against the Athenians, which was, that we meant to make a War for the
Liberty of Greece. But if we be come late, as deceived by the War there, in
the opinion we had, that we our selves should soon have pulled the Athenians
down, without any danger of yours, no man has reason therefore to blame us.
For we are come as soon as occasion served, and with your help will do our
Lacedaemonians have undergone this great danger, of passing many days journey
through the Territory of Strangers, and showed all possible zeal, be cause we
imagined that we went to such Confederates, as before we came, had us present
in their hearts, and were desirous of our coming. And therefore it were hard,
that you should now be otherwise minded, and withstand your own, and the rest
of the Grecians liberty; not only in that your selves resist us, but also
because others whom I go to, will be the less willing to come in; making
difficulty, because you to whom I came first, having a flourishng City, and
being esteemed wise, have refused us: For which I shall have no sufficient
Athenians. And yet against this same Army I now have, when I went to encounter
the Athenians at Nisaea, though more in number, they durst not hazard battle.
Nor is it likely that the Athenians will send forth so great a number against
you, as they had in their Fleet there at Nisaea. I come not hither to hurt, but
to set free the Grecians, and I have the Lacedaemonian Magistrates bound unto
me by great Oaths, that whatsoever Confederates shall be added to their side,
at least by me, shall Athenians. And therefore I claim not only that you be
not jealous of me, especially having given you so good assurance, or think me
unable to defend you, but also that you declare your selves boldly with me.
And if any man be unwilling so to do, through fear of some particular man,
apprehending that I would put the City into the hands of a few, let him cast
away that fear; for Multitude, to the Few, or the Few to the Multitude. For to
be governed so, were worse then the domination of a Forrainer. And there would
result from it to us Lacedaemonians, not thanks for our labors, but in stead
of honor and glory, an imputation of those Ambition and desire to subdue other
States.
crimes, for which we make War amongst the Athenians, and which would be more
odious in us then in them, that never pretended the The desire to assert other
States.
virtue. For it is more dishonorable, at least, to men in dignity, to amplify
their estate by specious fraud, then by open violence. For the

But besides the oath which they have sworn already, the greatest ^
Heroes of this place, that my counsel which you refuse, was for your good,
and will endeavor by wasting of your Territory Lacedaemonians, lest whilst
they have your affections, and not your society, they should receive hurt from
your contribution of money to the Athenians; another, of the Grecians, lest
they should be hindered of their liberty by your example; for otherwise indeed
we could not justly do it; nor ought we Lacedaemonians to set any at liberty
against their wills, if it were not for some common good. We covet not dominion
over you, but seeing we haste to make others lay down the same, we should do
injury to the greater Greece, to get your selves eternal glory, to preserve
every man his private estate from damage, and to inuest the whole City with a
most honorable (...) ^itle of a free City.
Title. Thus spoke Brasidas.

The Acanthians, after much said on either side, partly for that which Brasidas
had effectually spoken, The revolt of (...).
and partly for fear of their fruits abroad, the most of them decreed
Athenians, having given their votes in secret. And when they had made him take
the same oath, which the Lacedaemonian Magistrates took, when they sent him
out; namely, that what Confederates soever he should join to the
Lacedaemonians, should enjoy their own Laws, they received his Army into the
City. And not long after, The revolt of Stagyrus.
revolted Stagyrus, another Colony of the Andrians. And these were the Acts of
this Summer.

The end of the eighth Sum^^^.
In the very beginning of the next Winter, when the Boeotian Hippocrates and
Demosthenes, Generals of the Athenians, ^
and that Demosthenes should have gone to Siphae, and Hippocrates to Delium,
having mistaken the days, on which they should have both set forward,
Demosthenes went to Siphae ^
first, and having with him the Acarnans, and many Confederates of those parts
in his Fleet, yet lost his labor. For the Treason was detected by one
Nicomachus a Phocean, The Treason detected.
of the Town of Phanotis, who told it unto the Lacedaemonians, and they again
unto the Boeotians. Whereby the Boeotians concurring universally to relieve
those places, (for Hippocrates was not yet gone to trouble them in their own
several Siphae, and Chaeronea. And the Conspirators knowing the error,
attempted in those Cities no further.

But Hippocrates having raised the whole power of the City of Athens,
Hippocrates (...) Delium.
both Citizens and others that dwelt amongst them, and all strangers, that were
then there, arrived After Demosthene^ ha^ been at Si^^ae (...) was too late.

He fortifieth (...).


afterward at Delium, when the Boeotians were now returned from Siphae, and
there stayed, and took in Delium a Temple of Apollo with a wall; in this
manner. Round about the Temple, and the whole consecrated ground, Athens, and
wrought all the same day, and all the fourrh and the fifth day, till dinner. The
army of the Athenians, having taken Delium, begin to retire.
And then being most part of it finished, the camp came back from Delium,
about ten Furlongs homewards. And the light-armed Soldiers went most of them
presently away, but the men of Arms, laid down their Arms there, and rested.
Hippocrates staid yet behind, and took order about the Garrison, and about the
finishing of the remainder of fortification. The Boeotians follow them
The Boeotians took the same time to assemble Tanagra; and when all the Forces
were come in, that from every City were expected, and when they understood
that the Athenians drew homewards, though the rest (...), eleven in number.
Boeotian Commanders, which were eleven, approved not giving battle, because
they were not now in Boeotia (for the Athenians, when they laid down their
Arms, were in the Confines of Oropia) yet Pagondas the son of Aioladas,
being the It seems that the several States of Boeotia being free of (...),
and hold^ng altogether, were united under power no r^sent from them severally
(...)* the Wars, and then they had the lead^ng of the common forces by (...).
Boeotian Commander It seems that the several States of Boeotia being free of
(...), and hold^ng altogether, were united under power no r^sent from them
severally (...)* the Wars, and then they had the lead^ng of the common forces
by (...).
for Thebes, whose turn it was to have the leading of the Army, was, together
with Arianthidas the son of Lysimachidas, of opinion to fight, and held it
the best course to try the fortune of a battle; wherefore calling them unto
him every Company by it self, that they might not be all at once from their
Boeotians to march against the Athenians, and to hazard battle, speaking in
this manner.

THE ORATION OF PAGONDAS to his Soldiers.
MEN of Boeotia, it ought never to have so much as entered into the thought of
any of us the Commanders, that because we find not the Athenians now in
Boeotia, it Boeotia, and fortified in it, with intent to waste it, and are
indeed enemies in whatsoever ground we find them, or whencesoeuer they come,
doing the acts of hostility. But now if any man think it also unsafe, let him
henceforth be of another opinion. For providence in them that are invaded,
endures not such deliberation concerning their own, as may be used by them,
who retaining their own, out of desire to enlarge, voluntarily invade the
estate of another. And it is the custom of this Country of yours, when a
foreign enemy comes against you, to fight with him, Athenians, when they be
borderers. So that so score a^ a State has a neighbor strong enough to (...)
it, it is (...) more to be thought a (...) State.
For liberty with all men, is nothing else but to be a match for the Cities
that are their neighbors. With these then that attempt the subiugation, not
only of their neighbors, but of estates far from them, why should we not
try the utmost of our fortune? We have for example, the estate that the
Euboeans over against us, and also the greatest part of the rest of Greece do
live in under them. And you must know, that though others fight with their
neighbors, about the bounds of their Territories, we Athenians, then of other
people. And such as upon confidence in their strength invade their neighbors,
(as the Athenians now do) use to be bold in warring on those that sit still,
defending themselves only in their own Territories; whereas they be less
urgent to those that are ready to meet them without their own limits, or also
to begin the War when opportunity serves. We have experience hereof in
these same men; for after we had overcome them at Coronea, at what time
Boeotia, which lasted till this present. Remembering which, we ought now, the
elder sort to imitate our former acts there, and the younger sort, who are the
children of those valiant Fathers, to endeavor not to disgrace the virtue of
their Houses; but rather with confidence that the God, whose Temple fortified
they unlawfully dwell in, will be with us, the Sacrifices we offered him
appearing fair, to march against them, and let them see, that though they may
gain what they covet, when they invade such as will not fight, yet men that
have the generosity to hold their own in liberty by

Pagondas with this exhortation persuaded the Boeotians to march against the
Athenians, and making them It was the fashion in those times, for the Soldiers
to sit down with their Arms by them, when they staide any where in the Field.
rise, led them speedily on, for it was drawing toward night, and when he was
near to their Army, in a place, from whence by the interposition of a Hill
they saw not each other, making a stand, he put his Army into order, and
prepared to give Battle. When it was told Hippocrates, who was Delium, that
the Boeotians were marching after them, he sends presently to the Army,
commanding them to be put in array, and not long after he came himself,
having left some 300. Horse about Delium, both for a guard to the place, if it
should be assaulted, and withal to watch an opportunity to come upon the
Boeotians when they were in fight. But for these, the Boeotians appointed some
Forces purposely to attend them. And when all was as it should be, they showed
themselves from the top of the Hill. Where they sat down with their Arms,
The order of the Army of the Boeotians.
in ten thousand, a thousand Horsemen, and five hundred Thebans, and their
partakers; In the middle battle were the Haliartians, Coronaeans, Copaeans,
and the rest that dwell about the The Lake Copa^s.
Lake; In the left were the Thespians, Tanagraeans, and Orchomenians. The
Horsemen, and light-armed Soldiers were placed on either wing. The Thebans
were ordered by twenty five in File, but the rest, every one as it fell out.
This was the preparation and order of the Boeotians.

The order of the army of the Athenians.
The Athenian men of Arms, in number, no fewer then Hippocrates the General
came into the Army of the Athenians, and encouraged them, speaking to this
effect.

THE ORATION OF HIPPOCRATES to his Soldiers.
MEN of Athens, my exhortation shall be short, but with valiant men, it has as
much force as a longer, and is for a remembrance, rather then a command. Let no
man think, because it is in the Territory of another, that we therefore
precipitate our selves into a great danger that did not concern us. For
Peloponnesians will never invade our Territories again, for want of the
Boeotian Horsemen. So that in one battle, you shall both gain this Territory,
and free your own. Therefore march on against the enemy, every one as
becomes the dignity, both of his natural City, (which he glories to be
chief of all Greece) and of his Ancestors, who having overcome these men at
Oenophyta, under the Conduct of Myronides, were in times past Masters of all
Boeotia.

Whiles Hippocrates was making this exhortation, and Boeotians, The Boeotians
interrupt the Oration.
(for Pagondas likewise made but a short exhortation, and had there sung the
Paean) came down upon them from the hill. And the Athenians likewise went
forward to meet them, so fast, that they met together running. The utmost parts
of both the Armies never came to join, hindered both by one, and the same
cause, for certain currents of water kept them asunder. But the rest made
sharp battle; standing close, and striving to put by each others Bucklers.
The left wing of the Boeotians, to Athenians, who in this part had to deal,
amongst others principally with the Thespians. For whilst they that were
placed within the same wing, gave back, and were circled in by the Athenians
in a narrow compass, those Thespians that were slain, were hewed down in the
very fight. Some also of the Athenians themselves, troubled with enclosing
the^, through ignorance slew one another. So that the Boeotians were
overthrown in this part, and fled to the other part, where they were yet in
fight. But the right wing wherein Thebans stood, had the better of the
Athenians, and by little and little, forced them to give ground, and followed
upon them from the very first. It happened also that Pagondas, whilst the left
wing of this Army was in distress, sent two Companies of Horse secretly about
the hill; whereby that wing of the Athenians which was victorious, apprehending
upon their sudden appearing that they had bin a fresh Army, was put into
affright, and the whole Army of the Athenians, now doubly terrified, by this
accident, and by the Thebans that continually won ground, and brake their
ranks, Delium, and the sea; and some toward Oropus; The Athenians fly.
others toward the mountain Parnethus, and others other ways, as to each
appeared hope of safety. The Boeotians, especially their horse, and those
Locrians that came in, after the enemy was already defeated, followed, killing
the^. But night surprising them, the multitude of the^ that fled, was the
easier saved. The next day, those that were gotten to Oropus and Delium, went
thence by Sea to Athens, having left a Garrison in Delium, which place,
notwithstanding this defeat, they yet retained. Boeotians, when they had
erected their Trophy, taken away their own dead, rifled those of the enemy,
and left a guard upon the place, returned back to Tanagra, and there Delium.
In the mean time, a Herald sent from the Athenians, to require the bodies, met
with a Herald by the way, sent by the Boeotians, which turned him back by
telling him he could get nothing done, till himself was returned from the
Athenians. Dispute about giving leave to the Athenians to take up their dead.
This Herald, when he came before the Athenians, delivered unto them what the
Boeotians had given him in charge; The message of the Boeotians to the
Athenians.
namely, That they had done iniustly, to transgress the universal law of the
Grecians; being a constitution received by them all, that the Inuader of
another country, shall abstain from all holy places in the same. That the
Athenians had fortified Delium, and Boeotians, both in the behalf of the god,
and of themselves, inuoking Apollo, and all the interessed (...).
spirits, did warn them to be gone, and to remove their stuff out of the
Temple. The message of the Athenians to the (...), by a friend of their own.
After the Herald had said this, the Athenians sent a Herald of their own to
the Boeotians* Denying that either they had done any wrong to the holy place
already, or would willingly do any hurt to it hereafter. For neither did they
at first enter into it, to such Grecians have, it is no other, but that they
which have the dominion of any territory, great or small, have ever the Temples
also, and besides the accustomed rites, may superinduce what other they can.
For also the Boeotians, and most men else, all that having driven out another
nation, possess their territory, did at first invade the Temples of others,
and make them their own. That therefore, if they could win from them more of
their Land, they would keep it; and for the part they were now in, they were
in it with a good will, and Boeotians that had invaded their territory first,
they were forced to use it. For whatsoever is forced by War, or danger, has in
reason a kind of pardon, even with the god himself. For the Altars, in cases
of inuoluntary offenses, are a refuge; and they are said to violate Laws, that
are evil without constraint, not they that are a little bold upon occasion of
distress.

That the Boeotians themselves, who require restitution of the holy places, for
a redemption of the dead, are more irreligious by far, And they bad him say
plainly, That they would not depart out of the Boeotian Territory, for that
they were not now in it, but in a Territory which they had made their own by
the (...), by the (...).
Sword; And nevertheless, required Truce according to the Ordinances of the
Country, for the fetching away of the dead. To this the Boeotians answered,
The reply of the Boeotians.
That if the dead were in Boeotia they should quit the ground, and take with
them, whatsoever was theirs. But if the dead were in their own Territory, the
Athenians themselves knew best what to do. For they thought, that though
Oropia, wherein the dead lay, (for the battle was fought in the border
between Attica and Boeotia) by subjection belonged to the Athenians, yet they
could not fetch them off by force; and for Truce, that the Athenians might come
safely on Athenian ground, they would give none, but conceived it was a
handsome answer, to say, That if they would quit the ground, they should
obtain whatsoever they required. Which when the Athenian Herald heard, he went
his way without effect. The Boeotian presently sent for Darters and Slingers
from the Towns on the Melian Gulf, and with these, and with two thousand men
of Arms, of Corinth, and with the Peloponnesian Garrison that was put out of
Nisaea, and with the Megareans, all which arrived after the battle, they
marched forthwith to Delium, and assaulted the wall; and when they had
attempted the same many other ways, at length they brought to it an Engine,
wherewith they also took it, made in this manner. Having slit in two a great
Mast, they made hollow both the sides, The form of an Engine, wherewith they
let the wall on fire*
and curiously set them together again in form of a Pipe. At the end of it in
chains they hung a Caldron, and into the Caldron from Delium recovered by the
Boeotians.
so that no man being able to stand any longer on it, but abandoning

Of the Defendants, some were slain, and 200 taken Delium thus taken on the
seventeenth day after the battle, and the Herald, which not long after, was
sent again about the fetching away of the dead, not knowing it, The Boeotians
deliver to the Athenians their dead.
the Boeotians let him have them, and answered no more as they had formerly
done. In the battle there dyed Boeotians few less then five hundred.
Athenians few less then a thousand, with Hippocrates the General; but of
light-atmed Soldiers, and such as carried the provisions of the Army, a great
number.

Not long after this battle, Demosthenes, that had been with his Army at
Siphae, seeing the Treason succeeded not, having aboard his Galleys, his Army
of Acarnanians, and Agraeans, Demosthenes landing in (...), is beaten back by
the Inhabitants.
and four hundred men of Arms of Athens, landed in Sicyonia. But before all
his Galleys came to Shore, the Sicyonians, who went out to defend their
Territory, put to flight such as were already landed, and chased them back to
their Galleys; having also slain some, and taken some alive. And when they had
erected a Trophy, they gave Truce to the Athenians for the fetching away of
their dead.

Sitalces King of Thrace, dies, and Seuthes his brothers son succeeds him.
About the time that these things past at Delium, dyed Sitalces, Odrysians,
overcome in battle, in an expedition against the Triballians; And Seuthes the
son of Spardocus, his brothers son, succeeded him, in the kingdom both of
the Odrysians, and of the rest of Thrace, as much as was before subject to
Sitalces.

Brasidas goes to Amphipolis.
The same Winter, Brasidas, with the Confederates in Thrace, made War upon
Amphipolis; a Colony of the Athenians, situated on the River Strymon. The
place whereon the City now stands, Aristagoras of Miletus, had formerly
attempted to inhabit, The original of Amphipolis.
when he fled from King Dar^us, but was beaten away by the Edonians. Two and
thirty years after this, the Athenians assayed the same, and sent thither ten
thousand of their own City, and of others as many as would go. And these
were destroyed all by the Thracians at Drabescus.

Agnon Founder of Amphipolis.
In the 29 year after, conducted by Agnon the son of Nisias, the Athenians
came again, and having driven out the Edonians, became Founders of this place,
formerly called the Nine-wayes. This Army lay then at Eion, a Town of
Athenians, at the Strymon; five and twenty Furlongs from the City; Agnon named
this City Amphipolis, because it was surrounded by the River Strymon, that
runs on either side it. When he had taken it in, with a long wall from River
to River, he put Inhabitants into the place, being conspicuous round about,
both to the Sea, and Land.

Against this City marched Brasidas with his Army, dislodging from Arnae in
Chalcidea. Being about twilight come as far as Au^on and Bromiscus, where the
Lake Bolbe Amphipolis, but only the Traitors, should be aware of his coming.
The Argilians co^^ betray Amphipolis.
For there were both Argilians that dwelt in the same City, (now Argilus is a
Colonie of the Andrians) and others, that contrived this, induced thereunto,
some by Perdiccas, and some by the Chalcideans. But above all, the Argilians
being of a City near unto it, and ever suspected by the Athenians, and
Brasidas arrived, (who had also long before dealt underhand with as many of
them as dwelt in Amphipolis, to betray it) both received him into their own
City, and reuolting from the Athenians, Argilus reuolteth.
brought the Army forward the same night, as far as to the bridge of the
River. The Town stood not close to the River, nor was there a Fort at the
Bridge then, as there is now, but they kept it only with a small guard of
Soldiers. Having easily forced this guard, both in respect of the Treason,
Brasidas wins the Bridge, and is master of all between it and the City.
and of Amphipolitans had, that dwelt without. Having thus suddenly passed the
Bridge, and many of those without being slain, and some fled into the City,
the Amphipolitans, were in very great confusion at it, and the rather, because
they were jealous one of another. And it is said, that if Brasidas had not sent
out his Army to take booty, but had marched presently to the City, he had
in all likelihood taken it then. But so it was, that he pitched the contrary
Faction to the Traitors, being superior in Eucles the General, who was then
there for the Athenians, The Amphipolians send for aid to Thucydides, the
Author of this History.
to keep the town, sent unto the other General, Thucydides the son of
Olorus, the Writer of this History, who had charge in Thrace, and was now
about Thasus (which is an Island, and a Colonie of the Parians, distant from
Amphipolis, about half a days sail) requiring him to come and relieve them.

When he heard the news, he went thitherwards in all haste, with seven Galleys
which chanced to be with him Amphipolis, but if he should fail of that, then
to possess himself of Eion, before Brasidas his coming.

Brasidas in the mean time, fearing the aid of the Galleys, to come from
Thasus, and having also been informed that Thucydides possessed mines of gold
in the parts of Thrace thereaboues, and was thereby of ability amongst the
principal men of the Continent, hasted by all means to get Amphipolis, before
he should arrive; lest otherwise at his Commons of Amphipolis, expecting that
he would leuy Confederates, both from the Sea side, and in Thrace, and relieve
them, should thereupon refuse to yield. And to that end, offered them a
moderate composition, causing to be proclaimed, That whosoever Amphipolitan, or
Athenian would, Brasidas, fearing to be prevented by Thucydides, hastes by
ea^e conditions, to procure the Town to yield.
might continue to dwell there, and enjoy his own, with equal and like form
of government. And that he that would not, should have five days respit to be
gone, and carry away his good.

When the Commons heard this, their minds were turned; Athenians amongst them
were but few, and the most, were a promiscuous multitude; And the kinsmen of
those that were taken without, flocked together within, and in respect of their
fear, they all thought the Proclamation reasonable. The Athenians thought it
so, because they were willing to go out, as apprehending their own danger to
be greater, then that of the rest, and withal, not expecting aid in haste; and
the rest of the multitude, as being thereby both delivered of the danger, and
withal to retain their City, with the Insomuch, that they which Brasidas,
now openly justified the offer to be reasonable, and seeing the minds of the
Commons were now turned, and that they gave ear no more to the words of the
Athenian General, they compounded, and upon the conditions proclaimed,
received him. Amphipolis yielded.
Thus did these men deliver up the City.

Thucydides with his Galleys, Thucydides comes too late to relieve
Amph^^^^lis, and puts himself into Eion.
arrived in the evening of the same day at Eion. Brasidas had already gotten
Amphipolis* and wanted but a night of taking Eion also, for if these Galleys
had not come speedily to relieve it, by next morning

After this, Thucydides assured Eion, so as it should be safe, both for the
present, though Brasidas should assault it, and for the future; and took into
it, such as according to the Proclamation made, came down from Amphipolis.
Brasidas, with many Boats came suddenly down the River to Eion, and attempted
to seize on the point of the ground lying out from the wall into the Sea, and
thereby to command the mouth of the River; he assayed also the same, And
defends it against Brasidas.
at the same time by Land, and was in both beaten off; but Amphipolis he
furnished with all things necessary.

Then revolted to him Myrcinus, a City of the Edonians, Great inclination of
the people of those parts to come in to Brasidas.
(Pittacus, the King of the Edonians, being slain by the sons of Goaxis, and
by Braure his own wife.) And not long after, Gapselus also, and Oesyme,
Colonies of the Thasians. Perdiccas also after the taking of these places, came
to him, and helped him in assuring of the same. After Amphipolis was taken, the
Athenians were brought into great fear; The Athenians begin to fear.
especially, for that it was a City that yielded them much profit, both in
Timber which is sent them for the building Lacedaemonians had a passage open to
come against their Confederates (the Thessalians conuoying them) as far as to
Strymon, yet if they had not gotten that Bridge, the River being upwards,
nothing but a vast Fenne, and toward Eion, well guarded with their Galleys,
they could have gone no further, which now they thought they might easily do;
and therefore feared lest their Confederates should revolt. For Brasidas both
showed himself otherwise very moderate, and also gave Greece. And the Cities,
which were subject to the Athenians, hearing of the taking of Amphipolis, and
what Athenians to be less then afterward it appeared, and making a judgment
of it according to blind wilfulness, rather then safe forecast. It being the
fashion of men, what they wish to be true to admit, even upon an ungrounded
hope, and what they wish not, with a (...).
Magistrall kind of arguing Athenians had lately received a blow from the
Boeotians, and because Brasidas had said, not as was the truth, but as served
best to allure them, that when he was at Nisaea, the Athenians durst not fight
with those forces of his alone, they grew confident thereon, and believed not
that any man would come against them. But the greatest cause of all was, that
for the delight they took at this time to innouate, and for that they were to
make trial of the Lacedaemonians, not till now angry, they were content by any
means to put it to the hazard. Which being perceived, the Athenians sent The
Athenians send Garrisons to the places therabouts.
as many as the shortness of the time, and the season of Winter would permit.
And Brasidas sent unto Lacedaemon, to demand greater forces; and in the mean
time prepared to build Galleys on the River of Strymon. Brasidas envied at home.
But the Lacedaemonians, partly through envy of the principal men, and partly,
because they more affected the redemption of their men taken in the Sphacteria.
Island, and the ending of the War, refused to furnish him.

The Megareans demolish their Long-wals, which were before but disioyned from
the City, by the Athenians.
The same Winter, the Megareans having recovered Athenians, rased them to the
very ground.

Brasidas inuadeth the Territory of Act, where Athos stands.
Brasidas, after the taking of Amphipolis, having with him the Confederates,
marched with his Army into the Territory called Act. This Act is that
prominent Territory, which is disioyned from the Continent, by a Ditch made by
the Xerxes when he invaded Greece.
King. And Athos a high mountain in the same, determines at the Aegean Sea.
Of the Cities it has, one is Sane, a Colony of the Andrians, by the side of
the Euboea; The rest are Thyssus, Cleonae, Acrothoi, Olophyxus, and Dion, and
are inhabited by promiscuous Barbarians of The Greek, and their own Barbarian.
two languages; some few there are also of the Chalcidean Nations but the most
are Pelasgique, of those Tyrrhene Nations that once inhabited Athens, and
Lemnos; and of the Bisaltique and Chrestonique Nations, and Edonians; and dwell
in small Cities, the most of which yielded to Brasidas. But Sane, and Dion held
out; for which cause he stayed with his Army and wasted their Territories. But
seeing they would not hearken unto him, he led his Army presently against
Torone of Chalcidea, held by the Athenians. Torone reuolteth to Brasidas.
He was Few, The manner how the Town was betrayed.
who were ready withal to deliver him the City, and arriving there a little
before break of day, he sat down with his Army at the Temple of Castor and
Pollux, distant about three Furlongs from the City. So that to the rest of the
City, and to the Athenian Garrison in it, his coming was unperceived. But the
Traitors knowing he was to come, (some few of them, being also privily gone to
him) attended his approach, and when they perceived he was come, they took in
unto them seven men* armed only with Daggers, (for of twenty appointed
Lysistratus of Olynthus) which getting over the wall toward the main Sea
unseen, went up (for the Town stands on a hills side) to the watch that kept
the upper end of the Town, and having slain the watchmen, brake open the
Posterne Gate toward Canastraea. Brasidas this while, with the rest of his
Army, lay still, and then coming a little forward, sent 100 Targettiers
before, who when the Gates should be opened, and sign agreed on be Toroneans
within, which helped the men that entered to perform the enterprise, when the
Posterne Gate was broken open, and the Gate leading to the Market place opened
likewise, by cutting asunder the Bar, went first and fetch some of them about
to the Posterne, to the end that they might suddenly affright such of the Town
as knew not the matter, both behind, and on either side; and then they put up
the sign appointed,

Brasidas, when he saw the sign, made his Army rise, and The Town taken.
was now again in building) for the drawing up of Stone. Brasidas therefore,
with the greatest number, betook himself to the highest places of the City,
to make sure the winning of it, by possessing the places of advantage.

But the rest of the Rabble ran dispersed here and Toronaeans were much
troubled, because they were not acquainted with the matter, but the
Conspirators, and such as were pleased with it, joined themselves presently
with those that entered. The Athenians (of which there were about fifty men of
Arms asleep in the Market place) when they knew what had happened, The
Athenian^ escape into a Castle of the same called Lecyt^us.
fled all, except some few that were slain upon the place, some by Land, some
by water in two Galleys that kept watch there, and saved themselves in
Lecythus; which was a Fort which they themselves held, cut off from the rest of
Isthmus. And thither also fled all such Toronaeans as were affected to them.
Being now day, and the City strongly possessed, Brasidas caused a Proclamation
to be made, that those Toronaeans which were fled with the Athenians, might
come back, as many as would, to their own, and Inhabit there in security. To
the Athenians he sent a Herald, bidding them depart out of Lecythus, under
Truce, with all that they had, as a place that belonged to the Chalcideans. The
Athenians denied to quit the place, but the Truce they desired for one day,
Brasidas granted it for two. In which two days, he fortified the buildings
near, and so also did the Athenians theirs. He also called an Assembly of the
Toronaeans, and spoke unto them, as he had done before to the Acanthians,
Brasidas his speech to the Toronaeans.
adding, That there was no just cause, why either they that had practiced to
put the City into his hands, should be the worse thought of, or accounted
Traitors for it, seeing that they did it, with no intent to bring the City
into servitude, nor were hired thereunto Athenians, because he thought them
never the worse for that friendship, and made account when they had made trial
of the Lacedaemonians, they would show as much good will also unto them, or
rather more, in as much as they would behave themselves with more equity; and
that their present fear, was only upon want of trial. Withal, he wished
them to prepare themselves to be true Confederates

When he had thus said, and put them again into heart, Brasidas (...).
the Truce being expired, he made diverse assaults upon Lecythus. The Athenians
fought against them from the Wall, though a bad one, and from the houses, such
as had Battlements, and for the first day, kept them off. But the Athenians,
having upon the top of the building, erected a Turret of Wood, and carried up
many Buckets of Water, and many men being also gone up into it, the building
ouercharged with weight, fell suddenly to the ground, and that with so huge a
noise, that though those which

Brasidas, when he perceived the Battlements to be abandoned, and saw what had
happened, came on with his Army, and presently got the Fort, and slew all that
he found within it. But the rest of the Athenians, which before abandoned the
place, with their Boats and Galleys, Pallene.

There was in Lecythus a Temple of MYNERVA.

And when Brasidas was about to give the assault, he 9^ pound, 15 shillings
sterling.
30 Minae of silver, for a reward. Brasidas now conceiving that the place was
won, by means not humane, gave those 30 minae, to the Goddess, to the use of
the Temple. And then pulling down Lecythus, he built it anew, and consecrated
unto her the whole place. The rest of this Winter, he spent in assuring the
places he had already gotten, and in contriuing the conquest of more. Which
Winter ending, ended the eighth year of this War.

The Lacedaemonians, and Athenians, in the Spring of the Summer following, THE
NINTH YEAR.
made a cessation of Arms, presently, for a year, Truce for a year. The
motives to Truce on either side.
having reputed with themselves; the Athenians, that Brasidas should by this
means cause no more of their Cities to revolt, but that by this leisure they
might prepare to secure them; and that if this suspension liked them, they
might afterward make some agreement for a longer time; The Lacedaemonians,
that the Athenians fearing what they feared, would upon the taste of this
intermission of their miseries, and weary-life, be the willinger Brasidas his
good fortune continued, and whilst, if they could not recover them, they might
yet ( Brasidas prospering, and setting them equal with the Athenians) try it
out upon even terms, and get the victory. Whereupon a suspension of Arms was
concluded, comprehending both themselves, and their Confederates, in these
words:

The Articles of the Truce.
Concerning the Temple and Oracle of Apollo Pythius, it seems good unto us,
that whosoever will, may without fraud, and without fear, ask counsel
thereat, according to the Laws of his Country. The same also seems good to
the Lacedaemonians and their Confederates, here present, and they promise
moreover, to send Ambassadors to the Boeotians and Phoceans, and do their best
to persuade them to the same.

That concerning the treasure belonging to the god, we shall take care to find
out those that have offended therein, both we and you, proceeding with right
and equity, according to the Laws of our several States. And that whosoever
else will, may do the same, every

If the Athenians will accord that each side shall keep within their own
bounds, retaining what they now possess, the Lacedaemonians, and the rest of
the Confederates, touching the same, think good thus,

That the Lacedaemonians in Coryphasium, stay within the mountains of Buphras,
and Tomeus, and the Athenians in Cythera, without joining together in any
League, either we with them, or they with us.

That those in Nisaea and Minoa, pass not the high way, which from the Gate of
Megara, near the Temple of Nisus, leads to the Temple of Neptune, and so
straight forward to the Bridge that lies Minoa. That the Megareans pass not
the same Highway, nor into the Island which the Athenians have taken; Neither
having commerce with other.

That the Megareans keep what they now possess in Troezen, and what they had
before by agreement with the Athenians, and have free Navigations, both upon the
Coasts of their own Territories, and their Confederates.

That the Lacedaemonians and their Confederates shall pass the Seas not in a
Long ships were of use for the War, and therefore here excluded yet they lead
leave to use vessels that w^nt with the Oar, so they were of another form.
long Ship, but in any other boat, rowed with Oars, of burden not exceeding
500 Talents. That the Heralds and Ambassadors

That during this time of Truce, neither we nor you receive one another
fugitives, free, nor bond.

That you to us, and we to you shall afford Law according to the use of our
several States, to the end our Controversies may be decided Iudicially,
without War.

This is thought good by the Lacedaemonians, and their Confederates. But if you
shall conceive any other Articles more fair, or of more equity then these,
then shall you go and declare the same at Lacedaemon. For neither shall the
Lacedaemonians, nor their Confederates refuse any thing, that you shall make
appear to be just. But let those that go, go with full Authority, even as
you do now require it of us That this Truce shall be for a year.

The people decreed it. Acamantis was (...).
President of the Assembly. Phaenippus the (...).
Scribe. Niciades (...), was the name of an Officer that kept the Cittadell,
which Office was but for a day, and be that had it, was one of (...).
Ouerseer, and Laches pronounced these words: With good fortune to the people
of Athens, a suspension of Arms is concluded, according as the Lacedaemonians
and their Confederates have agreed; And they consented before the people, that
the suspens^on February.
Elaphebolion. In which time the Ambassadors and Heralds going from one side to
the other, should treat about a final end of the Wars. And that the
Commanders of the Army, and the Presidents of the City calling an Assembly, the
Athenians should hold a Council touching the manner of Embassage, for ending
of the War first. And the Ambassadors there present should now immediately
swear this Truce for a year. The same Articles, the Lacedaemonians
propounded, and the Confederates agreed unto, with the Athenians, and their
Confederates Lacedaemon, on the twelfth day of the Geraslion. The men that
agreed upon these Articles, and (...), they sacrificed at the making of all
accords between Cities.
sacrificed, were these, viz. Of the Lacedaemonians, Taurus the son of
Echetimidas, Athenaeus the son of Pericleidas, and Philocharidas, the son
of Eryxidaedas. Of the Corinthians, Aeneas the son of Ocytes, and Euphamidas
the son of Aristonymus. Of the Sicyonians; Damotimas the son of Naucrates,
and Onesimus the son of Megacles. Of the Megareans, Nicasus the son of
Cenalus, and Menecrates the son of Amphidorus. Of the Epidaurians, Amphias
the son of Eupaeidas; Of the Athenians, the Generals themselves, Nicostratus
the son of Diotrephes, Nicias the son of Niceratus, and Autocles the son
of Tolmaeus. This was the Truce, and during the same, they were continually in
Treaty, about a longer Peace.

About the same time, whilst they were going to and fro, The revolt of Scione.
Scione a City in Pallene revolted from the Athenians to Brasidas. The
Scionaeans say that they be Pellenians descended of those of Peloponnesus, and
that their Ancestors passing the Seas from Troy, were driven in by a Tempest,
which tossed the Achaeans up and down* and planted themselves Brasidas upon
their revolt, went over into Scione by night, and though he had a Gallie, with
him that went before, yet he himself followed a loofe, Brasidas goes over in
a a Boat, but with a Gally before him, and his reason.
in a Light-horseman. His reason was this, that if his Light-horseman should be
assaulted by some greater Vessel, the Gally would defend it; But if he met
with a Gally equal to his own, he made account that such a one would not
assault his Boat, but rather the Gally, whereby he might in the mean time go
through in safety. When he was over, and had called Scionaeans to assembly, he
spoke unto them as he had Acanthus, and Toronae, adding, Brasidas his speech
to the (...).
That they of all the rest were most worthy to be commended, in as much as
Pallene, being cut off in the Isthmus by the Athenians that possess Potidaea,
and being no other then Ilanders, did yet of their own accord come forth to
meet their liberty, and stayed not through cowardlinesse, till they must of
necessity have been compelled to their own manifest good. Which was an
argument, that they would valiantly undergo any other great matter, to have
their State ordered to their minds. And that he would verily hold them for
most faithful friends to the Lacedaemonians, and also otherwise The Scionaeans
were erected with these words of his; and now every one alike encouraged, as
well they that liked not what was done, as those that liked it, entertained a
purpose, stoutly to undergo the War; and received Brasidas both otherwise
honorably, The honor done to Brasidas by the (...).
and crowned him with a Crown of gold, in the name of the City, as the
deliverer of Greece. And private persons honored him with Garlands, and came
to him, as they use to do, to a Champion that has won a prize. But he
leaving there a small Garrison for the present, came back, Scione, to make an
attempt upon Menda and Potidaea. For he thought the Athenians would send
succors to the place, as to an Island, and desired to prevent them. Withal he
had in hand a practice with some within to have those Cities betrayed. So he
attended, ready to undertake that enterprise.

But in the mean time, came unto him in a Gally, Brasidas receives news of
the suspension of Arms.
Aristonymus for the Athenians, and Athenaeus for the Lacedaemonians, that
carried about the news of the Truce. Whereupon Torone. And these men related
unto Brasidas, the Articles of the agreement. The Confederates of the
Lacedaemonians, in Thrace approved of what was done, and Aristonymus had in all
other things satisfaction; But for the Scionaeans, whose revolt by computation
of the days, he had found to be after the making of the Truce, he denied that
they were comprehended therein. Brasidas said much in contradiction of this,
and that the City revolted before the Truce, Difference between the Athenians
and Laced^^monians, about the resti^tution of Scione, which revolted after the
(...) made, but before the Lacedaemonians kn^w of i^.
and refused to render it. But when Aristonymus had sent to Athens* to inform
Athenians were ready presently to have sent an Army against Scione. The
Lacedaemonians in the mean time, sent Ambassadors to the Athenians, Brasidas
his word; challenged the City to belong unto them, offering themselves to the
decision of Law. But the Athenians would by no means put the matter to
judgment. The Athenians prepare to War on Scione.
But meant, with all the speed they could make, to send an Army against it.
Being angry at the heart, that it should come to this pass, that even Ilanders
durst revolt, and trust to the unprofitable help of the strength of the
Lacedaemonians by Land. Besides, touching the time of the revolt, Athenians had
more truth on their side then themselves alleged. For the revolt of the
Scioneans was after the Truce two days. Decree of the Athenians against Scione.
Whereupon, by the advice of Cleon, they made a Decree, to take them by force,
and to put them all to the Sword. And forbearing War in all places else, they
prepared themselves only for that.

The revolt of Menda.
In the mean time revolted also Menda in Pallene, a Colony of the Eretrians.
These also Brasidas received into protection, holding it for no wrong, because
they came in openly in time of Truce. And somewhat there was also, Athenians
with, about breach of the Truce. For which cause the Mendaeans had also been
the bolder, as Sure he would not reject them.
sure of the intention of Brasidas, which they might guess at by Scione, in as
much as he could not be gotten to deliver it. Withal, the Few were they, which
had practiced the revolt, who being once about it, would by no means give it
over, but fearing lest they should be discovered, forced the multitude,
contrary to their own inclination to the same. The Athenians being hereof
presently advertised, and much more angry now then before, Brasidas expecting
that they would send a Fleet against them, received the women and children of
the Scionaeans, and Mendaeans into Olynthus in Chalcidea, and sent over thither
500 Peloponnesian men of Arms, and 300 Chalcidean Targettiers, and for
Commander of them all, Polydamidas. And those that were left in Scione, and
Menda, joined in the administration of their affairs, as expecting to have the
Athenian Fleet immediately with them.

Perdiccas and Brasidas jointly invade Arrhibaeus.
In the mean time Brasidas, and Perdiccas, with joint Lyncus against
Arrhibaeus, the second time. Perdiccas led with him the power of the
Macedonians his subjects, and such Grecian men of Arms as dwelt among them.
Brasidas besides the Peloponnesians that were left him, led with him the
Chalcideans, Acanthians, and the rest, according to the Forces they could
severally make. The whole number of the Grecian men of Arms were about 3000.
The horsemen, both Macedonians* and Chalcideans, somewhat less then 1000, but
the other Rabble of Barbarians was great. Being entered the Territory of
Arrhibaeus, and finding the Lyncesteans encamped in the field, Lyncesteans,
coming down to aid their Horse from the hill, and offering battle first, The
Lyncesteans fly.
Brasidas and Perdiccas drew down their Army likewise, and charging, put the
Lyncestians to flight, many of which being slain, the rest retired to the hill
top, and lay still. After this, they erected a Trophy Illyrians, Perdiccas
expects mercenary aid out of Illyris.
who were coming to Perdiccas upon hire, and Perdiccas meant afterward to
have gone on against the Villages of Arrhibaeus one after another, and to have
sitten still there no longer. But Brasidas having his thoughts on Menda, lest
if the Athenians came thither before his return, it should receive some blow;
seeing withal that the Illyrians came not, had no liking to do so, but rather
to retire. Whilst they thus varied, The Illyrians come and turn to Arrhibaus.
word was brought that the Illyrians had betrayed Perdiccas, and joined
themselves with Arrhibaeus. So Macedonians, and multitude of Barbarians (as it
is usual with great Armies to be terrified upon causes unknown) being
suddenly affrighted and supposing them to be many more in number then they
were, and even now upon them, The Macedonians upon a sudden fear run away, and
desert Brasidas.
betook themselves to present flight, and went home. And Perdiccas, who at
first knew not of it, they constrained when he knew, before he had Brasidas,
(their Camps being far asunder) to be gone also. Brasidas betimes in the
morning, Brasidas his retreat.
when he understood that the Macedonians were gone away without Illyrians* and
Arrhibaeans were coming upon him, putting his men of Arms into a square
form, and receiving the multitude of his light-armed into the midst,
intended to retire likewise. The youngest men of his Soldiers, he appointed to
run out upon the enemy, when they charged the Army any where with shot; and he
himself with three hundred chosen men, marching in the Rere, intended, as he
retired, to sustain the foremost of the enemy fighting, if they came close up.
But before the enemy approached, he encouraged his Soldiers, as the
shortness of time gave him leave, with

THE ORATION OF BRASIDAS to his Soldiers.
MEN of Peloponnesus, If I did not mistrust, in respect you are thus abandoned
by the Macedonians, and that the Barbarians which come upon you, are many, that
you were Many bear rule over the Few, but the Few over Many, and have gotten
this for power by no other means then by ouercomming in fight. And as
Barbarians, whom through ignorance you fear, you may take notice both by the
former battles, fought by us against them before, in favor of the Macedonians,
and also by what I my self conjecture, and have heard by others, that they
have no great danger in them. For when any enemy whatsoever makes show of
strength, being indeed weak, the truth once known, does rather serve to
embolden the other side, whereas against such as have valor indeed, a man will
be the boldest, when he knows the least. These men here, to such as have
not tried them, do indeed make terrible offers; for the sight of their number,
is

When Brasidas had made his exhortation, Brasidas draws away his army, and
the Barbarians follow him.
he led away Barbarians seeing it, pressed after them with great cries and
tumult, as supposing he fled. But seeing that those who were appointed to run
out upon them, did so, and met them, which way soever they came on; and that
Brasidas himself with his chosen band sustained them where they charged close,
and endured the first brunt, beyond their expectation, and seeing also that
afterward continually when they charged, the other received them and fought,
and when they ceased, the other Barbarians forbore the Grecians, that with
Brasidas were in the open field, and leaving a part to follow them with shot,
The Illyrians pursue the Macedonians, leaving part of their army to follow
Brasidas.
the rest ran with all speed after the Macedonians which were fled, of whom,
as many as they ouertooke, they slew; and withal, praepossessed the passage,
which is a narrow one between two hills, giving entrance into the Country of
Arrhibaeus* knowing that there was no other passage, by which Brasidas could
get away. And when he was come to the very strait, they were going about him,
Brasidas seazeth the top of the hill by which he was to pass.
to run every man as fast as he could to one of the tops, which of them they
could Barbarians that were now going up to the same, before any greater number
was above to hemme them in. These accordingly fought with, and overcame those
Barbarians upon the hill, and thereby the rest of the Army marched the more
easily to the top. For this beating of them from the vantage of the hill, made
the Barbarians also afraid, so that they followed them no further, conceiving
withal, that they were now at the Confines, and already escaped through.
Brasidas, having now gotten the hills, and marching with more Arnissa, of the
dominion of Perdiccas. The spite of Brasidas Soldiers against the Macedonians
for abandoning them.
And the Soldiers of themselves being angry with the Macedonians, for leaving
them behind, whatsoever teems of Oxen, or fardles fallen from any man (as was
likely to happen in a retreat, made in fear, and in the night) they lighted on
by the way, the Oxen they cut in pieces, and took the fardles to themselves.
And from this time did Perdiccas first esteem Brasidas as his enemy, Perdiccas
and Brasidas fall out.
and afterward hated the Peloponnesians, not with ordinary hatred for the
Athenians sake; but being utterly fallen out with him, about his own particular
interest, sought means as soon as he could, to

Brasidas at his return out of Macedonia to Torone, found that the Athenians
had already taken Menda, and therefore staying there (for he thought it
impossible to pass over into Pallene, and to recover Menda) he kept good watch
upon Torone. For about the time that these things passed amongst the
Lyncesteans, the Athenians after all was in readiness, set sail for Menda and
Scione, with 50 Galleys, whereof 10 were of Chius, and 1000 men of Arms of
their own City, 600 Archers, 1000 Thracian Mercenaries, and other Targettiers
Nicias the son of Niceratus, and Nicostratus the son of Diotrephes. These
lanching from Potidaea with their Galleys, The Mendaeans encampe without the
City.
and putting in at the Temple of Neptune, marched presently against the
Mendaeans. The Mendaeans with their own forces, 300 of Scione that came to aid
them, and the aids of the Peloponnesians, in all 700 men of Arms, and
Polydamidas their Commander, were encamped upon a strong hill without the City
Nicias with 120 light-armed Soldiers Methone, and 60 chosen men of Arms of
Athens, and all Nicias wounded.
and could not make his way by force. And Nicostratus with all the rest of the
Army, going another way farther about, as he climbed the hill being hard of
access, was quite disordered, and the whole Army wanted little of being
utterly discomfited. So for this day, seeing the Mendaeans and their
Confederates stood to it, the Athenians retired, and pitched their Camp. And
at night the Mendaeans retired into the City. The next day the Athenians
sailing about unto that part of the City Scione, seized on the suburbs, and
all that day wasted their fields, no man coming forth to oppose them; for
there was also sedition in the City, Sedition (...)*
and the 300 Scionaeans the night following went home again. The next day,
Nicias with the one half of the Army marched to the Confines, and wasted the
Territory of the Scionaeans, and Nicostratus at the same time with the other
half, sat down against the City, before the higher Gates toward Potidaea.
Polydamidas (for it fell out that the Mendaeans, and their aides had their
Arms lying within the wall, in this part) set his Mendaeans to make a sally.
But when one of the faction of the Commons in sedition, said to the contrary,
that they would not go out, and that it was not necessary to fight, and was
upon this contradiction, by Polydamidas pulled and molested, the Commons in
passion presently took up their Arms, and made toward the Peloponnesians,
and such other with them as were of the contrary faction, and falling upon
them, put the^ to flight, partly with the suddenness of the charge, and partly
through the fear they were in of the Athenians, The Gates opened to the
Athenians upon sedition.
to whom the Gates were at the same time opened. For they imagined that this
insurrection was by some appointment made between them. So they fled into the
Cittadell, as many as were not presently slain, which was also in their own
hands before. But the Athenians (for now was Nicias also come back, and at the
Town side) rushed into the City, with the whole Army, and rifled it, not as
opened to them by agreement, but as taken by force. And the Captains had much
ado to keep them that they also killed not the men. After this, Menda
pillaged by the Athenians.
they bade the Mendaeans authors of the revolt, amongst themselves. Those
Menda, The Athenians lead their army against Scione.
they led their Army against Scione.

The Scionaeans, and the Peloponnesians, coming out against them, possessed
themselves of a strong hill before the City, which if the enemy did not win,
he should not be able to enclose the City with a wall. The Athenians having
strongly charged them with shot, and beaten the defendants from it, encamped
upon the hill, and after they Athenians were at work about this, those aides
that were besieged in the Cittadell of Menda, forcing the watch by the
Seaside, came by night, and escaping most of them through the Camp before
Scione, put themselves into that City.

Perdiccas makes Peace with the Athenians.
As they were enclosing of Scione, Perdiccas sent a Herald to the Athenian
Commanders, and concluded a Peace with the Athenians, upon hatred to Brasidas,
about the retreat made out of Lyncus, having then immediately begun to
Ischagoras a Lacedaemonian was leading an Army of foot unto Brasidas. And
Perdiccas, partly because Nicias advised him, seeing the Peace was made, to
give some clear token that he would be firm, and partly because he himself
desired not that the Peloponnesians should come any more into his Territories,
wrought with his hosts in Thessaly, having in that kind, ever used the prime
men, and so stopped the Army and Munition, as they would not so much as try the
Thessalians, whether they would let them pass or not. Ischagoras, and
Ameinias, and Aristeus themselves went on to Brasidas, as sent by the
Lacedaemonians to view the state of affairs there. The Lacedaemonians make
young men governors of Cities.
And also took with them from Sparta, contrary to the Law, such men as were
but in the beginning of their youth to make them governors of Cities, rather
then to commit the Cities to the care of such as were there before. And
Clearidas the son of Cleonymus, they made governor of Amphipolis, and
Epitelidas the son of Hegesander, governor of Torone.

The walls of Thespiae demolished by the Thebans.
The same Summer, the Thebans demolished the walls Thespians, laying Atticisme
to their charge. And Athenians.

The Temple of Juno in Argos, The Temple of Juno in Argos burnt by negligence
of an old woman Priest.
was also burnt down the same Summer, by the negligence of Chrysis the Priest,
who having set a burning Torch by the Garlands, fell asleep, insomuch as all
was on fire, and flamed out before she knew. Chrysis the same night, for fear
of the Argiues, fled presently to Phlius, and they according to the Law
formerly used, chose another Priest in her room, called Phaeinis. Now when
Chrysis fled, Phaeinis, Priest of Juno, in the place of Chrysis.
was the eighth year of this War ended, and half of the ninth.

Scione in the very end of this Summer was quite enclosed, and the Athenians
having left a guard there, Siege laid to Scione.
The end of the ninth Summer.
went home with the rest of their Army.

The Winter following, nothing was done between the Athenians and the
Lacedaemonians, because of the Truce. Battle between the Mantineans and the
Tegeatae.
But the Mantineans, and the Tegeatae, with the Confederates of both, fought a
battle at Laodicea, in the Territory of Orestis, wherein the victory was
doubtful, for either side put Delphi. Nevertheless, after many slain on
either side, and equal battle, which ended by the coming of night, the
Tegeatae lodged all night in the place, and erected their Trophie then
presently, whereas the Mantineans turned to Bucolion, and set up their Trophie
afterward.

The same Winter ending, and the Spring now approaching, Brasidas made an
attempt upon Potidaea; Brasidas attempteth Potidaea.
For coming by night, he applied his Ladders, and was thitherto The end of the
ninth year.
So ended this Winter, and the ninth year of this War written by THVCYDIDES.

THE FIFTH BOOK
The principal Contents.
The former years Truce ended, Cleon warre^h on the Chalcidicke Cities, and
recouereth Torone. Phaeax is sent by the Athenians, to move a War amongst the
Sicilians. Cleon and Brasidas, who were on both sides the principal
maintainers Amphipolis. Presently after their death, a Peace is concluded, and
after that again, a League between the Lacedaemonians and the Athenians.
Diverse of the Lacedaemonian Confederates hereat discontented* seek the
Confederacy of the Argiues. These make League, first with the Corinthians,
Eleans, and Mantineans, then with the Lacedaemonians; and then again (by the
artifice of Alcibiades) with the Athenians. After this the Argiues make War
upon the Epidaurians; and the Lacedaemonians upon the Argiues. The Athenian
Captains and the Melians treat Melos, which the Athenians afterward besiege
and win. These are the Acts of almost six years more of the same War.

THE Summer following, The Truce for a year expired.
the Truce for a year, which was to last till the Exercises dedicated to
Apollo, and celebrated at Delphi, about the 12 of the month Elaphobolium, as
may be gathered by the beginning of the Truce on that day.

The Delians removed out of Delos, upon superstition.


Pythian Holidayes, expired. During this Truce, the Athenians removed the
Delians out of Delos; because though they were consecrated, yet for a certain
crime committed purgation of the Island; in the purging whereof, as I declared
(...). 3. page 201.
before, they thought they did well to take up the sepulchers of the dead.
These Delians seated themselves afterward, The Delians ^eat themselves in
Adramyttium.
every one as he came, in Adramyttium in Asia, a Town given unto them by
Pharnaces.

Cleon goes out with an (...), into the parts upon Thrace.
After the Truce was expired, Cleon prevailed with the Athenians, to be sent out
with a Fleet against the Cities, lying upon Thrace; He had with him of
Athenians, 1200 men of Arms, and 300 horsemen; Of Confederates more, and
thirty Galleys. And first arriving at Scione, which was yet besieged, he took
aboard some men of Arms, of those Colophonians, not far distant from the
City of Torone. And there having heard by fugitives, that Brasidas was not in
Torone, He assaulteth Torone.
nor those within sufficient to give him battle, he marched with his Army to
the City, and sent ten of his Galleys about into the Into the Haven of Torone.
Haven. And first he came to the New-wall, which Brasidas had raised about the
City to take in the Suburbs, making a breach in the Old-wall, that the whole
might be one City. Pasitelidas with the Garrison of the Town, endeavors to
defend it.
And Pasitelidas, a Lacedaemonian, Captain of the Town, with the Garrison
there present, came to the defense, and fought with the Athenians that
Pasitelidas was afraid, lest those Galleys should take the Town, unfurnished
of defendants, before he could get back, and that the Athenians on the
otherside should win the wall, and he be intercepted between them both; and
thereupon abandoned the wall, and ran back into the City. Cleon takes Torone.
But the Athenians that were in the Galleys, having taken the town before he
came, and the Land-army following in after him, without resistance, and entering
the City by Peloponnesians, and Toronaeans on the place, and some others,
amongst whom was the Captain Pasitelidas, Pasitelidas, a Lacedaemonian
Captain, taken alive.
they took alive. Brasidas was now coming with aid toward Torone, but
advertised by the way, that it was already lost, went back again, being about
forty Furlongs short of preventing it. Cleon and the Athenians erected two
Trophies, one at the Haven, another at the Wall.

The Women and Children of the Toronaeans, they made Torone, and the
Peloponnesians, and Chalcideans as were amongst them, in all, about 700; Seven
hundred men sent prisoners to Athens.
they sent away prisoners to Athens. The Peloponnesians were afterward, at the
making of the Peace, dismissed, the rest were redeemed, by the Olynthians by
exchange of man for man.

About the same time the Boeotians took Panactum, Panactum taken by the
Boeotians.
a Fort of the Athenians, standing in their Confines, by treason.

Cleon, after he had settled the Garrison in Torone, Cleon goes to Amphipolis.
went thence by Sea about the mountain Athos, to make War against Amphipolis.

Phaeax the son of Erasistratus, Phaeax sent Ambassador to the Sicilians.
who with two others was sent Ambassador into Italy, and Sicily, departed from
Athens with two Galleys. For the Leontines, after the Athenians, upon the
making of the Peace, were gone out of Sicily, received many strangers into the
freedom of their City, and the Commons had a purpose also to have made division
of the Land. But the great men perceiving it, The Leontine Commons driven out
of the City by the Syracusians.
called in the Syracusians, and drove the Commons out. And they wandered up and
down every one as he chanced, and the great men, upon conditions agreed on with
the Syracusians, The Leontine Nobility become Syracusians, and go to Syracusa
to dwell.
abandoning Syracusa. After this again, some of them, upon dislike,
relinquished Syracusa, and seized on Phoceae, a certain place, part of the
City of the Leontines, and upon Bricinniae, a Castle in the Leontine Territory;
thither also came unto them most of the Commons, The Leontines make War on the
Syracusians.
that had before been driven out, and settling themselves, made War from
those places of strength. Upon intelligence hereof, the Athenians sent Phaeax
thither, to persuade their Confederates there, and, if they could, Phaeax
moves the Sicilians to War upon the Syracusians.
all the Sicilians jointly, Syracusians that were now beginning to grow great,
to try if they might thereby preserve the common people of the Leontines.
Phaeax arriving, prevailed with the Camarinaeans, and Agrigentines: but the
business finding a stop at Gelas, The Gelans stop the motian made by Phaeax.
he went unto no more, as conceiving he should not be able to persuade the^.
So he returned through the cities of the Siculi unto Catana, having been at
Bricinniae, by the way, and there encouraged them to hold out* and from Catana
he set sail, and departed. In his voyage to Sicily, both going and coming,
he Italy, to enter into friendship with the Athenians.

He also lighted on those Locrians, which having dwelt Messina, were afterward
driven out again; being the same men, which after the Peace in Sicily, upon a
sedition in Messina, wherein one of the factious called in the Locrians, had
been then sent to inhabit there, and now were sent away again. For the
Locrians held Messina for a while. Phaeax therefore chancing to meet with these;
as they were going to their own City, did them no hurt, because the Locrians
had been in speech with him about an agreement with the Athenians. Phaeax
makes Peace with the Locrians.
For when the Sicilians made a general Peace, these only of all the
Confederates, refused Athenians. Nor indeed would they have done it now, but
that they were constrained thereunto by the War they had with the Itonians,
and Melaeans their own Colonies and borderers. And Phaeax, after this,
returned to Athens.

Cleon, who was now gone from Torone, and come about to Amphipolis, Cleon
makes War on Amphipolis.
making Eion the seat of the War, assaulted the City of Stagirus the City
where Aristotle was borne.
Stagirus, a Colony of the Andrians, but could not take it; But Gampselus, a
Colony of the Thasians he took by assault. Gampselus taken by Cleon.
And having sent Ambassadors to Perdiccas, Thrace unto Poll^s, Brasidas
sits down over against Cleon, at Cerdylium.
King of the Odoma^ians, to take up as many mercenary Thracians, as he could,
he lay still in Eion, to expect their coming. Brasidas upon notice hereof,
sat down over against him at Cerdylium. This is a place belonging to the
Argilians, standing high, and beyond the River, not far from Amphipolis, and
from whence he might discern all that was about him. So that Cleon could not
but be seen, if he should rise with his Army to go Amphipolis; which he
expected he would do; and that in contempt of his small number, he would go
up with the Forces he had then present. Withal he furnished himself with 1500
mercenary Thracians, and took unto him all his Edonians, both horsemen, and
Targettiers. He had also of Myrcinians, The Forces of Brasidas.
and Chalcideans, 1000 Targettiers* besides them in Amphipolis. But for men of
Arms, his whole number was at the most 2000; and of Grecian horsemen 300. With
1500 of these, came Brasidas, and sat down at Cerdylium, the rest stood ready
ordered with Clearidas Amphipolis. Cleon for a while lay Cleon goes up to
Amphipolis against his own mind.
but was afterward forced to do as was expected by Brasidas. For the
Soldiers being angry with their stay there, and recounting with themselves,
what a command his would be, and with what ignorance, and cowardice, against
what skill and boldness of the other, and how they came forth with him against
their wills; he perceived their muttering, and being unwilling to offend them
with so long a stay in one place, dislodged, and led them forward. And he took
the same course there, which having succeeded well before at Pylus, gave him
cause to think himself to have some judgment. Cleon, not expecting a ^^lly,
vieweth the (...) of the Town.
For he thought Amphipolis, standing himself to view the Fens of the river
Strymon, and the situation of the City toward Torace; and thought he could
have retired again Brasidas, Brasidas puts himself into Amphipolis.
as soon as he saw the Athenian^ remove, came down also from Cerdylium, and
put himself into Amphipolis. He would not suffer them to make any sally, nor
to face the Athenians in order of battle, mistrusting his own Forces, which
he Athenians as were there, were pure, and the Lemnians, and Imbrians which
were amongst them, were of the very ablest) but prepared to set upon them by a
wile. A stratagem of Brasidas.
For if he should have showed to the enemy, both his number, and their Armor,
such as for the present they were forced to use, he thought that thereby he
should not so soon get the victory, as by keeping them out of sight, and out
of their contempt, till the very point. Wherefore choosing to him self 150 men
of Clearidas* he resolved to set suddenly upon them before they should retire;
as not expecting to take them so alone another

THE ORATION OF BRASIDAS to his Soldiers.
MEN of Peloponnesus, as for your Country, how by valor it has ever retained
her liberty; and that being Dorians, Ionians, of whom you were ever wont to get
the victory, let it suffice that I have touched it thus briefly. But in what
manner I intend to charge, that, I am now to inform you of; lest the venturing
by few at once, and not altogether, should seem to proceed from weakness, and
so dishearten you. I do conjecture that it was in contempt of us, and as not
expecting to be fought withal, that the enemy both came up to this place, and
that they have now betaken themselves carelessly, and out of order to view the
Country. But he that best observing such errors in his enemies, shall also,
to his strength, give the onset, not always openly, and Clearidas, afterward,
as soon as you shall see me to have charged* and (as it is probable) to have
put them into affright, take those Amphipolitans, and all the rest of the
Confederates, and setting open the Gates, run out upon them, and with all
possible speed, come up to stroke of hand (for there is great hope this way to
terrify them, seeing they which come after, are ever of more terror to the
enemy, then those that are already present, and in fight.) And be valiant, as
is likely you should that are a Spartan; and you Confederates, follow manfully,
and believe that the parts of a good Soldier, are willingness, sense of
shame, and obedience to his Leaders; and that this day you shall either gain
your selves liberty by your valor, and to be called Confederates of the
Lacedaemonians, Athenians your selves, and at the Grecians. But be not you
cowards, seeing how great a matter is at stake: and I for my part will make it
appear, that I am not more ready to persuade another, then to put my self
into action.

When Brasidas had thus said, Brasidas prepares to assault the army of the
Athenians.
he both prepared to go out himself, and also placed the rest that were with
Clearidas before the Gates, called the Thracian Gates, to issue forth
afterward as was appointed. Now Brasidas having Cerdylium, and again when he
sacrificed in the City, by the Temple of Pallas, which place might be seen
from without, it was told Cleon, whilst Brasidas was ordering of his men, (for
he was at this time gone off a little to look about him) that the whole Army
of the enemies was plainly to be discerned within the Town, and that the feet
of many men, Cleon is admonished of a sally toward:
and horses, ready to come forth, might be discerned from under the Gate.
Hearing this, he came to the place, and when he saw it was true, being not
minded to fight, until And leads his army back.
he commanded at once to give the signal of retreat, and that, as they went,
the left Wing should march foremost, which was the only means they had to
withdraw toward Eion. But when he thought they were long about it, causing the
right Wing to wheel about, and lay open their disarmed parts to the enemy, he
led away the Army himself. Brasidas at the same time, having spied his
opportunity, and that the Army of the Athenians removed, said to those about
him, and the rest, These men stay not for us; Brasidas takes this opportunity
for this sally.
it is apparent by the wagging of their Spears, and of their heads. For where
such motion is, they use not stay for the charge of the enemy: Therefore open
me some body the Gates appointed, and let us boldly and speedily sally forth
upon them. Then he went out himself at the Gate toward the Trench, and which
was the first Gate of the Long-wall, which then was standing, and at high speed
took the straightway, in which, as one passes by the strongest part of the
Town, there stands now a Trophy. And charging upon the midst of the Athenian
Army, Clearidas, (as was appointed) having issued out, by the Thracian
Athenians by this unexpected and sudden attempt, were on both sides in
confusion; and the left wing which was next to Eion, and which indeed was
marching away before, was immediately broken off, from the rest of the Army,
Brasidas is wounded and ^^lleth.
and fled. When that was gone, Brasidas coming up to the right wing, was there
wounded. The Athenians saw not when he fell, and they that were near, took
him up, and carried him off. The right wing stood longer to it; and though
Cleon himself presently fled, (as Myrcinian Targettier, and slain, yet his
men of Arms casting themselves into a circle, Cleon flies, and is slain.
on the top of a little hill, twice or thrice resisted the charge of Clearidas,
and shrunk not at all, till begirt with the Myrcinian and Chalcidean horse,
Brasidas his army gets the victory.
and with the Targettiers, they were put to flight by their Darts. Thus the
whole Army of the Athenians, getting away with much ado over the hills, and by
several ways: all that were not slain upon the place, or by the Chalcidean
horse, and Targettiers, recovered Eion. Brasidas out of the battle, and having
so long kept him alive, brought him yet breathing into the City. Brasidas
lives only so long as to know he had the victory.
And he knew that his side had gotten the victory; but expired shortly after.
When Clearidas with the rest of the Army, were returned from pursuit of the
enemy, they rifled those that were slain, and erected a Trophie.

The honor done to Brasidas after his death.
After this the Confederates following the Corpse of Brasidas, all of them in
their Arms, buried him in the City at the public charge, in the entrance of
that which is Amphipolitans afterward having taken in his Monument with a
wall, Killed sacrifices unto him.
killed unto him, as to a Ors^mig^d.
Hero, honored him with Games and anniuersary sacrifice, and attributed their
Colony unto him, as to the Founder; pulling down the Edifices of Who was their
true Founder.
Agnon, and defacing whatsoever Monument might maintain the memory of his
foundation. This they did both for that they esteemed Brasidas for their
preserver, and also because at this time, through fear of the Athenians, they
courted the Lacedaemonians for a League. As for Agnon, Athenians, they thought
Athenians; of whom there were slain about 600, and but seven of the other
side, by reason, that it was no set battle, but fought upon such an occasion
and precedent affright. After the dead were taken up, the Athenians went home
by Sea, and Clearidas, and those with him, stayed to settle the estate of
Amphipolis.

About the same time of the Summer now ending, Ramphias, Antocharidas, and
Epicydidas, Lacedaemonians, Supplies going to Brasidas, stay by the way at
Heraclea.
were leading Thrace, of 900 men of Arms, and when they were come to Heraclea,
in Trachinia they stayed there, to amend such things as they thought amiss;
Whilst they stayed, this battle was fought. And the Summer ended.

The next Winter they that were with Ramphias, The end of the ^enth Summer.

The supplies going to Brasidas, hearing of his death, return to Lacedaemon.


went presently forward, as far as the hill Pierium in Thessaly. But the
Thessalians forbidding them to go on, and Brasidas to whom they were carrying
this Army being dead, they returned homewards; conceiving that the opportunity
Athenians were upon this overthrow gone away, and for that they themselves were
unable to perform any of those designs, which the other had intended. But the
principal cause of their return was this, that they knew at their coming
forth, that the Lacedaemonians had their minds, more set upon a Peace, then
War.

Presently after the battle of Amphipolis, and return of Rhamphias out of
Thessaly, it fell out, The Athenians, and Lacedaemonians incline to Peace.
that neither side did any act of War, but were inclined rather to a Peace;
Athenians for the blow they had received at Delium, The causes why the
Athenians desired Peace.
and this other, a little after, at Amphipolis; and because they had no longer
that confident hope in their strength, on which they relied, when formerly they
refused the Peace, as having conceived upon their present success, that they
should have had the upper hand.

Also they stood in fear of their own Confederates, lest emboldned by these
losses of theirs, they should more and more revolt, and repented that they made
not the Peace, after their happy success at Pylus, when occasion The causes
why the Lacedaemonians desired peace
And the Lacedaemonians on the other side did desire Peace, because the War
had not proceeded as they expected: for Athens, by wasting their Territory; and
because they were fallen into that calamity in the Island, the like whereof had
never happened unto Sparta before: because also their Country was continually
rauaged by those of Pylus and Cythera, and their Helotes continually fled to
the Enemy; and because they feared lest those which remained, trusting in them
that were run away, should in this estate of theirs, raise some innovation,
as at other times before they had done. Withal it happened, that Argiues was now
upon the point of expiring; and the Argiues Ampe^idas and Lichas we (...) to
Argos (...) but the Argiues (...) Lacedaemonians (...) Athenians, refused it.
would not renew it, without restitution made them of Cynuria; so that to war
against the Argiues and the Athenians both at once, seemed impossible. They
suspected also, that some of the Cities of Peloponnesus would revolt to the
Argiues, as indeed it came afterward to pass. These things considered, it was
by both parts thought good to conclude a Peace; but especially by the
Lacedaemonians, for the desire they had to recover their men taken in the
Island; for the Spartans that were

But the Athenians, by reason of their prosperity, would not lay down the War
at that time on equal terms. But after their defeat at Delium, the
Lacedaemonians knowing they would be apter now to accept it, made that Truce
for a year, during which they were to meet, and consult about a longer time.
But when also this other overthrow happened to the Athenians at Amphipolis, and
that both Cleon and Brasidas were slain (the which on either side were most
opposite to the Peace; Cleon and Brasidas opposers of the Peace for several
ends.
the one, for that he had good success and honor in the War; the other,
because in quiet times his evil actions would more appear, and his
calumniations be the less believed) those two that in the two States aspired
most to be chief, Pleistoanax and Nicias perswaders to Peace.
Pleistoanax the son of Pausanias, and Nicias the son of Niceratus, who in
Military charges had been the most fortunate of his time, did most of all
other desire to have the Peace go forward; Nicias, because he was desirous,
Nicias his ends in seeking Peace.
The reason why Pleistoanax desired the peace.
and by putting himself as little as he might into the hands of Fortune: And
to stand out of danger is the benefit of Peace. Pleistoanax had the same
desire, because of the imputation laid upon him, about his return from exile,
by his enemies, that suggested unto the Lacedaemonians upon Aristocles, had
suborned the Prophetess of Delphi, to answer the (...). Ambassadors to the
Oracles (...) so called.
Deputies of the Lacedaemonians when they came thither, most commonly with
this, That they should bring back the seed of the Hercules, from whom
Pleistoanax was descended.
Semigod, the son of Jupiter, out of a strange Country into his own: and
that if they did not, they should plow their land with a silver plough: and so
at length to have made the Lacedaemonians, 19. years after, with such Dances
and Sacrifices Lacedaemon had ordained to be used, at the enthroning of their
Kings, to fetch him home again, who lived in the mean time in exile in the
Mountain Lycaeum, in a House whereof the one half was part of the Temple of
Jupiter, for fear of the Lacedaemonians, as being suspected to have taken a
bribe to withdraw his Army out of Attica. Pleistoanax banished for withdrawing
his Army out of Attica.


Being troubled with these imputations, and considering with himself, there
being no occasion of calamity in time of Peace, and the Lacedaemonians thereby
recovering their

And this Winter they fell to treaty, and withal the Lacedaemonians braued
them with a preparation already making against the Spring, The Lacedaemonians
desiring the peace, make show of War.
sending to the Cities about for that purpose, as if they meant to fortify in
Attica, to the end that the Athenians might give them the better Peace
concluded.
that Peace should be concluded, each part rendering what they had taken in
Athenians should hold Nisaea, (for when they likewise demanded Plataea, and the
Thebans answered, that it was neither taken by force, nor by treason, but
rendered voluntarily, the Athenians said that they also had Nisaea in the same
manner. The Boeotians, Corinthians, Eleans, and Megareans, refuse to be
comprehended.
) The Lacedaemonians calling together their Confederates, and all but the
Boeotians, Corinthians, Eleans, and Megareans, (for these disliked it) giving
their votes for the ending of the War, they concluded the Peace, and
confirmed it to the Athenians with sacrifice, and swore it, and the Athenians
again unto them, upon Articles.

THE ARTICLES OF THE PEACE BETWEEN THE ATHENIANS, AND THE LACEDAEMONIANS.
The Athenians, and Lacedaemonians, and their Confederates, have made Peace,
and sworn it, City by City, as follows:

Touching the public Temples, it shall be lawful to whomsoever will, to
sacrifice in them, and to have access unto them, and to ask counsel of the
Oracles in the same, and to send their (...) about matters of Religion.
Deputies unto them, according to the custom of his Country, securely both by
Sea and Land.

The whole place consecrate, and Temple of Apollo, in Delphi, and Delphi it
self, shall be governed by their own Law, taxed by

The Peace shall endure between the Athenians, with their Confederates, and
the Lacedaemonians with their Confederates, for fifty years, both by Sea and
Land, without fraud, and without harme-doing.

It shall not be lawful to bear Arms, with intention of hurt, neither for
the Lacedaemonians and their Confederates, against the Athenians, nor for the
Athenians and their Confederates, against Lacedaemonians, by any Art or
Machination whatsoever.

If any Controversy shall arise between them, the same shall be decided die
Law, and by Oath, in such manner as they shall agree on.

The Lacedaemonians and their Confederates, shall render Amphipolis to the
Athenians.

The Inhabitants, of whatsoever City the Lacedaemonians shall render unto the
Athenians, shall be at liberty, to go forth whither they will, with bag and
baggage.

Those Cities which paid the tribute, taxed in the Which was the first time
that the Athenians began to command the rest of Greece ^or (...) the end of the
Medan War, the Lacedaemonians left that Command, the Athenians undertook it,
and taxed the several Cities with tribute toward the War. The War ended,
the tribute ended not.
time of Aristides, continuing to pay it, shall be governed by their own
Laws, Athenians, or their Confederates, to bear Arms against them, or to do
them any hurt, as long as they shall pay the said tribute. The Cities are
these, Argilus, Stagirus, Acanthus, Scolus, Olynthus, Spartolus. And they shall
be Confederates of neither side, neither of the Lacedaemonians, nor of the
Athenians. But if the Athenians can persuade these Cities unto it, then it
shall be lawful for the Athenians to have them for Confederates, having
gotten their consent.

The Mecybernians, Sanaeans,, and Singaeans, shall inhabit Olynthians and
Acanthians.

The Lacedaemonians, and their Confederates, shall render Panactum unto the
Athenians. And the Athenians shall render to the Lacedaemonians, The promont^ry
(...) stood, put (...) for (...).
Coryphasium, Cythera, Methone, Pteleum, and Atalante.

They shall likewise deliver whatsoever Lacedaemonians are in the prison of
Athens, or in any prison of what place soever, in the Athenian dominion; and
dismiss all the Peloponnesians, besieged in Scione, and all that Brasidas did
there put in, and whatsoever Lacedaemonians are in prison, either at Athens, or
in the Athenian State. And the Lacedaemonians and their Confederates, shall
deliver whomsoever they have in their hands of the Athenians, or their
Confederates, in the same manner.

Touching the Scioneans, Toronaeans, and Sermylians, and whatsoever other City
belonging to the Athenians, the Athenians shall do with them, what they think
fit.

The Athenians shall take an Oath to the Lacedaemonians and their Confederates,
City by City; and that Oath shall be the greatest I stand to these Articles,
and to this Peace, truly and sincerely. And the Lacedaemonians and their
Confederates, shall take the same Oath to the Athenians. This oath they shall
on both sides every year renew, and shall erect Pillars, [inscribed with this
Peace] at Olympia, By Delphi where the Pythian games were kept.
Pythia, and in the Isthmus; at Athens, within the Cittadell; and at
Lacedaemon, in the Amyclaeum, a Temple of Apollo.
Amycleum.

And if any thing be on either side forgotten, or shall be thought fit upon
good deliberation to be changed; it shall be lawful for them to This Article
displeased the Confederates of Lacedaemon, because the Articles might by this
be changed without them.
in such manner as the Lacedaemonians, and Athenians shall think fit, jointly.

This Peace shall take beginning from the 24 of the month Artemisium, being
Ephore, at Sparta, and the 15 of February.
Elaphebolium, after the account of Athens, Alcaeus, being Archon.

They that took the Oath, and sacrificed, were these; of the Lacedaemonians,
Pleistolas, Damagetus, Chionis, Metagenes, Acanthus, Daidus, Ischagoras,
Philocaridas, Zeuxidas, Anthippus, Tellis, Alcenidas, Empedias, Menas,
Laphilus. Of the Athenians these, Lampon, Isthmionicus, Nicias, Laches,
Euthidemus, Procles, Pythadorus, Agnon, Myrtilus, Thrasycles, Theagenes,
Aristocoetes, Iolcius, Timocrates,

This Peace was made in the very It appears here that the Month Elaphobolion
amongst the Athenians was the last Month of their Winter quarter.
end of Winter, and the Spring then beginning, presently after the City
Bacchanals, and full ten years, and some few days over, after the first
invasion of Attica, and the beginning of this War. But now for the certainety
hereof, let a man consider the times themselves, and not trust to the account
of the names of such as in the several places bare chief offices, or for some
honor to themselves, had their names The true way of accounting the years of
this War.
according as they are written, he shall find by the two half years, which
make the whole, that this first War was of ten Summers, and as many Winters
continuance.

The Lacedaemonians begin to perform the Articles, and presently deliver their
prisoners.
The Lacedaemonians (for it fell unto them by lot to begin the restitution) both
dismissed presently those Prisoners Ischagoras, Menas, and Philocharidas into
the parts upon Thrace, with command to Clearidas to deliver up Amphipolis to
the Athenians, and requiring the rest of their Confederates there to accept of
the Peace in such manner as was for every of them accorded. But they would not
do it, because they thought it was not for their advantage. The Amphipolitans
refuse to render themselves under the Athenians.
And Clearidas also, to gratify the Chalcideans, surrendered not the City,
alleging that he could not do it whether they would or not. And coming away
soon after with those Ambassadors Lacedaemon, both to purge himself, if he
should Ischagoras, for disobeying the States command, Clearidas endeavors to
dissolve the Peace.
and also to try if the Peace might by any means be shaken: when he found it
firm, he himself being sent back by the Lacedaemonians, with command
principally to surrender the place, and if he could not do that, then to draw
thence all the Peloponnesians that were in it, immediately took his journey.
But the Confederates chanced to be present themselves in Lacedaemon, and the
Lacedaemonians required such of them as formerly refused, that they would
accept the Peace: but they, upon the same pretense on which they had rejected
it before, said, Lacedaemonians seeing they refused, dismissed them, and by
themselves entered with the Athenians into a League; The Lacedaemonians make
league with the Athenians.
because they imagined that the Argiues would not renew their Peace (because
they had refused it before, when Ampelidas and Lichas went to Argos,) and held
them for no dangerous Enemies without the Athenians: and also conceived, that
by this means the rest of Peloponnesus would not stir; for if they could,
they would turn to the Athenians. Wherefore the Ambassadors of Athens being

The Lacedaemonians shall be Confederates with the Athenians for fifty years.
THE ARTICLES OF THE LEAGVE BETWEEN THE LACEDAEMONIANS AND THE ATHENIANS.


If any enemy invade the territory of the Lacedaemonians, and do the
Lacedaemonians any harm, the Athenians shall aid the Lacedaemonians against
them in the strongest manner they can Lacedaemonians and to the Athenians, and
shall be warred upon by them both; and both Cities shall again lay down the
War jointly. And this to be done justly, readily, and sincerely.

And if any enemy shall invade the Territories of the Athenians, and do the
Athenians any harm, then the Lacedaemonians shall aid the Athenians against
them, in the strongest manner they can possibly. But if the enemy, after he
has spoiled the Country, shall be gone away, then shall that City be held
for enemy both to the and to the Athenians, and shall be warred upon by both,
and both the Cities shall again lay down the War together. And this to be
done justly, readily, and sincerely.

If their slaves shall rebel, the Athenians shall assist the Lacedaemonians
with all their strength possible.

These things shall be sworn unto by the same men on either side that swore
the peace, and shall be every year renewed by the Lacedaemonians at their
coming to the Bacchanalia Vrbica. Which were celebrated yearly, not much
before this time.
Bacchanals at Athens; and by the Athenians at their going to the Hyacinthian
Feast at Lacedaemon; and either side shall erect a Pillar [inscribed with this
League] one at Lacedaemon, near unto Apollo in the Amycleum, another at
Athens, near Minerua in the Citadell.

If it shall seem good to the Lacedaemonians and Athenians to add or take
away anything touching the League, it shall be lawful for them to do it
jointly.

Of the Lacedaemonians took the Oath, these, Pleistoanax, Agis, Pleistolas,
Damagetus, Chionis, Metagenes, Acanthus, Daidus, Ischagoras, Philocharidas,
Zeuxidas, Anthippus, Alcinadas, Tellis, Empedias, Menas, Laphilus. Of the
Athenians, Lampon, Istmionicus, Laches, Nicias, Euthydemus, Procles,
Pythodorus, Agnon, Myrtilus, Thrasycles, Theagenes, Aristocrates, Iolcius,
Timocrates, Leon, Lamachus and Demosthenes.

This League was made not long after the Peace. And the Athenians delivered to
the Lacedaemonians the men they had taken in the Island; The Athenians deliver
the prisoners taken at Pylus.
and by this time began the Summer of the eleventh year. And hitherto has
been written these ten years which this first War continued, without
intermission.

THE ELEVENTH YEAR.
After the Peace and League made between the Lacedaemonians and Athenians,
after the ten years War, Pleistolas being Ephore at Lacedaemon, and
Alcaeus Archon of Athens; though there were Peace to those that had accepted
Corinthians and some Cities of Peloponnesus, endeavored to overthrow what was
done, and presently arose another stir, by the Confederates, against
Lacedaemon. The Lacedaemonians slack in performance of the Articles of the
Peace.
And the Lacedaemonians also after a while became suspect unto the Athenians,
for not performing somewhat agreed on in the Articles. And for six years and
ten months, they abstayned form entering into each others Territories with
their Arms: but the Peace being but weak, they did each other abroad what
harm they Thucydides of Athens, written from point to point, by Summers and
Winters, as every thing came to pass, until such time as the Lacedaemonians,
and their Confederates, had made an end of the Athenian dominion, and had taken
their Long-wals and Peiraeus. From the beginning to this end of the War 27
years.
To which time from the beginning of the War, it is in all 27 years. As for
the composition between, if any man shall think it not to be accounted with
the War, he shall think amiss. For let him look into the actions that passed as
they are distinctly set down, and he shall find, that, The time of this Peace,
not to be esteemed Peace.
that deserves not Mantinean and Epidaurian wars, and in other actions, it was
on both sides infringed. Moreover, the Confederates on the borders of Thrace
continued in hostility as before; and the Boeotians had but a truce from one
ten days to another. So that with the first ten years war, and with this
doubtful cessation and the war that followed after it, a man shall find,
counting by the times, that it came to just so many years, and some few days;
The number of years which the whole War lasted*
and that those who built upon the prediction Thucydides, for his ill success
at Amphipolis, banished Athens for 20 years.
It happened also that I was banished my country for 20 years, after my charge
at Amphipolis; whereby being present at the affairs of both, and especially of
the Lacedaemonians, by reason of my exile, I could* at leisure the better learn
the truth of all that passed.

After the concluding of the 50 years Peace, The Corinthians contriue with the
Argiues to make a League in Peloponnesus without the Lacedaemonians.
and the League which followed, and when those Ambassadors which were sent for,
out of the rest of Peloponnesus, to accept the said Peace, were departed from
Lacedaemon, the Corinthians (the rest going all to their own Cities) turning
first to Argos, entered into Treaty with some of the Argiue Magistrates, to this
purpose, That the Lacedaemonians Athenians, their heretofore mortal enemies,
tending not to the benefit, but to the enslauing of Peloponnesus, it behooved
Grecians that would, and were a free City, and admitted the like, and equal
trials of Judgment with theirs, might make a League with the Argiues, for the
one mutually to aid the other, and to assign them a Few men, with absolute
authority from the State, to treat with; and that it should not be motioned to
the People, to the end, that if the multitude would not agree to it, it might
be unknown that ever they had made such a motion; affirming that many would
come into this Confederacy upon hatred to the Lacedaemonians. Corinthians, when
they had made this ouerture, went home. These men of Argos, having heard them,
and reported their proposition, both to the Magistrates, and to the People, the
Argiues ordered the same accordingly, Twelve men chosen at Argos to treat
about a League.
and elected 12 men, with who^ it should be lawful for any Grecian to make the
League that would, except the Lacedaemonians, and the Athenians, with neither
of which they were to enter into any League, without the consent of the Argiue
People. And this the Argiues did the more willingly admit, as well for that
they saw the Lacedaemonians would Peloponnesus. For about this time Lacedaemon
had but a bad report, and was in contempt for the losses it had received. And
the Argiues in all points were in good estate, as not having concurred in the
Attique War, but rather been in peace with both, and thereby gotten in their
revenue. Thus the Argiues received into League all such Grecians as came unto
them.

The Mantineans enter League with the Argiues.
First of all therefore, came in, the Mantineans, and their Lacedaemonians. For
a part of Arcadia, during the war of Athens, was come under the obedience of
the Mantineans, over which, they thought, the Lacedaemonians, now they were at
rest, would not permit them any longer to command. And therefore they willingly
joined with the Argiues, as being they thought, a great City, ever enemy to the
Lacedaemonians, and governed as their own by Democracy. When the Mantineans
had revolted the rest of Peloponnesus began also to mutter amongst themselves,
The rest of Peloponnesus incline to the same League.
Mantineans to turn and were also angry with the Lacedaemonians amongst many
other causes, for that it was written in the Articles of the Attique Peace, The
Article of adding and altering (...).
That it should be lawful to add unto, or take away from the same, whatsoever
should seem good to the two Cities of the Lacedaemonians and the Athenians.
For this was the Article that the most troubled the Peloponnesians, and put
them into a jealousy that the Lacedaemonians might have a purpose joining with
the Athenians to bring them into subjection. For in justice the power of
changing the Articles, ought to have been ascribed to all the Confederates in
general. Whereupon* Argiues, every one severally striving to come into their
League.

The Lacedaemonians perceiving this stir to begin in Peloponnesus; The
Lacedaemonians expostulate with the Corinthians, about this League with Argos.
and that the Corinthians were both the contriuers of it, and entered themselves
also into the League with Argos, sent Ambassadors unto Corinth, with intention
to prevent the sequel of it, and accused them, both for the whole design, and
for their own revolt in particular, which they intended to make from them, to
the League of Argiues; saying that they should therein infringe their oath, and
that they had already done unjustly, to refuse the Peace made with the
Athenians; for as much as it is an Article of their The Peloponnesian League
against Athens.
League, that what the mayor part of the Confederates should conclude, unless
it were hindered by some God or Hero, the same was to stand good. But the
Corinthians (those Confederates which had refused the Peace as well as they,
being now at Corinth; for they had sent for them before) in their answer to the
Lacedaemonians, did not Athenians had not restored Solium, nor Anactorium, nor
any thing else they had in this War lost, but pretended not to betray those
of Thrace, The Apology of the Corinthians for their refusing the Peace.
for that they had in particular taken an oath unto them, both when (together
with Potidaea) they first revolted, and also another afterward. And therefore
they said they did not break the oath of their League, by rejecting the Peace
with Athens. For having sworn unto them by the Gods, they should in betraying
them, offend the Gods. And whereas it is said, Their answer touching their
League with Argos.
Unless some God or hinder it, This appears to be a Divine hinderance. Thus
they answered for their old oath.

Then, for their League with the Argiues, they gave this Lacedaemon went home.
At the same time were present also in Corinth, the Ambassadors of Argos, to
inuit the Corinthians to their League, and that without delay. But the
Corinthians appointed them to come again at their next sitting.

The Eleans make a league first with Corinth, then with Argos.
Presently after this, came unto them an Embassage also from the Eleans. And
first, they made a League with the Corinthians; and going thence to Argos, made
a League Argiues* according to the The decree of the Argiues that any Grecian
that would might make a league with them, treating with the ^2 Commissioners by
them chosen to that purpose.
declaration before mentioned. The Eleans had a quarrel with the
Lacedaemonians concerning Lepreum. For the Lepreates, having heretofore warred
on certain of the Arcadians, and for their aid called the Eleans into their
Confederacy, with condition to give the^ the moity of the Land to be won from
them, when the War was ended, the Eleans gave unto the Lepreates, the whole
Land to be enjoyed by themselves, with an imposition thereon of a 180 pound ten
shillings sterling.
Talent to be paid to Jupiter Olympian, which they continued to pay, till the
beginning of the Athenian War. But afterward, upon pretense of that War,
giving over the payment, the Eleans would have forced them to it again. The
Lepreates for help, having recourse to the Lacedaemonians, and the cause being
referred to their decision, the Eleans afterward, upon suspicion that the
Lacedaemonians would not do them right, renounced the reference, and wasted the
Territory of the Lepreates. The Lacedaemonians nevertheless gave sentence,
Quarrel of the Eleans against the Lacedaemonians.
That the Lepreates should be at liberty to pay it, or not, and that the Eleans
did the injury; and because the Eleans had not stood to the reference,
Lacedaemonians put into Lepreum, a Garrison of men of Arms. The Eleans taking
this, as if the Lacedaemonians had received their revolted City, and producing
the Article of their League, That what every one possessed, when they entered
into the Attique War, the same they should possess when they gave it over,
revolted to the Argiues, as wronged, and entered league with them, as is before
related.

The Corinthians* and the Towns upon Thrace enter into the league with Argos.
After these, came presently into the Argiue League, the Corinthians, and the
Chalcideans upon Thrace. The Boeotians also, and Megareans threatened as much,
but because they Argiue Democracy would not be so commodious Lacedaemonians by
Oligarchie, they stirred no further in it.

About the same time of this Summer, The Athenians recover Scione.
the Athenians expugned Scione, slew all that were within it at man's estate,
made slaves of the women and children, and gave their Territory to the
Plataeans.

They also replanted the Delians, in Delos, The Delians replanted in Delos.
both in consideration of the defeates they had received after their expulsion,
and also because the Oracle at Delphi had commanded

The Phoceans and Locrians also began a War at that time against each other.
Phocis and Locris in War


And the Corinthians and Argiues, being now leagued, The Corinthians seek to
turn the Cities of ^eloponnesus and other Confederates from the Lacedaemonians
to the Argiues.
went to Tegea* to cause it to revolt from the Lacedaemonians; conceiving it to
be an important piece of Peloponnesus* and making account, if they gained it to
their side, they should easily obtain the whole. But when the Tegeates refused
to become enemies to the Lacedaemonians, the Corinthians, who till then had
been very forward, grew less violent, Boeotians, and solicited them to enter
into league with them, and the Argiues, and to do as they did. And the
Corinthians further desired the Boeotians to go along with them to Athens, The
Corinthians seek the ten days Truce with Athens, as the Boeotians had it.
and to procure for them the like ten days Truce, to that which was made
between the Athenians and Boeotians, presently after the making of the fifty
years Peace, on the same terms that the Boeotians had it; and if the
Athenians refused, then to renounce theirs, and make no more Truces hereafter
Corinthians. The Corinthians having made this request, The Boeotians take time
to answer, concerning a League with Argos.
the Boeotians willed them touching the League with the Argiues to stay a while
longer, and went with them to Athens, but obtained not the ten days Truce, the
Athenians answering, that if the Corinthians were Confederates with the
Lacedaemonians, they had a Peace already. The Athenians deny the ten days
Truce to the Corinthians.
Nevertheless, the Boeotians would not relinquish their ten days Truce,
though the Corinthians both required the same, and affirmed that it was so
before agreed on. Yet the Athenians granted the Corinthians a cessation of
Arms, (...). The Lacedaemonians demolish the Fort of Cypsela.
without solemn ratification.

The same Summer the Lacedaemonians with their whole power, under the Conduct
of Pleistoanax, the son of Pausanias, Lacedaemonians, made War upon the
Parrhasians of Arcadia, subjects of the Mantineans, partly as called in, by
occasion of sedition, and partly because they intended, if they could, to
demolish a fortification which the Mantineans had built, and kept with a
Garrison in Cypsela, in the Territory of the Parrhasians, toward Sciritis of
Laconia. The Lacedaemonians therefore wasted the Territory of the Parrhasians.
And the Mantineans leaving their own City to the Custody of the Argiues, came
forth to aid the Parrhasians their Confederates. But being unable Cypsela, and
the Cities of the Parrhasians too, they went home again; and the
Lacedaemonians when they had set the Parrhasians at liberty, and demolished the
fortification went home likewise.

The Lacedaemonians put a Garrison into Lepreum, of men newly enfranchised.
The same Summer, when those Soldiers which went out with Brasidas, and of
which Clearidas, after the making of the Peace, had the charge, were returned
from the parts upon Thrace, the Lacedaemonians made a decree, that those
Hel^t^s which had fought under Brasidas, should receive their liberty, and
inhabit where they thought good; but Lepreum, a City standing in the Confines
between Laconia, and the Eleans, with whom they were now at variance.

Fearing also lest those Citizens of their own, which had been taken in the
Sphacteria, over against Pylus.
Island, and had delivered up their Arms to the Athenians, should upon
apprehension of disgrace for that calamity, The Lacedaemonians disable those
that were taken in Sphacteria, to (...) office, or to make bargain.
if they remained capable of honors, make some innovation in the State, they
disabled them, though some of them were in office already; and That they should
neither bear office, nor be capable to buy and sell, yet in time they were
again restored to their former honors.

The Dictideans take Thyssus from the Athenians.
The same Summer also, the Dictideans took Thyssus, a Town in Mount Athos, and
Confederate of the Athenians.

Jealousy between the Athenians and Lacedaemonians.
This whole Summer there was continual commerce between the Athenians and the
Peloponnesians; nevertheless they began, both the Athenians, and the
Lacedaemonians, to have each other in suspicion immediately after the Peace, in
respect of the places not yet mutually surrendered. Lacedaemonians, to whose lot
it fell to make restitution Amphipolis, and the other Cities, Amphipolis not
yet rendered* nor the Peace accepted in the part (...) Thrace, nor by the (...)
and Corinthians.
nor had caused the Peace to be accepted by the Confederates upon Thrace, nor
by the Boeotians, nor Corinthians, though they had ever professed, that in case
they refused, they would join with the Athenians, to bring them to it by
force, and had prefixed a time (though not by writing) within the which, such
as entered not into this Peace, were to be held as enemies unto both. The
Athenians therefore, when they saw none of this really performed, suspected
that they had no sincere intention, The Athenians refuse to render Pylus.
and thereupon refused to Pylus, when they required it; nay, they repented that
they had delivered up the prisoners they took in the Island; and detained the
rest of the Towns they then held, till the Lacedaemonians should have
performed the conditions on their part also. The Lacedaemonians, to this,
alleged, That they had done what they were able to do. For they had delivered
the Athenian prisoners that were in their hands, The Apology of the
Lacedaemonians for (...) the Articles.
and had withdrawn their Soldiers from the parts upon Thrace, and whatsoever
else was in their own power to perform. But Amphipolis they said, was not in
their power to surrender. That they would Boeotians and Corinthians, to accept
the Peace, and to get Panactum restored, and all the Athenian prisoners in
Boeotia, to be sent home. And therefore desired them to make restitution of
Pylus, or if not so, at lest to draw out of it, the Messenians and Helotes ( as
they for their part had drawn their Garrisons out of the Towns upon Thrace)
and if they thought good, to keep it with a Garrison of Athenians. After
diverse, and long Conferences had this Summer, The Athenians* draw the
Messenians and Helotes out of Pylus.
they so far prevailed with the Athenians, at the last, as they drew thence,
all the Messenians, and Helotes, and all other Laconian fugitives, Cranij, a
City of Cephallenia. The end of the eleventh Summer.
So for this Summer there was Peace, and free passage from one to another.

In the beginning of Winter, The Lacedemonian Ephores endeavor to dissolve the
peace.
(for now there were other Ephores in office; not those in whose time the Peace
was made, but some of them that opposed it) Ambassadors being come from the
Confederates; and the Athenian, Boeotian, and Corinthian Ambassadors being
already there, and having had much conference together, but concluded nothing,
Cleobulus, and Xenares, Ephores that most desired the with the Boeotians and
Corinthians, exhorting them to A proposition of a league between the
Lacedaemonians, Argiues, Boeotians and Corinthians.
and advised the Boeotians to enduour first to make a League themselves with
the Argiues, and then to get the Argiues together with themselves, into a
League with the Lacedaemonians. For that they might by this means avoid the
necessity of accepting the Peace with Athens. For the Lacedaemonians would more
regard the friendship and League of the Argiues, then the enmity and
dissolution of the Peace with the Athenians. For he knew the Lacedaemonians
had ever desired to have Argos their friend upon any reasonable conditions,
Peloponnesus, would thereby be a great deal the easier. Wherefore they
entreated the Boeotians to put Panactum into the hands of the Lacedaemonians,
to the end that if they could get Pylus for it in exchange, they might make War
against the Athenians the more commodiously.

The Boeotians and Corinthians being dismissed by Xenares and Cleobulus, and
all the other Lacedaemonians of that Faction, with these points to be delivered
to their Commonwealths, The Argiues propound a League to the Boeotians and
Corinthians.
went to their several Cities. And two men of Argos, of principal authority
in that City, having waited for, and met with them by the way, entered into a
treaty with them, about a League between the Argiues and the Boeotians, as
there was between them and the Corinthians, and the Eleans, and Mantineans
already. For they thought, if it succeeded, they might the more easily have
either War or Peace, (forasmuch as the cause would now be common) either
with the Lacedaemonians, or whomsoever else it should be needful.

When the Boeotian Ambassadors heard this, they were well Argiues requested the
same things of them, that they, by their friends in Lacedaemon, had been sent
to procure of the Argiues. These men therefore of Argos, And promise to send
Ambassadors into Boeotia to that purpose.
when they saw that the Boeotians accepted of the motion, promised to send
Ambassadors to the Boeotians about it, and so departed.

When the Boeotians were come home, they related there what they had heard,
both at Lacedaemon, and by the way, from the Argiues. The Governors of Boeotia
were glad thereof, and much more forward in it now, then formerly Lacedaemon
Argiues themselves hastened to have done the selfsame thing. Not long after
this, the Ambassadors came to them from Argos, to solicit the dispatch of the
business before propounded, but the governors of Boeotia commended only the
proposition, and dismissed them, The Boeotians propound an oath between
themselves, the Corinthians, Chalcideans, and Megareans, of mutual assistance.
with promise to send Ambassadors about the League to Argos. In the mean time
the Governors of Boeotia thought fit, that an oath should first be taken by
themselves, and by the Ambassadors from Corinth, Megara, and the Confederates
upon Thrace, to give mutual assistance Boeotians and Megareans, (for these two
ran the same course) should make a League with the Argiues. But before this
oath was to be taken, the Governors of Boeotia communicated the business to the
4 Boeotian Councels, in the which the whole authority of the State consists,
and withal presented their advice, That any City that would, might join with
them, in the like oath for mutual assistance. But they that were of these
Councels approved Lacedaemonians in being sworn to the Corinthians, that had
revolted from their confederacy. The Argiue league with the Boeotians, falls
off.
For the Governors of Boeotia had not reported unto them, what had past at
Lacedaemon, how Cleobulus, and Xenares the Ephores, and their friends there,
had advised them, to enter first into league with the Argiues, and Corinthians,
and then afterward to make the same league with the Lacedaemonians. For they
thought that the Councels, though this had never been told them, would have
decreed it no otherwise then they upon premeditation should Corinth, and from
the Cities upon Thrace, departed without effect. And the Governors of Boeotia,
that were before minded, if they had gotten this done, to have leagued
themselves also with the Argiues, made no mention of the Argiues in the
Councels at all, nor sent the Ambassadors to Argos, as they had before
promised, but a kind of carelessenesse and delay possessed the whole business.

The same Winter the Olynthians took Mecyberne, Mecyberne taken from the
Athenians by assault.
held with a Garrison of the Athenians by assault. The Lacedaemonians enter
into a League with the Boeotians, knowing it to be against Justice.


Lacedaemonians (for the conferences between the Athenians and the
Lacedaemonians about restitution reciprocal continued still) hoping that if
the Athenians Boeotians, Panactum; that then they also should recover Pylus,
sent Ambassadors to the Boeotians, which request that Panactum, and the
Athenian prisoners might be put into the hands of the Lacedaemonians, that they
might get Pylus restored in exchange. But the Boeotians answered, that unless
the Lacedaemonians would make a particular League with them, as they had done
with the Athenians, they would not do it. The Lacedaemonians, though they knew
they should therein wrong the Athenians, for that it was said in the Articles,
that neither Panactum, to exchange it for Pylus, and withal, they that longed
to break the Peace with Athens, were so eager in it, that at last they
concluded a league with the Boeotians, Winter then ending, and the Spring
approaching. And Panactum was presently pulled down to the ground. So ended
the eleventh year of this War.

THE TWELFTH YEAR.
In the Spring following, the Argiues, when they saw that the Ambassadors which
the Boeotians promised to send unto them, The Argiues seek Peace with the
Lacedaemonians.
came not, and that Panactum was razed, and that Boeotians and the
Lacedaemonians, were afraid lest they should on all hands be abandoned, and
that the Confederates would all go to the Lacedaemonians. For they apprehended
that the Boeotians had been induced, both to raze Panactum, and also to enter
into the Athenian Peace, by the Lacedaemonians; and that the Athenians, were
privy to the same. So that now they had no means to make league with the
Athenians neither* whereas before they made account that if their truce with
the Lacedaemonians continued not, they might upon Athenians. The Argiues being
therefore at a stand, and fearing to have War all at once with the
Lacedaemonians, Tegeats, Boeotians, and Athenians, as having formerly refused
the truce with the Lacedaemonians, and imagined to themselves the principality
of all Peloponnesus, they sent Ambassadors with as much speed as might be,
Eustrophus and Aeson persons, as they thought most acceptable unto them, with
this cogitation, that by compounding with the Lacedaemonians, as well as for
their

Argiues desired to have the matter referred, The Territory of Cynuria, ground
of the quarrels between Lacedaemon and Argos.
either to some private man, or to some City, concerning the Territory of
Cynuria, about which they have always differed, as lying on the borders of
them both (it contains the Cities of Thyrea and Anthena, and is possessed by
the Lacedaemonians) But afterward, the Lacedaemonians not suffering mention to
be made of that, but that if they would have the Truce go on as it did before,
they might; Argiue Ambassadors, got them to yield to this, That for the
present, an accord should be made for fifty years, An odd condition of a
Truce.
but withal, that it should be lawful nevertheless, (if one challenged the
other thereunto) both for Lacedaemon, and Argos to try their Titles to this
Territory by battle, so that there were in neither City, the Plague or a War
to excuse them; (as once before they had done, when as both sides thought they
had the victory.) And that it should not be lawful for one part to follow the
chase of the other, further then to the bounds either of Lacedaemon or Argos.

Lacedaemonians at first to be but a foolish proposition, yet afterward,
(because they desired by all means to have friendship with the Argiues) they
agreed unto it, and put into writing what they required. Howsoever, before the
Lacedaemonians would make any full conclusion of the same, they willed them to
return first to Argos, and to make the People acquainted with it, and then, if
it were accepted, to return at the Hyacinthian Feast and swear it. So these
departed.

Whilst the Argiues were treating about this, The Lacedaemonian Ambassadors
require Pylus in exchange for Panactum.
the Lacedaemonian Andromenes, and Phaedimus, and Antimenidas, Commissioners
for receiving of Panactum, and the prisoners from the Boeotians, to render them
to the Athenians, found that Panactum was demolished, and that their pretext
was this, That there had been anciently an Oath by occasion of difference
between the Athenians and them, That neither part should inhabit the place
solely, but jointly, both. But for the Athenian prisoners, as many as the
Boeotians had, they that were with Andromenes received, conuoyed and delivered
them unto the Athenians, and withal Panactum, alleging it as rendered, in
that, no enemy of Athens should dwell in it hereafter.

The Athenians take in evil part, both the razing of Panactum, and the League
made with the Boeotians.
But when this was told them, the Athenians made it a Lacedaemonians had done
them wrong, both in the matter of Panactum which was pulled down, and should
have been rendered standing; and because also they had heard of the private
League made with the Boeotians, whereas they had promised to join with the
Athenians in compelling such to accept of the Peace, as had refused it; withal
they weighed whatsoever other points the Lacedaemonians had been short in,
touching the performance of the Articles, and thought themselves abused; so
that they answered the Lacedaemonian Ambassadors roughly, and dismissed them.

The Argiues make League with Athens* by means of Alcibiades.
This difference arising between the Lacedaemonians, and the Athenians, it was
presently wrought upon by such also of Athens, as desired to have the Peace
dissolved.

Amongst the rest was Alcibiades the son of Clinias, a man though young in
years, yet in the dignity of his Ancestors honored as much as any man of what
City soever: Who was of opinion, that it was better to join with the Argiues;
not only for the matter it self, but also out of stomach, The cause why
Alcibiades desires to break with the Lacedaemonians.
laboring to cross the Lacedaemonians, because they Nicias, and Laches,
without him; whom for his youth they had neglected, and not honored, as for
the ancient hospitality between his house and them, had been requisite, which
his father had indeed renounced, but he himself by good Offices done to those
prisoners, which were brought from the Island, had a purpose to have renewed.
But supposing himself on all hands disparaged, he both opposed the Peace at
first, alleging that the Lacedaemonians would not be constant; and that they
had made the Peace, only Argiues by that means away from them, and afterward
to invade the Athenians again, when they should be destitute of their friends;
And also as soon as this difference was on foot, he sent presently to Argos
of himself, Alcibiades sends for the Argiues to Athens to make a League.
willing them with all speed to come to Athens, as being thereunto invited, and
to bring with them the Eleans and Mantineans, to enter with the Athenians into
a League, the opportunity now serving; and promising that he would help them
all he could.

The Argiues having heard the message, and knowing Athenians had made no League
with the Boeotians, Lacedaemonians, neglected the Ambassadors they had then in
Lacedaemon, (whom they had sent about the Truce) and applied themselves to the
Athenians, with this thought, that if they should have War, they should by
this means be backed with a City that had been their ancient friend, governed
like their own by Democracy, and of greatest power by Sea. Whereupon they
presently sent Ambassadors to Athens to make a League; and together with
theirs, went also the Ambassadors of the Eleans, and Mantineans. The
Lacedaemonian^ ^^^bassadours (...) to Athens, to (...) their League with the
Argiues.
Thither also with all speed came the Lacedaemonian Philocharidas, Leon, and
Endius, persons accounted most gracious with the Athenians, for fear, lest in
their passion, they should make a League with the Argiues; and withal to
require the restitution of Pylus for Panactum, and to excuse themselves
concerning their League with the Boeotians, as not made for any harm intended
to the Athenians.

Now speaking of these things before the Council, and how that they were come
thither with full power to make agreement concerning all Controversies betwixt
Alcibiades into fear, lest, if they should say the same before the people, the
multitude would be drawn unto their side; and so the Argiue League fall off.
Alcibiades persuades the Lacedaemonian Ambassadors, to deny before the people,
that they had power to conclude.
But Alcibiades deuiseth against them this plot. He persuades the
Lacedaemonians not to confess their plenary power before the people, and
gives them his faith, that then Pylus should be rendered, (for he said he would
persuade the Athenians to it, as much as he now opposed it) and that the rest
of their differences should be compounded. This he did to alienate them from
Nicias, and that Argiues, Eleans, and Mantineans. And it came to pass
accordingly. For when they came before the people, and to the question, whether
they had full power of concluding, had (contrary to what they had said in
Council) answered no, the Athenians would no longer endure them, but gave ear
to Alcibiades, Alcibiades inueigheth against the Lacedaemonians.
that exclaimed against the Lacedaemonians far more now then ever, Argiues,
and those others with them brought in, and to make the League* But an
Earthquake happening, before any thing Nicias endeuoreth to have the Peace go
on with the Lacedaemonians.
Nicias, though the Lacedaemonians had been abused, and he himself also
deceived, touching their coming with full power to conclude, yet he persisted
to affirm, that it was their best course to be friends with the
Lacedaemonians, and to defer the Argiues business, till they had sent to the
Lacedaemonians again to be assured of their intention; saying, that it was
honor unto themselves, and dishonor to the Lacedaemonians to have the War
put off. For, for themselves, being in estate of prosperity, it Lacedaemonians,
Nicias is sent Ambassador to Lacedaemon to get satisfaction about performance
of the Articles.
(if they meant sincerely) to render Panactum standing, and also Amphipolis:
and if the Boeotians would not accept of the Peace, then to undo their League
with them, according to the Article, That the one should not make league with
any, without the consent of the other. They willed him to say further; That
they themselves Argiues, who were present then at Athens, for the same purpose.
And whatsoever they had to accuse the Lacedaemonians of besides, they
instructed Nicias in it, and sent him and the other, his fellow Ambassadors,
away. When they were arrived, and had delivered what they had in charge, and
this last of all, That the Athenians would make League with the Argiues,
unless the Lacedaemonians would renounce their League with the Boeotians, if
the Boeotians accepted not the Peace, the Lacedaemonians denied to renounce
Boeotians, (for Xenares the Ephore, and the rest of that faction carried it)
but at the request of Nicias, they renewed their former Oath. For Nicias was
afraid he should return with nothing done, and be carped at (as after also it
fell out) as Nicias was the Author of the Peace between the Athenians and the
Lacedaemonians, and that Peace was therefore called Nicia.
author of the Lacedaemonian Peace.

At this return, when the Athenians understood that nothing was effected at
Lacedaemon, they grew presently into choler, and apprehending injury (the
Argiues, and Alcibiades,

The Athenians, and Argiues, and Mantineans, THE ARTICLES OF THE LEAGVE
BETWEEN THE ATHENIANS AND THE ARGIVES, etc.
and Eleans, for themselves, and for the Confederates commanded by every of
them, have made an accord for 100 years without fraud or damage* both by Sea
and Land.

It shall not be lawful for the Argiues nor Eleans, nor Mantineans, nor their
Confederates to bear Arms against the Athenians, or the Confederates were of
two sorts such as on equal (...) entered League with other, and such as (...)
by compulsion, or as subjects; both called in the Greek, (...) (...) properly,
but not properly Confederates.
Confederates under the command of the Athenians, or their Confederates, by any
fraud or machination whatsoever. And Athenians, Argiues, and Mantineans, have
made League with each other for 100 years on these terms.

If any enemy shall invade the Territory of the Athenians* then the Argiues,
Eleans, and Mantineans shall go unto Athens, to assist them according as the
Athenians shall send them word to do, in the best manner they possibly can.
But if the enemy after he have spoiled the Territory shall be gone back, then
their City shall be held as an enemy to the Argiues, Eleans, Mantineans, and
Athenians, and War shall be made against it, by all those Cities. And it
shall not be lawful for any of those Cities to give over the

And if an enemy shall invade the Territory, either of the Ar^giues, or of the
Eleans, or of the Mantineans, then the Athenians shall come unto Argos, Elis,
and Mantinea* to assist them, in such sort as those Cities shall send them word
to do, in the best manner they possibly can. But if the enemy after he has
wasted their Territory, shall be gone back, then their City shall be held as
an enemy, both to the Athenians, and also to the Argiues, Eleans, and
Mantineans, and War shall be made against it, by all those Cities; and it
shall not be lawful for any of them to give over the War against

There shall no armed men be suffered to pass through the Dominions either of
themselves, or of any the Confederates under their seueuerall commands to make
War in any place whatsoever; unless by the suffrage of all the Cities,
Athens, Argos, Elis, and Mantinea, their passage be allowed.

To such as come to assist any of the other Cities, that City which sends
them shall give maintenance for thirty days after they shall arrive in the
City that sent for them; and the like at their going away. But if they will
use the Army for a longer time, then the City that Oboles of Aegina a day for
a man of Arms, and of a Dram of Aegina for a horseman.

The City which sends for the aids, shall have the leading, and

The Athenians shall swear unto the Articles both for themselves, and for
their Confederates; and the Argiues, Eleans, Mantineans, and the Confederates
of these shall every one swear unto them City by City, and their oath shall
be the greatest that by custom of the several Cities is used, and with most
perfect Beasts offered in sacrifice.
hoastes, and in these words: I will stand to this League according to the
Articles thereof, justly, innocently, and sincerely, and not

This oath shall be taken at Athens, by the Senate, and the Officers of the
Commons, and administered by the Prytaneis. At Argos it shall be taken by the
Senate, and the Council of Eighty, and by the Artynae, and administered by the
Council of Eighty. At Mantinea it shall be taken by the procurators of the
people, and by the Senate, and by the rest of the Magistrates, and administered
by the Theori, and by the Tribunes of the Soldiers. At Elis it shall be taken
by the procurators of the people, and by the Officers of the Treasury, and by
the Council of 600, and administered by the Procurators of the People, and by
the Keepers of the Law.

This oath shall be renewed by the Athenians, who shall go to Elis, and to
Mantinea, and to Argos, thirty days before the Olympian Games; and by the
Argiues, Eleans, and Mantineans, who shall come to Athens, ten days before the
Panathenaean Holy Days.

The Articles of this League and Peace and the oath, shall be inscribed in a
pillar of stone; by the Athenians in the Cittadell; by the in their Market
place, within the Precinct of the Temple of Apollo; and by the Mantineans in
their Market place, within the precinct of the Temple of Jupiter. And at the
Olympian Games, now at hand, there shall be erected jointly by them all, a
brazen pillar in Olympia, [ with the same inscription.]

If it shall seem good to these Cities to add any thing to these Articles;
whatsoever shall be determined by them all in common Council, the same shall
stand good.

Thus was the League and the Peace concluded, and that which was made before
between the Lacedaemonians and the Athenians, was notwithstanding, by neither
side renounced.

Corinthians, The Corinthians (...) the (...) with (...), and incline again to
the Lacedaemonians.
although they were the Confederats of the Argiues, yet would they not enter
into this League; nay, though there were made a League before this, between
them and the Argiues, Eleans, and Mantineans, that where one, there all, should
have War, or Peace, yet they refused to swear to it; but said that their
League defensive was enough, whereby they were bound to defend each other, but
not to take part one with another in inuading. So the Corinthians fell off from
their Confederates, and inclined again to the Lacedaemonians.

Olympian Games, The Olympian Games.
in which Androsthenes an Arcadian, was the first time Victor in the exercise
called Pancratium consisted ^f wrastl^ng and fighting with Fish.

The Lacedaemonians forbidden the exercises, and why.


Pancratium. And the Lacedaemonians were by the Eleans prohibited the Temple
there; so as they might neither sacrifice, nor contend for the prizes, amongst
the rest; for that they had not paid the Fine set upon them, (according to an
Olympique Law) by the Eleans, that laid to their charge that they had put
Soldiers into the Fort of Phyrcon, and into Lepr^um in the time of the
Olympique Truce.

6^5 pound sterling.
2000 Minae, which was 6 pound 5 shillings sterling
two Minae for every man of Arms, according to the Law. But the Lacedaemonians
by their Ambassadors which they sent thither, made answer, That they had been
unjustly condemned, Contention between the Lacedaemonians and Eleans, before
the Grecians, at Olympia, about a (...) upon the Lacedaemonians, by the Eleans,
o^ breaking the Olympi^^^ Truce.
alleging that the Truce was not published in Lacedaemon, when their Soldiers
were sent out.

To this the Eleans said again, That the Truce was already begun amongst
themselves, who used to publish it first in their own Dominion, and thereupon,
whilst they lay still, and expected no such matter, as in time of Truce, the
Lacedaemonians did them

The Lacedaemonians hereunto replied, That it was not necessary to proceed to
the publishing of the truce in Lacedaemon at all, if they thought themselves
wronged already; but rather, if they thought themselves not wronged yet, then
to do it by way of prevention, that they should not Arm against them
afterward.

The Eleans stood stiffely in their first Argument; that they would never be
persuaded but injury had been done them; but were nevertheless contented, If
they would render both to remit their own part of the money, and also to pay
that part for them which was due unto the God.

When this would not be agreed unto, they then required Lepreum unless they
would, but that then they should come to the Altar of Jupiter Olympian, seeing
they desired to have free use of the Temple, and there before the Grecians to
take an oath, to pay the fine at least hereafter. But when the Lacedaemonians
refused that also, they were excluded the Temple, the sacrifices, and the
games, and sacrificed at home; But the rest of the Grecians, except the
Lepreates, were all admitted to be spectators. Nevertheless, the Eleans
fearing lest they would come and sacrifice there by force, kept a guard there
Argiues and Mantineans, of either City 1000, and certain Athenian horsemen,
who were then at Argos, waiting the celebration of the Feast. For a great fear
possessed all the Assembly, lest the Lacedaemonians should come upon them with
an Army; Lichas a Lacedaemonian whipped upon the Olym^^an Race.
and the rather, because Lichas the son of Arcesilaus, a Lacedaemonian, had
been whipped by the Sergeants upon the Race, for that when his Chariot had
gotten the prize, after Proclamation made, that the Chariot of the Boeotian
State had won it (because he himself was not Lacedaemonians stirred not, and
the Feast passed over.

After the Olympian Games, the Argiues and their Confederates went to Corinth,
to get the Corinthians into their League, and the Lacedaemonian Ambassadors
chanced to be there also; and after much conference, and nothing concluded,
upon occasion of an Earthquake, they brake off the The twelfth Summer.


The next Winter, the men of Heraclea in Trachinia, fought a battle against
the Aelians, Delopians, Melians, and certain Thessalians. For the neighbor
Cities, were enemies to this City, as built to the prejudice only of them,
and both opposed the same from the time it was first founded, annoying it what
they could, and also in this battle overcame them, and slew Xenares a
Lacedaemonian, their Commander, with some others, Heracleots. Thus ended this

THE THIRTEENTH YEAR.
the Boeotians took Heraclea miserably afflicted, into their own hands, and
put Hegesippidas a Lacedaemonian out of it, for his evil government. They
took it, because they feared, lest whilst the Lacedaemonians were troubled
about Peloponnesus, it should have been taken in by the Athenians.
Nevertheless the Lacedaemonians were offended with them for doing it.

The same Summer Alcibiades the son of Clinias, being General of the
Athenians, by the practice of the Argiues, Peloponnesus, and having with him a
few men of Arms, and Archers of Athens, and some of the Confederates which he
took up there, as he passed through the Country with his Army, both ordered
such affairs by the way concerning the League, as was fit; and coming to the
Patraeans, persuaded them to build their walls down to the Seaside, and
purposed to raise another wall himself toward Rhium in Achaia. But the
Corinthians, Sicyonians, and such others as this wall would have prejudiced,
came forth and hindered him.

Epidaurians and the Argiues; War between the Epidaurians and Argiues.
the pretext thereof was about a Beast for sacrifice, which the Epidaurians
ought to have sent, in consideration of their pastures, to Apollo Pythius, and
had not done it; the Argiues being the principal owners of the Temple. But
Alcibiades, and the Argiues had indeed determined to take in the City, though
without pretense at all, both that the Corinthians might not stir, and also
that they might bring the Athenian succors from Aegina, into those parts a
nearer way, then by compassing the Promontory Scyllaeum. And therefore the
Argiues prepared, as of themselves, to exact the sacrifice by invasion.

About the same time also, the Lacedaemonians with their whole forces, came
forth as far as Leuctra, in the Confines of their own Territory toward
Lycaeum, under the Conduct of Agis, the son of Archidamus their King. No man
knew against what place they intended the War; No not the Cities themselves
out of which they were leuyed. But when in the sacrifices which they made for
their passage, the tokens observed were unlucky, they went home again, Their
holy month, in which they kept a Feast to Apollo.
Carneius) to prepare themselves after the next (...).
Feast of the New Moon (kept by the Dorians,) to be Argiues; who set forth the
26 day of the month before July*
Carneus, though they celebrated the same day, yet all the time they continued
inuading and wasting Epidauria. And the Epidaurians called in their
Confederates to help them, whereof some excused themselves upon the quality of
the month, and others came but to the Confines of Epidauria, and there stayed.
Whilst the Argiues were in Epidauria, the Ambassadors of diverse Cities,
solicited by the Athenians, met together at Mantinea, where in a conference
amongst them, Ephamidas of Corinth said, Ambassadors meet about Peace, but
cannot agree.
That their actions agreed not with their words, for as much as whilst they
were sitting there to treat of a Peace, the Epidaurians with their
Confederates, and the Argiues stood armed in the mean time against each other
in order of battle. That it was therefore fit that some body should go first
unto the Armies from either side, and dissolve them, and then come again and
dispute of Peace.

This advice being approved, they departed, and withdrew the Argiues from
Epidauria; and meeting afterward again in the same place, they could not for
all that agree; and the Argiues again invaded and wasted Epidauria.

The Lacedaemonians also drew forth their Army against Caryae, but then again
their sacrifice for passage, being not to their mind, they returned. And the
Argiues, when they had spoiled about the third part of Epidauria, went home
likewise. They had the assistance of one thousand men of Arms of Athens, and
Alcibiades their Commander; but these hearing that the Lacedaemonians were in
the field, and seeing now there was no longer need of them, departed, and so
passed this Summer.

The end of the thirteenth Summer.
The next Winter the Lacedaemonians unknown to the Athenians* put 300 Garrison
Soldiers under the Command of Agesippidas, into Epidaurus by Sea. For which
cause the Argiues came and expostulated with the Athenians, that whereas it was
written in the Articles of the League, that no enemy should be suffered to pass
through either of their Dominions, yet had they suffered the Lacedaemonians to
pass by The Argiues acknowledge the Sea on their own coast, (...) be of the
Dominion of Athens.
Sea; and said they had wrong, unless the Athenians would again put the
Messenians, and Helotes into Pylus against the Lacedaemonians. Hereupon the
Athenians, Alcibiades, wrote upon the Which was erected for the Articles of the
Peace to be written in.
Laconian Lacedaemonians had violated their oath, and they drew the Helotes out
of Jn Cephalonia where they had before placed them.
Cranij, and put them again into Pylus, to infest the Territory with driving
of booties, but did no more.

All this Winter, though there was War between the Argiues and Epidaurians;
yet was there no set battle, but only Ambushes and Skirmishes, wherein were
slain on both sides, such as it chanced.

But in the end of Winter, and the Spring now at hand, the Argiues came to
Epidaurus with Ladders, as destitute of

In the middle of the next Summer, the Lacedaemonians seeing that the
Epidaurians, their Confederates, were tired, THE FOVRETEENTH YEAR.
and that of the rest of the Cities of Peloponnesus, some had already revolted,
and others were but in evil terms, and apprehending that if they prevented it
not, the mischief would spread still farther, Preparation of the
Lacedaemonians against Argos.
put themselves into the field Helotes, to make War against Argos, under the
Conduct of Agis the son of Archidamus their King. The Tegeates went also with
them, and of the rest of Arcadia, all that were in the Lacedaemonian League.
But the rest of their Confederates both within Peloponnesus, and without, were
to meet together at Phlius. That is to say, of the Boeotians 5000 men of Arms,
and as many Light-armed, 500 horse, and to every (...)*
horseman, another man on foot, which holding the horses Mane, ran by with
equal speed. Of Corinthians, Phliasians, because the Army was assembled in
their own Territory, put forth their whole power. The Argiues having had
notice both formerly of the preparation of the Lacedaemonians, and afterward of
their marching on to join with the rest at Phlius, brought their Army likewise
into the field. They had with them the aides of the Mantineans, and their
Confederates, and 3000 men of Arms of the Eleans; and marching forward, met
the The Lacedaemonians, Tegeates, and some Arcadians, not the whole League*
which was not yet united.
Lacedaemonians at Methydrium, a Town of Arcadia, each side seazing on a hill.
And the Argiues prepared to give battle to the Lacedaemonians, whiles they
were single. The Lacedaemonians and their Confederates meet at Phlius.

The Argiues go to meet them at the Forest of Nemea.


But Agis dislodging his Army by night, marched Phlius to the rest of the
Confederates, unseen. Upon knowledge hereof, the Argiues betimes in the
morning retired first to Argos, and afterward to the Forest of Nemea, by
which they thought the Lacedaemonians and their Confederates would fall in. But
Agis came not the way which they expected, but with the Lacedaemonians,
Arcadians, and Epidaurians, whom he acquainted with his purpose, took another
more difficult way to pass, and came down into the Argiue Plains. The
Lacedaemonians come into the Plains before Argos.
The Corinthians also, and Pellenians, and Phliasians, marched another
troublesome Boeotians, Megareans, and Sicyonians, were appointed to come down
by the way of the Forest of Nemea, in which the Argiues were encamped; to the
end that if the Argiues should turn head against the Lacedaemonians, these
might set upon them at the back with their horse.

Thus ordered, Agis entered into the Plains, and spoiled Saminthus, and some
other Towns thereabouts. Which when the Argiues understood, they came out of
the Forest somewhat after break of day to oppose them, and lighting Phliasians
and Corinthians, slew some few of the Phliasians, but had more slain of their
own, by the Corinthians, though not many. The Boeotians, Megareans, and
Sicyonians, marched forward toward Nemea, and found that the Argiues were
departed. For when they came down, and saw their Country wasted, they put
themselves into order of battle; and the Lacedaemonians, on the other side did
the same; The Argiues enclosed between the Lacedaemonians and the Boeotians.
and the Argiues stood intercepted in the midst of their enemies. For in the
Plain between them and the City, And the Lacedaemonians enclosed between the
army of the Argiues and their City.
stood the Lacedaemonians, and those with Corinthians, Phliasians, and
Pellenians; and toward Nemea were the Boeotians, Sicyonians, and Megareans.
And horsemen they had none, for the Athenians alone, of all their Confederates,
were not yet come. Now the generality of the Army of the Argiues, and their
Confederates, did not think the danger present so great, as indeed it was, but
rather that the advantage in the battle would be their own, and that the
Lacedaemonians were intercepted, not only in the Argiues Territory, but also
hard by the City. But two men of Argos, Thrasyllus, one of the Alciphron,
(...)* He that lodged, the Lacedaemonians when any of them came to Argos.
entertayner Lacedaemonians, when the Armies were even ready to join, went
unto Agis, and dealt with him to have the battle put off, for as much as the
Argiues were content and ready, both to propound, Propositions of Peace made by
two private men of Argos:
and accept of equal Arbitrators, in whatsoever the Lacedaemonians should
charge them withal, and in the mean time, to have peace with them solemnly
confirmed.

This these Argiues said of themselves, And accepted by Agis, without the
knowledge of the rest of the Commanders.
without the command of the generality, and Agis, of himself likewise,
accepting their proposition, without deliberation had with the mayor part, and
having communicated it only to Agis withdraws his Army, and is censured for
it by the Confederates.
without giving account to any of the rest of the League why he did so. The
Lacedaemonians, and the Confederates followed Agis, according to the Law, as
being their General, but amongst themselves taxed him exceedingly, for that
having a very fair occasion of battle, the Argiues being enclosed on all
sides, both by their Horse and Foot, he Grecians had in the field unto this
day; but it was most to be seen, when they were That is going home for till
then they were never altogether in Nemaea*
altogether in the Forest of Nemea. Where the Lacedaemonians were with their
whole Forces, besides the Arcadians, Boeotians, Corinthians, Sicyonians,
Pellenians, Phliasians, and Megareans; and these all chosen men of their
several Cities, and such as were thought a match, not only for the Argiues,
but for such another added to it. The Army thus offended with Agis, departed,
and were dissolved, every man to his home. The Argiues were much more offended
with those of their City, which without the consent of the multitude, had made
the Truce, they also supposing that the Lacedaemonians had escaped their hands
in such an advantage, as they never had the like before; in that the battle
was to have been fought under their City walls, and with the assistance of many
and good Confederates. And in their return, Thrasyllus punished for
propounding the Peace.
they began to stone Thrasyllus, at the Charadrum, (the place where the
Soldiers before they enter into the City from warfare, use to have their
Military causes heard) but he flying to the Altar,

The Athenians instigate the Argiues to break the Truce.
After this, the Athenians coming in, with the aid of 1000 men of Arms, and
300 Horse, under the Conduct of Lach^s and Nicostratus, the Argiues (for they
were afraid for all this, to break the Truce with the Lacedaemonians) willed
them to be gone again, and when they desired to treat, would not present them
to the People, till such time as the Mantineans, and Eleans (who were not yet
gone) forced them unto it by their importunity. Then the Athenians, in the
presence of Alcibiades, that was Ambassador there, Argiues, and their
Confederates, saying, That the Truce was unduly made, without the assent of
the rest of their Confederates, and that now (for they were come time enough)
they ought to fall again to be War, The Argiues break the Truce, and
besiege Orchomenus.
and did by their words so prevail with the Confederates, that they all, save
the Argiues, presently marched against (...) Orchomenus (...).
Orchomenus of Arcadia.

And these, though satisfied, stayed behind at first, but afterward they also
went; and sitting down before Orchomenus, ioynely besieged, and assaulted the
same; desiring to take it in as well for other causes, as chiefly for that the
Hostages which the Arcadians had given to the Lacedaemonians, Orchomenians
fearing the weakness of their walls, and the greatness of the Army, and lest
they should perish, before any relief arrived, yielded up the Town on
conditions: Orchomenus yielded.
To be received into the League; to give Hostages for themselves; and to
surrender the Hostages h^ld there by the Lacedaemonians, into the hands of the
Mantineans.

The Confederates after this, having gotten Orchomenus, sat in Council, about
what Town they should proceed against next. The Eleans gave advice to go
against As being in particular (...) with it.
Lepreum, Mantineans, against Tegea. And the Argiues and Athenians concurred in
opinion with the Mantineans. But the Eleans taking it in evil part, The
Argiues go next against Tegea, which displeases the Eleans, and they (...)
home.
that they did not decree to go against Lepreum, went home; but the rest
prepared themselves at Mantinea, to go against Tegea, which also some within
had a purpose to put into their hands.

The Lacedaemonians question their King, for suffering the Argiues to go off
vnsoughten.
The Lacedaemonians, after their return from Argos with their four months
Truce, severely questioned Agis, for that upon so fair an opportunity, as they
never had before, Argos to the State; for so many and so Orchomenus, then was
their indignation much greater, and they presently resolved, contrary to their
own custom, in their passion, to raze his house, and fine him in the sum of
312 pound 10 shillings sterling.
10000 Drachmaes. But he besought them that they would do neither of these
things yet, and promised that leading out the Army again, he would by some
valiant action cancel those accusations; or, if not, they might proceed
afterward to do with Spartans should be elected and joined with him as
Councillors, without whom it should not be lawful for him to lead the Army
into the field.

In the mean time came news from their side in Tegea, The Lacedaemonians put
their Army into the field to rescue Tegea.
that unless they came presently with aid, the Tegeans would revolt to the
Argiues, and their Confederates; and that they wanted little of being revolted
already.

Lacedaemonians with speed leuyed all their forces, both of themselves, and
their Helotes, in such number, as they had never done before, and marched unto
Orestium in Maenalia, and appointed the Arcadians, such as were of their
League, to assemble, and follow them at the heels to Tegea.

The Lacedaemonians being come entire to Orestium, from thence sent back the
sixth part of their Army (in which they put both the youngest and the eldest
sort) for the custody of the City, and with the rest marched on to Tegea;
Arcadia.

They sent also to Corinth, and to the Boeotians, Phoceans, and Locrians, to
come with their aids with all speed to Mantinea. But these had too short a
warning, nor was it easy for them, unless they came altogether, and stayed
for one another, to come through the enemies Country, which lay between, and
barred them of passage. Nevertheless, they made what have they could. The
Lacedaemonians waste the Territory of Mantinea.
And the Lacedaenians taking with them, their Arcadian Confederates present,
Mantinea, and pitching their Camp by the Temple of Hercules, wasted the
Territory about.

The Argiues, and their Confederates, as soon as they Lacedaemonians marched
presently toward them, and came up within a stone or a darts cast. But then
one of the ancient men of the Army cried out unto Agis, seeing him to go on
against a place of that strength, that he went about to amend one fault with
another* signifying that he intended to make amends for his former retreat from
Argos, which he was questioned for, with his now unseasonable forwardness.
But he, Tegea, turned the course of the water into the Territory of Mantinea;
touching which water, because into what part soever it had his course, it did
much harm to the Country, the Mantineans, and Tegeates were at Wars. Now
his drift was, by the turning of that water to provoke those Argiues, and their
Confederates which kept the hill, when they should hear of it, to come down,
and oppose them, that so they might fight with them in Argiues, and their
Confederates were at first amazed at this their sudden retreat, from so near
them; and knew not what to make of it. But when after the retreat they returned
no more in sight, and that they themselves lying still on the place, did not
pursue them, then began they anew to accuse their Co^manders, both for
suffering the Lacedaemonians to depart formerly, when they had them enclosed at
so fair an advantage before Argos; and now again, for not pursuing The
Argiues come down from their advantage, to seek the enemy.
and coming forth into the Plain, encamped, as to go against the enemy. The
next day the Argiues and their Confederates put themselves into such order as
(if occasion served) they meant to fight in and the Lacedaemonians returning
from the water to the temple of Hercules, the same place where they had
formerly Lacedaemonians were more affrighted at this time, The Lacedaemonians
put themselves in order hastily.
then ever they had been to their remembrance before. For the time they had to
prepare themselves was exceeding short, and such was their diligence that every
man fell immediately into his own Rank, Agis the King commanding all,
according to the Law. For whilst the King has the Army in the field, all
things are commanded by him, and he signifies what is to be done, to the
Polemarchi Martials of the field. The Commanders of Regiments, Colonels.
Pentecontateres, Captains of Companies. Enomatarchi, Captains of the fourth
part of Company. An Enomatia, was in this Army thirty two Soldiers.
Polemarchi, they to the Lochagi, these to the Pentecontateres, and these
again to the Enomatarchi, who lastly make it Enomatia. In this manner, when
they would have any thing to be done, their commands pass through the Army,
and are quickly executed. For almost all the Lacedaemonian Army, save a very
few, are Captains of Captains, and the care of what is to be put in
execution, lies upon many. Now their left Wing consisted of the A Band of the
Lacedaemonians so called, perhaps from Scirus, a Town in Laconia.
Sciritae, which amongst ahe Lacedaemonians have ever alone that place. Next to
these were placed the Brasidian Soldiers lately come out of Thra^e, and with
them, (...).
those that had been newly made free. Lacedaemonians, Band after Band; and by
them Arcadians, first the Heraeans, after these the Maenalians. In the right
Wing were the Tegeates, and a few Lacedaemonians in the point of the same Wing.
And upon the out side of either Wing, the horsemen. So stood the
Lacedaemonians. Opposite to them, The order of the battle of the Argiues.
in the right Wing, stood the Mantineans, because it was upon their own
Territory, and with them such Arcadians as were of their League. Then the 1000
chosen Argiues which Argiues. After these the Cleonaeans, and Orneates, their
Confederaes. And lastly, the Athenians with the Horsemen (which were also
theirs) had the left Wing. This was the order and preparation of both the
Armies.

The Army of the Lacedaemonians appeared to be the greater. But what the number
was, either of the particulars of either side, or in general, I could not
exactly write. Lacedaemonians, agreeable to the secrecy of that State, was
unknown; and of the other side, for the ostentation usual with all men,
touching the number Lacedaemonians may be attained by computing thus. Besides
the Sciritae, which were 600. there fought in all seven (...), less then
ordinary Regimets with us, more then ordinary Companies.
Regiments, in every Regiment were four Companies of 50, but more or less in
them as occasion served.
Companies, in each Company were four Enomatia, the fourth part of a
Pentecostye. By this account every Enomatia had 32. every Pentecostye 128.
every Band or (...) 512. the whole Army besides the Sciritae 3584, and with the
Sciritae which are 600.4184. which number rises also thus, 448 in rank 8 in
File, make 3584, and then the 600 Sciritae, as before make 4184. light-armed
Soldiers, which usually far exceeded the number of men of Arms are not
reckoned. The hortatiue to the Argiues, and their Confederates.
Enomatiae, and of every Enomatia, there stood in Front, four; but they were
not ranged all alike in File, but as the Captains of Bands thought it
necessary. But the Army in general was so ordered, as to be eight men in
depth, and the first Rank of the whole, besides the Sciritae, consisted of 448

Now when they were ready to join, the Commanders made their hortatines, every
one to those that were under his own command. To the Mantineans it was said,
That they were to fight for their Territory, and concerning their liberty, and
servitude, that the former might not be taken from them, and that they might
not again taste of the later. The Argiues were admonished, That whereas
anciently they had the leading of Peloponnesus, and in it an equal share, they
should not now suffer themselves to be deprived of it for ever; and that
withal, they To the Athenians it was remembered, how honorable a thing it
would be for them, in company of so many and good Confederates, to be inferior
to none of them; and that if they had once vanquished the Lacedaemonians in
Peloponnesus, their own Dominion would become both the more assured, and the
larger by it, and that no other would invade their Territory hereafter. Thus
much was said to the Argiues and their Confederates. The Lacedaemonians
encourage one another.
But the Lacedaemonians encouraged one another, both of themselves, and also by
the They used before battle to sing Songs containing encouragement, to dye for
their Country.
manner of their Discipline

The Argiues and their Confederates, marched to the charge with great violence,
The fight.
and fury. But the Lacedaemonians, slowly, and with many Flutes, according to
their Military Discipline, not as a point of Religion, but that marching

Whilst they were yet marching up, Agis the King thought of this course. All
Armies do thus; In the Conflict they extend their right Wing, so as it comes
in upon the Flank of the left Wing of the enemy; and this happens for that,
that every one through fear seeks all he can to cover his unarmed side, with
the Shield of him that stands next him on his right hand, conceiving, that to
be so locked together, is their best defense* The beginning Mantineans in the
right Wing, had far encompassed the Sciritae: and the Lacedaemonians on the
other side, and the Tegeates, were come in, yet farther, upon the Flank of the
Athenians, by as much as they had the greater Army. Wherefore Agis fearing lest
his left Wing should be encompassed, and supposing the Mantineans to be come in
far, signified unto the Sciritae and Brasidians, to draw out part of
Mantineans, and into the void space, he commanded to come up Hipponoidas, and
Aristocles, two Colonels with their Bands, out of the right Wing, and to fall
in there, and make up the breach: Conceiving that more then enough would be
still remaining in their right Wing, and that the left Wing opposed to the
Mantineans, would be the stronger. But it happened (for he commanded it in the
very onset, and on the sudden) both that Aristocles, and Hipponoidas refused
to go to the place commanded Sparta, as thought to have disobeyed out of
cowardice) and that the enemy had in the mean time also charged. And when
those which he commanded to go to the place of the Sciritae, went not, they
could no more reunite themselves, nor cloze again the empty space. But the
Lacedaemonians, The Lacedaemonians have the disadvantage for order, but
advantage of valor.
though they had the worst at this time in every point, for skill, yet in
valor they manifestly showed themselves superior. For after the fight was once
begun, notwithstanding that the right Wing of the Mantineans did put to
Sciritae and Brasidians, and that the Mantineans, together with their
Confederates, and those 1000 chosen men of Argos, falling upon them in Flank,
by the breach not Lacedaemonians, and put to flight, and chased them to their
Carriages, slaying also certain of the elder sort, left there for a guard, so
as in this part the Lacedaemonians were overcome. But with the rest of the
Army, and especially the middle battle, where Agis was himself, and those
which are called, the 300 horsemen, about him, they charged upon the eldest of
the Argiues, and upon those which are named, the five Cohorts, and upon the
Cleonaeans, and Orneates, and certain Athenians aranged amongst them, The
Lacedaemonians have the victory.
and put them all to flight. In such sort, as Lacedaemonians charged, gave
ground presently, and some for fear to be overtaken, were trodden under foot.
As soon as the Army of the Argiues and their Confederates had in this part
given ground, they began also to break, on either side. The right Wing of the
Lacedaemonians and Tegeates had now with their surplusage of number hemmed the
Athenians in, so as they had the danger on all hands, being within the circle,
pend up; and without it, already vanquished. And they had been the most
distressed part Agis when he perceived the left Wing of his own Army to
labor, namely, that which was opposed to the Mantineans, and to those thousand
Argiues, commanded the whole Army to go and relieve the part overcome. By
which means the Athenians, and such of the Argiues as together with them, were
ouerlaid whilst the Army passed by and declined them, saved themselves at
leisure. And the Mantineans with their Confederates, and those chosen Argiues,
had no more mind Lacedaemonians approaching them, presently turned their backs.
Of the Mantineans the greatest part were slain, but of those chosen Argiues,
the most were saved, by reason the flight, and going off, was neither hasty nor
long. For the Lacedaemonians fight long and constantly till they have made the
enemy to turn his back, but that done, they follow him not far.

The Lacedaemonians (...) the enemy far.
Thus or near thus, went the battle, the greatest that had been of a long time
between Grecians, and Grecians, Lacedaemonians Tegea, where they were also
buried, and delivered to the Enemy theirs, under truce. Of the Argiues, and
Orneates, Number of the (...)*
and Cleonaeans were slain 700. of the Mantineans, 200. and of the Athenians,
with the Aeginetae, likewise 200. and both the Captains. The Confederates of
the Lacedaemonians were never pressed, and therefore their loss was not worth
mentioning. And of the Lacedaemonians themselves, it is

When it was certain they would fight, Pleistoanax the other King of the
Lacedaemonians, and with him both old and young, came out of the City to have
aided the Army, and came forth as far as Tegea; but being advertised of the
Victory, they returned. And the Lacedaemoni^ans sent out to turn back also
those Confederates of theirs which were coming to them from Corinth, and from
without the Isib^nus. And then they also went home Carneian Holidaies)
celebrated that Feast. Thus in this one Battle they wiped off their disgrace
with the Grecians: The Lacedaemonians recover their reputation.
for they had been taxed both with cowardice, for the blow they received in
the Island, and with imprudence and slacknesse in other occasions. But after
this, their miscarriage was imputed to Fortune, and for their minds, they were
esteemed to have been ever the same they had been.

The day before this Battle, it chanced also that the Epidaurians with their
whole power invaded the Territory of Argos, as being emptied much of men; The
Epidaurians enter the territory of Argos.
and whilst the Argiues were abroad, killed many of those that were left
behind to defend it.

Also three thousand men of Elis, The Athenians build a Fort before Epidaurus.
and a thousand Athenians, besides those which had been sent before, being
come after the Battle to aid the Mantineans, marched presently all, to
Epidaurus, and lay before it all the while the Lacedaemonians were celebrating
the Carneian Holidaies: and assigning to every one his part, began to take in
the City with Athenians quickly finished a Fortification, (which was their
task) wherein stood the Temple of Juno. In it, amongst them all they The end
of the twelfth Summer.

Peace concluded between the Argiues and Lacedaemonians.


And so this Summer ended.

In the beginning of the Winter following, the Lacedaemonians, presently after
the end of the Carneian Holidaies, drew out their Army into the Field, and
being come to Tegea, sent certain propositions of agreement before to Argos.
There were before this time many Citizens in Argos, well-affected to the
Lacedaemonians, and that desired the deposing of the Argiue People, and now
after the Battle, they were better able by much to persuade the people
Lacedaemonians, and after that a League, and then at last to set upon the
Commons.

There went thither, Lichas the son of Archesilaus, entertainer of the
Argiues in Lacedaemon, and brought to Argos two propositions; one of War, if
the War were to proceed; another of Peace, if they would have Peace. And
after much contradiction, (for Alcibiades was also there) the Lacedaemonian
Faction, that boldly now discovered Argiues to accept the proposition of Peace,
which was this.

THE ARTICLES.
It seems good to the Council of the Lacedaemonians, to accord with the
Argiues on these Articles:

The Argiues shall redeliuer unto the Orchomenians their Hostages which they
took of the Orchomenians.
children, and unto the Maenalians their Hostages of the Maenalians.
men, and unto the Lacedaemonians those Hostages of the Arcadians given to the
Lacedaemonians, and by them kept in Orchomenus, and at the taking of Orchomenus
by the Argiue League, carried away to Mantinea.
men that are at Mantinea.

They shall withdraw their Soldiers from Epidaurus, and raze the Fortification
there. And if the Athenians depart not Epidaurus likewise, they shall be held
as Enemies both to the Argiues and to the Lacedaemonians, and also to the
Confederates of them both.

If the Lacedaemonians have any men of theirs in custody, they shall deliver
them every one to his own City.

And for so much as concerns the Apollo, to whom the Epidaurians should have
sent a beast for sacrifice, in name of their pastures, but not doing it, the
Argiues went about to force the^ to it.
God, the Argiues shall accept composition with the Epidaurians, upon an An
Oath to send the beast for sacrifice hereafter.
Oath which they shall swear, touching that controversy, and the Argiues
shall give the form of that Oath.

All the Cities of Peloponnesus, both small and great, shall be

If any without Peloponnesus shall enter into it, to do it harm, the Argiues
shall come forth to defend the same, in such sort as in a Common Council shall
by the Peloponnesians be thought reasonable.

The Confederates of the Lacedaemonians, without Peloponnesus, shall have the
same conditions which the Confederates of the Argiues, and of the
Lacedaemonians have, every one holding his own.

This composition is to hold from the time, that they shall both parts have
showed the same to their Confederates, and obtained their consent.

And if it shall seem good to either part to add or alter any thing, their
Confederates shall be sent unto, and made acquainted therewith.

These Propositions the Argiues accepted at first, and the Army of the
Lacedaemonians returned from Tegea, to their own City. But shortly after, when
they had commerce together, the The Lacedaemonian faction.
same men went further, and so wrought, that the Argiues renouncing their
League with the Mantineans, Eleans, and Athenians, made league and alliance
with the Lacedaemonians in this form.

It seems good to the Lacedaemonians and Argiues, The League between the
Argiues and Lacedaemonians.
to make League and alliance for fifty years, on these Articles:

That either side shall allow unto the other, equal and like trials of
Judgment, after the form used in their Cities.

That the rest of the Cities of Peloponnesus (this League and Alliance
comprehending also them) shall be (...).
free, both from the laws, and payments of any other City then their own,
holding what they have, and affording equal, and like trials of judgment,
according to the form used in their several Cities.

That every of the Cities, Confederate with the Lacedaemonians without
Peloponnesus, shall be in the same condition with the Lacedaemonians, and the
Confederates of the Argiues, in the same with the Argiues, every one holding
his own.

That if at any time there shall need an expedition to be undertaken in common,
the Lacedaemonians, and the Argiues shall consult thereof, and decree, as shall
stand most with equity toward the Confederates; and that if any Controversy
arise between any of the Cities either within, or without Peloponnesus, about
limits or other matter, they also shall decide

That if any Confederate City be at contention with another, it shall have
recourse to that City, which they both shall

Thus was the Peace and League concluded, and whatsoever one had taken from
other in the War, or whatsoever one had against another otherwise, was all
acquitted.

The Argiues and Lacedaemonians make an order that the Athenians shall quit the
Fort.
Now when they were together settling their business, they ordered, that the
Argiues should neither admit Herald or Embassage from the Athenians, till they
were gone out of Peloponnesus, and had quit the Fortification, nor should make
Peace or War with any, without consent of the

They solicit the towns upon Thrace to revolt from the Athenians.
And amongst other things which they did in this heat, they sent Ambassadors
from both their Cities, to the Towns lying upon Thrace, and unto Perdiccas,
whom they also persuaded to swear himself of the same League. Yet he revolted
not from the Athenians presently, but intended it; because he saw the Argiues
had done so* and was himself also anciently descended out of Argos. They
likewise renewed their old oath with the Chalcideans, and took another besides
it.

The Argiues sent Ambassadors also to Athens, requiring Epidaurus. Demosthenes
being sent to fetch their Soldiers from the Fort, delivers the same by a
wile to the Epidaurians.
And the Athenians considering that the Soldiers they had in it, were but few,
in respect of the many other that were with them in the same, sent Demosthenes
thither to fetch them away. He, when he was come, and had exhibited for a
pretense, a certain exercise of naked men without the Fort, when the rest of
the Garrison were gone forth to see it, made fast the Gates, and afterward
having renewed the League with the Epidaurians, the Athenians

The Mantineans forsake the League of Athens.
After the revolt of the Argiues from the League, the Mantineans also, though
they withstood it at first, yet being too weak without the Argiues, made their
Peace with the Lacedaemonians, and laid down their command over the Which they
had the leading of in Arcadia.
other Cities. And the Lacedaemonians and Argiues, with a thousand men of
either City, having joined their Arms, the Lacedaemonians first, Si^yon, and
Argos reduced to Oligarchies.
with their single power, reduced the government of Sicyon to a smaller number,
and then they both together dissolved the Democracy at Argos.

And the Oligarchy was established conformable to the Lacedaemon. These things
passed in the end of Winter, and near the Spring. And so ended the foureteenth
year of this War.

The next Summer the Dictidians seated in Mount Athos, THE FIFTEENTH YEAR.
revolted from the Athenians, to the Chalcideans.

And the Lacedaemonians ordered the State of Achaia, The Dictidians revolt from
Athens.

Achaia Oligarchized. Argos relapseth into a Democracy.


after their own form, which before was otherwise. But the Argiues, after
they had by little and little assembled themselves, and recovered heart, taking
their time when the Lacedaemonians were celebrating their exercises of the
naked Few, and in a battle fought within the City, the Commons had the
victory, and some they slew, other they drove into exile. The Lacedaemonians,
though those of their faction in Argos sent for them, went not a long time
after, yet at last they adiourned the exercises, and came forth with intention
to give them aid, but hearing by the way, at Tegea, that the Few were overcome,
they could not be entreated, by such as had escaped thence, to go on, but
returning, went on with the celebration of their exercises. But afterward,
when there came Ambassadors unto Argiues in the City, and from them that were
driven out, there being present also their Confederates, and much alleged on
either side, they concluded at last, that those in the City had done the wrong,
and decreed to go against Argos with their Army; but many delays passed, and
much time was spent between. The Argiues come again to the League of Athens,
and with long walls take in a way from their City to the Sea.
In the mean time the common people of Argos, fearing the Lacedaemonians, and
regaining the League with Athens, as conceiving the same would turn to their
very great advantage, raise long walls from their City, down to the Seashore;
to the end that Athenians, bring things necessary into the City by Sea. And
with this their building, some other Cities of Peloponnesus were also
acquainted. And the Argiues, universally themselves, and wives, and servants,
wrought at the wall; and had workmen, and hewers of stone from Athens. The end
of the fifteenth Summer.
So this Summer ended.

The next Winter, the Lacedaemonians understanding, The Lacedaemonians Army
comes to Argos, and razeth the walls which they were building.
that they were fortifying, came to Argos with their Army, they and their
Confederates, all but the Corinthians, and some practice Argos. The Army was
commanded by Agis the son of Archidamus, King of the Lacedaemonians. But
those things which were Argos, and supposed to have been already mature, They
take Hysi^ a Town in Argia.
did not then succeed. Nevertheless they took the walls that were then in
building, and razed them to the ground; and then after they had taken Hysiae, a
town in the Argiue Territory, and slain all the freemen in it, they went
home, and were dissolved every one to his own City.

The Argiues spoil the Territory of Phliasia.
After this, the Argiues went with an Army into Phliasia, which when they had
wasted, they went back. They did it, because the men of Phlius had received
their Outlawes; for there the greatest part of them dwelt.

The same Winter the Athenians shut up Perdiccas in Macedonia, The Athenians
quarrel Perdiccas, and bar him the use of the Sea.
from the use of the Sea; Obiecting that he had sworn the League of the
Argiues, and Lacedaemonians, and that when they had prepared an Army, under the
command of Nicias the son of Niceratus, to go against the Chalcideans upon
Thrace, and against Amphipolis, he had broken the League made betwixt them, and
him; and by his departure, was the principal cause of the dissolution of that
Army, and was therefore an enemy. And so this Winter ended, and the fifteenth
year of this War.

The next Summer went Alcibiades to Argos, with twenty Galleys, THE SIXETEENTH
YEAR.
and took thence the suspected Argiues, and such as seemed to savor of the
Lacedaemonian faction, Alcibiades fetches away 300 Citizens of Argos for
Lacedaemonisme.
to the number of 300, and put them into the nearest of the Islands subject to
the Athenian State.

The Athenians made War also against the I Will of Melos, with 30 Galleys of
their own, The Athenians war against the Island of Melos.
6 of Chios, and 2 of Lesbos. Wherein were of their own, 1200 men of Arms,
300 Archers, and 20 Archers on horsebake, and of their Confederates, and
Ilanders, about 1500 men of Arms. The Melians Lacedaemonians, and therefore
refused to be subject, as the rest of the Islands were, unto the Athenians; but
rested at the first newtrall, and afterward when the Athenians put them to it,
by wasting of their Land, they entered into open War.

Now the Athenian Commanders Cleomenes the son of Lycomedes, and Licias the
son of Lisimachus, being encamped upon their Land with these forces, before
they would hurt the same, sent Ambassadors to deal with them first by way of
conference. These Ambassadors the Melians refused Magistrates, and the Few, and
they accordingly said as follows.

DIALOGVE BETWEEN THE ATHENIANS and MELIANS.
Ath. SInce we may not speak to the multitude, for fear lest when they hear
our perswasiue and unanswerable Arguments, all at once in a continued Oration*
they should chance to be seduced, (for we know that this is the scope of your
bringing us to audience before the Few) make surer yet that point, you that sit
here; answer


Whereunto the Council of the Melians answered, Mel. The equity of a leasurely
debate is not to be found fault withal; but this preparation of war, not
future, but already here present, seems not to agree with the same. For we
see that you are come to be Judges of the conference, and that the issue of
it, if we be superior in argument, and therefore yield not, is likely to
bring us


Ath. Nay, if you be come together to reckon up suspicions of what may be, or
to any other purpose, then to take advice upon what is present, and before your
eyes, how to save your City from destruction, let us give over. But if this be
the point, let us speak to it.


Mel. It is reason, and pardonable for men in our cases, to turn both their
words and thoughts upon diverse things: Howsoever, this consultation being held
only upon the point of our safety, we are content, if you think good, to go
on with the course you have propounded.


Ath. Medes, our reign is therefore lawful, or That we come against you for
injury done) make a long discourse without being believed; so would we have you
also not expect to prevail, by saying, either, That you therefore took not
our parts, because you were a Colonie of the Lacedaemonians; or, that you have
done us no injury; but out of those things which we both of us do really
think, let us go through, with that which is fesible; both you* and we,
knowing, that in humane disputation, justice is then only agreed on, when the
necessity is equal. Whereas they that have


Mel. Well then, (seeing you put the point of profit in the place Justice) we
hold it profitable for our selves, not to overthrow a general profit to all
men, which is this, That men in danger, if they plead reason, and equity, nay,
though somewhat without the strict compass of Justice, yet it ought ever to
do them good; And the same most of all concerns you, forasmuch as you shall
else give an example unto others, of the greatest revenge that can be taken,
if you chance to miscarry.


Ath. As for us, though our dominion should cease, yet we fear not the
sequel. For not they that command, as do the Lacedaemonians, are cruel to
those that are vanquished by them, (yet we have Lacedaemonians,) but such as
having been in subjection, have assaulted those that commanded them, and
gotten the victory. But let the danger of that be to our selves. In the mean
time, we tell you this, that we are here now, both to enlarge our own
dominion, and also to confer about the saving of your City. For we would
have dominion over you, without oppressing you, and preserve you, to the profit
of us both.


Mel. But how can it be profitable for us to serve, though it be so for you to
command?


Ath. Because you by obeying, shall save your selves from extremity; and we
not destroying you, shall reap profit by you.


Mel. But will you not accept that we remain quiet, and be your friends,
(whereas before we were your enemies,) and take part with neither?


Ath. No. For your enimity does not so much hurt us, as your friendship will be
an argument of our weakness, and your hatred, of our power, amongst those
whom we bear rule over.


Mel. Why? Do your Subjects measure equity so, as to put those that never had
to do with you, and themselves, who for the most part have been your own
Colonies, and some of them after revolt conquered, into one and the same
consideration?


Ath. Why not? For they think they have reason on their side, both the one
sort and the other; and that such as are subdued, are subdued by force, and
such as are forborne, are so through our fear. So that by subduing you,
besides the extending of our dominion over so many more Subjects, we shall also
assure it the more over those we had before, especially being masters of the
Sea, and you Ilanders, and weaker (except you can get the victory) then others
whom we have subdued already.


Mel. Do you think then, that there is no assurance in that which


Ath. We do not think that they shall be ever the more our Enemies, who
inhabiting any where in the Continent, will be long ere


Mel. If you then to retain your command, and your vassals, to get loose from
you, will undergo the utmost of danger, would it not in us that be already
free, be great baseness and cowardice, if we should not encounter any thing
whatsoever, rather then suffer our selves to be brought into bondage?


Ath. No, if you advise rightly. For you have not in hand a match


Mel. But we know, that in matter of War, the event is sometimes otherwise
then according to the difference of the number in sides. And that if we yield
presently, all our hope is lost; whereas, if we hold out, we have yet a hope
to keep our selves up.


Ath. Hope, the comfort of danger, when such use it as have to spare, though it
hurt them, yet it destroys them not. But to such as set their rest upon it,
(for it is a thing by nature prodigal) it at Divination, Oracles, and other
such things, which with hopes destroy men.


Mel. We think it (you well know) a hard matter for us to combat your power
and fortune, unless we might do it on equal fortune we shall be nothing
inferior, as having the Gods on our side, because we stand innocent, against
men unjust. And for power, what is wanting in Lacedaemonians, who are of
necessity obliged, if for no other cause, yet for consanguinities sake, and for
their own honor to defend us. So that we are confident, not altogether so
much without reason, as you think.


Ath. As for the favor of the Gods, we expect to have it as well as you, for
we neither do, nor require any thing contrary to what mankind has decreed,
either concerning the worship of the Gods, or concerning themselves. For of the
Gods we think, according to the common opinion; and of men, that for certain,
by necessity of Nature, they will every where reign over such as they be to
strong for. Neither Gods, we have in reason no fear of being inferior. And as
for the opinion you have of the Lacedaemonians, in that you believe they will
help you for their own honor, we bless your innocent minds, but affect
not your folly. For the Lacedaemonians, though in respect of themselves, and
the constitutions of their own Country, they are wont* for the most part, to
be generous, honorable that which pleases, and for just, that which
profits. And such an opinion makes nothing for your now absurd means of
safety.


Mel. Nay for this same opinion of theirs we now the rather believe that they
will not betray their own Colony, the Melians; and thereby become perfidious
to such of the Grecians as be their friends, and beneficial to such as be
their enemies.


Ath. You think not then that what is profitable, must be also Lacedaemonians
are least vvilling of all men, to undergo for others.


Mel. But we suppose that they will undertake danger for us, rather then for
any other; and that they think that we will be more assured unto them, then
unto any other; because for action we lie near to Peloponnesus, and for
affection, are more faithful then others for our neerenesse of kin.


Ath. The security of such as are at Wars, consists not in the good will
of those that are called to their aid, but in the power of Lacedaemonians


Mel. Yea, but they may have others to send; and the Cretique sea is wide,
wherein, to take another, is harder for him that is Master of it, then it is
for him that will steal by, to save himself. And if this course fail, they
may turn their Arms against your own Territory, or those of your
Confederates not invaded by Brasidas. And then you


Ath. Let them take which course of these they will, that you also may find by
experience, and not be ignorant, that the Athenians, never yet gave over siege,
for fear of any diuersion upon others. But we observe, that whereas you said
you would consult of your safety* you have not yet in all this discourse said
any thing, which a man relying on, could hope to be preserved by. The strongest
arguments you use, are but future hopes, and your present power, is too short
to defend you against the forces already aranged against you. You shall
therefore shame, which, when dishonor and danger stand before men's eyes* for
the most part undoes them. For many, when they have foreseen into what
dangers they were entering, have nevertheless been so overcome by that
forcible word, dishonor, that that which is but called dishonor, has caused
them to fall willingly into immedicable calamities and so to draw upon
themselves, really by their own madness, a greater dishonor then could have
befalne them by fortune. Which you, if you deliberate So the Athenians went
aside from the conference; and the Melians after they had decreed the very same
things which before they had spoken, made answer unto them in this manner.


Mel. Men of Athens, our resolution is no other then what 700 years since it
was first founded. But trusting to the fortune by which the Gods have preserved
it hitherto, and unto the help of men, that is, of the Lacedaemonians, we
will do our best to maintain the same. But this we offer; To be your friends;
Enemies to neither side; and you to depart out of our Land after agreement,
such as we shall both think fit. Thus the Melians answered; to which the
Athenians, the conference being already broken off, replied thus.


Ath. You are the only men, (as it seems to us by this consultation) that
think future things more certain, then things seen, and behold things
doubtful, through desire to have them true, as if they were already come to
pass. As you attribute and trust the most, unto the Lacedaemonians, and to
Fortune, and Hopes; So will you be the most deceived. The Athenians and Melians
agree not.
This said, the Athenian Ambassadors departed to their Camp, and the
Commanders, seeing that the Melians stood out, fell presently to the War, and
dividing the work among the several Cities, encompassed the City of the
Melians with a wall. The City of Melos besieged.
The Athenians afterward, left some forces of their own, and of their
Confederates, for a guard, both by Sea and Land, and with the greatest part of
their Army, went home. The rest that were left, besieged the place.


The Argiues loose 80 men by an Ambushment of the Phliasians.
About the same time, the Argiues, making a Road into Phliasia, lost about* 80
of their men, by ambush laid for them by the men of Phlius, and the outlawes of
their own City.

The Athenians in Pylus infest Laconia.
And the Athenians that lay in Pylus, fetched in thither a great booty from the
Lacedaemonians; notwithstanding which the Lacedaemonians did not war upon
them, as renouncing Athenians.

The Corinthians War on the Athenians.
The Corinthians also made War upon the Athenians, but it was for certain
controversies of their own, and the rest of Peloponnesus stirred not.

The Melians ^^leeue their ^owne.
The Melians also took that part of the wall of the Athenians by an assault in
the night, which looked toward the Market place, and having slain the men
that guarded it, brought into the Town both Corn, and other provision
Athenians from thenceforth kept a better watch. And so this Summer ended. The
end of the fifteenth Summer.


The Winter following, the Lacedaemonians being about to enter with their Army
into the Territory of the Argiues, when they perceived that the sacrifices
which they made on the border, for their passage, were not acceptable,
returned. And the Argiues, having some of their own City in suspicion, in
regard of this design of the Lacedaemonians, apprehended some of them* and
some escaped.

About the same time, the Melians took another part Athenians, they that kept
the siege, being then not many. But this done, there came afterward fresh
forces from Athens, under the Conduct of Philocrates the son of Demeas. And
the Town being now strongly besieged, there being also within some that
practiced to have it given up, they yielded themselves to the discretion of the
Athenians, who slew all the men of Military age, made slaves of the women and
children, and inhabited the place with a Colony sent thither afterward, of
five hundred

ANCIENT SICELE ACCORDING TO THE Description of Philip Ch^erius
map of Sicily and Aeolian Isles
THE SIXTH BOOK
The principal Contents.
Sicily described. The causes and pretenses of the Sicilian War, with the
consultation and preparation for the same. Alcibiades, one of the Generals of
the Army accused of defacing the Images of Mercury, is suffered for that
present to depart with the Army. Athenian Army comes to Rhegium, thence to
Catana. From thence Alcibiades is sent for home, to make answer to his
accusations, and by the way escaping, goes to Lacedaemon. Nicias encampeth
near Syracuse, and having overcome the Army of the Syracusians in Battle,
returns to Catana. The Syracusians procure aids amongst the rest of the
Sicilians. Alcibiades instigateth and instructs the Lacedaemonians against
his Country. Nicias returns from Catana to Syracuse, and encamping in
Epipolae, besieges the City, and begins to encloze them with a double
Wall, which was almost brought to perfection

THe same Winter the Athenians with greater Forces then they had before sent
out with Laches and Eurymedon, The Athenians resolve to invade Sicily.
resolved to go again into Sicily, and if they could wholly to subdue it.
Being for the most part ignorant both of the greatness of the Island, and of
the multitude The greatness of Sicily* and the inhabitants.
as well Greeks as Barbarians that inhabited the same; and that they
undertook a War not much less then the War against Peloponnesians.

For the compass of Sicily is little less then eight days sail for a Ship,
(...).
and though so great, is yet divided with no more then twenty Furlongs, Sea
measure, from the Continent.

It was inhabited in Old time, thus; and these were the Nations that held it.
The most ancient Inhabitants in a part thereof, are said to have been the
Cyclopes, and Laestrigones, Cyclopes and Laestrigones.
of whose Stock, and whence they came, or to what place they removed, I have
nothing to say. Let that suffice which the Poets have spoken, and which every
particular

After them, the first that appear to have dwelt therein, Sicanians.
are the Sicanians, as they say themselves; nay, before the other, as being the
(...).
natural breed of the Island. But the truth is, they were Iberians, and driven
away by the Ligyans from the banks of Sicanus, a River on which they were
seated in Iberia. And the Island from them came to be called Sicania, Sicania,
Trinacria.
which was before Trinacria. And these two inhabit yet in the Western parts of
Sicily.

Trojans.
After the taking of Ilium* certain Trojans, escaping the Grecians, landed with
small Boats in Sicily, and having planted themselves on the borders of the
Sicanians, both the Nations in one were called Elymi, and their Cities were
Eryx, and Egesta.

Hard by these came and dwelled also certain Phoceans, who coming from Troy,
were by tempest carried first into Afric, and thence into Sicily. But the
Siculi passed out of Italy, Siculi.
(for there they inhabited) flying from the Opici, having, as is most likely,
and as it is reported, observed the

There is at this day a people in Italy, called Siculi. And Italy it self got
that name after the same manner, from a King of Arcadia, called Italus. Of
these a great Army crossing over into Sicily, overthrew the Sicanians in
battle, and drove them into the South, and West parts of the same; and in
stead of Sicania, caused the Island to be called Sicilia, and held and inhabited
the best of the Land, for Grecians came thither. And till now, they possess
the midland, and North parts of the Island.

Also the Phoenicians inhabited the Coast of Sicily on all sides, having taken
possession of certain Promontories, Phoenicians.
and little Islands adjacent, for Trades sake with the Sicilians. But after that
many Grecians were come in by Sea, the Phoenicians abandoned most of their
former habitations, and uniting themselves, dwelt in Mo^ya, and Soloeis, and
Panormus, upon the borders of the Elymi; as relying upon their League with the
Elymi, and because also, from thence, lay the shortest Cut over unto Carthage.
These were the Barbarians, Sicily.

Now for Grecians, first a Colony of Chalcideans, Chalcideans.
under Thucles their Conductor, going from Euboea, built Naxus, and the Altar
of Apollo Id est, (...) guide.
Archegetes, now standing without the City, upon which the (...).
Ambassadors employed to the Oracles, as often as they lanch from Sicily, are
accustomed to offer their first sacrifice. Corinthians.
The next year Archias, a man of the Herculean Family, carried a Colony from
Corinth, and became Founder of Syracuse, where first he drove the Siculi out of
that Nasus, Ortygia, an Jland part of the City of Syracuse.
Island, in which the inner

In the fifth year after the building of Syracuse, Thucles, and the
Chalcideans, going from Naxus, built Leontium, expelling thence the Siculi, and
after that Catana, but they that went to Catana, chose Euarchus for their
Founder. About the same time arrived in Sicily, also Lamis, with a Colony
Megara, and first built a certain Town called Trotilus, upon the River
Pantacius, where for a while after he governed the estate of his Colony in
common with the Chalcideans of Leontium. But afterward, Megareans.
when he was by them thrust out, and had builded Thapsus, he dyed; and the rest
going from Thapsus, under the Conduct of Hyblon, a King of the Siculi, built
Megara, called Megara-Hyblea. And after they had there inhabited, 245 years,
they were by Gelon a Tyrant of Syracuse, put out both of the City and
Territory. But before they were driven thence, namely 100 Pammilus, and built
the City of Selinus. This Pammilus came to them from Megara, their own
Metropolitan City, and so together Selinus. Gela was built in the 45 year
after Syracuse, by Antiphemus, that brought a Colony out of Rhodes, Rhodians
and Cretans.
and by Entymus, that did the like out of Crete, jointly. This City was named
after the name of the River, Gela, and the place where now the City stands,
and which at first they walled in, was called Lindij. And the Laws which they
established, were the Dorique. About 108 years after their own foundation,
they of Gela built the City of Acragante, calling the City after the name of
the River, and for their Conductors, choze Aristonous, Pythilus, and gave unto
them the Laws of Gela. Zancle was first built by Pirates, Messana first built
by Pirates of Cumae.
that came from Cumae, a Chalcidean City in Opicia; but afterward there came a
multitude and helped to people it, out of Chalcis, and the rest of Euboea; and
their Conductors were Prieres, and Crataemenes; Euboeans.
one of Cumae, the other of Chalcis. And the name of the City was at first
Zancle, so named by the Sicilians, because it has the form of a Sicle, and
the Sicilians call a Sicle, Zanclon. But these Inhabitants were afterward
chased thence by the Samians, Samians and other Ionians.
and other people of Ionia, that in their flight from the Medes, fell upon
Sicily.

Rhegium.
After this, Anaxilas, Tyrant of Rhegium, drove out the Samians, and peopling
the City with a mixed people of them, and his own, in stead of Zancle, called
the place by the name of his own Country from whence he was anciently
descended, Messana. After Zancle, was built Himera, by Eucleides, Simus, and
Sacon; the most of which Colony were Chalcideans; but there were also amongst
them certain Outlawes of Syracuse, the vanquished part of a Sedition, called
the Myletidae. Their language grew to a Mean between the Chalcidean, and
Dorique; but the laws Chalcidean prevailed. Acrae, Chasmenae.
Acrae, and Chasmenae, were built by the Syracusians. Acrae 20 years after
Syracuse; and Chasmenae, Camarina.
almost 20 after Acrae. Camarina was at first built by the Syracusians, very
near the 135 year of their own City, Dascon, and Menecolus, being the
Conductors. But the Camarinaeans having been by the Syracusians driven from
their seat by War, for revolt, Hippocrates, Tyrant of Gela, in process of
time, taking of the Syracusians, that Territory for ransom of certain
Syracusian prisoners, became Camerina again.

Gelon they were planted the third time in the same City. These were the
Nations, Greeks and Barbarians, that inhabited Sicily.

And though it were thus great, yet the Athenians longed very much to send an
Army against it, The cause and pretense of the Athenians to invade it.
out of a desire to bring it all under their subjection (which was the true
motive) but as having withal this fair pretext of aiding their kindred and
new Confederates. But principally they were instigated to it by the Ambassadors
of Egesta who were at Athens, and earnestly pressed them thereto. For bordering
Selinuntians, they had begun a War about certain things concerning marriage,
and about a piece of ground that lay doubtfully between them. And the
Selinuntians having leagued themselves with the Syracusians, infested them with
War both by Sea and by Land. Insomuch as the Egestaeans putting the Athenians
in mind of their former League with the Leontines, made by Laches, prayed them
to send a Fleet thither in their aid; alleging amongst many other things,
this as principal, That if the Syracusians who had driven the Leontines from
their Athenians there, to get the whole power of Sicily into their hands, it
would be dangerous, lest hereafter some time or other, being Doreans, they
should with great Forces aid the Doreans for affinity, and being a Colonie of
the Peloponnesians, join with the Peloponnesians, that sent them out, to pull
down the Athenian Empire. That it were wisdom therefore, with those
Confederates they yet retain, to make head Syracusians, and the rather, because
for the defraying of the War, the Egestaeans would furnish money sufficient,
of themselves. Which things when the Athenians had often heard in their
Assemblies, from the mouths of the Egestaean Ambassadors, and of their
Advocates and Patrons, they decreed to send Ambassadors to Egesta, to see
first, whether there were in their Treasury and Temples so much wealth as they
said there was, and to bring word in what terms the Warstood between that
City and the Selenuntians* and Ambassadors were sent into Sicily accordingly.

Lacedaemonians and their Confederates, The Lacedaemonians waste part of
Argolica, and put the Outlawes of Argos into Ornea.
all but the Corinthians, having drawn out their forces into the Territory of
the Argiues, wasted a small part of Orneae, and having placed there the Argiue
Outlawes, left with them a few others of the rest of the Army, and then making
a composition for a certain time, that they of Orneae* and those Argiues
should not wrong each other, they carried their Army home. But the Athenians
arriving not long after with 30. Galleys, and 600. men of Arms, the people of
Argos came also forth with their whole power, and joining with them, sat down
betimes in the morning before Orneae. But when at night the Army went somewhat
far off to Argiues the next day perceiving it, pulled Orneae to the ground,
and went home; and so also did the Athenians not long after with their Galleys,

The Athenians war upon Macedonia.
Also the Athenians transported certain Horsemen by Sea, part of their own,
and part Macedonian fugitives, that lived with them, into Methone, and rauaged
the Territory of Perdiccas. And the Lacedaemonians sent unto the Chalcideans
upon Thrace, who held Peace with the Athenians from ten days to ten days,
appointing them to aid Perdiccas. Thucydides.

THE SEVENTEENTH YEAR.
The next Summer, early in the Spring, the Athenian Ambassadors returned from
Sicily, and the Ambassadors of Egesta with them, The Athenian (...) the Voyage
of (...), and Alcibia^es, N^^ias, and Lamachus for Generals.
and brought, in silver vncoined, sixty Talents, for a months pay of sixty
Galleys, which they would entreat the Athenians to send thither. And the
Athenians having called an Assembly, and heard both from the Egestaean and
their own Ambassadors, amongst other perswasiue, Sicily, and Alcibiades the
son of Clinias, Nicias the son of Niceratus, and Lamachus the son of
Xenophanes, for Commanders, with authority absolute, the which were to aid the
people of Egesta against the Selinuntians, and withal, if they had time spare,
to plant the Leontines anew in their City, and to order all other the affairs
of Sicily, as they should think most for the profit Athenians.

Armada in readiness, and to decree such things as the Generals should further
require for the Expedition. But Nicias having heard that himself was chosen
for one of the Generals, and conceiving that the State had not well resolved,
but affected the Conquest of all Sicily, a great matter upon small aed
superficial pretenses, stood forth, desiring to have altered this the Athenians
purpose, and spoke as follows.

THE ORATION OF NICIAS.
THough this Asembly was called to deliberate of our preparation, and of the
manner how to set forth our Fleet for Sicily; yet to me it seems* that we
ought rather, once again, to consult, whether it be not better, not to send it
at all, then upon a short deliberation in so weighty an affair, and upon the
credit of strangers, to draw upon our selves an impertinent War. For my own
part, Lacedaemonians, which though as long as you stir not, may continue a
League in name, (for so some have made it of our own side) yet if any
considerable forces of ours chance to miscary, our enemies will soon renew the
War, as having made the peace, constrained by calamities, and upon terms of
more dishonor to accept it, and they none of the weakest, whereof The
Corinthians.
some are now in The Boeotians.
others, because the Lacedaemonians stir not, maintain only a Truce with us
from ten to ten days, and so are contented yet to hold their hands. But
peradventure when they shall hear that our power is distracted (which is the
thing we now hasten to do) they will be glad to join in the War with the
Sicilians against us, the confederacy of whom they would heretofore have valued
above many other. It behooves us therefore to consider of these things, and not
to run into new dangers, when the state of our own City hangs unsettled,
nor seek a new dominion, before we assure that which we already have. For the
Chalcideans of Thrace, after so many years revolt, are yet vnreduced: and from
Egestaeans, being forsooth our Confederates, and wronged, they in all haste
must be aided; though to right us on those by whom we have a long time our
selves been wronged, that we defer. And yet if we should reduce the
Chalcideans into subjection, we could easily also keep them so. But the
Sicilians, though we vanquish them, yet being many, and far off, we should
have much ado to hold them in obedience. Now it were madness to invade such,
whom conquering, you cannot keep, and failing, should lose the means for ever
after to attempt the same againe^ As for the Sicilians, it Syracusians, then
they are now; And yet this is it that the Egestaeans would most affright us
with: for now the States of Sicily in several, may perhaps be induced, in
favor of the Lacedaemonians, to take part against us: whereas then, being
reduced into one, it is not likely they would hazard with us state against
state. For by the same means that they, joining with the Peloponnesians may
pull down our Dominion, by the same it would be likely that the
Peloponnesians Grecians there will fear us most, if we go not at all; next,
if we but show our Forces, and come quickly away. But if any misfortune befall
us, they will presently despise us, and join with the Grecians here to invade
us. For we all know, that those things are most admired which are farthest
off, and which least come to give proof of the opinion conceived of them. And
this (Athenians) is your own case now with the Lacedaemonians, and their
Confederates, whom because beyond your hope you have overcome, in those things
for which at first you feared them, you now in contempt of them, turn your
Arms upon Sicily. But we ought not Lacedaemonians set their minds on any
thing else, but how they may yet for the late disgrace, repair their
reputation, if they can, by our overthrow; and the rather because they have so
much, and so long labored to win an opinion in the world of their valor. The
question with us therefore (if we be well advised) will not be of the Egestaeans
in Sicily, but how we may speedily defend our City against the insidiation of
them that favor the Oligarchy. We must remember also that we have had now
some short recreation from a late great Plague, and great War, and thereby
are improued both Heglanceth at Alcibiades.
man here; that, for ends of his own, as being glad to be General, especially
being yet too young to have charge in chief, shall advise the expedition, to
the end he may have admiration for his expense upon horses, and help from his
place to defray that expense, suffer him not to purchase his private honor and
splendour with the That the Sicilians, within the limits they now enjoy, not
misliked by you, and with liberty to sail by the shore, in the Ionian Gulf,
and in the maine of the Sicilian Sea, shall possess their own, and compound
their differences within themselves. And for the Egestaeans, to answer them in
particular, thus; That as without the Athenians they had begun the War against
the Selinuntians, so they should without them And, that we shall no more
hereafter, as we have used to do, make such men our Confederates, as when
they do injury, we must maintain it* and when we And you the President, (if
you think it your office to take care of the Commonwealth, and desire to be a
good member of the same) put these things once more to the question, and let
the Athenians speak to it again. Think (if you be afraid to infringe the
orders of the Assembly) that before so many witnesses, it will not be made a
crime, but that you shall be rather thought a Physician of your Country, that
has swallowed down evil council. And he truly discharges the duty of a
President, who labors to do his Country the most good, or at least will
not willingly do it hurt. Thus spoke Nicias.

But the most of the Athenians that spoke after him, were of opinion, that the
voyage ought to proceed, the Decree already made, not to be reuersed. Yet some
there were that said to the contrary. But the expediton was most of all pressed
by Alcibiades the son of Clinias, The motives of Alcibiades to further his
voyage.
both out of desire he had to cross Nicias, with whom he was likewise at odds
in other points of State, and also for that he had glanced at him inuidiously
in his Oration, but principally for that he affected to have charge, hoping
that himself Sicily and Carthage, to the State of Athens, and withal, if it
succeeded, to increase his own private wealth and glory. For being in great
estimation with the Citizens, his desires were more vaste, then for the
proportion of his estate, both in maintaining of horses and other his expenses,
was meet. Which proved afterward none of the least causes of the subversion of
the Athenian Commonwealth. For most men fearing him, both for his excess in
things that concerned his person, and form of life, and for the greatness of
his spirit, in Alcibiades at this time stood forth, and spoke to this effect.

THE ORATION OF ALCIBIADES.
MEN of Athens, It both belongs unto me, more then to any other, to have this
charge, and withal, I think my self (for I must needs begin with this, as
having been touched by Nicias,) to be worthy of the same. For those things,
for which I am so much spoken of, do indeed purchase glory to my progenitors,
and my self, but to the Commonwealth, they confer both Grecians have
thought our City, a mighty one, even above the truth, by reason of my brave
appearance at the Olympian Games; whereas before they thought easily to have
warred it down. For I brought thither seven Chariots, and not only won the
first, second, and fourth prize, but carried also in all other things, a
magnificence worthy the honor of the victory. And in such things as these, as
there is honor to be supposed, according to the Law; so is there also a power
conceived, upon sight of the thing done. As for my (...), the exhibition of
(...) or other festiual^spectacles.
expenses in the City, upon setting forth of shows, or whatsoever else is
remarkable in me, though Peloponnesus without much, either danger, or
Lacedaemonians to stake all that ever they had, upon the Fortune of one day of
Mantinea.

And this has my youth and Madness, supposed to have been very
Peloponnesians, and showing reason for my passion, made my madness now no
longer to be feared. But as long as I flourish with it, and Nicias is esteemed
fortunate, make you use of both our services. And abrogate not your Decree
touching the voyage into Sicily, as though the power were great you are to
encounter withal. For, the number wherewith their Cities are populous, is but
of promiscuous Nations, easily shifting, and easily admitting new comers; and
consequently not sufficiently armed any of them for the defense of their
bodies, nor furnished, as the custom of the place appoints, Grecians there
in all, as the several Greece has much belyed it self, and was scarce
sufficiently armed in all this War past. So that the business there, for all
that I can by Fame understand, is even as I have told you, and will yet be
easier. For we shall have many of the Barbarians, upon hatred of the
Syracusians, to take our parts against them there, and if we consider the case
aright, there will be nothing to hinder us at home. For our Ancestors having
the same Enemies which they say we leave behind us now in our voyage to
Sicily, and the Persian besides, did nevertheless erect the Empire we now
have, by

And the hope of the Peloponnesians against us, was never less then now it is,
though their power were also as great as ever; for they would be able to
invade our Land, though we went not into Sicily; and by Sea they can do us no
harm though we go, for we shall leave a Navy sufficient to oppose theirs,
behind us. What therefore can we allege with any probability for our
backwardness? or what can we pretend unto our Confederates, for denying them
assistance? whom we ought to defend, were it but because we have sworn it to
them; without obiecting that they have not Greeks or Barbarians. For if we
should all sit still, or stand to make choice, which were fit to be assisted,
and which not, we should have little under our government of the estates of
other men, but rather hazard our own. For when one is grown mightier then
the rest, men use not only to defend themselves against him, when he shall
invade, but to anticipate Peloponnesians, and show Sicily. Whereby, either
conquering those States, we shall become masters of all Greece, or weaken the
Syracusians, to the benefit of our selves, and our Confederates. And for our
security to stay; (if any City shall come to our side) or to come away (if
otherwise) our Galleys will afford it. For in that, we shall be at our own
liberty, though all the Sicilians together were against it. Let not the speech
of Nicias, tending only to laziness, and to the stirring of debate between
the young men and the old, auert you from it; but with the same decency
wherewith your Ancestors consulting planted, that with most unity observe the
present Laws and customs, Thus spoke Alcibiades.

The Athenians, when they had heard him, together with the Egestaeans and
Leontine Outlawes, who being then present, entreated, and (obiecting to them
their Oath) begged their help in form of Suppliants, were far more
earnestly bent upon the Iourny then they were before. But Nicias, when he saw
he could not alter their resolution with his Oration, but thought he might
perhaps put them from it by the greatness of the provision, if he should
require it with the most, stood forth again, and said in

THE ORATION OF NICIAS.
MEN of Athens, Forasmuch as I see you violently bent to this Expedition, such
effect may it take, as is desired. Nevertheless I shall now deliver my opinion
upon the matter, as it yet stands. As far as we understand by report, we
set out against Greek Cities. For besides Naxus and Catana, (which two I hope
will join with us, for their affinity with the Leontines,) there are other
seven, furnished in all respects after the manner of our own Army, and
especially those two, against which we bend our Forces most, Selinus, and
Syracuse. For there are in them, many men of Arms, many Archers, many Darters,
besides many Galleys, and a multitude of men Selinuntians. The Syracusians have
a Tribute beside, coming in from some of the Barbarians. But that wherein they
exceed us most, is this, that they abound in Horses, and have Corn of their
own, not fetched in from other places. Against such a power, we shall therefore
need, not a Fleet only, and with it a small Army, but there must great Forces
go along of Land-souldiers, if we mean to do any thing worthy our design,
and not to be kept by their many horsemen from landing; especially if the
Cities there, terrified by us should now hold all together, and none but the
Egestaeans Peloponnesus as many as we can get, either for love or money: and
also many Archers and Slingers, whereby to resist their Cauallery; and much
spare Shipping, for the more easy bringing in of provision. Also our corn, I
mean, Wheat and Barley parched, we must carry with us from hence in (...)
Ships of the round building, going only with sails, without oars after the
fashion of our ships. In distinction from Galleys.
Ships; and Bakers from the Milles, hired, and made to work by turns, that
the Army, if it chance to be weather-bound, may not be in want of victual.
For being so great, it will not be for every City to receive it. And so for
all things else, we must as much as we can, provide them our

Above all, we must take hence as much money as we can; for as for that which
is said to be ready at Egesta, think it ready in words, but not in deed: For
although we go thither with an Army not only equal unto theirs, but also,
(excepting their men of Arms for Battle) in every thing exceeding it, yet so
shall we scarce be able, both to overcome them, and withal to preserve our
own. We must also make account, that we go to inhabit some City in that
foreign and hostile Country, and either the first day we come thither, to
be presently Masters of the Field, or failing, be assured to find all in
hostility against

Thus spoke Nicias, imagining that either the Athenians would, upon the
multitude of the things required, abandon

The Athenians upon this speech, made to desire them from the enterprise, are
the more encouraged to it.
But the Athenians gave not over the desire they had of

As for the common sort, and the Soldiers, they made account to gain by it,
not only their wages for the time, but also so to amplify the State in power,
as that their stipend should endure for ever. So that through the vehement
desire thereunto of the most, they also that liked it not, for fear (if they
held up their hands against it) to be thought evil affected to the State, were
content to let it pass.

And in the end a certain Athenian stood up, and calling upon Nicias, said, he
ought not to shift off, nor delay the business any longer, but to declare
there before them all, Athenians to decree him. To which, unwillingly, he
answered, and said, he would consider of it first with his fellow-Commanders;
Nevertheless, for so much as he could judge upon the sudden, he said, there
would need no less then 100 Galleys; whereof for transporting of men of Arms,
so many of the Athenians own, as they themselves should think meet, and the
rest to be sent for to their Confederates. And that of men of Arms, in all, of
their own, and of their Confederates, there would be requisite no less then
5000 but rather Crete, and Slingers, and whatsoever else should seem
necessary, they would provide it themselves, and take it with them.

When the Athenians had heard him, they presently decreed that the Generals
should have absolute authority, both touching the greatness of the
preparation, and the whole voyage, to do therein, as should seem best unto

In the mean time the Mercuries of Stone, The faces of all the Images of
Mercury, throughout Athens, pared plain.
throughout Athens, (now there were many of these of square-stone, set up, by
the Law of the place, and many in the porches of private houses, and in the
Temples) had in one night, most of them their faces pared, and no man knew who
had done it. And yet great rewards out of the Treasury had been propounded to
the discouerers; and a Decree made that if any man knew of any other
profanation, he might boldly declare the same, were he Citizen, Stranger, or
Bondsman. And they took the fact exceedingly to heart, as ominous to the
expedition, and done withal, upon Democracie.

Hereupon, certain Strangers dwelling in the City, and certain Seruing-men,
revealed something, not about the Mercuries, but of the paring of the Statues
of some other of the Gods, committed formerly, through wantonness, and too
much Wine, by young men, and withal, how they had in private houses, acted the
Mysteries of their Religion, in mockery; amongst whom they also accused
Alcibiades. This, they that most enuyed Alcibiades, Alcibiades accused for
having in mockery, acted the celebration of the Mysteries of their Religion.
because he stood in Mercuries, tended to the deposing of the People; and that
nothing therein was done without him, alleging for argument, his other
excess, in the ordinary course of his life, not convenient in a popular
estate. He, at that present, made his Apology, and was there ready, if he had
done any such thing, to answer he were guilty, and if absolved, to resume his
charge. Protesting He desires to come to his Trial before his going forth, but
is not suffered.
But his enemies fearing lest if he came then to his Trial, he should have had
the favor of his Army, and lest the people which loved him, because the
Argiu^s and some of the Mantineans served them in this War, only for his
sake, should have been mollified, put the matter Alcibiades should go.

After this, the Summer being now half spent, they put to Sea for Sicily. The
Athenian Fleet puts to Sea.
The greatest part of the Confederates, Corcyra, thence all together to cross
over the Ionian Gulf, to the Promontory of Iapigia. But the Athenians
themselves, and as many of their Confederates as were at Athens, The
description of the setting forth of the Fleet.
upon the day appointed, betimes in the morning, came down into Peiraeus, and
went aboard to take Sea. With them came down in a manner the whole multitude
of the City, as well Inhabitants as strangers: The Inhabitants, to follow after
such as belonged unto them, some their friends, Grecian Power, that ever went
out of Greece from one only City, was the most sumptuous, and the most
glorious of all that ever had been set forth before it, to that day.
Nevertheless for number of Galleys, and men of Arms, that which went out with
Pericles to Epidaurus, and that which Agnon carried with him to Potidaea, was
not inferior to it. For there went four thousand men of Arms, three hundred
Horse, and one hundred Galleys, out of Athens Lesbos and Chios fifty Galleys,
besides many confederates that accompanied him in the voyage. But they went not
far, and were but meanly furnished. Whereas this Fleet, as being to stay
long abroad, was furnished for both kinds of service, in which of them soever
it should have occasion to be employed, both with shipping, and Land-Souldiers.

For the shipping, it was elaborate with a great deal of cost, both of the
Captains of Galleys, and of the City. For the State allowed a Dram a day
to every Mariner; empty, in respect of th^se that carried provision.
empty Galleys which they sent forth, being of nimble ones 60. and of such as
carried their men of Arms, 40. more. And the Captains of Galleys both put
into them the most able servants, and besides the wages of the State, unto the
[vppermost bank of Oars, called the] (...). There being three banks of
Oars, one above another, the uppermost were called Thranitae, the middlemost
Zeugi^e, and the lowest Thalamitae* where of the Thranitae managed the longest
Oar, and therefore in respect of their greater labor, might deserve a greater
pay.
Thranitae, and to the servants, gave somewhat of their own; and bestowed
great cost otherwise every one upon his own Gallie, both in the (...). The
Images which being set on the forepart of the Gallie, did give it the name for
the most part.
Badges, and other rigging, each one striving to the utmost, to have his Gally,
both in

And for the Landforces, they were leauied with exceeding great choice, and
every man endeavored to excel his fellow in the bravery of his Arms, and
vtenciles that belonged to his person. Insomuch as amongst themselves, it
begat quarrel about precedencie, but amongst other Grecians, a conceit, that
it was an ostentation rather of their power and riches, then a preparation
against an Enemy. For if a man enter into account of the expense, as well of
the public, as of private men that went the voyage, carry with them; and of
private men, what every one had

After they were all aboard, and all things laid in, that they meant to carry
with them, silence was commanded by the Trumpet; and after the Wine had been
carried about to the whole Army, and All, as well the Generals as the Soldiers,
had (...). It was a form amongst the Grecians, and other Nations then, both
before great Enterprises to wish good fortune; and at the making of League and
Peace, to ratify what they did, by drinking one to another.
drunk a health to the Voyage, they made their prayers, such as by the Law
were appointed for before their taking Sea, not in every Galley apart, but all
together, the Herald pronouncing them: And the company from the shore, both of
the City, and whosoever Paean, and ended the Health, they put forth to Sea.
And having at first gone out in a long File, Gally after Gally, they after went
a vie by Aegina. Thus hasted these to be at Corcyra; to which place also the
other Army of the Confederates were assembling.

The Syracusians, upon the same of their coming, do some believe it, and some
not.
At Syracuse they had advertisement of the Voyage from diverse places;
nevertheless it was long ere any thing would be believed. Nay, an Assembly
being there called, Athenian Army to be true, as by others that affirmed the
contrary. And Hermocrates the son of Hermon, as one that thought he knew the
certainety, stood forth, and spoke to this effect.


COncerning the truth of this Invasion, though perhaps I shall be thought as
well as other men, to deliver a thing incredible; and though I know that such
as be either the Authors or relaters of matter incredible, shall not only not
persuade, but be also accounted fools; nevertheless I will not for fear
thereof, hold my tongue, as long as the Common wealth is in danger; being
confident that I know the truth hereof somewhat more certainly then others
do. The Athenians are bent to come, even against us, (which you verily wonder
at) and that with great Forces, both for the Sea and Land, with pretense
indeed to aid their Confederates, the Egestaeans, and to replant the
Leontines, but in truth they aspire to the dominion of all Sicily, and
especially of this City of ours, which obtained, they make account to get the
rest with ease. Seeing then they will presently be upon us, advise with your
present means, how you may with most honor make head against them, that you
may not be taken unprovided through contempt, nor be careless through
incredulity; and that such as believe it, may not be dismayed with their
audaciousnes, and power. For Sicilians; for being terrified by them, they will
the rather league with us. And if we either vanquish or repulse them without
obtaining what they come for (for I fear not at all the effecting of their
purpose) verily it will be a great honor to us, and in my opinion not
unlikely to come to pass. For in truth there have been few great Fleets,
whether of Grecians or Barbarians, sent far from home, that have not prospered
ill. Neither are these that come against us, more in number Athenians, who
raised themselves by the misfortune of the Medes, (though it happened for the
most part contrary to reason) because in name they went only against the
Athenians. And that the same shall now happen unto us, is not without
probability.

Let us therefore with courage put in readiness our own fortes, Siculi, to
confirm those we have, and to make peace and league with others; and let us
send Ambassadors to the rest of Sicily, to show them that it is a common
danger; and into Italy, to get Athenians. And in my judgment, it were our best
course to send also to Carthage; for even they are not without expectation of
the same danger. Nay, they are in a continual fear, that the Athenians will
bring the War upon them also, even to their City. So that upon apprehension
that if they neglect us, the trouble will come home to their own door, they
will perhaps, either secretly, or openly, or some way assist us. And of all
that now are, they are the best able to do it, if they please. For they have
the most gold and silver, by which both the Wars, and all things else are the
best expedited. Let us also send to Lacedaemon and Corinth, praying them not
only to send their succors hither with speed, but also to set on foot the
War there. But that which I think the best course of all, though through an
habit of sitting still, you will hardly be brought to it, I will nevertheless
now tell you what it is. If the Sicilians all together, or if not all, yet if
we, and most of the rest, would draw together our whole Navy, and with 2.
months provision go and meet the Athenians at Tarentum, and the Promontory of
Iapygia, and let them see, that they must fight for their passage over the
Ionian Gulf, before they fight for Sicily, it would both terrify them the
most, and also put them into a consideration, That we, as Tarentum) whereas
they themselves have a great deal of Sea to pass with all their preparations,
and cannot keep themselves in their order for the length of the voyage. And
that for us, it will be an easy matter to assail them, coming up as they
do, slowly and thin. Again, if lightning their Galleys, they shall come up
to us more nimbly, and more close together, we shall charge upon them already
wearied, or we may, if we please, retire again into Tarentum. Whereas they, if
they come over but with a part of their provisions, as to fight at Sea, shall
be driven into Corcyra, or whilst they spend time in deliberating, and in
sending out to explore, how many, and in what place we are, the season will
be lost, and Winter come; or deterred with our unlooked for opposition, they
will give over the Voyage. And the rather, for that (as I hear) the man of
most experience amongst their Commanders, has the Lacedaemonians to pull them
down. But if they should see us once bolder then they looked for, they would be
terrified more with the vnexpectednes, then with the truth of our power it
self. Be persuaded therefore, principally to Athenians, they come, and I am
sure are already in the way, and want only, that they are not now here. Thus
spoke Hermocrates.

But the people of Syracuse were at much strife amongst themselves, some
contending, that the Athenians would by no means come, and that the reports
were not true; and others, Hermocrates, and feared the event. But Athenagoras,
who was chief Magistrate of the People, and at that time most powerful with
the Commons, spoke as follows: THE ORATION OF ATHENAGORAS.
HE is either a Coward, or not well affected to the State, whosoever he be,
that wishes the Athenians not to be so mad, as coming hither, to fall into
our power. As for them that report such things as these, and put you into
fear, though I wonder not at their boldness, yet I wonder at their folly, if
they think their ends not seen. For they that are afraid of any thing
themselves, will put the City into affright, that they may shadow their own
with the Common fear. And this may the reports do at this time, not raised by
chance, but framed on purpose, by such as always but by that which wise men,
and men of great experience, (such as Athenians to be) are likely to do. For
it is not probable, that leaving the Peloponnesians, and the War there not
yet surely ended, they should willingly come hither to a new War, no less
then the former; Seeing, in my opinion, they may be glad that we invade not
them, so many, and so great Cities, as we are. And if indeed they come, (as
these men say they will) I think Sicily more sufficient to dispatch the War,
then Peloponnesus, as being in all respects better furnished: and that this our
own City, is much stronger then the Army which they say is now coming,
though it were twice as great as it is. For I know, they Egestaeans, nor have
men of Arms, so many as we, in that they are to bring them by Sea. For it is
a hard matter to come so far as this by Sea, though they carried no men of
Arms in their Galleys at all, if they carry with them all other their
necessaries; which cannot be small against so great a City. So that I am so
far from the opinion of these others, that I think the Athenians, though they
had here another City as great as Syracuse, and confining on it, and should
from thence make their War, yet should not be able to escape from being
destroyed every man of them; much less now, when all Sicily is their enemy.
For in their Camp, fenced Athenians considering, I am very sure, will look
unto their own; and our men talk here of things that neither are, nor ever
will be; who I know have desired, not only now, but ever, by such reports as
these, or by worse, or by their actions, to put the multitude in fear, that
they themselves might rule the State. And I am afraid, lest attempting it Few,
I shall in somewhat reprove them, in somewhat have an eye to them, and in
somewhat advise them. For this I think will be the best course to auert them
from their bad intentions. Tell me, forsooth, (I have asked this question
often) you that are the younger sort, what would you have? would you now bear
office? the Law allows it not. And the Law was made, because ye are not now
sufficient for government, not to disgrace you when you shall be sufficient.
But Democracy is neither a well-gouerned, nor a just State, and that the most
wealthy, are aptest to make the best government. But I answer first, Democracy
is a name of the whole; Oligarchy, but of a part. Next, though the Rich are
indeed fittest to keep the Treasure, yet the wise are the best Counselors,
and the Multitude, upon hearing, the best Judge. Now in a Democracy all these,
both jointly and severally participate equal privileges. But in the
Oligarchy, they allow indeed to the Multitude, a Multitude, but take from them,
and keep the whole. Which is the thing that you the Rich, and the Younger sort
affect, but in a great City cannot possibly embrace. But yet, O ye, the most
unwise of all men, unless you know that what you affect, is evil, and if you
know not that, you are the most ignorant of all the Grecians I know, or, ye
most wicked of all men, if knowing it* you dare do this: yet I say, inform
your selves better, or change your purpose, and help to amplify the common
good of the City, making account that the good amongst you, shall not only
have an equal, but a greater share therein Athenians come, will be able to
defend it self with honor. And we have Generals to look to that matter. And
if they come not, (which I rather believe) it will not, upon the terror of
your reports, make choice of you for Commanders, and cast it self into
voluntary servitude. But taking direction of it self, it both judges your
words, virtually as facts, and will not upon words let go her present liberty,
but endeavor to preserve it, by not committing the same actually to Thus said
Athenagoras.



The speech of one of the Sy^^^usian Generals.
Then one of their Generals rising up, forbad any other

It is no wisdom, neither for the speakers to utter such calumnies one
against another, nor for the hearers to receive them. We should rather
consider, in respect of these reports, how we may in the best manner, both
every one in particular, and the City in general, be prepared to resist them
when they come. And if there be no need, yet to furnish the City with Horses,
and Arms, and other Habiliments of War can do us no hurt. As for the care
hereof, and the musters, we will look to it, and will send men abroad, both
to the Cities, and for spials, Which when the General had said, the
Syracusians dissolved the Assembly.

The Athenians were now all in Corcyra, both they and their Confederates. The
Athenians put out from Corcyra.
And first the Generals took a view of the whole Army, and put them into the
order wherein they were to Anchor, and make their Nauall Camp, and having
divided them into three squadrons, to each squadron they assigned a Captain by
lot, to the end that being Italy, and Sicily, to bring them word what Cities in
those parts would receive them, whom they appointed to come back and meet
them, that they might know whether they might be received or not, The quantity
of the Army.
before they put in. This done, the Athenians with all their provisions put out
from Corcyra, Sicily, having with them in all 134 Galleys, and two Rhodian
Long-boats of fifty Oars a piece. Of these, a hundred were of Athens it self,
whereof sixty were expedite the other forty, for transportation of Soldiers.
The rest of the Navy belonged to the Chians, and other the Confederates. Of men
of Arms they had in all 5100. Of these, there were of the Athenians themselves
1500 enrolled, and 700 more [of the poorer sort, called] Thetes, hired, for
defense of the Galleys. The rest were of their Confederates, some of them being
their subjects. Of Argiues there were 500. Of Mantineans and Mercinaries,
Cretans. Rhodian Slingers they had 700. Of Light-armed Megarean fugitives 120,
and in one vessel made for transportation of horses, 30 horsemen. These were
the forces that went over to the War at first. With these went also 30 Ships,
carrying necessaries, wherein went also the Bakers, and Masons, and Carpenters,
and all Tools of use in fortification. And with these 30 Ships went 100
Boats, by constraint, and many other Ships and Boats that voluntarily followed
the Army for Trade, which Corcyra over the Ionian Gulf. And the whole Fleet
being come to the Promontory of Iapygia, and to Tarentum, and such other places
as every one could recover, they went on by the coast of Italy, neither
received of the States there, into any City, nor allowed any Market, having
only the liberty of Anchorage and water, (and that also at Tarentum, and Locri
denied them) till they were at Rhegium, where they all came together again,
and settled their Camp in the Temple of Diana, (for neither there were they
suffered to come in) without Rhegians allowed them a Market. And when they had
drawn their Galleys to Land, they lay still. Being here, they dealt with the
Rhegians, who where Chalcideans, to aid the Leontines, Chalcideans likewise. To
which was answered, that they would take part with neither, but what the rest
of the Italians should conclude, that also they would do. So the Athenians lay
still, meditating on their Sicilian business, how they might carry it the
best; and withal expected the return from Egesta, of the three Galleys which
they had sent before them, desiring Athens.

The Syracusians in the mean time from diverse parts, The Syracusians certainly
knowing of their coming prepare for their defense.
and also from their spies, had certain intelligence, that the Fleet was now
at Rhegium, and therefore made their preparations with all diligence, and were
no longer incredulous; but sent unto the Siculi, to some Cities, men to keep
them from reuolting; to others, Ambassadors; and into such places as lay upon
the Sea, Garrisons; And examined the forces of their own City, by a view taken
of the

The hope of the Athenians of money from Egesta frustrated.
The three Galleys sent before to Egesta, returned to the Athenians at Rhegium,
and brought word, that for the rest of the money promised there was none, only
there appeared thirty Talents. At this, the Generals were presently
discouraged, both because this first hope was crossed, and because also the
Rhegians, whom they had already begun to persuade to their League, and whom it
was most likely they should have won, as being of kin to the Leontines, and
always heretofore favorable to the Athenian State, now refused. And though to
Nicias this news from the Egestaeans was no more then he expected, yet to the
other The fraud of the Egestaeans.
it was extreme strange. But the Egestaeans, when the first Ambassadors from
Athens went to see their Treasure, had thus deceived them. They brought them
into the Temple of Venus, in Eryx was a City near Egesta, and subject to it.
Eryx, and showed them the holy Treasure, Goblets, Flagons, Censers, and other
Furniture, in no small quantity, which being but silver, appeared to the eye a
great deal above their true value in money. Then they feasted such as came
with them, in their private houses, and at those feastings exhibited all the
gold and silver vessel they could get together, either in the City of Egesta
it self, or could borrow in other, as well Phaenician, Grecian Cities, for
their own. So all of them in a manner making use of the same Plate; and much
appearing in every of those houses, it put those which came with the
Ambassadors, into a very great admiration, in so much as at their return to
Athens, they strove who should first proclaim, what wealth they had seen.
These men, having both been abused themselves, and having abused others, when
it was told that there was no such wealth in Egesta, were much taxed by the
Soldiers. But the Generals went to council upon the business in hand.

Nicias was of this opinion, That it was best to go presently with the whole
Fleet to Selinus, The several opinions of the Generals, touching how to
proceed. The opinion of Nicias.
against which they were chiefly set forth; and if the Egestaeans would furnish
them with money for the whole Army, then to deliberate further upon the
occasion, if not, then to require maintenance for the 60 Galleys set forth at
their own request, and staying with them, by force or composition, to bring the
Selinuntians and them to a Peace. And thence passing along by other of those
Cities, to make a show of the power of the Athenian State, and of their
readiness to help their Leontines, or gain some of the other Cities to their
own League, and not to put the Commonwealth in danger at her own charges.

Alcibiades said it would not do well to have come out from Athens with so
great a power, The opinion of Alcibiades.
and then dishonourably without effect to go home again. But rather to send
Heralds to every City but Selinus and Syracuse, and assay to make the Siculi to
revolt from the Syracusians; and others to enter League with the A^henians,
that they might aid Messenians, as being seated in the passage, and most
opportune place of all Sicily for coming in; and having a Port and Harbor
sufficient for their Fleet; and when they had gained those Cities, and knew
what help they were to have in the War, then to take in hand Syracuse and
Selinus; unless these would agree with the Egestaeans, and the other suffer
the Leontines to be replanted.

But Lamachus was of opinion, The opinion of Lamachus.
that it was best to go directly to Syracuse, and to fight with them as soon
as they Sicilians would then neglect leaguing with the Syracusians, and join
with the Athenians, no longer standing off, and spying who should have the
better. And for a place to retire unto, and Anchor in, he thought Megara most
fit, being desert, and not far from Syracuse, neither by Sea nor Land. Lamachus
said this, but came afterward to the opinion of Alcibiades.

After this, Alcibiades with his own Gallie having passed Messana, Alcibiades
seeks league wi^h the Messanians, but is denied.
and propounded to them a League, and not prevailed, they answering, that they
would not let the Army in, but allow them only a Market without the Walls,
The Athenians go with part of their Fleet to Naxus.
returned back to Rhegium. And presently the Generals having out of the whole
Fleet manned threescore Galleys, and taken provision aboard, went along the
shore to Naxus, having left the rest of the Army with one of the Generals at
Rhegium. The Naxians having received them into the City, they went on by the
Coast, And to Catana.
to Catana.

But the Cataneans receiving them not, (for there were some within that
favored the Syracusians) they entered the River of Terias, and having stayed
there all that night, went the next day toward Syracuse, leasurely with the
rest of their Galleys; They send ten Galleys to view Syracuse, and the Havens.
but ten they sent before into the great Haven, not to stay, but to discover
if they had lanched any Fleet there, and to proclaim from their Galleys, that
the Athenians were come to replant the Leontines on their own, according to
League and affinity, and that therefore such of the Leontines as were in
Syracuse, should Athenians, as to their friends and benefactors.

And when they had thus proclaimed, and well considered the City, and the
Havens, and the region where they were to seat themselves for the War, they
returned to Catana.

Catana surprised.
An Assembly being called at Catana, though they refused to receive the Army,
they admitted the Generals, and willed them to speak their minds. And whilst
Alcibiades, was in his Oration, and the Citizens at the Assembly, Catanaeans,
such as favored the Syracusians, seeing the Army within, for fear stole
presently out of the Town, being not many. The rest concluded the League with
the Athenians, and willed them to fetch in the rest of the Army from Rhegium.
After this, the Athenians went back to Rhegium, and rising from thence, came
to Catana with their whole Army together.

The Athenians go to Camerina, but are not received.
Now they had news from Camarina, that if they would Camarinaeans would join
with them, and that the Syracusians were manning their Navy. Whereupon with the
whole Army they went along the Coast, first to Syracuse, where not finding any
Navy manned, they went on to Camarina. And being come close up to the shore,
they sent a Herald unto them; but the Camarinaeans would not receive the Army;
alleging that they had taken an Oath, not to receive the Athenians with more
then one Gallie, unless they should have sent for more, of their own accord.
Having lost their labor, they departed, and Syracuse, and had gotten some
booty. But the Syracusian Horsemen coming out, and killing some stragglers of
the light-armed, they returned again to Catana.

Here they find the Gallie called Salaminia, Alcibiades called home, to
answer about the Mercuries.
come thither from Athens, both for Alcibiades, who was commanded to come home,
to purge himself of such things as were laid to his charge by the State, and
also for other Soldiers, that were with him, whereof some were accused for
profanation of the Mysteries, and some also Mercuries. For the Athenians,
after the Fleet was put to Sea, proceeded nevertheless in the search of those
that were culpable, both concerning the Mysteries, and the Mercuries. And
making no inquiry into the persons of the informers, but through jealousy
admitting of all sorts, upon the report of evil men, apprehended very good
Citizens, and cast them into prison. Choosing rather to examine the fact, and
find the truth by torments, then that any man, how good soever in estimation,
being once accused, should escape unquestioned.

Pisistratus and his sons, was heavy in the latter end, and withal, that
neither themselves, nor Harmodius, but the Lacedaemonians overthrew it, were
ever fearful, and apprehended every thing suspiciously.

For the fact of Aristogiton and Harmodius, Digression touching the deposing of
the Tyranny of Pisistratus and his sons.
was undertaken upon an accident of love, which unfolding at large, I shall
make appear that neither any other, nor the Athenians themselves report any
certainety, either of their own Tyrants, Pisistratus dying in the Tyranny, not
Hipparchus, (as the most think) but Hippias, who was his eldest son,
succeeded in the government. Now Harmodius, Aristogiton, a Citizen of a middle
condition, that was his Lover. This Harmodius having been solicited by
Hipparchus the son of Pisistratus, and not yielding, discovered the same unto
Aristogiton. He apprehending it (as Lovers use) with a great deal of anguish,
and fearing the power of Hipparchus, lest he should take him away by force,
fell presently as much as his condition would permit, to a contriuing how to
pull down the Tyranny. In the mean time, Hipparchus, having again Harmodius,
and not prevailed, intended, though not to offer him violence, yet in secret,
as if forsooth he did it not for that cause, to do him some disgrace. For
neither was the government otherwise heavy till then, but carried without their
evil will. And to say the truth, these Tyrants held virtue and wisdom in
great account for a long time; and taking of the Athenians but a twentieth part
of their revenues, adorned the City, managed their Wars, and administered
their religion worthily. In other points they were governed by the Laws
formerly Archon, Pisistratus also had it, the son of Hippias, of the same
name with his Grandfather, who also when he was Archon, dedicated the Altar of
the twelve Gods in the Marketplace, and that other in the Temple of Apollo
Pythius. And though the People of Athens, amplifying afterward that Altar
which was in the Marketplace, thereby defaced the Inscription, yet that upon
the Altar that is in the Apollo Pythius, is to be seen still, though in
Letters somewhat obscure, in these words.

PISISTRATVS the son of HIPPIAS
erected this to stand
In The Temple of Apollo Pythius;
witness of his command.
And that Hippias being the elder Brother, had the government, Athenian
Cittadell. In which there is no mention of any son of Thessalus, or of
Hipparchus, but of five sons of Hippias, which he had by Myrrhine, the
daughter of Callias the son of Hyperochidas. For it is probable that the
eldest was first married, and in the forepart of the Pillar, his name after his
fathers, was the first; not without reason, as being both next him in Hippias
have easily taken on him the government on a sudden, if his brother had dyed,
seized of the Tyranny, and he been the same day to settle it on himself.
Whereas he retained the same with abundant security, both for the customary
fear in the people, and diligence in the Guard; and was not to seek, like a
younger brother, to whom the government had not continually been familiar. But
Hipparchus came to be named for his misfortune, and thereby grew an opinion
afterward, that he was also

This Harmodius therefore that had denied his suit, he disgraced, as he before
intended. For when some had warned a sister of his, a Virgin, to be present, to
carry a little Basket in a Procession, they rejected her again when she came,
and said, that they had never warned her at all, as holding her unworthy the
honor. This was taken heavily by Harmodius; but Aristogiton, for his sake, was
far more exasperated then he. Whereupon, with the rest of Panathenaea, upon
which day only, such Citizens as lead the Procession, might without suspicion
be armed in good number. And they were to begin the fact themselves, but the
rest were to help them against the The Guard of Hippias the Tyrant.
Halbardiers.

Now the Conspirators for their better security, were not many; for they hoped
that such also as were not privy to it, if they saw it once undertaken, being
upon this Hippias was gone out of the City, into the place called Ceramicum,
with his Harmodius and Aristogiton, with each of them a Dagger, proceeded to
the fact. But when they saw one of the Conspirators, familiarly talking with
Hippias, (for Hippias was very affable to all men) they were afraid, and
believed that they were discovered, and must presently have been apprehended.
They resolved therefore (if it were possible) to be revenged first upon him
that had done them the wrong, and for whose sake they had undergone all this
danger; and, furnished as they were, Hipparchus, at a place called Leocorium,
without all regard of themselves, fell upon him, and with all the anger in the
world, one upon jealousy, the other upon disgrace, struck, and slew him.
Ar^stogiton, for the present, by means of the great confluence of people,
escaped through the Guard, but taken afterward* was ungently handled; but
Harmodius was slain upon the place.

The news being brought to Hippias, in the A street without the walls of
Athens, where they used to bury their (...) in the Wars. Lib. 1* (...) named
from (...), a Potter, or as Paus. from one Ceramus.
Ceramicum, he went not toward the place where the fact was committed

Thus was the enterprise first undertaken upon quarrel of Love, and then upon
a sudden fear, followed this unadvised adventure of Harmodius and Aristogiton.
And after this time the Tyranny grew sorer to the Athenians then it had been
before. And Hippias standing more in fear, not only put many of the Citizens
to death, but also cast his eye on the States abroad, to see if he might get
any security A woman of Athens, a City (...) and ciuility, to a man of
Lampsacus, a City (...) famous for (...) and effeminacy.
though an Athenian, and to a Lampsacen) gave his daughter Archedice unto
Aeantidas the son of Hippocles, Tyrant of Lampsacus, knowing that the
Lampsacens were in great favor with King Darius. And her Sepulcher is yet to
be seen, with this Inscription.

Archedice, the Daughter of King Hippias,
who in his time,
Of all the Potentates of Greece was prime,
this dust does hide.

yet free from pride.
And Hippias, after he had reigned three years more in Athens, and was in the
fourth deposed by the Lacedaemonians, and the exiled A Family descended from a
noble C^t^zen of Athen^, named Alema (...), who being in exile, solicited the
Lacedaemonians ^o expo^e the Tyrants of Athens.
Alemaeonides, went under Truce to Sigeum, and to Aeantidas, at Lampsacus, and
thence to King Darius, from whence twenty years after in his old age, he came
to Marathon with the Medan Army.

The People of Athens bearing this in mind, He had (...) him to be (...) out
of the State ^f Athens.

The jealousy and passionate fury of the people, in enquity (...) the authors
of the offenses, touching the Mysteries and Mercuries.


and remembering Mysteries, and thought all to have been done upon some
Oligarchicall or Tyrannical Conspiracy. And whilst they were passionate upon
this surmise, many worthy men had already been cast in prison, and yet they
were not likely so to give over, but grew daily more saluage, and sought to
apprehend more still. Whilst they were at this pass, One of the prisoners is
persuaded by a fellow-prisoner, to app^^ch some man, whether true or not true,
and does so.
a prisoner that seemed most to be guilty, was persuaded by one of his fellow
prisoners, to accuse Mercuries.

Athens, Diverse men accused of the paring of the Mercuries.
gladly receiving the certainty (as they thought) of the fact: and having been
much vexed before, to think that the Conspirators should But only to some few
of the Great-men*
never Multitude, presently set at liberty the accuser, and the rest with him,
whom he had not appeached, but for those that were accused, they appointed
Judges, and all they apprehended, they executed. And having condemned to dye,
such as fled, they ordained a sum of money to be given to those that should
slay them. And though it were all this while uncertain, whether they suffered
justly, or unjustly, yet the rest of the City had a manifest ease for the
present. But touching Alcibiades the Athenians took it extreme ill, through
the Mercuries, the other crime also concerning the Mysteries, whereof he had
been accused, seemed a great deal the more to have bin committed by him upon
the same reason, and conspiracy against the people.

Presumptions against Alcibiades.
For it fell out withal, whilst the City was in a tumult about this, that an
Army of the Lacedaemonians, was come as f^rre as the Isthmus, upon some design
against the Boeotians.

These therefore they thought were come thither, not against the Boeotians, but
by appointment of him, and that if they had not first apprehended, the persons
appeached, the City had been betrayed. And one night they watched all night
long in their Arms, in the Temple of Theseus, within the City. And the
friends of Alcibiades in Argos, were at the same time suspected of a purpose,
to set upon the People there, whereupon the Athenians also delivered unto the
Argiue People, those 300 in number. lib. 5.
Hostages which they held of theirs in the Islands, to be slain. And there were
Alcibiades, Alcibiades sent for home.
on all sides. Insomuch, as purposing by Law to put him to death, they sent, as
I have said, the Gally called Salaminia, into Sicily, both for him, and the
rest with him, that had been accused: But gave command to those that went, not
to apprehend him, but to bid him follow them, to make his purgation; because
they had a care, not to give occasion of stir, either amongst their own, or
the enemies Soldiers, but especially, because they desired, that the
Mantineans, and the Argiues, who they thought followed the War by his
persuasion, Salaminia, left Sicily, and set sail for Athens. Alcibiades slyeth.
But being at Thuria, they followed no further, but left the Gally, and were no
more to be found: fearing indeed to appear to the accusation. They of the
Salaminia made search for Alcibiades and those that were with him for a while,
but not finding him, followed on their course for Athens. Alcibiades, now an
Outlaw, passed shortly after in a small Boat from Thuria into Peloponnesus,
and the Athenians proceeding to judgment upon his not appearing, condemned
both

After this, The Athenian Generals in Sicily go to Selinus and Egesta.
the Athenian Generals that remained in Sicily, having divided the Army into
two, and taken each his part by lot, went with the whole toward Selinus, and
Egesta, with intention both to see if the Egestaeans would pay them the money,
and withal to get knowledge of the designs of the Selinuntians, and learn
the state of their controversy with the Egestaeans. And sailing by the Coast
of Sicily, having it on their left hand, on that side which lies to the
Tyrrhene Gulf, Himera, the only Grecian City in that part of Sicily: which
not receiving them, they went on, and by the way took Hyccara, They take
Hyccara.
a little Town of the Sicanians, Enemy to the Egestaeans, and a Sea-Towne;
and having made the inhabitants Slaves, delivered the Town to the Egestaeans,
whose Horse-forces were there with them.

Thence the Athenians wlth their Landmen returned through the Territory of the
Siculi, to Catana; and the Galleys went about with the Captives. Nicias going
with Hyccara to Egesta, when he had dispatched with them his other business,
and received thirty Talents of Money, returned to the Army. The Captives they
ransomed, of which they made 120. Talents more. Then they sailed about to their
Confederates of the Siculi, appointing them to send their Forces; and with the
half of their own they came before Hybla, in the Territory of Gela, an Enemy
City, but took it not, and so ended this Summer. The end of the seventeenth
Summer.


The next Winter the Athenians fell presently to make Syracuse. The Syracusians
contemn the Athenians.
And the Syracusians on the other side prepared to invade the Athenians. For
seeing the Athenians had not presently upon the Sicily, and assaulting Hybla,
could not take it, they contemned them more then ever: and prayed their
Commanders, (as is the manner of the multitude when they be in courage) seeing
the Athenians came not unto them, to conduct them to Catana. And the Syracusian
Horsemen, which were ever abroad for Scowts, spurring up to the Camp of the
Athenians, amongst other scorns, asked them, whether Leontines to their own?

Nicias his stratagem to get easy landing and encamping by Syracuse.
The Athenian Generals having observed this, and being desirous to draw forth
the Syracusians whole power as far as might be from the City, to be able
in the mean time, without empeachment, going thither in the night, by Sea, to
seize on some convenient place to encampe in; for they knew they should not be
able to do it so well in the face of an Enemy prepared, nor if they were
known to march by Land, for that the Syracusian Horsemen being many, would
greatly annoy the light-armed, and other Syracusian Outlawes that were with
them, had told them of a place near the Temple Olympieum, which also they
seized) I say, the Athenian Generals, to bring this their purpose to effect,
contrived the matter thus: They send a man, of whose fidelity they were well
assured, and in the opinion of the Syracusian Commanders,

This man was a Catanaean, and said he came from Catana, from such and such,
whose names they knew, and knew to be the remnant of their wel-willers in that
City. He told them that the Athenians lay every night within the Town, and far
from their Arms, and that if with the whole power of their City, at a day
appointed, betimes in a morning, they would come to their Camp, those friends
of the Syracusians would shut the Athenians in, and set fire on their Galleys,
by which means, the Syracusians assaulting Catanaeans that were to help them
herein were many and those he came from, already prepared for it.

The Syracusian Commanders having been also otherwise encouraged, and having
intended a preparation to go against Catana, though this Messenger had not
come, did so much the more unadvisedly believe the man and straight ways being
agreed of the day, on which they were to be there, sent him away. These
Commanders (for by this time the Selenuntians, and some other their
Confederates were come in) appointed the Syracusians, universally to set
Catana, and encamped the night following upon the banckes of the River
Simethus, in the Territory of the Leontines. The Athenians upon advertisement
that they were set forth, rising with their whole Army, both themselves, and
such of the Siculi, and others as went with them, and going aboard their
Galleys and Boats in the beginning of the night, set sail for Syracuse. In
the morning betimes, the Athenians disbarked over against Olympieum, to make
their Camp. And the Syracusian Horsemen, who were at Catana before the rest,
finding the Camp risen, came back to the Foot, and told them. Whereupon they
went all together back to the aid of the City. In the mean time, The
Athenians land, pitch their Camp, and entrench themselves ere the Syracusians
return.
the way the Syracusians had to go being long, the Athenians had pitched their
Camp at leisure in a place of advantage, wherein it was in their own power to
begin Battle when they list, and where, both in and before the Battle, the
Syracusian Horsemen could least annoy them. For on one side, there were Dascon.
And on that part that was most accessible to the Enemy, they made a Fort with
stone, (the best they could find, but unwrought) and with Wood, and withal
pulled down the Bridge of the River Anapus.

Whilst this was doing, The Syracusian Army comes back.
there came none to empeach them from the City. The first that came against
them, Syracusian Horsemen, and by and by after, all the Foot together. And
though at first they came up near unto the Camp of the Athenians, yet after,
seeing the Athenians came not out against them, they retired again, and
crossing to the other side of the Helorine highway, stayed there that night.

The next day the Athenians and their Confederates prepared to fight, and were
ordered thus: The Argiues and the Mantineans had the right Wing, the Athenians
were in the middle, and the rest of their Confederates in the other Wing. That
half of the Army which stood foremost, was ordered by eight in File; the other
half toward their Tents, ordered likewise by eights, was cast into the form
The Athenians and Syracusians prepare to fight.
Weapons and Tools of the Army.

The Syracusians arranged their men of Arms, who were Syracusians of all
conditions, and as many of their Confederates as were present, by sixteen in
File. They that came to aid them, were chiefly the Selinuntians, and then the
Horsemen of the Geloans, about two hundred; Camar^naeans, about twenty
Horsemen, and fifty Archers. The Cauallery they placed in the right point of
the Battle, being in all no less then a thousand two hundred, and with them
the Darters. But the Athenians intending to begin the Battle, Nicias went up
and down the Army, from one Nation to another, to whom, and to all in
general, he spoke to this effect.

THE ORATION OF NICIAS to his Army.
WHat need I, sirs, to make a long exhortation, when this Battle is the thing
for which we all came hither? For in my opinion, the present preparation is
more able to give you encouragement, then any Oration, how well soever made, if
with a weak Army. For where we are together, Argiues, Mantineans, Athenians,
and the best of the Ilanders, how can we choose, amongst so many and good
Confederates, but conceive great hope of the victory? especially against tagge
and ragge, and not chosen men, as we are our selves, and against Sicilians,
who though they

Nicias, having thus exhorted the Army, The battle between the Athenians and
Syracusians.
led it presently to the charge. The Syracusians expected not to have fought at
that instant, and the City being near, some of them were gone away; and some,
for haste, came in running; and though late, yet every one, as he came, put
himself in, where was the greatest number. For they wanted neither
willingness, nor courage, either in this, or any other battle, being no less
valiant, so far forth as they had experience, then the Athenians. But the
want of this, made

Nevertheless, though they thought not the Athenians would have begun the
battle, and were thereby constrained to fight on a sudden, yet they resumed
their Arms, and came presently forward to the encounter.

And first, the Casters of Stones, and Slingers, and Archers of either side,
skirmished in the midst between the Armies, mutually chasing each other, as
amongst the Light-armed, was not unlikely.

Syracusians for their Country, and their lives for the present, and for their
liberty in the future. On the otherside, the Athenians, to win the Country of
another, and make it their own, and not to weaken their own by being
vanquished. The Argiues, and other free Confederates, to help the Athenians to
conquer the Country they came against, and to return to their own as
desperate, if they overcame not, and withal upon the Athenians to subdue the
Country of another, their own subjection might be the easier.

After they were come to handstroakes, they fought long on both sides. But in
the mean time there happened some claps of Thunder, and flashes of Lightning,
together with a great shower of Rain; insomuch as it added to the fear of the
Syracusians that were now fighting their first battle, and not familiar with
the Wars; whereas to the other side that had more experience, the season of
the year seemed to expound that accident; and their greatest Argiues first,
had made the Left Wing of the Syracusians, to give ground, and after them, the
Athenians also had done the like to those that were arranged against them, The
Athenians have the victory.
then the rest of the Syracusian Army was presently broken and put to flight.
But the Athenians pursued them not far, (because the Syracusian Horsemen
being many, and vnvanquished, whenever any men of Arms advanced far from
the body of the Army, charged upon Syracusians having rallyed themselves in the
Helorine way, and recovered their order, as well as they could for that time,
sent a guard into Olympieum, lest the Athenians should take the treasure there,
and returned with the rest of the Army into the City. The Athenians went not
to assault the Temple, but gathering together their dead, laid them upon the
funeral fire, and stayed that night upon the place. The next day they
Syracusians to take up their dead (of whom, and of their Confederates, were
slain about 260.) and gathered up the bones of their own. Of the Athenians
and their Confederates, there dyed about fifty. And thus, having rifled the
bodies of their dead enemies, they returned to Catana. For it was now Winter,
and to make War there, they thought it yet impossible, before they had sent for
Horsemen to Athens, and leuyed other amongst their Confederates there in
Sicily; to the end they might not be altogether over mastered in Horse* and
before they had also Athens, Syracuse again. With this mind they went to
winter at Naxus and Catana.

The Syracusians, after they had buried their dead, Hermocrates encourages the
Syracusians, and is chosen General^ with two more.
called an Assembly, and Hermocrates the son of Hermon, a man not otherwise
second to any in wisdom, and in war, both able for his experience, and
eminent for his valor, standing Their courage, he said, was not overcome,
though their want of order had done them hurt. And yet in that, they were not
so far inferior, as it was likely they would have been. Especially being
(as one may say) homebred artificers, against the most experienced in the
War of all the Grecians. That they had also been hurt by the number of their
Generals and Commanders, (for there were fifteen that commanded in chief) and
by the many supernumerary Soldiers under no command at all. Whereas, if they
would make

The Syracusians, when they had heard him, The Syracusians send for aid into
Peloponnesus.
decreed all that he advised, and elected three Generals, Him, Heraclides the
son of Lysimachus, and Sicanus the son of Exegestus. They sent also
Ambassadors to Corinth and Lacedaemon, as well to obtain a League with them,
as also to persuade the Lacedaemonians to make a hotter War against
Athenians, and to declare themselves in the quarrel of the Syracusians,
thereby either to withdraw them from Sicily, or to make them the less able to
send supply

The Athenian attempt (...) sail.
The Athenian Army at Catana, sailed presently to Messana* to receive it by
Treason of some within, but the plot came not to effect. For Alcibiades when
he was sent for from his charge, being resolved to fly, and knowing what was
to be done, discovered the same to the friends of the Syracusians in Messana,
who with those of their Faction slew such as were accused, and being armed upon
occasion of the Sedition, obtained to have the Athenians kept out. And the
Athenians, after 13 days stay, troubled with Naxus; and having fortified their
Camp with a Palizado, they wintred there, and dispatched a Gallie to Athens
for money, and Horsemen to be with them early in the Spring.

The Syracusians enlarge the compass of their Walls, and burn the Tents of
the Athenians by Catana.
The Syracusians this Winter raised a Wall before their City, all the length of
the side toward Epipolae, including The ground belonging to the Temple of
Apollo.
Temenitis; to the end, if they chanced to be beaten, they might not be so
easily enclosed, as when they were in a narrower compass. And they put a Guard
into Megara, Olympieum: and made Palizadoes on the Seaside, at all the places
of landing. And knowing that the Athenians wintred at Naxus, they marched with
all the power of the City unto Catana, and after they had wasted the
Territory, and burnt the Cabines and Camp where the Athenians had lodged
before, returned home.

(...) both from (...) City.
And having heard that the Athenians had sent Ambassadors to Camarina,
according to a League made before in the time of ^aches, to try if they could
win them to their side, they also sent Ambassadors to oppose it. For they
Camarinaeans had sent those succors in the former Battle with no great good
will, and that now they would take part with them no longer, seeing the
Athenians had the better of the day, but would rather join with the Athenians
upon the former League. Hermocrates therefore and others, being come to
Camarina from the Syracusians, and Euphemus and others from the Athenians, when
the Assembly was met, Hermocrates desiring to increase their envy to the
Athenians, spoke unto them to this effect.

THE ORATION OF HERMOCRATES.
MEN of Camarina, we come not hither, upon fear that the Forces of the
Athenians here present may affright you, but lest their Speeches which they are
about to make, may seduce you, before you have also heard what may be said by
us. They are come into Sicily with that pretense indeed which you hear given
out, but with that intention which we all suspect. And to me they seem not to
intend the replantation of the Leontines, but rather our supplantation;
Leontines, because Chalcideans, for kindreds sake, when ^hey keep in servitude
the Chalcideans themselves of Euboea, of whom these here are but the Colonies.
But they both hold the Cities there, and attempt those that are here in one and
the same kind. For when the Ionians, and the rest of the Confederates, their
own Colonies, had willingly made them their Leaders in the War, to avenge
them of the Medes, the Athenians laying afterward to their charge, to some,
the not sending of their Grecians, that these men, nor for the liberty of
themselves, that the Grecians made head against the Medes; but the Athenians
did it, to make them serve, not the Medes, but them, and the Grecians to change
their Master, as they did, not for one less wise, but for one worsewise. But
intruth we come not to accuse the Athenian State (though it be obnoxious
enough) before you that know sufficiently the injuries Grecians there, brought
into servitude for want of defending themselves; and though we see them now,
with the same sophistry of replanting the Leontines, and their kindred, and
ayding of their Confederates the Egestaeans, prepare to do the like unto us,
do not yet unite our selves, and with better courage, make them to know, that
we be not Ionians, nor Hellespontines, nor Ilanders, that changing, serve
always the Mede, or some other Master; but that we are Doriens, and freemen,
come to dwell here in Sicily out of Peloponnesus, a free Country. bent to this,
that by drawing some from our alliance with their Syracusian, that is the
Athenians Enemy, and thinks it a hard matter, that he should endanger
himself for the Territory that is mine, I would have him to consider, that he
is to fight not chiefly for mine, but equally for his own in mine, and with
the more safety, Athenians come not hither to punish the Syracusians for being
enemies to you, but by pretense of me, to make himself the stronger by your
friendship. If any man here enuieth, or also fears us, (for the strongest
are still liable unto both) and would therefore wish that the Syracusians might
be weakened, to make them more modest, but not vanquished for their own
safeties sake, that man has conceived a hope beyond the power of man. For it
is not reasonable, that the same man should be the disposer both of his
desires, and of his fortune. And Camarina, that are our borderers, and likely
to have the second place of danger, you should most of all have foreseen this,
and not have aided us so dully. You should rather have come to us, and that
which if the Athenians had come first against Camarina, you should in your need
have implored at our hands, the same you should Athenians. You made no League
against your friends, but against your enemies, in case any should invade you:
and by it you are also tied to aid the Athenians when others wrong the^, but
not when (as now) they wrong their neighbor. For even the Rhegians, who are
Chalcideans, refuse to help the^ in replanting the Leontines, though these
also be Chalcideans. And then it were a hard case, if they suspecting a bad
action under a

But this is no justice; to fight with them is justice, and not to stand in
fear of their preparation. Which, if we hold together, is not terrible, but
is, if contrarily (which they endeavor) we be disunited. For neither when they
came against us being none but our selves, and had the upper hand in (Battle,
could they yet effect their purpose, but quickly went their ways. There is no
reason therefore we should be afraid, when we are all together, but that we
should have the better will to unite Peloponnesus, who every way excel these
men in Military sufficiency. Nor should you think that your purpose to aid
neither, as being in League with both, is either just in respect of us, or safe
for your selves. For it is not so just in substance, as it is in the pretense.
For if through want of your aid, the assailed perish, and the assailant become
Victor, what do you by your neutrality, but leave the safety of the one
undefended, and suffer the other to do evil? Whereas it were more noble in
you, by joining with the wronged, and with your kindred, Sicily, and keep the
Athenians, as your friends, from an act of injustice. To be short, we
Syracusians say, That to demonstrate plainly, to you, or to any other, the
thing you already know, is no hard matter; but we pray you, and withal, if
you reject our words, we protest, that whereas the Ionians, who have ever
been our enemies, do take counsel against us, you that are Doriens as well
as we, betray us. And if they subdue us, though it be by your counsels that
they do it, yet they only shall have the honor of it. And for the prize of
their victory, they will have none other but even

Thus spoke Hermocrates.

After him, Euphemus, Ambassador from the Athenians, spoke thus.

THE ORATION OF EVPHEMVS.
THough our coming were to renew our former League, yet seeing we are touched
by the Syracusian, it will be necessary we speak something here of the
right of our Dominion. And the greatest testimony of this right he has
himself given, in that he said the Ionians were ever enemies to the Doriens.
And it is true. For being Ionians, we have ever endeavored to find out some
means or other, how best to free our selves from subjection Peloponnesians,
that are Doriens, more in number then we, and dwelling near us. After the
Medan War, having gotten us a Navy, we were delivered thereby from the
command and leading of the Lacedaemonians; there being no cause why they
should rather be Leaders of us, then we of them, save only that they were
then the stronger. And when we were made Commanders of those Grecians which
before lived under the King, we took upon us the government of them, because
we thought, that having power in our hands to defend our selves, we should
thereby be the less subject to the Peloponnesians. And to say truth, we
Ionians and Ilanders, (whom the Syracusians say we brought into bondage, being
our kindred) not without just cause: for they came with the Medes against ours
their Mother City, and for fear of losing their wealth, durst not revolt, as
we did, that abandoned our very City. But as they were content to serve, so
they would have imposed the same condition upon us. For these causes, we
took upon us our dominion over them, both as worthy of the same, in that we
brought the greatest Fleet, and promptest courage to the service of the
Grecians: whereas they, with the like promptness in favor of the Medes, did
us hurt: and also as being desirous Peloponnesians. And follow any other we
will not, seeing we alone have pulled down the Barbarian, (and therefore have
right to command) or at least have put our selves into danger more for the
liberty of the Peloponnesians, then of all the rest of Greece, and our own
besides. Now to seek means for ones own preservation is a thing unblameable.
And as it is for our own safeties cause that we are now here, so also we
find that the same will be profitable for you. Which we will make plain,
from those very things which they accuse, and you, as most formidable, suspect
us of; being assured, that such as suspect

And let no man object, that we be sollicitous for those that are nothing to
us. For as long as you be preserved, and able to make head against the
Syracusians, we shall be the less annoyed by their sending of Forces to the
Peloponnesians. And in this point you are Leontines, not to subject them, as
their kindred in Euboea, but to make them as puissant as we can; that being
near, they may from their own Territory, weaken the Syracusians in our
behalf. For as for our Wars at home, we are a match for our enemies,
without their help. And the Chalcidean, (whom having made a slave yonder, the
Syracusian said, we absurdly pretend to vindicate into liberty here) is most
beneficial to us there, without Arms, paying money only; but the Leontines,
and other our friends here, are the most profitable to us, when they are most
in

Now to a Tyrant or City that reigns, nothing can be thought absurd, if
profitable, nor any man a friend, that may not be trusted to. Friend or Enemy
he must be, according to the several occasions. But here it is for our
benefit not to weaken our friends, but by our friends strength to weaken our
enemies. This you must needs believe, in as much as yonder also, we so command
over our Confederates, as every of them may be most useful to us. The Chians
and Methymnaeans redeem their liberty, with providing us some Galleys: the
most of the rest, with a Tribute of money, somewhat more pressing.
Peloponnesus. It is probable therefore, that here also, we will so order our
affairs, as shall be most for our own turn, and most according to our fear
(as we told you) of the Syracusians. For they affect a dominion over you; and
having by advantage of your suspicion of us, drawn you to their side, will
themselves by force, or (if we go home without effect) by your want of
friends, have the sole command of Sicily. Which, if you join with them, must
of necessity come to pass. For neither Syracusians want strength to subdue
you, if we be absent. Him that thinks otherwise, the thing it self
conuinceth: for when Syracusians would subdue you, and we thereby should
participate of the danger. And it were unjust, that the argument you would
needs have to prevail then with us, should now have no effect with your
selves; or that you should be jealous of the much strength we bring against the
power of the Syracusians, when much rather you should give the less ear unto
them. We cannot so much as stay here without you; and if becoming perfidious,
we should subdue these States, yet we are unable to hold them, both in respect
of the length of the voyage, and for want of Leontines, and also otherwise. And
yet have these the face to move you against us that hinder this, and that have
hitherto kept Sicily from falling into their hands. But we on the otherside,
inuit you to a far more real safety, and (Camarinaeans) be neither you nor
others, moved with their calumnies. We have told you the very truth, why we
are suspected; and summarily we will tell it you again, clayming to prevail
with you thereby. We say, we command Grecians have good by it. For in all
places, though we Syracusians, take your turn once, and put them to their
guard, as they have done you. Thus spoke Euphemus.

Camarinaeans stood thus affected: The resolution of the Camarinaeans for
New^re^^y*
They bare good will to the Athenians; save that they thought they meant to
subiugate Sicily; And were ever at strife with the Syracusians about their
borders. Yet because they were afraid that the Syracusians that were near
them, might as well get the victory, as the other, they had both formerly sent
them some few horse, and also now resolved for the future, to help the
Syracusians, but underhand, and as sparingly as was possible; and withal, that
they might no less seem to favor the Athenians, then the Syracusians, That
for as much as they that warred, were both of them their Confederates, they
thought it most agreeable to their oath, for the present, to give aid to
neither. And so the Ambassadors of both sides went their ways. And the
Syracusians made preparation for the War by themselves.

The Athenians being encamped at Naxus, The Athenians seek to win the Siculi.
treated with the Siculi, to procure as many of them as they might, to
Syracusians, for the most part, held off; but they that dwelt in the most
inland parts of the Island, being a free people, and ever before dwelling in
Villages, presently agreed with the Athenians; and brought Corn into the Army,
and some of them also money. To those that held off, the Athenians went with
their Army, and some they forced to come in, and others they hindered from
receiving the aids, and garrisons of the Syracusians. And having brought their
Fleet from Naxus, They bring their Fleet to Catana.
where it had been Catana, and re-erected their Camp formerly burnt by the
Syracusians.

They send for aid to Carthage, and into Hetruria*
They sent a Gally also to Carthage, to procure amity, Hetruria, because some
Cities there had of their own accord promised to take their parts. They sent
likewise to the Siculi about them, And prepare to besiege Syracuse.
and to Egesta, appointing them to send in all the Horse they could, and made
ready Brickes, and Iron, and whatsoever else was necessary for a Siege, and
every other thing they needed, as intending to fall in hand with the War,
early the next Spring.

The ^yracusians pray aid of the Corinthians and Lacedaemonians.
The Ambassadors of Syracuse, which were sent to Corinth and Lacedaemon, as
they sailed by, endeavored also to Italians, to a regard of this action of the
Athenians. Being come to Corinth, they spoke unto them, and demanded aid* upon
the Corinth was the mother C^^y of Syracuse.
Title of consanguinity. The Corinthians having forthwith, for their own part,
decreed cheerfully to aid them, sent also Ambassadors from themselves, along
with these to Lacedaemon, to help them to persuade the Lacedaemonians, both to
make a more open War against the Athenians, at home, and to send some forces
also into Sicily.

Alcibiades at Lacedaemon, instigateth the Lacedaemonians against his Country.
At the same time that these Ambassadors were at Lacedaemon, from Corinth,
Alcibiades was also there with his fellow fugitives; who presently upon their
escape, passed over from Thuria, first to Cyllene, the Haven of the Eleans, in
a Ship, and afterward went thence to Lacedaemon, sent for by the
Lacedaemonians themselves, under public security. For he feared them for his
doings about Mantinea. And it fell out, that in the Assembly of the
Lacedaemonians, the Corinthians, Syracusians, and Alcibiades, made all of them
the same request. Now the Ephores and Magistrates, though intending to send
Ambassadors to Syracuse, to hinder them Athenians, being yet not forward to
send them aid, Alcibiades stood forth, and sharpened the Lacedaemonians,
inciting them with words to this effect: THE ORATION OF ALCIBIADES.
IT will be necessary that I say something first concerning mine own
accusation, lest through jealousy of me, you bring a preiudicate ^
office of receiving you, I was the man that restored the same again, and
showed you all possible respect, both otherwise, and in the (...) at Athens.
matter of your loss at Pylus. Whilst I persisted in my good will to you*
being to make a Peace at Athens, by treating the same with my adversaries, you
invested them with authority, and me with disgrace. For which cause, if in
applying my self afterward to the Mantineans, and Argiues, or in any thing
else I did you hurt, I did it justly. And if any man here were causelessly
angry with me then, when he suffered, let him be now content again, when
he knows the true cause of the People, let him acknowledge, that therein also
he is offended without a cause. For we have been always Enemies to Tyrants,
and what is contrary to a Tyrant, is called the People; and from thence has
continued our adherence to the multitude. Besides, in a City governed by
Democracie, it was necessary in most things to follow the present course;
nevertheless we have endeavored to be more moderate, then suteth with the
now headstrong humor of the People. But others there have been, both formerly
and now, that have incited the Common People to worse things then I, and they
are Democracie is, and I no less then another, (insomuch as I could inueigh
against it; But of confessed madness nothing can be said that is new) yet we
thought it not safe to change it, when you our Enemies were so near us. Thus
stands the matter touching my own accusation. And concerning what we are to
consult of both you and I, If I know any thing, which your selves do not,
hear Sicily, first, (if we could) to subdue the Sicilians; after them the
Italians; after them, to assay the dominion of Carthage, and Carthage it self.
If these or most of these enterprises succceded, then next we would have
undertaken Peloponnesus, with the accession both of the Greek Forces there,
and with many mercenarie Barbarians, Iberians, and others of those parts,
confessed to be the most warlike of the Barbarians that are now. We should
also have built many Galleys, besides these which we have already, (there being
plenty of Timber in Italy) with the which besieging Peloponnesus round, and
also taking the easily to have debelled it, and afterward to have gotten the
dominion Greece. As for Money and Corn to facilitate some points of this, the
places we should have conquered there, besides what here we should have
found, would sufficiently have furnished us.

Thus, from one that most exactly knows it, you have heard what is the
Design of the Fleet now gone, and which the Generals there, as far as they
can, will also put in execution.

Understand next, that unless you aid them, they yonder cannot possibly hold
out. For the Sicilians, though inexpert, if many of them unite, may well
subsist; but that the Syracusians alone, with Athenians already there, is a
thing impossible. And if their City should be taken, all Sicily is had, and
soon after Italy also, and the danger from thence, which I foretold you, would
not be long ere it fell upon you. Let no man therefore think, that he now
consulteth of Sicily only, but also of Peloponnesus, unless this be done
with speed. Let the Army you send be of such, as being aboard, may row, and
landing, presently be armed. And (which I think more profitable then the Army
it self) send a Spartan for Commander, both to Syracusians seeing your care,
may the rather hold out, and the Athenians be less able to send supply to
their Army. You ought likewise to fortify Decelea in the Territory of Athens,
a thing which the Athenians themselves most fear, and reckon for the only
evil they have not yet tasted in this War. And the way to hurt an Enemy
most, is to know certainly what he most fears, and Laurium, and whatsoever
other profit they have from their Land, or As Fees, and Fines, which would
cease in the Towns abroad, the Enemy continually lying upon them, or not be
able to be conveyed to the City.
from their Courts of Justice, will presently be lost. And, which is worst,
their Confederates will be remiss in bringing in their revenue, and will care
little for the Athenians,

Lacedaemon) it rests only in your selves: for I am confident, and I think
I err not, that all these things are possible to be done. Now I must crave
this, that I be neither the worse esteemed, for that having once been thought
a lover of my Country, I go now amongst the greatest Enemies of the same,
against it; nor yet mistrusted, as one that speaks with the zeal of a
Fugitive. For though I fly from the malice of them that drove me out, I shall
not (if you take my counsel) fly your profit. Nor are you enemies so much,
(Lacedaemonians) to make use of my service, in whatsoever danger or labor,
confidently, Athens, and but coniectured at yours. And considering you are now
in deliberation upon a matter of so extreme importance, I pray you think not
much to send an Army both into Sicily and Attica, as well to preserve the
great matters that are there, with the presence of a small part of your Force,
as also to pull down the power of the Athenians, both present and to come; and
afterward to dwell in safety your Greece; not forced, but voluntary, and with
their good affection.

Thus spoke Alcibiades.



And the Lacedaemonians, thuogh before this they had a purpose of their own
accord, The Lacedaemonians resolve to send Gylippus into Sicily.
to send an Army against Athens, but had delayed and neglected it, yet when
these particulars were delivered by him, they were a great deal the more
confirmed in the same, conceiving that what they had heard, was from one that
evidently knew it. Insomuch as Decelea, and upon the sending of some succors
into Sicily, for the present. And having assigned Gylippus the son
Cleandridas, unto the Syracusian Ambassadors for chief Commander, they willed
him to consider, both with them and the Corinthians, how best (for their
present means) and with greatest speed, some help might be conveyed unto
them in Sicily. He thereupon appointed the Corinthians to send him two Galleys
presently to Asine, and to furnish the rest they meant to send, and to have
them ready to sail when occasion should serve. This agreed upon, they departed
from Lacedaemon.

The Athenians resolve to send provision and Horsemen.
In the mean time the Gallie arrived at Athens, which Athenians upon hearing,
decreed to send both provision and Horsemen to the Army. So the Winter ended,
and the seventeenth year of this War, written by Thucydides.

THE EIGHTEENTH YEAR.
In the very beginning of the next Spring, the Athenians in Sicily, departed
from Catana, and sailed by the Coast to Megara of Sicily. The Athenians burn
the Fields of certain Towns of the Siculi, and take Centoripa.
The inhabitants whereof, in the time of the Tyrant Gelon, the Syracusians, (as
I mentioned before) had driven out, and now possess the Territory themselves.
Landing here, they wasted the Fields, and having Syracusians, not taking it,
they went presently back, part by Land, and part by Sea, unto the River
Tereas. And landing again in the plain Fields, wasted the same, and burnt up
their Corn; and lighting on some Syracusians, not many, they slew some of
them; and having set up a Trophie, went all again aboard their Galleys. Thence
they returned to Catana, and took in victual. Then with their whole Army they
went to Centoripa, a small City of the Siculi, which yielding on composition,
they departed, and in their way, Inessaeans and the Hyblaeans. Being come
again to Catana, They receive money and Horsemen from Athens.
they find there 250 Horsemen, arrived from Athens, without Horses, though not
without the furniture, supposing to have Horses there; and 30 Archers on
horseback, and 300 Talents of silver.

The Lacedaemonians invade Argia.
The same Spring the Lacedaemonians led forth their Army against Argos, and went
as far as to Cleonae; But an Earthquake happening, they went home again. But the
Argiues invaded the Territory of Thyrea, The Argiues take a great Booty in
Thyr^a^^^.
confining on their own, and took a great Booty from the Lacedaemonians,
which 4717 pound, 10 shillings sterling.
25 Talents.

SYRACVSE BESEEGED BY the Athenians
A. Acradina. B. Nasos. C. Sycha or Tycha. D. Temenitis. E. Epipolae. F. The
quarieand Prison. G. The fort of labdalum. H. Euryalus. I. The Camp of ye
Athenians. K. The walls made by the Athenians to beseege the City. L. Heaps
of Stones Laid ready for ye finishing of the wall* M. The Marshes. N. The wall
made by The Syracusians. O. leon. P. Trogilus. Q. Thapsus. R. The great Haven.
S. The little Haven. T. Plemmyrium. V. Dascon. W. Olympiaeum. X. The high way
to Helorus. Y. The river Anapus. Z. The lake Lysimelia*

view or map of ancient Syracuse

Thespiae, The Commons of Thespiae set upon the Few, but with ill success.
set upon them that had the government; but not prevailing, were part
apprehended, and part escaped to Athens, the Athenians having also aided them.

The Syracusians the same Summer, when they heard that the Athenians had
Horsemen sent to them from Athens, and that they were ready now to come against
them, conceiving, that if the Athenians gat not Epipolae a rocky ground, and
lying just against the City, they would not be able, though Masters of the
Field, to take in the City with a Epipolae a high groun^ ^^^fore the City of
Syr^^
For the rest of the place is to the outside high and steep, falling to the
City by degrees, and on the inside wholly subject to the eye. And it is called
by the Syracusians, Epipolae, because it lies above the level of the rest.
The Syracusians coming out of the City with their whole power, into a Meddow
by the side of the River Anapus, betimes in the morning, (for Hermocrates and
his fellow-Commanders had already received their Diomilus, an Outlaw of Andros,
both to guard Epipolae, and to be ready together quickly, upon any other
occasion wherein there might be use of their service. The Athenians the day
following, having been already mustred, came from Catana with their whole
Forces, and landed their Soldiers at a place called Leon (6 or 7 furlongs from
Epipolae) unperceived, and laid their Navy at Anchor under Thapsus. Thapsus
is almost an Island, lying out into Isthmus, not far from Syracuse, neither by
Sea nor Land. And the nauall Forces of the A^henians having made a Palizado
acrosse the said Isthmus, lay there quiet. But the Land-Souldiers marched at
high speed toward Epipolae, and gat up by Euryalu^, before the Syracusians
could come to them from out of the Meddow, where they were mustering.
Nevertheless they came on, every one with what speed he could, not only
Diomilus with his 700, but the rest also. They had no less to go from the
Meddow, then 25 Furlongs, before Syracusians therefore coming up in this
manner, and thereby defeated in Battle at Epipolae) withdrew themselves into
the City. But Diomilus was slain, Diomilus slain.
and 300 of the rest. The Athenians after this erected a Trophie, and delivered
to the Syracusians the bodies of their dead under Truce, and came down the
next day to the City. But when none came out to give them battle, they
retired again, and built a Fort upon Labdalum, The Athenians fortify Labdalum.
in the very brinke of the precipices of Epipolae; on the side that looks
toward Megara, for a place to keep their Vtensiles and Money in, when they
went out either to fight or to work.

Not long after, there came unto them from Egesta three Siculi, namely the
Naxians and some others, about one hundred: and the Athenians had of their own
two hundred and fifty; for which they had Horses, part from the Egestaeans and
Cataneans, and part they bought. So that they had together in the whole, six
hundred and fifty Horsemen. Having put a Guard into Labdalum, the Athenians
went down to Tyca, or Tycha, it was a Temple of Fortune, part of the City of
Syracu^a.
Syca, and raised there a Wall in circle, very quickly, so that they struck a
terror into the Syracusians with the celerity of the work. Who therefore
coming forth, intended Syracusian Generals perceiving their own to be in
disarray, and not easily to be embattailed, led them again into the City,
save only a certain part of their Horsemen, which staying, kept the Athenians
from carrying of Stone, and straggling far abroad from their Camp. But the
Athenians with one Squadron of men of Arms, together with their whole number
of Horse, charged the Horsemen of the Syracusians, and put them to

The Athenians begin to build on the North side of the Fortification wherein
they lay, the Wall wherewith to beg^^t the City.
The next day the Athenians fell to work upon their Wall, to the North side of
their circular Wall, some building, and some fetching Stone and Timber, which
they still laid down toward the place called Trogilus, in the way by which the
Wall should come, with the shortest compass from the great Haven to the other
Sea. The Syracusians, by the persuasion of their Generals, and principally of
Hermocrates, intended not to hazard Battle with their Athenians any more, but
thought Athenians were to bring their wall, to raise a counterwall, which if
they could but do, before the wall of the Athenians came on, it would exclude
their further building. And if the Athenians should set upon them as they were
doing it, they might send part of the Army to defend it, and pre-occupate the
accesses to it with a Palizado. And if they would come with their whole Army to
hinder them, then must they also be forced to let their own work stand still.
The Syracusians make a cross wall in their way.
Therefore they came out, and beginning at their own City, Athenians, and set
wooden Turrets upon it, made of the Oliue-trees, which they felled in the
ground belonging to the Temple. The Athenian Navy was not yet come about into
the great Haven, from Thapsus, but the Syracusians were masters of the places
near the Sea; and the Athenians brought their provision to the Army from
Thapsus, by land.

The Syracusians, when they thought both their Palizadoe, and wall sufficient,
and considering that the Athenians Athenians cut off the Pipes of their
Conduits, by which their water to drink was conveyed underground into the
Town.

And having observed also, that about noone the Syracusians kept within their
Tents, and that some of them were Syracusians. The rest of the Army divided in
two, went one part with one of the Generals, to stop the succor which might be
sent from the City, and the other with the other General, to the Palizado,
next to the Gate of the Counterwall. The three hundred assaulted and took also
their pursuers, but after they were in, were beaten out Syracusians, and some
slain, both of the Argiues and Athenians, but not many. Then the whole Army
went back together, and pulled down the wall, and plucked up the Palizado,
the Pales whereof they carried with them to their Camp, and erected a Trophie.
The next day, (...) build from their own Fortification, to the (...), toward
the great Haven.
the Athenians beginning at their Circular wall, built onwards to that Cragge
over the Marshes, which on that part of Epipolae, looks to the great Haven,
and by which, the way to the Haven, for their wall to come through the Plain
and Marish, was the shortest. As this Syracusians came out again, and made
another Palizado, beginning at the City, through the middle of the Marish, and
a Ditch at the side of it, to exclude the Athenians from bringing their wall to
the Sea. But the Athenians, when they had finished their work, as far as to
the Cragge, assaulted the Palizado and Trench of the Syracusians again. And
having commanded their Galleys to be brought about from Thapsus, into the great
Haven of Syracusa, about break of day, went straight down into the Plain;
and passing through the Marish, where The Athenians take their Palizado again.
won both the Trench and Palizado, all but a small part, betimes in the
morning, and the rest not long after. And here also they fought; and the
victory fell to the Athenians. The Syracusians, those of the Right-wing, fled
to the City, and they of the Left, to the River. The three hundred chozen
Athenians, desiring to cut off their passage, marched at high speed toward the
^
Bridge; but the Syracusians fearing to be prevented (for most of the Horsemen
were in this number) set upon these Athenians, and following, affrighted also
the foremost guard of the Wing. Lamachus seeing this, came to aid them with a
few Archers from the left Wing of their own, and with all the Argiues; and
passing over a certain Ditch, having but few with him, was deserted and
slain, Lamachus slain.
with some six or seven more. These the Syracusians hastily snatched up, and
carried into a place of safety, beyond the River. And when they saw the rest of
the Athenian Army coming toward them, Athenians that stood ranged against
them before, and withal sent a certain portion of their Army against the
circular Fortification of the Athenians upon Epipolae; Nicias assaulted in his
Camp, defends it.
supposing to find it without defendants, and so to take it. And they took
and demolished the out-worke ten ^ea Plethers, 680 (...)* Plether containing,
(...) to S^idas, 68. cubits.
Plethers in length; but the Circle it self was defended by Nicias, who
chanced to be left within it for infirmity. For he commanded his servants to
set fire on all the Engines, and whatsoever Athenians having by this time
beaten back the Enemy below, were coming up to relieve the Circle; and their
Galleys withal (as is before mentioned) were going about from Thapsus, into
the great Haven. Which they above perceiving, speedily made away, they, and the
whole Army of the Syracusians, into the City; with opinion that they could no
Athenians erected a Trophie, and delivered to the Syracusians their dead, under
Truce; and they on the other side delivered to the Athenians, the body of
Lamachus, and of the rest slain with him. And their whole Army, both Land and
Sea-forces being now together, they began to incloze the Syracusians with a
double Wall, from Epipolae and the Rocks, unto the Seaside. The necessaries
of the Army were supplied from all parts of Italy: and many of the Siculi, who
before stood aloof to observe the way of Fortune, took part now with the
Athenians, to whom came also three Penteconteri [long-boates of 50. Oars
apiece] from Hetruria; and diverse other ways their hopes were nourished. For
the Syracusians also, when there came no help from Peloponnesus, made no
longer account to subsist by War, but conferred, both amongst themselves, and
with Nicias, of composition: for Lamachus being dead, the sole command of the
Army was in him. And though nothing were concluded, yet many things (as was
likely Nicias, and more amongst themselves. The Syracusians change their
Generals.
And the present ill success, had also bred Heraclides, Eucles, and Tellias in
their places.

Gylippus despaireth of Sicily, and seeks to save Italy.
Whilst this passed, Gylippus of Lacedaemon, and the Corinthian Galleys were
already at Leucas, purposing with all speed to go over into Sicily. But when
terrible reports came unto them from all hands, agreeing in an untruth, That
Syracuse was already quite enclosed, Gylippus had Sicily no longer, but
desiring to assure Italy, he, and Pythen, a Corinthian, with two Laconicke and
two Corinthian Galleys, with all speed crossed the Ionique Sea to Tarentum.
And the Corinthians were to man ten Galleys of their own, two of Leucas, and
three of Ambracia, and come after. Gylippus went first from Tarentum to Thuria,
as Ambassador, by his Fathers right, who was free of the City of Tarentum;
but not winning them to his side, he put out again, and sailed along the
Coast of Italy. Passing by the Terinaean Gulf, he was put from the shore (by
a wind which in that quarter blows strongly against Tarentum, where he drew
up such of his Galleys as had been hurt by the weather, and repaired them.

Nicias despises the coming of Gylippus.
Nicias hearing that he came, contemned the small number of his Galleys, as
also the Thurians had before, supposing them furnished as for Piracie, and
appointed no Watch for them yet.

About the same time of this Summer, the Lacedaemonians Argos, they and their
Confederates, and wasted a great part of their Land. And the Athenians aided
the Argiues with thirty Galleys, which most apparently broke the Peace between
them and the Lacedaemonians. For before, they went out from Pylus with the
Argiues and Mantineans, but in the nature of Free-booters; and that also not
into Laconia, but other parts of Peloponnesus. Nay, when the Argiues have often
entreated them, but only to Land with their Arms in Laconia, and having
wasted never so little of their Territory, to return, Pythodorus, Laespodius,
and Demaratus, they landed in the Territory of Epidaurus Limera, and in Prasia,
and there and in other places wasted the Country, and gave unto the
Lacedaemonians a most justifiable cause to fight against the Athenians. After
this, the Athenians being departed from Argos with their Galleys, and the
Lacedaemonians gone likewise home, the Argiues invaded Phliasia, and when they
had wasted part of their Territory, and killed some of their men, returned.

THE SEVENTH THVCYDIDES.
The principal Contents.
Gylippus arriueth at Syracuse, checketh the fortune of the Athenians, and
cutteth off their works with a Counterwall. The Lacedaemonians invade Attica,
and fortify Decelea. The Confederates of each side are solicited for supplies
to be sent to Syracuse. Two battles fought in the great Haven; in the first of
which the Syracusians are beaten, in the second, superior; Demosthenes
arriueth with a new Army, and attempting the works of the enemy in Epipolae by
night, is repulsed with great slaughter of his men. They fight the third time,
and the Syracusians having the Victory, block up the Haven with Boats. A
Catalogue of the Confederates on each side. They fight again at the Bars of
the Haven, where the Athenians losing their Galleys, prepare to march away by
land. In their march they are afflicted, beaten, and finally subdued by the
Syracusians; The Nicias and Demosthenes, and misery of the Captives in the
Quarry; which happened in the ninteenth year of this War.

GYlippus, and Pythen, Gylippus and Pythen resolve to go to Syracuse.
having repaired their Galleys, from Tarentum, went along the Coast to Locri
Epizephyrij. And upon certain intelligence now, that Syracuse was not wholly
enclozed, but that coming with an Army, there was entrance still by Epipolae,
they consulted Sicily on their right hand, and adventure into the Town by Sea,
or on the left, and so first to go to Himera, and then taking along both them
Himera; the rather, because the four Attique Galleys, which Nicias (though he
contemned them before) had now when he heard they were at Locri, sent to wait
for them, were not arrived yet at Rhegium. Having prevented this guard, they
crossed the Straight, and touching at Rhegium, and Messa^a by the way, came to
Himera. Being there, they prevailed so far with the Himeraeans, They took
the aid of (...) of Himera.
that they not only followed them to the War themselves, but also furnished
Gylippus and Pythens Mariners as wanted. For at Himera they had drawn their
Galleys to Land. They likewise sent to the Sel^^untians, to meet them at a
place assigned with their whole Army. The G^loans also, and other of the
Siculi, promised to send them Forces, though not many; being much the willinger
to come to the side, both for that Archonidas was lately dead, who reigning
over some of the Siculi in those parts, and being a man of no mean power, was
friend to the Athenians, and also for that Gylippus seemed to come from
Lacedaemon Gylippus taking with him* of his own Mariners, and Sea-Souldiers,
for whom he had gotten Arms, at the most 700. and Himeraeans with Armor, and
without, in the whole 1000. and ^00 Horse, and some Light-armed Selinuntians,
with some few Horse of the G^loans, and of the Siculi in all, about 1000.
marched with these toward Syracuse.

(...) Galleys (...), make (...), and (...) first, (...) the (...) from
compounding.
In the mean time, the Corinthians, with the rest of their Galleys, putting to
Sea from Leucas, made after, as they were, every one with what speed he could,
and Gongy^^^, Corinthian Commanders, though the last that set forth, arrived
first at Syracuse with one Gallie, and but a little before the coming of
Gylippus. And finding them ready to call an Assembly about an end of the War,
he hindered them from it, and put them into heart, relating, both how the rest
of the Galleys were coming, and also Gylippus the son of Cleandridas for
General, sent unto them by the Lacedaemonians. With this the Syracusians were
reconfirmed, and went presently out with their whole Army to meet him; for they
understood now Iegas, a Fort in his Siculi, and imbattelled his men, comes to
Epipolae, Gylippus (...).
and getting up by Euryalus, where also the Athenians had gotten up before,
marched together with the Syracusians, toward the wall of the Athenians. At
the time when he arrived, the Athenians had finished a double wall, of seven or
eight furlongs toward the great Haven, save only a little next the Sea, which
they were yet at work on. And on the other side of their Circle, toward
Trogilus, and the other Sea, the Stones were for the most part laid ready upon
the place, Sycrause was now brought into.

The Athenians, at the sudden coming on of Gylippus, Gylippus offers the
Athenians five days Truce to be gone in.
though somewhat troubled at first, yet put themselves in order to receive him.
And he, making a stand when he came near, sent a Herald to them, saying, That
if they would abandon Sicily within five days, with bag and baggage, he was
content to give them Truce. Which the Athenians contemning, sent him away
without any answer. Gylippus finding the Syracusians troubled, and not easily
falling into their ranks, led back his Army in a more open ground. Nicias led
not the Athenians out against him, but lay still, at his own Fortification.
And Gylippus seeing he came not up, withdrew his Army, into the top called
Temenites, where he lodged all night. The next day, The Syracusians win
Labdalum.
he drew out the greatest part of his Army, and imbattelled them before the
Fortification of the Athenians, that they might not send succor to any
Labdalum, and took it, and slew all those they found within it. For the place
was out of sight to the Athenians. The same day the Syracusians took also an
Athenian Gally, as it entered into the great Haven.

After this, the Syracusians, The Syracusians build a wall upwards, through
Epipolae, to stop the proceeding of the Wall of the Athenians.
and their Confederates began a wall through Epipolae, from the City toward
the single cross wall upwards; that the Athenians, unless they could hinder
it, might be excluded from bringing their own wall any further on. And the
Athenians by this time, having made Gylippus (for some part of the wall was but
weak) rising with his Army by night, went to assault it; but the Athenians
Gylippus perceiving, again retired. And the Athenians, when they had built it
higher, kept the watch in this part themselves, and divided the rest of the
Wall to the charge of their Confederates. The Athenians fortify Plemmy^^um.
Also it seemed good to Nicias to fortify the place called Plemmyrium, (it is
a Promontory over over against the City, which shooting into the entrance of
the great Haven, streightneth the mouth of the same) which fortified, he
thought, would facilitate the bringing in Vi^ (...)* Haven.
Haven of the Syracusians, and not upon every motion of the Navy of the
enemies, to be to come out against them* as they were before, from the bottom
of the [great] Haven. And he had his mind set chiefly now, upon the War by
Sea, seeing his hopes by Land deminished, since the arrival of Gylippus.
Having therefore drawn his Army, and Galleys to that place, he built about it
three Fortifications, wherein he placed his baggage, and where now also lay at
Road both his great Syracusian Horsemen that were masters of the Field. For the
third part of the Syracusian Cauallery, were quartered in a little Town called
(...) Jupiter Olymp^us.
Olympieum, to keep those in Plemmyrium, from going abroad to spoil the
Country.

(...) sends 20 Galleys (...) lie in wai^ for the aid coming from
Peloponnesus.
Nicias was aduertized moreover of the coming of the Corinthian Galleys, and
sent out a guard of twenty Galleys, with order to wait for them about Locri,
and Rhegium, and the passage there, into Sicily.

Gylippus goes on with his wall, and fights with the (...), twice and in the
latter battle having the Victory, he finished his wall, and (...) excluded the
proceeding o^ the wall of the Athenians.
Gylippus in the mean time, went on with the wall through Epipolae, using the
Stones laid ready there by the Athenians, and withal drew out the Syracusians
and their Confederates beyond the point of the same, and ever as he brought
them forth, put them into their order; and the Athenians on the other side
imbattelled themselves against them. Gylippus, when he saw his time, began the
battle; Syracusians and their Confederates had no use at all of their
Horsemen. The Syracusians and their Confederates being overcome, and the
Athenians having given them Truce to take up their dead, and erected a Trophie,
Gylippus assembled the Army, and told them, That this was not theirs, but his
own fault, who by pitching the Battle so far within the Fortifications, had
deprived them of the use both of their Cauallery, and Darters; and that
therefore he meant to bring them on again; and wished them to consider, that
for Forces they were nothing inferior Peloponnesians and Doriens, they should
not master, and drive out of the Country, Ionians, Ilanders, and a rabble of
mixed Nations.

After this, when he saw his opportunity, he brought on the Army again.
Nicias and the Athenians, who thought it necessary, if not to begin the
Battle, yet by no means to set light by the Wall in hand (for by this time it
wanted little of passing the point of theirs, and proceeding, Syracusians.

Gylippus, when he had drawn his men of Arms further without the Walls than
he had done before, gave the onset. His Horsemen and Darters he placed upon
the Flank of the Athenians, in ground enough, to which neither of their Walls
extended. And these Horsemen, after the fight was begun, charging upon the
left Wing of the Athenians next them, put them to flight; by which Syracusians
overcome likewise, and driven headlong within their Fortifications. The night
following, the Syracusians brought up their Wall beyond the Wall of the
Athenians, so as they could no longer hinder them, but should be utterly
unable, though masters of the Field, to encloze the City.

After this, the other 12 Galleys of the Corinthians* The rest of the Galleys
come in from Peloponnesus, unseen of the Athenians that were set to watch them.
Ambraciotes and Leucadians, vndescryed of the Athenian Galleys that lay in
wait for them, entered the Haven, under the Command Erasinedes, a Corinthian,
and helped the Syracusians to finish what remained, to the cross Wall.

Gylippus goes about Sicily, and sends into Peloponnesus for more aid.
Now Gylippus went up and down Sicily, raising Forces Syracusians and
Corinthians, were sent to Lacedaemon and Corinth, to procure new Forces to be
transported either in Ships or Boats, or how they could, because the Athenians
had also sent to Athens for the like. In the mean time the Syracusians both
manned their Navy, and made trial of themselves, as intending to take in hand
that part also; and were otherwise exceedingly encouraged.

Nicias perceiving this, and seeing the strength of the Enemy, Nicias writes
to Athens for supply, and to be ea^ed of his change.
and his own necessities daily increasing, he also sent Messengers to Athens,
both at other times, and often, upon the occasion of every action that passed;
and now especially, as finding himself in danger, and that unless they
quickly sent for those away that were there already, or sent a great supply
unto them, there was no hope of safety: and fearing lest such as he sent,
through want of utterance or judgment, or through desire to Athenians should
best know his mind, whereof no part could now be suppressed by the Messenger,
and might therefore enter into deliberation upon true grounds.

With these Letters, and other their instructions, the Messengers took their
Journey; and Nicias in the mean time, having a care to the well guarding of
his Camp, was wary of entering into any voluntary dangers.

The Athenians besiege Amphipolis.
In the end of this Summer, Euetion, General for the Athenians, with Perdiccas,
together with many To^acians, warring against Amphipolis, took not the City;
but bringing his Galleys about into Strymon, besieged it from the River lying
at Imeraeum: And so this Summer ended. The end of the eighteenth Summer.


The next Winter, the Messengers from Nicias arrived at Athens; and having
spoken what they had in charge, and answered to such questions as they were
asked, they Clerk of the City, standing Athenians, containing as follows.

THE LETTER OF NICIAS to the People of Athens.
ATHENIANS, You know by many other my Letters, what has passed formerly: nor
is it less needful for you to be informed of the state we are in, and to
take counsel upon it at Syracusians, against whom we were sent, and had built
the Walls within which we now lie, came Gylippus a Lacedaemonian, with an
Army out of Peloponnesus, and also out of some of the Cities of Sicily; and in
the first Battle was overcome by us; but in the second, forced by his many
Horsemen and Darters, we retired within our Works. Whereupon giving over our
vvalling up of the City, for the multitude of our enemies, we now sit still.
Nor can we indeed have the use of our whole Army, because some part of the
men of Arms are employed to defend our Walls. And they have built a single
Peloponnesus; and Gylippus is gone amongst the Cities of Sicily, both to
solicit such to join with him in the War, as have not yet stirred; and of
others to get, if he can, both more Land-souldiers, and more munition for their
Navy. For they intend (as I have been informed) constrained, as now, to keep
watch upon them with our whole number. Sicily being large) shift themselves
away, every one as he can. Some there are also, who having bought here These
were they, which Nicia^ (...) the taking of Hyccara, made sale of, himself.
Hyccarian slaves, have gotten the Captains of Galleys to accept of them in
the room of themselves, and thereby destroyed the purity of our Nauall
strength. To you I write, who know how small a time any Fleet continues in the
height of vigor, and how few of the Mariners are skillful, both how to hasten
the course of a Gallie, and how to contain the Oar. But of all, my Naxus and
Catana, are not able to supply us. Had the Enemy but this one thing more, that
the Towns of Italy, that now send us provision, seeing what estate we are in,
and you not help us, would turn to them, the War were at an end, and we
expugned, without another stroke. I could have written to you other things,
more pleasing Sicily is united against us, and another Army expected out of
Peloponnesus, you must resolve (for those we have here, are not enough Sicilian
aids; And though those from Peloponnesus will be later, yet if you look not
to it, they will get hither partly unseen, as before, and partly by preventing
you with speed.


Nicias.

The Athenians, when they had heard it read, The Athenians conclude to send a
new Army to Syracuse.
though they released not Nicias of his Charge, yet for the present till such
time as others chosen to be in Commission might arrive, they joined with him
two of those that were already in the Army, Menander and Euthydemon, to the
end that he might not sustain the whole burden alone in his sickness. They
concluded likewise to send another Army, as well for the Sea as the Land, both
of Athenians enrolled, Nicias, they elected Demosthenes the son of
Alcisthenes, and Eurymedon the son of Thucles. Eurymedon they sent away
presently for Sicily, about the time of the Winter Solstice, with ten
Galleys, and twenty Talents of Silver, to tell them there, that aid was
coming, and that there was care taken of them. But Demosthenes staying, made
preparation for the Voyage, to set out early the next Spring; and sent unto the
Confederates, appointing what Forces they should provide, and to furnish
himself amongst

The Athenians sent also twenty Galleys about Peloponnesus, to watch that none
should go over into Sicily, They send twenty Galleys to Naupactus, to keep the
Corinthians from transporting their forces into Sicily.
from Corinth or Peloponnesus. For the Corinthians, after the Ambassadors were
come to them, and had brought news of the amendment of the affairs in Sicily,
thought it was well that they had sent thither those other Galleys before; but
now they were encouraged a great deal more, and prepared men of Arms to be
transported into Sicily in Ships, and the Lacedaemonians did the like for the
rest of Peloponnesus. Corinthians manned five and twenty Galleys, to present
Battle to the Fleet that kept watch at Naupactus, that the Ships with the men
of Arms, whilst the Athenians

The Lacedaemonians prepare to invade Attica, and fortify Decelea, supposing
the Athenians to have broken the Peace.
The Lacedaemonians, as they intended before, and being also instigated to it by
the Syracusians and Corinthians, upon advertisement now of the Athenians new
supply for Sicily, prepared likewise to invade Attica, thereby to divert them.
And Alcibiades also importunately urged the fortifying of Decelea, and by no
means to war remissely. But the Lacedaemonians were heartned thereunto
principally, because they thought the Athenians having in hand a double War,
Sicilians, would be the easilier pulled down; and because they conceived the
breach of the last Peace was in themselves; for in the former War, the injury
proceeded from their own side, in that the Thebans had entered Plataea in time
of peace, And because also, whereas it was inserted in the former Articles,
that Arms should not be carried against such as would stand to trial of
Judgment, they had refused such trial when the Athenians offered it. And they
thought all their misfortunes had deservedly befalne them for that cause;
remembering amongst others, the calamity at Pylus. Athenians with a Fleet of
thirty Sail had spoiled part of the Territory of Epidaurus, and of Pras^ae*
and other places, and their Soldiers that lay in Garrison in Pylus, had taken
booty in the Country about; And seeing that as often as there arose any
controversy touching any doubtful point of the Articles, the Lacedaemonians
offering trial by Judgment, they refused it; Then indeed, the Lacedaemonians
conceiving the Athenians to be in the same fault that themselves had been in
before, betook themselves earnestly to the War. And this Winter Sicilians,
they both made provision amongst themselves, and compelled the rest of
Peloponnesus to do the like. So ended this Winter, and the eighteenth Year of
the War, written by Thucydides.

THE NINETEENTH YEAR.
The next Spring, in the very beginning, earlier then ever before, the
Lacedaemonians and their Confederates entered Attica, The Peloponnesians invade
Attica, and fortify Decelea.
under the command of Agis the son of Archidamus, their King. And first they
wasted the Champaigne Country, and then went in hand with the Wall at Decelea,
dividing the work amongst the Army according to their Cities. This Decelea is
from the City of Athens, at the most, but 120. Furlongs, and about as much, or
a little more from Boeotia. This Fort they made in the plain, and in the most
opportune place that could be, to annoy the Athenians, and in sight of the
City. Now the Peloponnesians and their Confederates in Attica went on with
their fortification.

Peloponnesus sent away their Ships with the men of Arms about the same time
into Sicily. Of which, The Peloponnesians send away their men of Arms for
Sicily.
the Lacedaemonians, out of the best of their Helotes, and men made newly free,
sent in the whole six hundred, and Eccritus a Spartan for Commander. And the
Boeotians three hundred, under the Conduct of Xenon and Nicon, Thebans, and
Hegessander a Thespian. And these set forth first, and put to Sea at Taenarus
in Laconia. After them a little, the Corinthians sent away five hundred more,
part from the City it self of Corinth, and part mercenarie Arcadians, and
Alexarchus Corinthian for Captain. The Sicyonians also sent two hundred with
them that went from Corinth, and Sargeus a Sicyonian for Captain. Now the 25
Corinthian Galleys that were manned in Winter, lay opposite to the twenty
Galleys of Athens which were at Naupactus, till such time as the men of Arms
in the Ships from Peloponnesus might get away; for which purpose they were also
set out at first, that the Athenians might not have their minds upon these
Ships, so much as upon the Galleys.

In the mean time also, the Athenians, The Athenians send out Demosthenes
toward Sicily.
whilst Decelea Peloponnesus, under the command of Caricles the son of
Apollodorus, with order when he came to Argos, to take aboard the men of Arms
which the Argiues were to send them, according to League; and sent away
Demosthenes (as they intended before) into Sicily, with threescore Galleys of
Athens, and five of Chios, and one thousand two hundred men of Arms of the
Roll of Athens, and as many of the Ilanders as they could get, provided by
their subject Confederates of all other necessaries for the Charicles, and
help him to make War first upon Laconia. So Demosthenes went to Aegina, and
stayed there both for the Charicles till he had taken aboard the Argiues.

Gylippus persuades the Syracusians to fight by Sea.
In Sicily, about the same time of the Spring, Gylippus also returned to
Syracuse, bringing with him from the Cities he had dealt withal, as great
forces as severally he could get from them; And having assembled the
Syracusians, he told them, that they ought to man as many Galleys as they
could, and make trial of a battle by Sea, and that he hoped thereby to
perform somewhat to the benefit of the War, which should be worthy the
danger. Hermocrates also was none of the least means of getting them to
undertake the Athenians with their Navy, who told them, That neither the
Athenians had this skill by Sea, hereditary, or from everlasting, but were more
Inland-men then the Syracusians, and forced to become Seamen by the Medes: And
that to daring men, such as the Athenians are, they are most formidable that
are as daring against them. For wherewith they terrify their neighbors, which
is not always the advantage of power, but boldness of enterprizing, with the
same shall they i^ like manner be terrified by their enemies. He knew it,
certainly, that the Syracusians by their unexpected daring to encounter the
Athenian Navy, would get more advantage in respect of the fear it would cause,
then the Athenians should endammage them by their odds of skill. He bade them
therefore, to make trial of their Navy, and to be afraid no longer. The
Syracusians on these persuasions of Gylippus and Hermocrates, and others, if
any were, became now extremely desirous to fight by Sea, and presently manned
their Galleys.

The Syracusians win Plemmyrium, but are beaten by Sea.
Gylippus, when the Navy was ready, drew out his Plemmyrium. Withal, the
Galleys of the Syracusians, by appointment, 35 of them came up toward it, out
of the great Haven, and 45 more came about out of the little Haven, where also
was their Arsenall, with purpose to join with those within, and to go
together to Plemmyrium, that the Athenians might be troubled on both sides. But
the Athenians having quickly manned 60 Galleys to oppose them; with 25 of them,
they fought with the 35 of Syracusians in the great Haven, and with the rest
went Gylippus (the Athenians in Plemmyrium being now come down to the water
side, The Syracusians win the works of the Athenians in Plemmyrium.
and having their minds busied upon the fight of the Galleys) betimes in the
morning, and on a sudden assaulted the Fortifications, before they could come
back again to defend them; and possessed first the greatest, and afterward
the two lesser: Syracusians in the great Haven, had yet the better in the fight
upon the water, they gave them chase with one nimble Gally. But by that time
that the other two Walls were taken, the Syracusians upon the water were
overcome, and the Athenians which fled from those two Walls, got to their
Camp with more Syracusian Galleys that fought before the Havens mouth, having
beaten back the Athenians, entered in disorder, and falling foul one on
another, gave away the Victory unto the Athenians, The Athenians (...) victory
by (...).
who put to flight not only them, but also those other, by whom they had
before been overcome within the Haven, and sunk eleven Galleys of the
Syracusians, and slew most of the men aboard them, save only the men of three
Galleys, whom they took alive. Of their own Galleys they lost only three.

Syracusian Galleys, and erected a Trophie in the little Island over against
Plemmyrium, they returned to their Camp. The Syracusians, though such were
their success in the Battle by Sea, yet they won the Fortification in
Plemmyrium, and set up three Trophies, for every Wall one. One of the two
Walls last taken, they demolished, but two they repaired, and kept with a
Garrison.

At the taking of these Walls, many men were slain, Athenians using these
Works for their storehouse, there was in them Plemmyrium was it that most and
principally empayred the Athenians Army. For the entrance of their provision
was now no longer safe, (for the Syracusians lying against them there with
their Galleys, kept them out) and nothing could be brought in unto them but by
fight, and the Army besides was thereby otherwise terrified and

After this the Syracusians sent out twelve Galleys, under the command of
Agatharchus a Syracusian. Of which one carried Ambassadors into Peloponnesus,
to declare what hope they had now of their business, and to instigate them to
a sharper War in Attica. The other eleven went into Italy, upon intelligence
of certain Vessels laden with commodities coming to the Athenians Army: which
also they met with, and destroyed most of them; and the Timber which for
building of Galleys, the Athenians had ready framed, they burned in the
Territory of Caulonia.

After this they went to Locri, and riding here, there came unto them one of
the Ships that carried the men of Arms of the Thespians; whom the Syracusians,
took aboard, and went homeward by the Coast. The Athenians that watched for
them with 20 Galleys at Megara, took one of them, and the men that were in
her, but could not take the rest: So that they escaped through to Syracuse.

There was also a light Skirmish in the Haven of Syracuse, about the Piles
which the Syracusians had driven down before their old Harbor, to the end
that the Galleys might ride within, and the Athenians not annoy them by
assault. The Athenians having brought to the place a Ship of huge greatness,
fortified with Wooden Turrets, and covered against Fire, caused certain men
with little Boats, to go and fasten Cords unto the Piles, and so broke them up
with craning. Some also the Diverse did cut up with Sawes. In the mean time the
Syracusians from the Harbor, and they Athenians gotten up. But the greatest
difficulty was to get up those Piles which lay hidden; for some of them they
had so driven in, as that they came not above the Water. So that he that
should come near, was in danger to be thrown upon them as upon a Rock. But
these also for reward the Diverse went down, and sawed asunder. But the
Syracusians continually drove down other in their stead. Other devices they had
against each other, (as was not unlikely between Armies so near opposed) and
many light

The Syracusians moreover sent Ambassadors, some Corinthians, some
Ambraciotes, and some Lacedaemonians, unto the Cities about them, to let them
know, that they had won Plemmyrium, and that in the Battle by Sea, they were
not overcome by the strength of the Enemy, but by their own disorder; and also
to show what hope they were in, in other respects, and to entreat their aid
both of Sea and Landforces, for so much as the Athenians expecting another
Sicily.

Demosthenes, Demosthenes in his way to Sicily, fortifieth a neck of Land in
Laconia.
as soon as his forces which he was to carry to the succor of those in
Sicily, were gotten together, put to Sea from Aegina, and sailing into
Peloponnesus, joined with Charicles, and the 30. Galleys that were with him.
And having taken aboard some men of Arms of the Argiues, came to Laconia, and
first wasted part of the Territory of Epidaurus Limera. From thence, going to
that part of Laconia which is over against the Island Cythera, (where is a
Temple of Apollo) they wasted a part of the Country, and fortified an Isthmus
there, both that the Helots might have a refuge in it, running away from the
Lacedaemonians, and that Freebooters from thence, as from Pylus, might fetch in
Prizes from the Territory adjoining. As soon as the place was taken in,
Demosthenes himself went on to Corcyra, to take up the Confederates there,
with intent to go thence speedily into Sicily. And Charicles having staid to
finish, and put a Garrison into the Fortification, went afterward Athens; and
the Argiues also went home.

The aids of the T^^acians come too late to go into Sicily.
The same Winter also came to Athens a thousand and Machaerophori, of the race
of them that are called Dij, and were to have gone with Demosthenes into
Sicily. But coming too late, the Athenians resolved to send them back again
into Thrace, as being too chargeable a matter to entertain them only for the
War in Decelea; for their pay was to have been a Dram a man by the day.
The incommodities which befell the Athenians by the fortification in Decelea.
For Decelea being this Summer fortified, first by the whole Army, and the^ by
the several Cities maintained with a Garrison by turns, much endamaged the
Athenians, and weakened their Agis the King of Lacedaemon being always there in
person and diligently prosecuting the War, the Athenians were thereby very
grievously afflicted: for they were not

(...) lost all their Sheep and Oxen. And by the (...) going out of the
Athenian Horsemen, making (...), and defending the Country, their (...) partly
lamed, through incessant labor in rugg^^ grounds, and partly wounded by the
Enemy. And their pro^^^on, which formerly they used to bring in from (...) by
Oropus, the shortest way, through Decelea Sunium. And whatsoever the City was
wont to be served withal from without, it now wanted, and in stead of a City
was become as it were a Fort. And the Athenians watching on the Battlements of
the Wall, in the day time by turns, but in the night, both Winter and Summer,
all at once, (except the Horsemen) part at the Walls, and part at the Arms,
were quite tired. But that which pressed them most, was that they had two
Wars at once. And yet their obstinacy Peloponnesians, no man would have
imagined, that they should not only not have recalled their Army out of
Sicily, but have also besieged Syracuse there, a City of it self no less
then Athens, and therein so much have exceeded the expectation of the rest of
the Grecians, both in power and courage, (who in the beginning of this War
conceived, if the Peloponnesians invaded their Territory, some of them, that
they might hold out two years, others three, no man more) as that in the
seventeenth Sicily, and being every way weakened already by the former War,
have undergone another, not inferior to that which they had before with the
Peloponnesians. Now their Treasure being by these Wars, and by the detriment
sustained from Decelea, and other great expenses that came upon them, at a very
low ebb, about this time they imposed on such as were under their dominion, a
twentieth part of all goods passing by Sea, for a Tribute, by this means to
improve their commings

The Thracians therefore, The Thracians sent back, in their way sack the city
of Mycalessus.
that came too late to go with Demosthenes, they presently sent back, as
being unwilling to lay out money in such a scarcity; and gave the charge of
carrying them back to Dijtrephes, with command as he went along those Coasts,
(for his way was through the The straight between Euboea and Boeotia.
Euripus) if occasion served, to do somewhat against the Enemy. He accordingly
landed them by Tanagra and hastily Euripus from Chalcis in Euboea, he
disbarqued again in Boeotia, and led his Soldiers toward Mycalessus, and lay
all night at the Temple of Mercury undiscovered, which is distant from
Mycalessus about sixteen furlongs. The next day he comes to the City, being
a very great one, and takes it. For they kept no Watch, nor expected that any
man would have come in and assaulted them, so far from the Sea. Their Walls
also were but weak, in some places fallen down, and in others low built, and
their Gates open Thracians entering into Mycalessus, spoiled both Houses and
Temples, slew the people, The barbarous cruelty of the Thracians.
without mercy on old or young, but killed all they could Thracians, where they
dare, are extreme bloody, equal to any of the Barbarians. Insomuch as there
was put in practice at this time, besides other disorder, all forms of
slaughter that could be imagined. They likewise fell upon the Schoolehouse
(which was in the City a great one, and the children newly entered into it) and
killed them every one. And the calamity of the whole City, as it was as great
as ever befell any, so also Thebans hearing of it, came out to help them; and
ouertaking the Thracians before they were gone far, both recovered the booty,
and chased them to the Euripus, and to the Sea, where the Galleys lay that
brought them. Some of them they killed, of those most, in their going aboard.
For swim they could not; and such as were in the small Boats, when they saw
how things went a-land, had thrust off their Boats, and lay without the
Euripus. In the rest of the retreat, the Thracians behaved themselves not
unhandsomely, Theban Horsemen, by whom they were charged first; but running
out, and again rallying themselves in a circle, according to the manner of
their Country, defended themselves well, and lost but few men in that action.
But some also they lost in the City it self, whilst they stayed behind for
pillage. But in the whole, of 1300, there were slain, only 250. Of the
Thebans and others that came out to help the City, there were slain
Horsemen, and men of Arms, one with another, about 20, and amongst them
Scirphondas of Thebes, one of Boeotia. And of the Mycalessians there perished a
part. Thus went the matter at Mycalessus, the loss which it received, being
for the quantity of the City, no less to be lamented, then any that happened
in the whole War.

Demosthenes going from Corcyra, after his fortifying in Laconia, found a Ship
lying in Phia of Elis, and in her certain men of Arms of Corinth, ready to
go into Sicily. The Ship he sunk, but the men escaped, and afterward getting
another Ship, went on in their

Demosthenes being about Zacynthus, Eurymedon comes ^o De^osthenes out of
(...), and tells him of the taking of Plemmyrium.
and Cephallenia, took aboard their men of Arms, and sent to Naupactus for
the Messenians. From thence he crossed over to the Continent of Acarnania, to
Alyzea, and Anactorium, which belonged to the Athenians. Whilst he was in
these parts, he met with Eurymedon out of Sicily, that had been sent in Winter
unto the Army with commodities, who told him amongst other things, how he had
heard by the way, after he was at Sea, that the Syracusians had won
Plemmyrium. Conon also the Captain of Naupactus Corinth that lay before
Naupactus, would not give over War, and yet delayed to fight, and therefore
desired to have some Galleys sent him, as being unable with his 18 to give
battle to 25 of the enemy. Whereupon Demosthenes* and Eurymedon sent 20
Galleys more to those at Naupactus, the nimblest of the whole Fleet, by Conon
himself; Demosthenes and Eurymedon leuy forces for Sicily*
And went themselves about furnishing of what belonged to the Army. Of whom
Eurymedon went to Corcyra, and having appointed the^ there to man 15 Galleys,
Athens, he joined with Demosthenes, as having been elected with him, in the
charge of General; and Demosthenes took up Slingers and Darters, in the parts
about Acarnania.

The Ambassadors of the Syracusians, Nicias overthrows the new supply going
to Syracuse from the neighboring Cities, and kills 800 of them.
which after the taking of Plemmyrium, had been sent unto the Cities about,
having now obtained, and leuyed an Army amongst them, were conducting the same
to Syracuse. But Nicias, upon intelligence thereof, sent unto such Cities of
the Siculi Centoripines, Halicycaeans, and others, not to suffer the enemy to
go by, but to unite themselves and stop them; for that they would not so much
as offer to pass any other way, seeing the Agrigentines had already denied
them. When the (...).
Sicilians were marching, the (...).
Siculi, as the Athenians had desired them, put themselves in Ambush in three
several places, and setting upon them unawares, and on a sudden, slew about
eight hundred of them, and all the Ambassadors, save only one, a Corinthian,
which Syracuse.

About the same time, came unto them, also the aid of Camarinaeans, 500 men of
Arms, 300 Darters, and 300 Archers. Also the Geloans sent them men for five
Galleys, besides 400 Darters, and 200 Horsemen. For now all Sicily (except the
Agrigentines, who were Newtrall) but all the rest, who before stood looking on,
came in, to the Syracusian side against the Athenians. Nevertheless, the
Syracusians, after this blow received amongst the Siculi, held their hands, and
assaulted not the Athenians for a while.

Demosthenes and Eurymedon having their Army now ready, crossed over from
Corcyra, and the The Continent about Acarnania, for there was Demosthenes; and
at Corcyra was Eurymedon.
Continent with Iapygia. From thence they went to the Chaerades, Islands of
Iapygia, and here took in certain Iapygian Darters, to the number of 250, of
the Messapian Nation. And having renewed a certain ancient alliance, with
Artas, who reigned there, and granted them those Darters, they went thence to
Metapontium, a City of Italy. There by virtue of a League, they got two
Galleys, and 200 Darters, which taken aboard they kept along the Shore, till
they came to the Territory of Thuria. Here they found the aduers faction to the
Athenians to have been lately driven out in a sedition. Thurians to join with
them freely in the War, (and as things stood) to have for friends and enemies,
the same that were so to the Athenians, they stayed about that in the Territory
of the Thurians.

The Peloponnesians, and the rest, who were at the same time in the 25 Galleys
that for safeguard of the Ships, The battle by Sea, before Naupactus, between
the Corinthians and Athenians.
lay opposite to the Galleys before Naupactus, having prepared Athenians, went
to an Anchor under Erineus of Achaia in Rhypica. The place where they rid, was
in form like a halfe-Moone, and their Land forces they had ready on either
side to assist them, both Corinthians, and other their Confederates of those
parts, embattelled upon the points of the Promontory, and their Galleys made up
the space between, under the command of Polyanthes, a Corinthian. Against
these, the Athenians came up, with 33 Galleys from Naupactus, Diphilus. The
Corinthians at first lay still, Athenians, and the fight began. They held each
other to it long. The Athenians sunk three Galleys of the Corinthians. And
though none of their own were sunk, yet seven were made unserviceable, which
having encountered the Corinthian Galleys ahead, were torn on both sides
between the beak and the oars, by the beakes of the Corinthian Galleys, made
stronger for the same purpose. After they had fought with equal fortune, and
so as both sides challenged the victory, (though Athenians were masters of the
wrecks, as driven by the wind into the maine, and because the Corinthians came
not out to renew the fight) they at length parted. There was no chasing of men
that fled, nor a prisoner taken on either side, because the Peloponnesians and
Corinthians fighting near the Land, easily escaped, nor was there any Gally of
the Athenians sunk. But when the Athenians were gone back to Naupactus, the
Corinthians presently set up a Trophie, as victors, in regard that more of the
Athenian Galleys were made unserviceable, than of theirs; and thought
Corinthians think they have the better, when they have not much the worse, and
the Athenians think they have the worse, when they have not much the better.
And when the Peloponnesians were gone, and their Army by Land dissolved, the
Athenians also set up a Trophie in Achaia, as if the victory had been theirs,
distant from Erineus, where the Peloponnesians rid, about twenty Furlongs. This
was the success of that battle

Demosthenes and Eurymedon, after the Thurians had put in readiness to go
with them, 700. men of Arms* Demosthenes and Eurymedon come along the shore of
Italy, and take up forces.
and 300. Darters, commanded their Galleys to go along the Coast, to Croton,
and conducted their Land-souldiers, having first taken a muster of them all
upon the side of the River Sycaris, through the Territory of the Thurians. But
coming to the River Hylias, upon word sent them from the men of Croton, that
if the Army went through their Territory, it should be against their will, they
marched down to the Hylias, where they stayed all that night, and were met by
their Galleys.

The next day imbarking, they kept along the sho^e, and Locri, till they arrived
at Petra, in the Territory of Rhegium.

(...) make ready (...) Galleys to fight with the Athenians there, before the
supply came.
The Syracusians in the mean time, upon intelligence of their coming on,
resolved to try again what they could do with their Navy, and with their new
supply of Landmen, which they had gotten together on purpose, to fight with the
Athenians, before Demosthenes and Eurymedon should arrive. And they furnished
their Navy, both otherwise, according to the advantages they had learnt in the
last battle, Their mane^ of strengthni^g the^^ Galleys.
and also made shorter the heads of their Galleys, and Corinthians had armed
their Galleys ahead to fight with those before Naupactus. For the Syracusians
made account, that against the Athenian Galleys, not so built, but weak
before, as not using so much to meet the Enemy ahead, as upon the side, by
fetching a compass, they could not but have the better; and that to fight in
the great Haven, many Galleys in not much room, was an advantage to them, for
that using to direct Athenians in that narrow room, would want means both to
go about, and to go through them, which was the point of Art they most relied
on. For as for their passing through, they would hinder it themselves as much
as they could, and for fetching compass, the straightness of the place would
not suffer it. And that fighting ahead, which seemed before Athenians, if
overcome, would have no retiring, but to the Land, which was but a little way
off, and little in compass, near their own Camp, and of the rest of the
Haven themselves should be Masters, and the Enemy being pressed, could not
choose, thronging together into a little room, and all into one and the same
place, but disorder one another, (which was indeed the thing that in all their
battles by Sea, did the Athenians Syracusians Plemmyrium for enemy, and the
Havens mouth not being large. The Syracusians having devised thus much over and
above their former skill and strength, and far more confident now since the
former Battle by Sea, assaulted them both with their Army and with their Navy
at once. The Landmen from the City Gylippus drew sooner out a Athenians Camp,
upon the side toward the City; and from Olympieum, the men of Arms, all that
were there, and the Horsemen and light-armed of the Syracusians, came up to the
Wall on the other side. And by and by after came sailing forth also the Galleys
of the Syracusians, and their Confederates. The Athenians that thought at
first, they would have made the attempt only with their Landmen, seeing also
the Galleys on a sudden coming toward them, were in confusion, and some of
them put themselves Olympieum, and the parts without. Others again went
aboard, and withal came to aid those ashore; but when the Galleys were
manned, they put off, being 75. in number, The Athenians and Syracusians fight.
and those of Syracuse about 80. Having spent much of the day in charging and
retiring, and trying each other, and performed nothing worth the mentioning,
save that the Syracusians sunk a Athenians, they parted again, and the
Land-souldiers retired at the same time from the Wall of the Athenian Camp.
The next day the Syracusians lay still, without showing any sign of what they
meant to do. Yet Nicias seeing that the Battle by Sea was with equality, and
imagining that they would fight again, made the Captains to repair their
Galleys, such as had been torn, and 2 great Ships to be mored, without those
Piles which he had driven into the Sea before his Galleys, to be instead of a
Haven inclozed. These Ships he placed about go safely out at leisure. In
performing of this, the Athenians

The Athenians and Syracusians fight again.
The next day the Syracusians assaulted the Athenians again with the same
Forces both by Sea and Land, that they had done before, but begun earlier in
the morning, and being opposed Fleet against Fleet, they drew out a great part
of the day, now again, as before, in attempting upon each other without
effect. Till at last Ariston the son of Pyrrhichus, The stratagem of Ariston,
a Master of a Gally.
a Corinthian, the most expert Master that the Syracusians had in their Fleet,
persuaded the Commanders of the Navy, to send to such in the City as
Athenians afresh the same day.

This advice being liked, they sent a Messenger, and the Market was furnished.
And the Syracusians suddenly rowed a-sterne, toward the City, and disbarking,
dined there-right on the shore. The Athenians supposing they had Syracusians
suddenly going aboard, came toward them again. And the Athenians in great
tumult, and for the most part vndined, imbarking disorderly, at length with
much ado went out to meet them. For a while they held their hands on both
sides, and but observed each other; But anon after, the Athenians thought not
fit by longer dallying, to overcome themselves Syracusians received and
resisted their charge; and fighting, as they had before determined, with their
Galleys head to head with those of the Athenians, and provided with beakes for
the purpose, brake the Galleys of the Athenians very much, between the heads of
the Galleys and the oars. The Athenians were also annoyed much by the Darters
from the Deckes, but much more by those Syracusians, who going about

The Syracusians having fought in this manner with the utmost of their
strength, in the end gat the victory, and the Athenians, between the two
Ships, escaped into their harbor. The Syracusian Galleys chased them as far
as to those Ships, but the Dolphins hanging from the Masts over the entrance of
the harbor, forbad them to follow any further. Yet there were two Galleys,
which upon a iollity after victory approached them, but were both lost, The
Syracusians have the victory.
The Syracusians, after they had sunk seven Galleys of the Athenians, and
torn many more, and of the men had taken some alive, and killed others,
retired, and for both the battles erected Trophies, and had already an assured
hope, of being far superior by Sea, and also made account to subdue the Army
by Land. And they prepared to assault them again in both kinds.

In the mean time Demosthenes, Demosthenes and Eurymedon, with a new Army
arrive at Syracuse.
and Eurymedon arrived with the Athenian supply, being about 73 Galleys, and
men Barbarians as Greeks, not a few, and Slingers, and Archers, and all other
provision sufficient. For the present, it not a little daunted the Syracusians
and their Confederates, to see no end of their danger, and that notwithstanding
the fortifying in Decelea, another Army should come now, equal, and like unto
their former, and that their power should be so great in every kind. And on the
other side, it was a kind of strengthening after weakness, to the Athenian
Army that was Demosthenes, when he saw how things stood, and thinking it unfit
to loyter, and fall into Nicias his case (For Nicias, who was formidable at his
first coming, when he set not presently upon Syracuse, but Wintred at Catana,
both grew into contempt, and was prevented also by the coming of Gylippus
thither, with an Army out of Peloponnesus. The which if Nicias had gone against
Syracuse at first, had never been so much as sent for. For supposing themselves
to have been strong enough alone, they had at once both found themselves too
weak, did) Demosthenes I say considering this, and that he also, Demosthenes
attempteth to win the Wall which the Syracusians had built through Epipolae, to
exclude the proceeding of the Wall of the Athenians.
intended with all speed to make use of this present terriblenesse of the Army.
And having observed that the Crosse-wall of the Syracusians, wherewith they
hindered the Athenians from enclosing the City, was but single, and that if
they could be Masters of the ascent to Epipolae, and again of the Camp there,
the same might easily be taken, (for none would have stood against them) hasted
to put it to trial, and thought it his shortest way to the dispatching of the
War. For either he Syracuse, or he would lead away the Army, and no longer
without purpose consume, both the Athenians there with him, and the whole
State. The Athenians therefore went out, and first wasted the Territory of the
Syracusians, about the River Anapus, and were the stronger as at first, both by
Sea and Land. For the Syracusians durst neither way go out against them, but
only with their Horsemen and Darters from Olympieum.

After this, Demosthenes thought good to try the Wall, Athenians had built to
enclose the City withal, with Engines, but seeing the Engines were burnt by
the Defendants fighting from the Wall, and that having assaulted it in diverse
parts with the rest of his army, he was, notwithstanding put back, he resolved
to spend the time no longer, but (having gotten the consent of Nicias, and the
rest in Commission, thereunto) to put in execution his design for Epipolae, as
was before intended. By day, it was thought impossible not to be discovered,
either in their approach, or in their ascent. Having therefore first commanded
Eurymedon, and Menander, with the whole Army, marched about midnight to
Epipolae, leaving Nicias in the Camp. Being come to Epipolae at Euryalus
(where also the Army went up before) they were not only not discovered by the
Syracusians that kept the Watch, but ascending, took a certain Fortification
of the Syracusians there, and killed part of them that kept it. Epipolae three
walled about, without the City, one of Syracusians, one of other Sicilians, and
one of Confederates, and carried the news of their coming in, and told it to
those 600 Syracusians that kept this part of Epipolae at the first, who
presently went forth to meet them. But Demosthenes and the Athenians lighting
on them, though they fought valiantly, put them to flight, and presently
marched on, making use of the present heat of the Army, to finish what he came
for, before it were too late. And others going on, in their first Syracusians,
they flying that kept it, and were throwing down the Battlements thereof. The
Syracusians and their Confederates, and Gylippus, and those with him, came out
to meet them, from their Camps, but because the attempt was unexpected, and in
the night, they charged the Athenians timorously, and were even at first forced
to retire. But as the Athenians advanced more out of order, chiefly as having
already gotten the victory, but desiring also, quickly to pass through all
that remained yet vnfoughten with, (lest through Boeotians withstood them
first, and charging, forced them to turn their backs. And here the Athenians
were mightily in disorder, and perplexed, so that it has been very hard to be
informed of any side, in what manner each thing passed. For if in the day time,
when things are better seen, yet they that are present cannot tell how all
things go, save only what every man with much ado sees near unto himself:
How then in a battle by night, (the only one that happened between Athenians,
some were already overcome, others went on in their first way. Also a great
part of the rest of the Army was already, part gotten up, and part ascending,
and knew not which way to Athenians once turned their backs, all before them
was in confusion; and it was hard to distinguish of any thing for the noise.
For the Syracusians Athenians sought each other, and took for Enemies all
before them, though friends, and of the number of those that fled. And by often
asking the Word, there being no other means of distinction, all asking at
once, they both made a great deal of stir amongst themselves, and revealed
the Word to the Enemy. But they did not in like manner know the Word of the
Syracusians, A Hymn with Trumpets or other loud musiqu^, both before and after
battle.
Paean, which being in both Armies the same, drove them to their wits end. For
the Argiues and Corcyraeans, and all other of the Dorique Race on the Athenians
part, when they sounded the Paean, terrified the Athenians on one

The Athenians fly.
As they fled before the Enemy, the way of the descent from Epipolae, by which
they were to go back, being but strait, many of them threw themselves down
from the Rocks, and dyed so: and of the rest that gate Syracusian Horsemen
that ranged the Country about.

The next day the Syracusians erected two Trophies, one in Epipolae at the
ascent, and another, where the first check was given by the Boeotians. The
Athenians received their dead under Truce; and many there were that dyed, both

After this, The (...) more supplies, (...) to win the (...) Camp.
the Syracusians having by such unlooked for prosperity recovered their former
courage, sent Sicanus with fifteen Galleys to Agrigentum being in sedition, to
bring that City if they could to their obedience. And Gylippus went again to
the Sicilian Cities by Land, to raise yet another Army, as being in hope to
take the Camp of the Athenians by assault, considering how the matter had gone
in Epipolae.

In the mean time the Athenian Generals went to Council upon their late
overthrow, The Athenian Commanders take council what to do.
and present general weakness of the Army. For they saw, not only that their
designs prospered not, but that the Soldiers also were weary of staying. For
they were troubled with sickness, proceeding from a double cause; this being
the time of the year most obnoxious to diseases, and the place where they lay,
moorish and noisome. And all things

Demosthenes thought fit to stay no longer; The advice of (...)
and since the execution of his Design at Epipolae had failed, delivered his
opinion for going out of the Haven whilst the Seas were open, and whilst, at
least with this addition of Galleys, they were stronger then the Army of the
Enemy. For it was better, he said, for the City to make War upon those
which fortify against them at home, then against the Syracusians, seeing they
cannot now be easily overcome; and there was no reason why they should spend
much money in lying before the City. This was Demosthenes.

Nicias, though he also thought their estate bad, yet was unwilling to have
their weakness discovered, and by decreeing of their departure openly with the
Votes of many, to make known the same to the enemy. For if at any time they
had a mind to be gone, they should then be less able to do it secretly.
Besides, the estate of the Enemy, in as much as he understood it better then
the rest, put him into some hope that it might yet grow worse then their own,
in case they pressed the Siege, especially for the Athenians in Sycrause that
desired to betray the (...) of Nicias.
and said, That he was sure, the People of Athens would take it ill, if he
went thence without their order: For that they were not to have such Judges, as
should give sentence upon their own sight of things done, rather then upon the
report of Calumniators, but such as would believe whatsoever some fine speaker
Athenians so well, choose to be put to death unjustly, and charged with a
dishonorable crime by the Athenians, rather then, if he must needs do one,
to suffer the same at the hand of the Enemy by his own adventure. And yet, he
said, the State of the Syracusians was still inferior to their own: For
paying much money to strangers, and laying out much more on Athenians are.
Therefore it was fit, he said, to stay close to the City, and not to go away,
as if they were too weak in money, wherein they were much superior.

Nicias, when he spoke this, assured them of it, as knowing the state of
Syracuse precisely, and their want of money; and that there were some that
desired to betray the City to the Athenians, and sent him word not to go.
Withal he had now confidence in the Fleet, which* as being before overcome,
he had not. As for lying where they did, Demosthenes would by no means hear
of it. But if the Army might not be carried away without order from the
Athenians, but must needs stay in Sicily, then he said they might go to
Thapsus, or Catana, Syracusians, and be to fight with their Galleys in the
maine Sea, and not in a narrow (which is the advantage of the Enemy) but in a
wide place, where the benefit of skill should be theirs, and and where they
should not be forced in charging and retyring, to come up, and fall off in
narrow and circumscribed limits. In sum he said, he by no means liked to
stay where they were, but with all speed, no longer delaying the matter, to
arise and be gone. Eurymedon also gave the Nicias, there grew a kind of sloth
and procrastination in the business, and a suspicion withal, that the
asseueration of Nicias, was grounded on somewhat that he knew above the rest,
and thereupon the Athenians deferred their going thence, and stayed upon the
place.

In the mean time Gylippus and Sycanus returned unto Syracuse. Sicanus without
his purpose at Agrigentu^ (for whilst he was yet in Gela, Gylippus returns
with another Army from the Cities of Sicily.
the sedition which had been raised in the behalf of the Syracusians was
turned into friendship;) Gylippus not without another great Army out of Sicily,
besides the men of Arms, which having set-forth from Peloponnesus in Ships the
Spring before, were then lately arrived at Selinus from out of Afric. For
having been driven into Afric, and the Cyreneans having given them two
Galleys with Pilots, in passing by the shore they aided the Euesperitae,
besieged by the Africans, and having overcome the Africans, they went on to
Neapolis, a Town of traffic belonging to the Carthaginians, where the
passage into Sicily is shortest, and but two days and a nights sail Selinus.
As soon as they were come, the Syracusians again presently prepared to set
upon the Athenians, both by Sea and Land. The Athenian Generals seeing them
have another Army, and their own not bettering but growing every day worse
then other, but especially as being pressed to it by the sickness of the
Soldiers, repented now that they removed not before; and Nicias being now no
longer against it, as he was, but desirous only that it might not be concluded
openly, gave order unto all, as secretly as was possible,

The Athenians out of superstition forbear to remove, because of an eclipse of
the Moon.
But when they were about it, and every thing was ready, Athenians called upon
the Generals to stay, but Nicias also (for he was addicted to superstition,
and observations of that kind somewhat too much) said, that it should come no
more into debate, whether they should go or not, till the three times nine
days were past, which the Southsayers appoint in that behalf. And the
Athenians, though upon going, stayed still for this reason.

The Syracusians assault the Athenian Camp with their Land-souldiers.
The Syracusians also, having intelligence of this, were Athenians much the
more, for that they confessed themselves already too weak for them, both by
Sea and Land; for else they would never have sought to have run away.

Besides, they would not have them sit down in any other part of Sicily, and
become the harder to be warred on; but had rather there-right, and in a place
most for their own advantage, compel them to fight by Sea. To which end they
manned their Galleys, and after they had rested as long as was sufficient, when
they saw their Athenians Camp, and some small number of men of Arms, and
Horsemen of the Athenians sallyed out against them by certain Gates, and the
Syracusians intercepting some of the men of Arms, beat them back into the
Camp. But the entrance being strait, there were 70 of the Horsemen lost, and
men of Arms some, but not many.

The Syracusians overcome the Athenians again by Sea.
The next day, they came out with their Galleys, 76 in number, and the Athenians
set forth against them with 86; and being come together, they fought. Eurymedon
had Athenians, and desiring to encompasse the Galleys of the Enemies, drew
forth his own Galleys in length more toward the shore; and was cut off by the
Syracusians, that had first overcome the middle battle of the Athenians from
the rest, in the bottom and inmost part of the Haven; and both slain
himself, and the Galleys that were with him lost. And that done, the rest of
the Athenian Fleet was also chased and driven ashore.

Gylippus, when he saw the Navy of the Enemy vanquished, Syracusians might the
easilier pull the Enemies Galleys from the shore, whereof themselves were
Masters. But the Tuscans, who kept guard in that part for the Athenians, seeing
them coming that way in disorder, made head, and charging these first, forced
them into the Marish, called Lysimelia. But when afterward a greater number of
the Syracusians and their Confederates came to help them, then also the
Athenians, to help the Tuscans, and for fear to lose their Galleys,
Syracus^ans took eighteen, and slew the men taken in them. And amongst the
rest, they let drive before the Wind, (which blew right upon the Athenians) an
old Ship, full of Faggots and Brands set on fire, to burn them. The Athenians
on the other side, fearing the loss of their Navy, devised remedies for the
fire, and having quenched the flame, and

After this the Syracusians set up a Trophie, both for the Battle by Sea, and
for the men of Arms which they intercepted above before the Camp, where also
they took the Horses. And the Athenians erected a Trophie likewise, both for
the flight of those Footmen, which the Tuscans drove into the Marish, and for
those which they themselves put to flight with the rest of the Army.

When the Syracusians had now manifestly overcome their Demosthenes) the
Athenians were in good earnest utterly out of heart. The Athenians dejected,
repent of the voyage.
And as they were much deceived in the event, so they repented more of the
Voyage. For having come against these Cities, the only ones that were for
institution like unto their own, and governed by the People, as well as
themselves, and which had a Navy, and Horses, and greatness, seeing they
could create no dissension amongst them, about change of government, to win
them that way, nor could subdue it with the greatness of wits end. But now,
when they were also vanquished by

The (...) intend to (...) the Athenians* and reck^n upon the glory of (...)
victory.
The Syracusians went presently about the Haven without fear, and meditated how
to shut up the same, that the Athenians might not steal away without their
knowledge, though they would. For now they studied not only how to save
themselves, but how to hinder the safety of the Athenians. For the Syracusians
conceived (not untruly) that their own strength was at this present the
greater, and that if they could vanquish the Athenians, Grecians. For all the
rest of Greece should be one part freed by it, and the other part out of fear
of subjection hereafter. For it would be impossible for the Athenians, with the
remainder of their strength to sustain the War that would be made upon them
afterward; and they being reputed the authors of it, should be had in
admiration, not only with all men now living, but also with posterity. And to
say truth, it was a worthy Mastery, Athenians only, but many others their
Confederates, nor again they themselves alone, but their Confederates also,
having been in joint command with the Corinthians and Lacedaemonians) and both
exposed their City to the first hazard, and of the business by Sea performed the
greatest part themselves.

The Nations that were at the Wars of Syracuse on one side or other.
The greatest number of Nations, except the general Roll of those which in this
War adhaered to Athens, and Lacedaemon, were together at this one City; And
this number on both sides, against Sicilie, and for it, some to help win,
and some to help save it, came to the War at Syracuse, not on any pretense
of right, nor as kindred to aid kindred, but as profit or necessity severally
chanced to induce them. Athenians.
The Athenians being Ionique went against the Syracusians that be Dorique,
voluntarily. With these, as being their Colonies, Lemnians. Imbrians.
went the Lemnians, and Imbrians, and the Aeginetae, Aeginetae.
that dwelt in Aegina then, all of the same language and institutions with
themselves.

Hestiaeans of Euboea.
Also the Hestiaeans of Euboea. Of the rest, some went Eretrians, Chalcideans,
Styrians, and Carystians, Eretrians, Chalcideans. Styrians, Car^^^ Ceians,
(...) Tenians, (...), Samians, Chi^^^*
from Euboea. Ceians, Andrians, Tenians, from out of the Islands. Milesians,
Samians, and Chians, from Ionia. Of these the Chians followed them as free, not
as tributaries of money, but of Galleys. And these were almost all of them
Ionians, descended from the Athenians, except only the Carystians, that are of
the Nation of the Dryopes. And though they were subjects and went upon
constraint, yet they Ionians against Dorians. Besides these, there went with
them Aeolians, namely the Methymnaeans, subjects to Athens, Methymnaeans,
Tenedians, Aeolians.
not tributaries of money, but of Galleys, and the Tenedians and Aeolians
tributaries. Now here, Aeolians were constrained to fight against Aeolians,
namely against their Founders the Boeotians, that took part with the
Syracusians. But the Plataeans, and only they, being Boeotians, Plataeans.
fought against Boeotians upon just quarrel. Rhodians and Cytherians.
The Rhodians and Cytherians Dorique both, by constraint, bore Arms one of
them, namely the Cytherians a Colony of the Lacedaemonians with Athenians,
against the Lacedaemonians that were with Gylippus; and the other, that is to
say, the Rhodians, being by descent Argiues, not only against the Syracusians,
who were also Dorique, but against their own Colony the Gelans which took
part with the Syracusians. Then of the Ilanders about Peloponnesus,
Cephallenians, Za^^cynthians.
there went with them the Cephallenians, and Zathythians, not but that they
were free States, but because they were kept in awe as Ilanders by the
Athenians who were masters of the Sea. Corcyreans.
And the Corcyraeans, being not only Dorique, but Corinthians, fought openly
Corinthians and Syracusians, though a Colony of the one, and of kin to the
other: which they did necessarily (to make the best of it) but indeed no less
willingly, in respect of their hatred to the Corinthians. Also the Messenians
now so called, in Naupactus, were taken along to this War, Messenians.
and the Messenians at Pylus then holden by the Athenians. Megareans.
Moreover the Megarean Out-lawes though not many* by advantage taken of their
misery, were feign to fight against the S^linuntians, that were Megareans
likewise. But now the rest of their Army was rather Argiues not so much for the
League, Argiues.
as for their enmity with the Lacedaemonians and their present particular
spleen, followed the Athenians to the War Ionique, Mantineans and other
Arcadians.
against Dorians. And the Mantineans and other Arcadian Mercenaries went with
him, as men accustomed ever to invade the enemy showed them, and now for gain,
had for enemies as much as any those other Arcadians which went thither with
the Corinthians. The Cretans, Cretans. Aetolians.
and Aetolians were all Mercenary, and it fell out, that the Cretans, who
together with the Rhodians were Founders of Gela, not only took not part with
their Colony, but fought against it willingly for their hire. And some
Acarnanians also went with them for gain, Acarnanians.
but Demosthenes, and for good will to the State of Athens. And thus many,
within the bound of the Ionian Gulf. Then of Italians fallen into the same
necessity of seditious times, there went with them to this War, Thurians.
the Thurians, and Metapontians. Of Greek Sicilians, Metapontians, Naxians.

Catanaeans, Egestaeans


the Naxians and Catanaeans. Of Barbarian, the Egestaeans, who also drew with
them the most of those Greek Sicilians. Without Sicily, there went with them
some Thuscans, Tuscans.
upon quarrels between them and the Syracusians; I^pygians.
and some Iapygian Mercenaries. These Athenians.

On the other side, there opposed them, on the part of the Syracusians,
Syracusians. Camarinaeans.
the Camarinaeans their borderers. And beyond them again the Gelans. And then
(the Agrigentines not stirring) beyond them again the same way, the
Seli^^ntians. These inhabit the part of Sicily, that lies opposite to
Afric. Himeraeans.
Then the Himeraeans, on the side that lies to the Terrhen sea, where dwell
only Grecians, of which, these also only aided them. These were their
Confederates of Greek Nation, within Sicily; all Doreans and free States. Then
of the Barbarians there, Siculi.
they had the Siculi, all but what revolted to the Athenians. For Grecians
without Sicily, Lacedaemonians.
the Laecedaemonians sent them a Spartan Commander, with some Helotes and the
rest (...) Newly made (...), o^ accounted among the people.
Freed-men. Then aided them, both with Galleys and with Land-men the
Corinthians only; Corinthians. Leucadians, Ambraciotes, Arcadian Mercenaries.
Sicyonians.
and for kindreds sake the Leucadians, and Ambraciotes. Out of Arcadia, those
Mercenaries sent by the Corinthians. And Sicyonians on constraint. And from
without Peloponnesus, the Boeotians. To the foreign Sicilians themselves, as
being great Cities; added Syracusians themselves, added, as I may say, above as
much more, in respect of the greatness, both of their City, and of their
danger.

These were the succors assembled on either part, and which were then all
there, and after them came no more, neither to the one side nor the other. No
marvel then, if the Syracusians thought it a noble mastery, if to the victory
Athenian Army, so great as it was, and hinder their escape both by Sea and
Land.

Presently therefore they fall in hand with stopping up the mouth of the great
Haven, The Syracusians shut up the Haven.
being about eight Furlongs wide, with Galleys laid cross, and Lighters and
Boats upon their Anchors, and withal prepared whatsoever else was necessary,
in case the Athenians would hazard another Battle, meditating on no small
matters in any

The Athenians seeing the shutting up of the Haven, and the rest of the Enemies
designs, thought good to go to council upon it: and the Generals, and
Commanders of Regiments, having met, and considered their present want, both
otherwise, and in this, that they neither had provision for the present, (for
upon their resolution to be gone, they had sent before to Catana, to forbid
the sending in of any more) nor were likely to have for the future, unless
their Navy got the upper hand, they resolved to Catana; if not, to make their
retreat in order of Battle, by Land (having first set fire on their Navy) the
nearest way unto some amicable place, either Barbarian or Grecian, that they
should best from their Camp above, and also manned every Gallie Acarnanians
and other strangers, and all things else provided, according to their means
and purpose. And Nicias, when almost every thing was ready, perceiving the
Soldiers to be dejected, for being so far overcome by Sea, contrary to
their custom, and yet in respect of the scarcity of victual, desirous as
soon as could be to fight, called them

THE ORATION OF NICIAS.
Soldiers, Athenians, and other our Confederates, though the trial at hand
will be common to all alike, and will concern the safety and Country, no
less of each of us, then of the Enemi^: (For if our Galleys get the victory,
we may every one see his (...) again) yet ought we not to be discouraged,
like Athenians here present, having bad experience already of many Wars, and
you our Confederates, that have always gone along with our Armies, remember
how often the event falls out otherwise in War, then one would think; and
in hope that Fortune will once also be of our side, prepare your selves to
fight again, in such manner as shall be worthy the number you see your selves
to be. What (...) thought would be helps in the narrowness of the Haven,
against Athenians, (though you be not so) you are not only admired for it
through all Greece, but also partake of our dominion, in matter of profit, no
less then our selves; and for awfulnesse to the Nations subject, and
protection from injury, more. You therefore that alone participate freely of
our Dominion, cannot with any justice betray the same. In despite therefore of
the Corinthians, whom you have often vanquished, and of the Sicilians, who, as
long as our Fleet was at the best, durst never so much as stand us, repel
them, and make it appear, that your knowledge, even with weakness and loss,
is better then the strength of another, with Fortune. Again, Athenians, I must
remember this, that you have no more such Fleets in your Harbors, nor such
able men of Arms, and that if ought happen to you but victory, your Enemies
here will presently be upon you at home; and those at home will be unable to
defend themselves, both against those that shall go hence, and against the
Enemy that lies there already. So one part of us shall fall into the mercy of
the Syracusians, against whom you your selves know, with what intent you came
hither, and the other part which is at home, shall fall into the hands of the
Lacedaemonians. Being therefore in this one battle to fight both for your
selves the whole estate, and great name of Athens. For which, if

Nicias having thus encouraged them, commanded presently to go aboard.

Gylippus and the Syracusians, might easily discern that the Athenians meant
to fight, by seeing their preparation. Besides, they had advertisement of their
purpose to cast Iron Grapnels into their Galleys. And as for every thing
Gylippus likewise, and other the Commanders, used unto their Soldiers this
hortatiue.

THE ORATION OF GYLIPPVS, and the Syracusian Generals.
THAT not only our former acts have been honorable, but that we are to
fight now also for further honor, (Men of Syracuse, and Confederates) the most
of you seem to know already (for else you never would so valiantly have
undergone it.) And if there be any man that is not so sensible of it as he
ought, we will make it appear unto him better. For whereas the Athenians came
into this Country, with design, first to enslaue Sicily, and then, if that
succeeded, Peloponnesus, and the rest of Greece. And whereas already they had
the greatest dominion of any Grecians whatsoever, either present or past, you,
the first that ever Athenians. Whereas with us, it falls out, that our former
courage, wherewith, though unexperienced, we durst stand them, being now
confirmed, ^
Land-Darters, both Acarnanians, and others, who would not be able to direct
their Darts, though they should fit, how can they choose but put the Galleys
into danger, and be all in confusion amongst themselves, moving in a fashion ^
not their own? As for the number of their Galleys, it will help them nothing

Overwhelmed with Calamities, and forced by the difficulties which they are in
at this present, they are grown desperate, not trusting to their Forces, but
willing to put themselves upon the decision of Fortune, as well as they may,
that so they may either go out by force, or else make their retreat afterward
by Land, as men whose estates

Against such confusion therefore, and against the fortune of our greatest
enemies, now betraying it self into our hands, let us fight with anger, and
with an opinion, not only that it is most lawful, to fulfill our hearts
desire upon those our enemies that justified their coming hither, as a
righting of themselves against an assailant; but also, that to be revenged on
an Enemy, is both most natural, and, as is most commonly said, the sweetest
thing in the world. And that they are our Enemies, and our greatest Enemies,
you all well enough know, seeing them come hither into our dominion, to bring
us into servitude. viz. the name of Subi^^.
name in the world. In regard whereof, it is not fit that any of you should be
so tender, as to think it gain, if they go away without putting you to
further danger, for so they mean to do, though they get the victory: But
effecting (as it is likely we shall) what we intend, both to be revenged of
these, and to deliver unto all Sicily their liberty, which they enjoyed before,
but now is more assured. Honorable is that Combat, and rare are those
hazards, wherein the failing brings little loss, and the success,

When Gylippus, and the Commanders of the Syracusians Athenians to do the same.

Nicias encourages his Soldiers anew.
Nicias perplexed with this present estate, and seeing how great and how near
the danger was, being now on the point to put forth from the Harbor, and
doubting (as in great battles it falls out) that somewhat in every kind was
still wanting, and that he had not yet sufficiently spoken his mind, called
unto him again, all the Captains of Galleys, and spoke unto them every one by
their fathers, their Countries liberty, and the uncontrolled power of all men
to live as they pleased, and saying whatsoever else in such a pinch men are
accustomed, not out of their store to (...). To speak old or (...) Sentences.
utter things stale, and in all occasions the same, touching their Wives,
Children, and patriall Gods, but such things as being thought by them
available in the present discouragement, they He prepares to fight.
And when he thought he had admonished them not enough, but as much as the time
would permit, he went his way, and drew out those forces that were to serve on
Land, to the Sea side, and embattelled them so, as they might take up the
greatest length of ground they were able, thereby, so much the more to confirm
the courage of them that were aboard. And Demosthenes Menander, and Eudemus,
(for those of the Athenian Commanders went aboard) putting forth of the
Harbor, went immediately to the Lock of the Haven, Syracusians and their
Confederates, being out already with the same number of Galleys, they had
before disposed part of them to the guard of the open passage, and the rest in
circle about the Haven, to the end they might fall upon the Athenians from all
parts at once, and that their Landforces might withal be near to aid them,
wheresoever the Galleys touched. In the Syracusian Navy, commanded Sicanus, and
Agatharchus, each of them over a Wing, and Pythen, with the Corinthians, had
Athenians were come to Syracusians and Confederates came upon them from every
side, they fought not at the Lock only, but also in the Haven it self. And
the battle was sharp, The Athenians (...) ^ight.
and such as there had never before been the like. For the courage wherewith
the Mariners on both sides brought up their Galleys to any part they were
bidden, was very great, and great was the plotting and counterplotting, and
(...).
Directors directed; for they directed thick and loud on both sides, not only
as Art required* but out of their present eagerness; the Athenians crying out
to theirs, to force the passage, and now, if ever, valiantly to lay hold upon
their safe return to their Country; Syracusians and their Confederates, to
theirs, how honorable a thing to every one of them it would be, to hinder
their escape, and by this Victory to improve, every Athenians, whether he
retired, because he thought the most hostile Land to be more their friend then
the Sea, which they had so long been masters of? The Syracusians theirs,
whether when they knew that the Athenians desired earnestly by any means to
fly, they would nevertheless fly from the Flyers? Whilst the Conflict was
upon the Water, the Athenians, who had their whole fortune at stake in their
Galleys, were in such a fear of the event, as they had never been in the like;
and were thereby of necessity to behold the fight upon the Water, The diversity
of passion (...) them tha^ ^^held the sight, from the Shore.
with very different passions. For the sight being near, and not looking all
of them upon one and the same part, he that saw their own side prevail, took
heart, and fell to calling upon the Gods, that they would Lamentations, Shouts,
That they won, That they lost, and whatsoever else a great Army, in great
danger is forced differently to utter. They also that were aboard, suffered the
same, till at last the Syracusians and their Confederates, after long
resistance of the other side, The Athenians fly.
put them to flight, and manifestly pressing, chased them with great clamor and
encouragement of their own, to the Shore. And the Sea-forces making to the
Pylus. For Lacedaemonians then, besides the loss of their Fleet, lost the men
which they had set over into the Island, and the Athenians now (without some
accident not to be expected) were out of all hope to save them selves by Land.
After this cruel battle, and many Galleys and men on either side consumed,
the Syracusians and their Confederates having the victory, took up the wrecke,
and bodies of their dead, and returning into the City, erected a Trophy. But
the Athenians, in respect of the greatness of their present loss, never
thought upon asking leave to take up their dead or wreck, Demosthenes coming
unto Nicias, delivered his opinion, for going once again aboard, and forcing
the passage, if it were possible, betimes the next morning; saying that their
Galleys which were yet remaining, and serviceable, were more then those of the
Enemy. (for the Athenians had yet left them about 60, and the Syracusians under
50.) But when Nicias approved the advice, and would have manned out the
Galleys, the Mariners refused to go aboard, as being not only dejected with
their defeat, The stratagem of Hermocrates, to hinder the escape of the
Athenians.
But Hermocrates of Syracuse suspecting their purpose, and apprehending it as a
matter dangerous, that so great an Army going away by Land, and sitting down
in some part or other of Sicily, should there renew the War, repaired unto the
Magistrates, and admonished them, that it was not fit through negligence, to
suffer the Enemy in the night time to go their ways, (alleging what he
thought best to the purpose) but that Syracusians and their Confederates should
go out and fortify in their way, and prepossesse all the narrow passages with
a guard. Now they were all of them of the Hercules) would not easily be brought
to obey. For through excess of joy for the victory, they would most of them,
being holiday, be drinking, and look for any thing, rather then to be
persuaded at this time to take Arms again, and go out. But seeing the
Magistrates upon this consideration thought it hard to be done, Hermocrates not
prevailing, of his own head Athenians should pass the worst of their way in
the night, and so at ease out-goe them, as soon as it grew dark, he sent
certain of his friends, and with them certain Horsemen, to the Athenian
Camp, who approaching so near as to be heard speak, called to some of them
to come forth, as if they had been friends of the Athenians (for Nicias had
some within that used to give him intelligence) and bade them to advise Nicias
not to dislodge that night, for that the Syracusians had beset the ways, but
that the next day, having had the leisure to furnish Gylippus goes out with
his Forces, and besets the way.
But Gylippus and the Syracusians, with their landforces, went out before
them, and not only stopped up the ways in the Country about, by which the
Athenians Athenians, and towed their Galleys away from the shore; some few
whereof they burnt, as the Athenians themselves meant to have done; but the
rest, at their leisure, as any of them chanced in any place to drive ashore,
they afterward haled into the City. The Athenians march away from before
Syracuse by Land.
After this, when every thing seemed unto Nicias and Demosthenes, sufficiently
prepared they dislodged,

Grecian Army being made slaves themselves, and in stead of Prayers Nicias
perceiving the Army to be dejected, and the great change that was in it, came
up to the Ranks, and encouraged and comforted them, as far as for the present
means he was able. And as he went from part to part,

THE ORATION OF NICIAS to his afflicted Army.
AThenians, and Confederates, we must hope still, even in our present estate.
Men have been saved ere now from greater dangers then these are. Nor ought you
too much to accuse Sicily can either easily sustain, if you assault, or
remove, if you be once seated. Now for your March, that it may be safe and
orderly, look to it your selves, making no other account any of you but what
place soever he shall be forced to fight in, the same, if he win it, must be
his Country and his Walls. March you must with diligence, both night and day
alike, for our victual is short; and if we can but reach some amicable
Territory of the Siculi, (for these are still firm to us for fear of the
Syracusians,) then you may think your selves secure. Let us therefore send
before to them, and bid them meet us, and bring us forth some supplies of
victual. Athenians may re-erect the great power of their City, how low soever
fallen. For the men, not the Walls, nor the empty Galleys, are the City.

Nicias, as he used this hortatiue, went withal about the Army, and where he
saw any man straggle and not march Demosthenes having spoken to the same or
like purpose, did as much to those Soldiers under him; and they marched
forward, those with Nicias in a square Battallion, and then those with
Demosthenes in the Rere. And the men of Arms received those that carried the
Baggage, and the other multitude, within them.

When they were come to the Foord of the River Anapus, The Athenians march, and
the Syracusians assault them always as they go
they there found cettaine of the Syracusians and their Confederates
embattelled against them on the bank, but Syracusian Horsemen lay still upon
them, and their Light-armed plied them with their Darts in the flank. This day
the Athenians marched forty Furlongs, and lodged that night at the foot of a
certain Hill. The next day, as soon as it was light, they marched forwards,
about 20 Furlongs, and descending into a certain Champaigne ground, encamped
there, with intent both to get victual at the houses, (for the place was
inhabited) and to carry water with them thence; for before Syracusians in the
mean time got before them, and cut off Acraeum Lepas. The next day the
Athenians went on. And the Horsemen and Darters of the Syracusians, and their
Confederates, being a great number of both, pressed them so with their Horses
and Darts, that the Athenians after long fight, were compelled to retire again
into the same Camp: But now with less victual then before, because the
Horsemen would suffer them no more to straggle abroad. In the morning betimes
Syracusian Foot embattelled in great length above the Fortification, on the
Hills side (for the place it self was but narrow.) The Athenians, coming up
assaulted the Wall, but the shot of the Enemy, who were many, and the
steepness of the Hill (for they could easily cast home from above) making them
unable to take it, they retired again and rested. There happened withal some
claps of Thunder, Autumn, which further disheartened the Athenians, who
thought that also this did tend to their destruction. Whilst they lay still,
Gylippus and the Syracusians sent part of their Army, to raise a Wall at their
backs, in the way they had come, but this the Athenians hindered, by sending
against them part of theirs. After this, the Athenians retiring with their
whole Army into a more Champaigne ground, lodged there that night; and the next
day went forward again. And the Syracusians with their Darts from every part
round about, wounded many of them; and when the Athenians charged, they
retired, and when they retired, the Syracusians charged; and that especially
upon the hindmost, that by putting to flight a few, they might terrify the
whole Army. And for a good while the Athenians, in this manner withstood them,
and afterward, being gotten five or six Furlongs forward, Nicias and
Demosthenes rise (...) the night, and march a contrary way, Nicias foremost, and
in order, but Demosthenes in the Ree^e* slower and more in disorder.
they rested in the Plain; and the Syracusians went from them to their own
Camp.

This night it was concluded by Nicias and Demosthenes, Syracusians guarded.
Now this whole journey of the Army lay not toward Catana, but toward the
other side of Sicily, Camarina, and Gela, and the Cities, as well Grecian, as
Barbarian, that way. When they had made many fires accordingly, they marched in
the night, and (as usually it falls out in all Armies, and Nicias leading the
way, kept together and got far before, but that of Demosthenes, which was the
greater half, was both severed from the rest, and marched more disorderly.
Nevertheless, by the morning betimes they got to the Sea side, and entering*
into the Helorine way, they went on toward the River Cacyparis, to the end
when they came thither to march upwards along the Rivers side, through Siculi
to whom they had sent, would meet them. When they came to the River, here also
they found a certain guard of the Syracusians, stopping their passage with a
Wall, and with Pyles. When they had quickly forced this guard, they passed the
River, and again marched on, to another River called Erineus, for that was the
way which the Guides directed them. In the mean time the Syracusians, and
their Confederates, as soon as day appeared, and that they knew the Athenians
were gone, most Gylippus, as if he had let them go with his consent, followed
them with speed the same way, which they easily understood they were gone, and
about dinner time ouertooke them. Demosthenes overtaken by the enemy, resists
as long as he can, and is taken.
When they were come up to those with Demosthenes, who were the hindmost, and
had marched more slowly and disorderly then the other part had done, as having
been put into disorder in the night, they fell upon them, and fought. And the
Syracusian Horsemen hemmed them in, and forced them up into a narrow compass,
the more easily now, because they were Nicias was gone by this time 150
Furlongs further on. For he led away the faster, because he thought not that
their safety Demosthenes was both in greater, and in more continual toil, in
respect that he marched in the Reere, and consequently was pressed by the
Enemy. And seeing the Syracusians pursuing him, he went not on, but put his men
into order to fight, till by his stay he was encompassed, and reduced, he and
the Athenians with him into great disorder. For being shut up, within a place
enclosed round with a Wall, and which on either side had a Syracusians
assaulted them in this kind, and not in close battle, upon very good reason.
For to hazard battle against men desperate, was not so much for theirs, as
for the Athenians advantage. Besides, after so manifest successes, they spared
themselves somewhat, because they were loath to wear themselves out before the
end of the business, and thought by this kind of fight, to subdue and take
them alive. Whereupon, after they had plied the Athenians and their
Confederates, all day long from every side with shot, and saw that with their
wounds, and other annoyance, they were already tired; Gylippus, and the
Syracusians, and their Confederates, first made Proclamation, that if any of
the Ilanders would come over to them, they should be at liberty; And the men of
some few Cities went over. And by and by after they made agreement with all the
rest, that were with Demosthenes, That they should deliver up their Arms,
Demosthenes yields.
and none of them be put to death, neither violently, nor by bonds, nor by want
of the necessities of And they all yielded, to the number of 6000 men, and the
silver they had, they laid it all down, casting it into the hollow of Targets,
and filled with the same, four Targets. And these men, they carried presently
into the City.

Nicias and those that were with him attained the same day to the River
Erineus, which passing, he caused his Army to sit down upon a certain ground
more eleuate then the rest; where the Syracusians the next day ouertooke and
told him, That those with Demosthenes had yielded Gylippus and the Syracusians,
saying, That he was content to compound on the part of the Athenians, to repay
whatsoever money the Syracusians had laid out, The offer of Nicias to redeem
his army, not accepted.
so that his Army might be suffered to depart. And that till payment of the
money were made, he would deliver them Hostages, Athenians, every Hostage rated
at a Talent. But Gylippus and the Syracusians refusing the condition, charged
them, and having hemmed them in, Syracusians perceiving it, gave the Alarm.
Whereupon the Athenians finding themselves discovered, sat down again; all
but 300, who breaking by force through the guards, marched as far as they
could that night. And Nicias when it was day, led Syracusians and their
Confederates still pressing them in the same manner, shooting and darting at
them from every side. The Athenians hasted to get the River Asinarus, not only
because they were urged on every side by the assault of the many Horsemen, and
other multitude, and thought to be more at ease when they were over the River,
but out of weariness also, and desire to drink. When they were come unto the
River, they rushed in without any order, every man striving who should first
get over. But the pressing of the Enemy, made the Syracusians standing along
the farther bank being a steep one, killed the Athenians with their shot from
above, as they were many of them greedily drinking, and troubling one another
in the hollow of the River, but the Peloponnesians came also water was
corrupted. Nevertheless they drunk it, foul Nicias yielded himself unto
Gylippus, (having more confidence in him then in the Syracusians) To be for his
own person at the discretion of him and the Lacedaemonians, and no further
slaughter to be made of the Soldiers. Gylippus from thenceforth commanded to
take prisoners. So the residue, except such as were hidden from them (which
were many) they carried alive Sicily was filled with them, because they were
not taken, as those with Demosthenes were, by composition. Besides, a great
part of these were slain; for the slaughter at this time was exceeding great,
none greater in all the Sicilian War. They were also not a few that dyed in
those other assaults in their Catana.

The Syracusians and their Confederates, being come together, returned with
their prisoners, all they could get, and with the spoil, into the City. As
for all other the prisoners of the Athenians and their Confederates, they put
them into the (...),
Quarries, as the safest custody. But Nicias and Demosthenes they killed,
against Gylippus his will. For Gylippus thought the victory would be very
honorable, if Lacedaemon. And it fell out, that the one of them, Demosthenes,
was their greatest Enemy, for the things he had done in the Sphacteri^.
Island, and at Pylus; and the other, upon the same occasion, their greatest
friend; For Nicias had earnestly labored to have those prisoners which were
taken in the Island, to be set at liberty, by persuading the Athenians to the
Peace. For which cause the Lacedaemonians were inclined to love him. And it was
principally in confidence of that, that he rendered Gylippus. But certain
Syracusians, (as it is Corinthians) fearing he might get away by corruption of
one or other, (being wealthy) and work them some mischief afresh, having
persuaded their Confederates to the same, killed him. For these, or for causes
near unto these, was he put to death, being the man that of all the Grecians
of my time, had least deserved to be brought to so great a degree of misery.
Syracusians handled them at first but ungently. For in this hollow place, first
the Sun and suffocating air (being without roof) annoyed them one way: and
on the other side, the nights coming upon that heat, autumnall and cold, put
them, by reason of the alteration, into strange diseases. Especially, doing all
things for want of room, in one and the same place, and the Carcasses of such
as dyed of their wounds, or change of air, or other like accident, lying
together there on heaps. Also the smell was intolerable, A small measure,
about half our Pyne.
Cotyle of water by the day, and two Cotiles of Corn. And whatsoever misery is
probable that men in such a place may suffer, they suffered. Some 70 days they
lived thus thronged. Afterward, retaining the Athenians, and such Sicilians
and Italians as were of the Army with them, they sold the rest. How many were
taken in all, it is hard to say exactly; but they were 7000 at the fewest. And
this was the greatest action that happened Grecians, being to the Victors most
glorious, and most calamitous to the vanquicted. For being wholly overcome* in
every kind, and receiving small loss in nothing, their Army, and Fleet, and
all that ever they had, perished (as they use to say) with an universal
destruction. Few of many returned home. And thus passed the business
concerning Sicily.

THE EIGHTH BOOK THVCYDIDES.
The principal Contents.
The Revolt of the Athenian Confederates, and the Offers made by Tissaphernes,
and Pharnabazus, the Kings Lieutenants of the lower Asia, draw the
Lacedaemonians to the War in Ionia, and Hellespont. First in Ionia, and the
Provinces of Tissaphernes, who by the Council of Alcibiades, and conniuence of
Astyochus, hinders their proceedings. Alcibiades in the mean while to make
way for his return into his country, gives occasion of sedition about the
government, whence ensued the authority of the 400, under the pretext of the
5000; the recalling of Alcibiades by the Army; and at length by his countenance
the deposing again of the 400, and end of the Sedition. But in the mean time
they lose Euboea. Mindarus, Successor of Astyochus, finding himself abused by
Tissaphernes, carries the War to Pharnabazus, into Hellespont, and there
Athenians before Abydus, being then Summer, and the 21 year of the War.

WHen the news was told at Athens, The fear and sorrow of the Athenians upon
the hearing of the news.
they believed not a long time, though it were plainly related, and by those
very Soldiers that escaped from the defeat it self, that all was so utterly
lost, at it was. When they knew it, they were mightily offended with the
Orators that furthered the Voyage, Prophecies, and with the Soothsayers, and
with whosoever else had at first by any Sicily should be subdued. Every thing,
from every place, grieved them; and fear and astonishment, the greatest that
ever they were in, beset them round. For they were not only grieved for the
loss which both every man in particular, and the whole City sustained, of so
many men of Arms Horsemen, and serviceable men, the like whereof they saw was
not left, but seeing they had neither Galleys in their Haven nor money in their
Treasury, nor furniture in their Galleys, were even desperate at that present
of their Sicily, would come forthwith with their Fleet into Piraeus,
(especially after the vanquishing of so great a Navy) and that the Enemy here
would surely now, with double preparation in every kind, press them to the
utmost, both by Sea and Land, and be aided therein by their reuolting
Confederates. The Athenian^ resolve to stand it out.
Nevertheless, as far as their means would stretch, it was thought best to
stand it out, and getting materials and money where they could have it, to make
ready a Navy, and to make sure of their Confederates, especially those of
Euboea; and to introduce a greater frugality in the City, and to erect a
Magistracy of the elder sort, as occasion should be offered, to praeconsult of
the business that passed. And they were ready, in respect of their present
fear, (as is the Peoples fashion) to order every thing aright. The end of the
nineteenth Summer.
And as they resolved this, so they did it. And the Summer ended.

The Grecians take part all of them against the Athenians.
The Winter following, upon the great overthrow of the Athenians in Sicily, all
the Grecians were presently up against them. Those who before were Confederates
of Athenians of their own accord, as having not only every one severally this
thought, that had the Athenians prospered in Sicily, they would afterward have
come upon them also, but imagined withal, that the rest of the War would be
but short whereof it would be an honor to participate. And such of them as
were Confederates of the Lacedaemonian, longed now more then ever, to be freed
as soon as might be of their great toil. But above all, the Cities Athenians,
were ready, even beyond their ability, The hopes of the Lacedaemonians.
But the Lacedaemonians themselves took heart, not only from all this, but
also principally from that, that their Confederates in Sicily, with great
power, having another Navy now necessarily added to their own, would in all
likelihood be with them in the beginning of the Spring. And being every way
full of hopes, they purposed without delay to fall close to the War; making
account, if this Athenians, if they had gotten Sicily, would have put them
into, and also having pulled them down, to have the principality of all
Greece, now secure unto themselves.

Whereupon Agis their King went out with a part of his Army the same Winter
from Decelea, Agis leuieth money.
and levied money amongst the Confederates, for the building of a Navy. And
turning into the Melian Gulf upon an old grudge, took a great Booty from the
Oetaeans, which he made Pthiotis, being Achaians, and others in those parts,
Subjects to the Thessalians, (the Thessalians complaining, and unwilling) to
give him Hostages, and Money. The Hostages he put into Corinth, and endeavored
to draw them into the League.

And the Lacedaemonians imposed upon the States confederate, the charge of
building 100 Galleys, The Lacedaemonians appoint a Fleet of 100. Galleys, to be
made ready amongst the Cities of League,
[that is to say] on their own State, and on the Boeotians, each 25. On the
Phoceans and Locrians, 15. On the Corinthians, 15. On the Arcadians,
Sicyonians, and Pellenians, 10. And on the Megareans, and Hermionians, 10. And
put all things else in readiness, presently with the Spring to begin the
War.

The Athenians also made their preparations, The Athenians build their Navy,
and contract their charges.
as they had designed, having gotten Timber, and built their Navy this same
Winter, and fortified the Promontory of Sunium, that their Corne-boats might
come about in safety. Also they abandoned the Fort in Laconia, which they had
built as they went by for Sicily. And generally where there appeared expense
upon any thing unuseful, they contracted

Whilst they were on both sides doing thus, The Euboeans offer to revolt to
Agis.
there came unto Agis, about their revolt from the Athenians, first the
Euboeans. Accepting the motion, he sent for Alcamenes the son of
Sthenelaidas, and for Melanthon, from Lacedaemon, to go Commanders into
Euboea. Whom, when he was come to him, with about 300 freedmen, he was now
about to send over. But in the mean time came the Lesbians, The Lesbians offer
to revolt to Agis.
they also desiring to revolt, and by the means of the Boeotians, Agis changed
his former resolution, and prepared for the revolt of Lesbos, deferring that of
Euboea, and assigned them Alcamenes, the same that should have gone into
Euboea, for their Governor. Boeotians promised them ten Galleys, and Agis
other ten, Now this was done, without acquainting therewith the State of
Lacedaemon. For Agis, as long as he was about Decelea with the power he had,
had the Law in his own hands, to send what Army, and whither he listed, and
to leuy men and money at his pleasure. And at this time, the Confederates of him
(as I may call them) did better obey him, then the Confederates of the
Lacedaemonians did them at home. For having the power in his hands, he was
terrible wheresoever he came. And he was now for the Lesbians. The Chians and
Erit^^^ans (...) to revolt.
But the Chians and Erythraeans, Agis, but to the Lacedaemonians in the City,
and with them went also an Ambassador from Tissaphernes, Lieutenant to King
Darius in the low Countries of Asia. For Tissaphernes also instigated the
Peloponnesians, T^^^aphernes Lieutenant of the lower Asia, labors to have
the Lacedaemonians (...) unto him.
and promised to pay their Fleet. For he had lately begged of the King the
Tribute accruing in his own Province, for which he was in arrearage, because
he could receive nothing out of any of the Greek Cities, by reason of the
Athenians. And therefore he thought by weakening the Athenians, to receive his
Tribute Lacedaemonians into a League with the King, and thereby, as the King
had commanded, to kill or take alive Amorges, Pissuthnes his bastard son, who
was in rebellion against him about Caria. The Chians therefore and
Tissaphernes, followed this business jointly.

Pharnabazus Lieutenant of Helespont, labors the li^e for himself.
Caligetus the son of Laophon, a Magarean, and Timagoras the son of
Athenagoras, a Cyzicene, both banished their own Cities, and abiding with
Pharnabazus the son of Pharnaces came also about the same time to Lacedaemon,
sent Pharnabazus, to procure a Fleet for the Hellespont, that he also, if he
could, might cause the Athenian Cities in his Province to revolt for his
Tributes sake, and be the first to draw the Lacedaemonians into league with the
King. (...) the same things that were desired before by Tissaphernes. Now
Pharnabazus and Tissaphernes treating apart, there was great canuasing at
Lacedaemon, between the one side, that persuaded to send to Ionia and Chius,
and the other, that would have the Army and Fleet go first into the
Hellespont. But the Lacedaemonians indeed approved best by much Chians, and of
Ti^saphernes. For with these cooperated Alcibiades, hereditary Guest and friend
of Endius, the Ephore of that year, in the highest degree; insomuch as in
respect of that guesthood, Alcibiades his family received a Laconique name. For
Endius was called Endius ^
Alcibiadis. Nevertheless the Lacedaemonians sent first one Phrynis, a man of
those parts, to Chius, to see if the Galleys they had, were so many as they
reported, and whether the City were otherwise so sufficient as it was said to
be. And when the messenger brought back word Chians acd the Erythraeans
presently into their League* and decreed to send them forty Galleys, there
being at Chius, from such places as the Chians named, no less then 60 already.
And of these at first they were about to send out ten, with Melancridas for
Admiral; but afterward, upon occasion of an Earthquake, for Melancridas they
sent Chalcideus, and in stead of ten Galleys, they went about the making
ready of five only, in Laconia. So the Winter ended, and nineteenth year of
this War, written Thucydides.

In the beginning of the next Summer, THE TWENTIETH YEAR.
because the Chians pressed to have the Galleys sent away, and feared lest the
Athenians should get notice what they were doing, The Lacedaemonians send to
Corinth, to ^asten away the Fleet to Chius.
(for all their Ambassadors went out by stealth) the Lacedaemonians send away
to Corinth three Spartans, to will them with all speed to transport their
Galleys over the Isthmus, to the other Sea toward Athens, and to go all to
Chi^s, as well those which Agis had made ready to go to Lesbos, as the rest.
The number of the Galleys of the League, which

But Calligetus and Timagoras, who came from Pharnabazus, would have no part in
this Fleet that went for Chius, nor would deliver the Money, (...) 10 shillings
(...).
twenty five Talents, which they had brought with them to pay for their setting
forth, but made account to go out with another Fleet afterward by themselves.

When Agis saw that the Lacedaemonians meant to send first to Chius, he
resolved not of any other course himself, but the Confederates assembling at
Corinth, The Confederates in council at Corinth set down an order for the
War following, with which to begin, and which to follow.
went to council upon the matter, and concluded thus, That they should go
first to Chius, under the command of Chalcideus who was making ready the five
Galleys in Laconia; And then, Lesbos, under the charge of Alcamenes, intended
also to be sent thither by Agis; and lastly into Hellespont, in which voyage
they ordained that Clearchus the son of Rhamphias should have the Command;
and concluded to carry over the Isthmus, first the one half of their Galleys,
and that those should presently put to Sea, that the Athenians might have their
minds more upon those, then on the other half to be transported afterward.
For they determined to pass that Sea openly, contemning the weakness of the
Athenians, in respect they had not any Navy of importance yet appearing. As
they resolved, so presently they Corinthians were unwilling to go along,
before they should have ended the celebration of the Isthmian Holidayes, then
come. Heerevpon Agis was content that they for their parts should observe the
Isthmian Truce; and he therefore to take the Fleet upon himself as his own.

The Athenians understand the purpose of the Chians to revolt.
But the Corinthians not agreeing to that, and the time passing away, the
Athenians got intelligence the easilier Chians, and sent thither Aristocrates,
one of their Generals, to accuse them of it. The Chians denying the matter, he
commanded them, for their better credit, to send along with him some Galleys
for their aid, due by the League; and they sent seven. The cause why they sent
these Galleys, was the Many not acquainted with the practice, and the Few and
conscious not willing to undergo the enmity of the multitude, without having
strength first, and their not expecting any longer the coming of the
Lacedaemonians, because they

Istmian Games were celebrating, The Athenians (...) Peloponnessia Galleys
(...) Piraeus, a desert (...) and there besiege (...).
and the Athenians (for they had word sent them of it) came and saw; and the
business of the Chians grew more apparent. After they went thence, they took
order presently, that the Fleet might not pass from Cenchreae undiscovered.
And after the Holidayes were over, the Corinthians put to Sea for Chius, under
the conduct of Alcamenes. And the Athenians at first, with equal number came
up to them, and endeavored to draw them out into the maine Sea. But seeing the
Peloponnesians followed not far, but Athenians went also from them. For the
seven Galleys of Cbius, which were part of this number, they durst not trust.
But afterward having manned thirty seven others, they gave chase to the Enemy
by the shore, and drove them into Piraeus, in the Territory of Corinth, (this
Piraeus is a desert Haven, and the utmost upon the Confines of Epidauria.) One
Gallie that was far from Land, the Peloponnesians lost, the rest they brought
together into the Haven. But the Athenians charging them by Sea with their
Galleys, and withal setting Alcamenes their Commander. And some they lost of
their own.

The fight being ended, they assigned a sufficient number of Galleys to lie
opposite to those of the Enemy, and the rest to lie under a little Island, not
far off, in which also they encamped, and sent to Athens for supply. For the
Peloponnesians had with them for aid of their Galleys, the Corinthians the
next day, and not long after, diverse others Agis also, when he heard the news,
sent unto them Thermon, a Spartan.

The Lacedaemonians having been advertised of the departure Isthmus, The
voyage of Chalcideus and Alcibiades to Chius.
(for the Ephores had commanded Alcamenes, when he put to Sea, to send him word
by a Horseman) were minded presently to have sent Laconia, and Chalci^^us the
Commander of them, and with him Aleibiades; but afterward, as they were ready
to go out, came the news of the Galleys chased into Peiraeus: which so much
discouraged them, in respect they stumbled in the very entrance of the Ionique
War, that they purposed now, not only not to send away those Galleys of
their own, but also to call back again some of those that were already at
Sea.

When Alcibiades saw this, he dealt with Endius, and the Ephores again, not to
fear the Voyage, alleging that they would make haste, and be there before the
Chians should have heard of the misfortune of the Fleet. And that as soon as
he should arrive in Ionia himself, he could easily make the Cities there to
revolt, by declaring unto them the weakness of the Athenians, and the
diligence of the Lacedaemonians, wherein he should be thought more worthy to
be believed then any other. Moreover to Endius he said, that it would be an
honor in particular to him, that Ionia should revolt, and the King be made
Confederate Lacedaemonians, by his own means, and not to have it the mastery
of Agis, for he was at difference with Agis. So, having prevailed with Endius
and the other Ephores, he took Sea with 5 Galleys, together with Chalcideus of
Lacedaemon, and made haste.

Sixteen Galleys of Pelop^^nesus intercepted, and hardly handled, in their
return from Sicily, by the Athenians, arrive in Corinth.
About the same time, came back from Sicily those 16 Galleys of the
Peloponnesians, which having aided Gylippus in that War, were intercepted by
the way, about Leucadia, and evil entreated by twenty seven Galleys of Athens,
that watched thereabouts, under the command of Hyppocles the son of Menippus,
for such Galleys as should return out of Sicily. For all the rest, saving one,
avoiding the Athenians, were arrived in Corinth before.

Chalcideus and Alcibiades, as they sailed, kept prisoner every man they met
with by the way, to the end that notice might not be given of their passage,
and touching first at Corycus in the Continent, where they also dismissed those
whom they had apprehended, after conference there with some of the Conspirators
of the Chians, that advised them to go to the City, without sending them word
before, Chians suddenly and unexpected. It Commons into much wonder and
astonishment, but the Few had so ordered the matter beforehand, that an
Assembly chanced to be holden at the same time. And when Chalcideus, and
Alcibiades had spoken in the same, and told them that many Galleys were coming
to them, but not that those other Galleys were besieged in Peiraeus, Chius and
(...)
the Cbians first, and afterward the Erythraeans, revolted from the Athenians.

After this, they went with three Galleys to Clazomenae, Clazomenae reuolteth.
and made that City to revolt also. And the Clazomenians Polichna, least they
should need a retyring place, from the little Island wherein they dwelt. The
rest also, all that had revolted, fell to fortifying, and making of preparation
for the War.

This news of Chius was quickly brought to the Athenians, who conceiving
themselves to be now beset with great and evident danger, and that the rest of
the Confederates, seeing so great a City to revolt, The Athenians abrogate the
decree touching the 1000 Talents reserved for the extremities of State, and
furnish out a Fleet with the money.
would be no longer quiet, in this their present fear, decreed that those
187500 pounds sterling.
1000 Strombichides the son of Diotimas, 8 Galleys, of the number of those
that besieged the Enemy at Peiraeus, the which, having forsaken their charge to
give chase to the Galleys that went with Chalcideus, and and not able to
overtake them, were now returned, and Thrasicles to help the^ with 12 Galleys
more, which also had departed from the same guard upon the Enemy. And those 7
Galleys of Chius, which likewise kept watch at Peiraeus with the rest, they
fetched from thence, and gave the bondmen that served in them their liberty,
and the chains to those that were free. And in stead of all those Galleys,
that kept guard upon the Galleys of the Peloponnesians, they made ready other
with all speed in their places, besides 30 more which they intended to furnish
out afterward. Great was their diligence, Chius.

Strombichides in the mean time arrived at Samos, and taking Samian Gally,
went thence to Teus, and entreated them not to stir. But toward Teus, was
Chalcideus also coming with 23 Galleys from Chius, and with him also the
Landforces of the Clazomenians, and Erythraeans, whereof Strombichides having
been aduertized, he put forth again, before his arrival, and standing off at
Sea, when he saw the many Galleys that came from Chius, Teus re^olteth.
he fled toward Samos, they following him. The Landforces, the Teans would
not at the first admit, but after this flight of the Athenians, they brought
them in. And Chalcideus from the chase; but when he stayed somewhat long, they
fell of themselves to the demolishing of the wall built about the City of
Teus, by the Athenians, toward the Continent; wherein they were also helped by
some few Barbarians that came down thither, under the leading of Tages, Deputy
Lieutenant of Tissaphernes.

Chalcideus, and Alcibiades, when they had chased Strombichides into Samos,
armed the Mariners that were in the Peloponnesus, and left them in Chius, in
stead of whom they manned with Mariners of Chius, both those, and 20 Galleys
more, and with this Fleet they went to Miletus, with intent to cause it to
revolt. For the intention of Alcibiades, that was acquainted with the
principal Milesians, was to prevent the Fleet which was to come from
Peloponnesus, and to turn these Cities first, that the honor of it might be
ascribed to the Chians, to himself, to Chalcideus, and (as he had promised) to
Endius, that set them out, as having brought most of the Cities to revolt,
Chians only, and of those Galleys that came with Chalcideus. So these, for the
greatest part of their way undiscovered, and arriving, not much sooner then
Strombichides, and Thrasicles, (who now chancing to be present with those 12
Galleys from Athens, followed them with Strombichides) caused the Milesians to
revolt. The Athenians following them at the heels with 19 Galleys, Miletus
reuolteth.
being shut out by the Milesians, lay at Anchor at Lada, an Island over against
the City.

Presently upon the revolt of Miletus, was made the first King, and the
Lacedaemonians by Tissaphernes and Chalcideus, as follows.

The Lacedaemonians and their Confederates, League between Tissa^phernes and
the Lacedaemonians.
have made a League with the King and Tissaphernes, on these Articles.

Whatsoever Territory or Cities the King possesses, and his Ancestors have
possessed, the same are to remain the Kings.

Whatsoever money or other profit redounded to the Athenians from their Cities,
the King, and the Lacedaemonians are jointly to hinder, so as the Athenians may
receive nothing from thence,

The King and the Lacedaemonians, and their Confederates, are to make joint
War against the Athenians. And without consent of both parts, it shall not be
lawful to lay down the War against the Athenians, neither for the King, nor
for the Lacedaemonians and their Confederates.

If any shall revolt from the King, they shall be enemies to the
Lacedaemonians, and their Confederates. And if any shall revolt from the
Lacedaemonians, and their Confedetates, they shall in like manner be enemies to
the King.



Presently after this, the Chians set out ten Galleys more, and went to Anaea,
both to hearken what became of the business at Miletus, and also to cause the
Cities there, abouts to revolt. But word being sent them from Chalcideus, to
go back, and that Amorges was at hand with his Army, they went thence to the
Temple of Jupiter. Being there they descryed 16 Galleys more, which had been
sent out by the Athenians under the charge of Diomedon, after the putting
Thrasycles, upon sight of whom they fled, one Gally to Ephesus, the rest
toward Teos. Four of them, the Athenians took, but empty, the men being
gotten on Shore; the rest escaped into the City of Teos. And the Athenians went
away again toward Samos.

The Chians putting to Sea again, Lebedus and Erae revolt.
with the remainder of their Fleet, and with the Landforces, caused first
Lebedus to revolt, and then Erae. And afterward returned, both with their
Fleet and Land-men, every one to his own.

The Peloponnesians in (...) escape.
the twenty Galleys of Peloponnesus, which the Athenians had formerly chased
into Peiraeus, and against whom they now lay with a like number, suddenly
Athenian Galleys, and going to C^nchreae, prepared afresh for their voyage to
Chius and Ionia. At which time there came also unto them from Lacedaemon, for
Commander, ^
Astyochus, who was now Admiral of the whole Navy.

^
When the Land-men were gone from Teos, Tissaphernes himself came thither with
his Forces, and he also demolished the Wall, as much as was left standing, and
went his way again.

Not long after the going away of him, came thither Diomedon with ten Galleys
of Athens, and having made a Truce with the Teians, that he might also be
received, he put to Sea again, and kept the shore to Erae, and assaulted it,
but failing to take it, departed.

It fell out about the same time, that the Commons of Samos, together with the
Athenians who were there with three Galleys, made an insurrection against the
great men, and slew of them in all about two hundred. And having banished four
hundred more, and distributed amongst Athenians having now, as assured of their
fidelity, decreed them their liberty) they administered the affairs of the
City from that time forward, by themselves, no more communicating with the ^
Ge^mori, nor permitting any of the Common people to marry with them.

After this, the same Summer, the Chians, as they had begun, perseuering in
their earnestness to bring the Cities to revolt, even without the
Lacedaemonians, with their single forces, and desiring to make as many fellows
of Lesbos, (which was according to what was concluded by the Lacedaemonians,
namely to go thither in the second place, and thence into the Hellespont.) And
withal, the Landforces, both of such Peloponnesians as were present, and of
their Confederates thereabouts, ^
went along by them to Clazomenae and Cyme. These under the command of Eualas a
Spartan, and the Galleys, of Deiniadas, a man of the parts thereabouts. The
Galleys putting in at Methymna, caused that City to revolt

Astyochus the Lacedaemonian Admiral, having set forth as he intended from
Cenchreae, arrived at Chius. The third day after his coming thither, came Leon
and Diomedon into Lesbos, with 25 Galleys of Athens; for Leon came with a
supply of ten Galleys more, from Athens afterward. Astyochus in the evening
of the same day, The Athenians recover ^^^tylene.
taking with him one Gally more of Chius, took his way toward Lesbos, to help
it what he could, and put in at Pyrrha, and the next day at Eressus. Here he
heard that Mitylene was taken by the Athenians, even with the shout of their
Athenians coming unexpected, entered the Haven, and having beaten the Galleys
of the Chians, disbarked, and overcame those that made head against them, and
won the City. When Astyochus heard this, both from the Eressians, and from
those Chian Galleys that came from Methymna with Eubulus, (which having been
left there before, as soon as Mitylene was lost, fled, and three of them
chanced to meet with him, for one was taken by the Athenians) he continued his
course for Mitylene no longer, but having caused Eressus to revolt, and armed
Antissa and Methymna by Land, under the conduct of Eteonicus, and he himself
with his own Galleys, and those 3. of Chius, rowed thither along the shore,
hoping that the Methymnaeans, upon sight of his Forces, would take heart, and
continue in their revolt. Astyochus seeing he could do no good at Lesbos
returned to Chios.
But when in Lesbos all things went against him, he reimbarqued his Army, and
returned to Chios. And the Landmen that were aboard, and should have gone into
Hellespont, went again into their Cities. After this came to them six Galleys
to Chios, of Cenchreae. The Athenians, when they had reestablished the State of
Lesbos, went thence, and took Polichna, which the Clazomenians had fortifyed
in the Continent, and brought them all back again into the City, which is in
the Island, save only the authors of the revolt, The Athenians recover
Clazomenae.
(for these got away to Daphnus) and Clazomenae returned to the obedience of
the Athenians.

The same Summer, those Athenians that with twenty Galleys lay in the I Will of of
Lada, before Miletus, landing in the Territory of Miletus, at Panormus,
Chalcideus slain.
slew Chalcideus the Lacedaemonian Commander, that came out against him but
with a few; and set up a Trophie, and the third day after departed. But the
Milesians pulled down Athenians were not Masters.

The Athenians make ^ha^p war upon Chius.
Leon and Diomedon, with the Athenian Galleys that were at Lesbos, made War
upon the Chians by Sea, from the Isles called Oinussae, which lie before Chius,
and from Sidussa, and Pteleum (Forts they held in Erythraea and from Lesbos.
They that were aboard, were men of Arms of the Roll, compelled to serve in the
Fleet. With these they landed at Cardamyle; and having overthrown the Chians
that made head, in a Battle at Bolissus, and slain many of Phanae, and in a
third at Leuconium. After this, the Chians went out no more to fight; by which
means the Athenians made spoil of their Territory, excellently well
furnished. Praise of the Chians.
For except it were the Lacedaemonians, the Chians were the only men that I
have heard of, that had joined aduisednesse to prosperity, and the more their
City increased, had carried the more respect in the administration thereof to
assure it. Nor ventured they now to revolt Athens (as they themselves could not
deny) to have their estate, after the defeat in Sicily, reduced to extreme
weakness.

And if through humane misreckoning, they miscarryed in ought, they erred with
many others, who in like manner had an opinion, that the State of the Athenians

Being therefore shut up by Sea, and having their Lands spoiled, some within
undertook to make the City return unto the Athenians. Which though the
Magistrates perceived, yet they themselves stirred not, but having received
Astyochus into the City, with four Galleys that were with him from Erythrae,
they took advice together, how by taking Hostages, or some other gentle way,
to make them give over the Conspiracy. Thus stood the business with the
Chians.

In the end of this Summer (a thousand five hundred Athens, The Athenians fight
wit^ the Mi^esians* and begun to bes^ege the (...).
and a thousand of Argos (for the Athenians had put Armor upon five hundred
Light-armed of the Argiues) and of other Confederates a thousand more, with
forty eight Galleys, reckoning those which were for transportation of
Soldiers, under the conduct of Phrynichus, Onomacles, and Scironidas, came in
to Samos, and crossing over to Miletus, encamped before it. And the Milesians
issued forth with eight hundred men of Arms of their own, besides the
Peloponnesians that came with Chalcideus, and some auxiliar strangers with
Tissaphernes, (Tissaphernes Athenians and their Confederates. The Argiues, who
made one Wing of themselves, advancing before the rest, and in some disorder in
contempt of the enemy, as being Ionians, and not likely to sustain their
charge, were by the Milesians overcome, and lost no less then 300 of their
men. But the Athenians, when they had first overthrown the Peloponnesians, and
then beaten back the Barbarians and other multitude, and not fought with the
Milesians at all, (for they, after they were come from the chase of the
Argiues, and saw their other Wing defeated, went into the Town) sat down
with their Arms, as being now masters of the Field, close under the Wall of
the City. It fell out in this Battle, that on both sides the Ioniques had the
better of the Doriques. For the Athenians overcame the opposite Peloponnesians,
and the Milesians the Argiues. The Athenians, after they had erected their
Trophy, the place being an Isthmus, prepared to take in the Town with a Wall;
supposing if they got Miletus, the other Cities would easily come in. The
Athenians rise from Miletus, upon the coming of 55 Galleys from Peloponnesus.
In the mean time it was told them about Peloponnesus and Sicily were hard by,
and only not already come. For there came into Peloponnesus out of Sicily, by
the instigation of Hermocrates, to help to consummate the subversion of the
Athenian State, twenty Galleys of Syracuse, and two of Selinus. And the Galleys
that had been preparing in Peloponnesus being then also ready, they were,
both these and the other, committed to the charge of Theramenes, to be
conducted by him to Astyochus the Admiral. And they put in first at Eleus,
Miletus, and being advertised there, that the Athenians lay before the Town,
they went from thence into the Gulf of Iasus, to learn Milesians stood.
Alcibiades coming a horseback to Teichiussa, of the Territory of Miletus, in
which part of the Gulf the Peloponnesian Galleys lay at Anchor, they were
informed by him of the Battle; for Alcibiades was with the Milesians, and with
Tissaphernes present in it. And he exhorted them (unless they meant to lose
what they had in Ionia, and the whole business) to succor Miletus with all
speed, and not to suffer it to be taken in with a Wall. According to this they
concluded to go the next morning and relieve it. Phrynichus, when he Derus,
of the arrival of those Galleys, his Colleagues aduising to stay, and fight it
out with their Fleet, said, that he would neither do it himself, nor suffer
them to do it, or any other, as long as he could hinder it. For seeing he
might fight with the^ hereafter, when they should know against how many Galleys
of the Enemy, and with what addition to their own, sufficiently, and at
leisure made ready, they might do it; he would never, he said, for fear of
being vpbraided with baseness, (for it was no baseness for the Athenians to
let their Navy give way Samos, and thence, when they had all their Fleet
together to make out against the Enemy, as occasion should be offered.

As Phrynichus advised this, so he put it in execution, and was esteemed a wise
man, not then only, but afterward, nor in this only, but in whatsoever else
he had the ordering of. Thus the Athenians presently in the evening, with
Miletus. Samos, the Argiues in haste, and in anger for their overthrow, went
home.

The Peloponnesians setting forth betimes in the morning from Teichiussa, put
in at Miletus, and stayed there one day. The Peloponnesians and Tissaphernes,
take (...), wherein was Amorges, Rebel to the King, whom they take prisoner.
The next day they took with them those Galleys of Chius, which had formerly
been chased together with Chalcideus, and meant to have returned to Teichiussa,
to take aboard such necessaries as they had left a Shore; But as they were
going, Tissaphernes came to them with his Landmen, and persuaded them to set
upon Iasus, where Amorges Kings Enemy then lay. Whereupon they assaulted Iasus
upon a sudden, and (they within not thinking but they had been the Fleet of
the Athenians) took it. The greatest praise in this action was given to the
Syracusians. Having taken Amorges, the bastard son of Pissuthnes, but a
Rebel to the King, the Peloponnesians delivered him to Tissaphernes, to carry
him, if he would, to the King, as he had order to do. The City they pillaged,
wherein, as being a place of ancient riches, the Army got a very great quantity
of money. The auxiliary Soldiers of Amorges, they received, without doing them
hurt, into their own Army, being for the most part Peloponnesians. The Town
it self they delivered to Tissaphernes, with all the prisoners, as well free,
as bond, upon composition with him, at a Darique stater by the poll. And so
they returned to Miletus. And from hence they sent Paedaritus the son of
Leon, whom the Lacedaemonians had sent hither to to be Governor of Chius, to
Erythrae, and with him, the bands that had aided Amorges, by Land, and made
Philip Governor there, in Miletus. The end of the 20 Summer.
And so this Summer

The next Winter Tissaphernes, after he had put a Garrison into Iasus, came to
Miletus, and for one months pay, (as was promised on his part at Lacedaemon)
he gave unto the Soldiers through the whole Fleet after an Attique 7 pence
halfepenny, of our money.
Dram a man by the day. But for the rest of the time he would pay but 3
pence halfepenney farthing. This diminution of their stipend, proceeded from
the counsel which Alcibiades gave to Tissaphernes, as is hereafter declared.
3 oboles, till he had asked the Kings pleasure; and if the King commanded it,
then he said he would pay them the full Dram. Nevertheless upon the
contradiction of Hermocrates General of the Syracusians Theramenes was but
slack in exacting pay, as not being General, but only to deliver the Galleys
that came with him, to Astyochus.) It was agreed that but for ^
five Galleys that were over and above, they should have more then 3 oboles a
man. For to 55 Galleys, he allowed three Talents a month, and to as many, as
should be more then that number, after the same proportion.

The same Winter the Athenians that were at Samos, (for there were now come in
35 Galleys more from home, with Charminus, Strombichides, and Euctemon, their
Commanders) having gathered together their Galleys, as well those that had been
at Chius, as all the rest, concluded, distributing to every one his charge by
Lot, to go lie before Miletus with Chius, to send out both a Fleet, and an
Army of Landmen. And they did so. For Strombichides Onomacles, and Euctemon,
with thirty Galleys, and part of those 1000 men of Arms that went to Miletus,
which they carried along with them in vessels for transportation of Soldiers,
according to their Lot, went to Chius, and the rest remaining at Samos with 74
Galleys, were Masters of the Sea, and went to Miletus.

(...), thence to (...), and Cyme.
Astyochus, who was now in Chius, requiring Hostages in respect of the Treason,
after he heard of the Fleet that Theramenes, and that the Articles of the
League with Tissaphernes were mended, gave over that business; and with 10
Galleys of Peloponnesus, and 10 of Chius, went thence, and assaulted Pteleum,
but not being able to take it, he kept by the Shore to Clazomenae. There he
summoned those within to yield, with offer to such of them as favored the
Athenians, that they might go up and dwell at Daphnus. And Tamos the Deputy
Lieutenant of Ionia, offered them the same. But they not harkening thereunto,
he made an assault upon the City being unwalled, Phocaea, and Cyme, but the
rest of the Fleet put in at Marathusa, Pele, and Drimyssa, Islands that lie over
against Clazomenae. After they had stayed there 8 days in regard of the Winds,
spoiling and destroying, and partly taking aboard whatsoever goods of the
Clazomenians lay without, they went afterward to Phocaea, The Lesbians offer
to turn to Astyochus.
and Cyme, to Astyochus. While Astyochus was there, the Ambassadors of the
Lesbians came unto him, desiring to revolt from the Athenians, and as for
Corinthians Chius. Whither, after a great Tempest, his Galleys, some from one
place, and some from another, at length arrived all.

After this, Paedaritus, who was now at Erythrae, whither he was come from
Miletus by Land, came over with his Forces into Chius. Besides those Forces he
brought over with him, he had the Soldiers which were of the five Galleys that
came thither with Chalcideus, and were left

Now some of the Lesbians having promised to revolt, Astyochus communicated the
matter with Paedaritus and the Chians, alleging how meet it would be to go
with a Fleet, and make Lesbos to revolt, for that they should either get more
Confederates, or failing, they should at least weaken the Athenians. But they
gave him no ear; Astyochus, and Paedaritus the Governor of Ch^^ disagree.
and for the Chian Galleys, Paedaritus told him plainly, he should have none
of them. Whereupon Astyochus taking with Corinth, a sixth of Megara, one of
Hermione, and those of Laconia which he brought with him, went toward Miletus
to his Charge; mightily threatening the Chians, in case they should need him,
not to help them.

When he was come to Corycus in Erythraea, he stayed there; and the Athenians
from Samos lay on the other side of the point, the one not knowing that the
other was so near. Astyochus, upon a Letter sent him from Pedaritus,
signifying that there were come certain Erythraean Captives Samos, with
design to betray Erythrae, went presently back to Erythrae, so little he
missed of falling into the hands of the Athenians. Paedaritus also went over to
him, and having narrowly enquired touching these seeming Traitors, and found
that the whole matter was but a pretense, which the men had used for their
escape from Samos, they acquitted them, and departed, one to Chius, the other,
as he was going before, toward Miletus.

In the mean time, The Athenian Galleys tossed with Tempest.
the Army of the Athenians being Corycus, to Argenum, lighted on three long
Boats of the Chians, which when they saw, they presently chased. But there
arose a great Tempest, and Chius with much ado recovered the Harbor. But of
the Athenian Galleys, especially such as followed them furthest, there perished
three, driven ashore at the City of Chius; and the men that were aboard them,
were part taken, and part slain; the rest of the Fleet escaped into a Haven
called Phoenicus, under the Hill Mimas; from whence they got afterward to
Lesbos, and there fortifyed.

The Athenians take the Galleys of the Peloponnesians, sent to waft in the
Ships of Corn from Egypt to Cnidus.
The same Winter, Hippocrates setting out from Peloponnesus with ten Galleys
of Thurium, commanded by Dorieus Diagoras, with two others, and with one Gallie
of Laconia, and one of Syracuse, went to Cnidus. This City was now revolted
from Tissaphernes: and the Peloponnesians that lay at Miletus hearing of it,
commanded that (the one half of their Galleys remaining for the guard of
Cnidus) the other half should go about Triopium, and help to bring in the
Ships which were to come from Egypt. This Triopium is a Promontory of the
Territory of Cnidus, lying out in the Sea, and consecrated to Apollo. The
Athenians upon advertisement hereof, setting forth from Samos, took those
Galleys that kept guard at Triopium, but the men that were in them escaped to
Land. After this they went to Cnidus, which they assaulted, and had almost
taken, being without Wall; and the nexr day they assaulted it again; but being
less able to hurt it now then before, because they had fenced it better this
night, and the men also were gotten into it, that fled from their Galleys under
Triopium, they invaded and wasted the Cnidian Territory, and so went back to
Samos.

They assault the City of Cnidus, but cannot win it.
About the same time, Astyochus being come to the Navy Miletus, the
Peloponnesians had plenty of all things for the Army. For they had not only
sufficient pay, but the Soldiers also had store of money yet remaining of the
pillage of Iasus. And the Milesians underwent the War with a good will.
Nevertheless the former Articles of the League made by Chalcide^s with
Tissaphernes seemed defective, and not so aduantagious to them as to him.
Whereupon they agreed to new ones, in the presence of Tissaphernes, which were
these.

The Agreement of the Lacedaemonians and their Confederates, The second League
between the Lacedaemonians and the King of Persia
with King Darius and his children, and with Tissaphernes, for league and
amity, according to the Articles following.

Whatsoever Territories or Cities do belong unto King Darius, or were his
Fathers, or his Ancestors, Against those shall neither the Lacedaemonians go
to make War, nor any way to annoy them. Neither shall the Lacedaemonians, nor
their Confederates, exact Tribute of any of those Cities. Neither shall King
Darius, nor any under his Dominion, make War upon, or any way annoy the
Lacedaemonians, or any of the Lacedaemonian Confederates.

If the Lacedaemonians or their Confederates shall need any thing of the King,
or the King of the Lacedaemonians, or of their Confederates, what they shall
persuade each other to do, that if they do it, shall be good.

They shall, both of them, make War jointly against the Athenians and their
Confederates; And when they shall give over the War, they shall also do it
jointly.

Whatsoever Army shall be in the Kings Country, sent for by the King, the King
shall defray.

If any of the Cities comprehended in the League made with the King, shall
invade the Kings Territories, the rest shall oppose them, and defend the King
to the utmost of their power.

If any City of the Kings, or under his Dominion, shall invade the
Lacedaemonians, or their Confederates, the King shall make opposition, and
defend them, to the utmost of his power.

After this accord made, Theramenes goes to Sea in a Light-horseman, and is
cast away.
Theramenes delivered his Galleys Astyochus, and putting to Sea in a
Light-horseman, is no more seen.

The Athenians that were now come with their Army from Lesbos to Chius, and
were Masters of the Field, The Chians in distress* send for aid to Astyochus.
and of the Sea, fortifyed Delphinium, a place both strong to the Land-ward,
and that had also a Harbor for Shipping, and was not far from the City it
self of Chius. And the Chians, as having been disheartened in diverse former
Battles, and otherwise, not only, not mutually well affected, but jealous one
of another, (for Tydeus Paedaritus for Atticisme, and the rest of the City was
kept in awe, but by force, and for a time) stirred not against them. And for
Paedaritus had with him, sufficient to give them battle, they sent to Miletus,
Astyochus refuses to aid them, and is complained on by Paedaritus his Letters
to the State.
to require aid from Astyochus. Which when he denied them, Paedaritus sent
Letters to Lacedaemon, complaining of the wrong. Thus proceeded the affairs of
the Athenians at Chius. Also their Fleet at Samos went often out, against the
Fleet of the Enemy at Miletus; but when theirs would never come out of the
Harbor to encounter them, they returned to Samos, and lay still.

The Galleys that were provided for Pharnabazus let forth toward Jonia.
The same Winter, about the Solstice, went out from Peloponnesus toward Ionia,
those 27 Galleys, which at the procurement of Calligetus of Megara, and
Timagoras of Cyzicus, were made ready by the Lacedaemonians for Pharnabazus.
The Commander of them was Antisthenes a Spartan, with whom the Lacedaemonians
sent eleven Spartans more, Antisthenes and 11 other Spartans sent with absolute
authority into Ionia.
to be of council with Astyochus, whereof Lichas the son of Arcesilaus was
one. These had Commission, that when they should be arrived at Miletus,
besides their Hellespont to Pharnabazus, if they so thought fit, and and to
appoint Clearchus the son of Rhamphias, that went along in them, for
Commander. And that the same eleven, if they thought it meet, should put
Astyochus from his Charge, and ordain Antisthenes in his place: for they had
him in suspicion for the Letters of Paedaritus.

These Galleys holding their course from Malea Melos, lighted on ten Galleys
of the Athenians, whereof three they took, but without the men, and fired them.

After this, because they feared lest those Athenian Galleys that escaped from
Melos, should give notice of their coming, to those in Samos, (as also it fell
out) they changed their course, and went toward Crete, and having made their
Voyage the longer, that it might be the safer, they put in at Caunus in Asia.
Now from thence, as being in a place of safety, They arrive at Caunus in Asia.
they sent a Messenger to the Fleet Miletus for a Conuoy.

Chians and Paedaritus about the same time, ^
notwithstanding their former repulse, and that Astyochus was still backward,
sent messengers to him, desiring him to come with his whole Fleet, to help
them being besieged, and not to suffer the greatest of their Confederate Cities
in all Ionia, to be thus shut up by Sea, and rauaged by Land, as it was. For
the Chians having many slaves, more then any one State, except that of the
Lacedaemonians, whom for their offenses they the more ungently punished because
of their number, many of them, as soon as the Athenians appeared to Chians
said he must help them, whilst there was hope and possibility to do it.
Delphinium being still in fortifying, and unfurnished, and greater fences being
in making, both about their Camp and Fleet Astyochus though he meant it not
before, because he would have made good his threats, yet when he saw the
Confederates were willing, he was bent to have relieved them.

But in the mean time came the messenger from the 27 Lacedaemonian
Counselors, Astyochus is diuerted from helping the Chians, and goes to waft
in the 27 Galleys of Peloponnesus, that lay at Caunus.
that were come to Caunus. Astyochus therefore esteeming the wafting in of
these Galleys, whereby they might the more freely command the Sea, and the safe
coming in of those Lacedaemonians, who were to look into his actions, a
business that ought to be preferred before all other, presently gave over his
journey for Chius, and went toward Caunus.

As he went by the Coast, he landed at Cos Meropidis, being unwalled, and
thrown down by an Earthquake, Cos he went by night to Cnidus: but found it
necessary, by the advice of the Cnidians, not to land his men there, but to
follow, as he was, after those 20 Galleys of Athens, wherewith Charminus one of
the Athenian Generals gone out from Samos, stood watching for those 27 Galleys
that were come from Peloponnesus, the same that Astyochus himself Samos had
had intelligence from Miletus of their coming and Charminus was lying for them
about Syme, Chalce, Rhodes, Lycia: For by this time he knew that they were at
Caunus. Astyochus therefore desiring to outgoe the report of his coming, went
as he was, to Syme, hoping to find those Galleys out from the shore. But a
shoure of rain, together with the cloudinesse of the Sky, made his Galleys to
miss their course in the dark, and disordered them.

A fight between the Peloponnesian and Athenian Fleets, wherein the Athenians
had the worse.
The next morning, the Fleet being scattered, the left Wing was manifestly
discryed by the Athenians, whilst the rest wandered yet about the Island: And
thereupon Charminus and the Athenians put forth against them with twenty
Galleys, supposing they had been the same Galleys they were watching for, from
Caunus. And presently charging, sunk three of them, and hurt others, and were
superior in the fight, till such time as, contrary to their expectation, the
greater part of the Fleet came in sight, and enclozed them about. Then they
betook themselves to flight, and with the loss of six Galleys, the rest
escaped into the Island of Teuglussa; and from thence to Halicarnassus.

Afrer this the Peloponnesians putting in at Cnidus, and Caunus, went all
together to Syme, and having there erected a Trophie, returned again, and lay
at Cnidus.

The Athenians, when they understood what had passed in this battle went from
Samos with their whole Navy to Syme. But neither went they out against the
Navy in Cnidus, nor the Navy there, against them. Whereupon they took up the
furniture of their Galleys at Syme, and assaulted Loryma, a Town in the
Continent, and so returned Samos.

The whole Navy of the Peloponnesians being at Cnidus, was now in repayring,
and refurnishing with such things as it wanted; and withal, those eleven
Lacedaemonians conferred with Tissaphernes (for he also was present) touching
such things as they disliked in the Articles before agreed on, Tissaphernes and
the Lacedaemonians disagreee about the Articles of their League.
and concerning the War, how it might be carried for the future, in the best
and most aduantagious manner for them both. But Lychas was he that considered
the business most nearly, and said, that neither the first League,
Theramenes, was made as it ought to King and his Ancestors possessed before,
he should possess the same now: for so he might bring again into subjection
all the Islands, and the Sea, and the Locrians, and all as far as Boeotia; and
the Lacedaemonians, in stead of restoring the Grecians into liberty, should put
them into subjection to the rule of the Medes. Therefore he required other and
better Articles to be drawn, and not to stand to these. As for pay, in the
new Articles they would require none. But Tissaphernes chafing

The Peloponnesians solicited by Messengers from the great men of Rhodes,
resolved to go thither, Rhodes reuolteth to the Peloponnesians.
because they hoped it would not prove impossible, with their number of Seamen,
and Army of Land-Souldiers, to bring that Island into their power; and withal
supposed themselves able, with their present Confederates to maintain their
Fleet, without asking money any more of Tissaphernes. Presently therefore, the
same Winter, they put forth from Cnidus, and arriving in the Territory of
Rhodes, at Cameirus, first frighted the Commons out of it, that knew not of the
business; and they fled. Then the Lacedaemonians called together both these,
and the The City of Rhodes was not then built.
Rhodians of the two Cities, Lindus and Ielysus, and persuaded them to revolt
from the Athenians. And Rhodes turned to the Peloponnesians. The Athenians at
the same time hearing of their design, put forth with their Fleet from Samos,
desiring to have arrived before them, and were seen in the maine Sea, too
late, though not much. For the present they went away to Chalce, and thence
back to Samos, but afterward they came forth with their Galleys diverse times,
and made War against Rhodes, from Chalce, Cos, and Samos. Now the
Peloponnesians did no more to the Rhodians, but leauie money amongst them, to
the sum of 6000 pounds sterling.
thirty two Talents, and otherwise for fourscore days that they lay there,
having their Galleys haled ashore, they meddled not.

In this time, as also before the going of the Peloponnesians to Rhodes, came
to pass the things that follow.

Alcibiades, after the death of Chalcideus, Alcibiades flies to Tissaphernes,
and crosses the business of the Peloponnesians.
and Battle at Miletus, being suspected by the Peloponnesians; and Astyochus
having received letters from them from Lacedaemon, to put Agis, and also
otherwise not well trusted) retired to Tissaphernes, first for fear, and
afterward to his power hindered the affairs of the Peloponnesians. And being
in every thing his instructor, he not only cut shorter their pay, insomuch as
from a 7 pence halfepenny.
Dram, he brought it to 3 3 pence halfepenny farthing.
oboles, and those also not continually paid; He advises Tissaphernes to
shorten their pay.
aduising Tissaphernes to tell them, how that the Athenians, men of a long
continued skill in Nauall affairs, allowed but three oboles to their own, not
so much for want of money, but lest the Mariners, some of them growing And to
corrupt the Captains.
and others should quit the Galleys, with the arrere of their pay in their
Captains hands for a pawn; but also gave counsel to Tissaphernes, to give
money to the Captains of the Galleys, and to the Generals of the several
Cities (save only those of Syracuse) to give way unto it. The integrity of
Hermocrates.
For Hermocrates, the General of the Syracusians was the only man, that in
the name of the whole League stood against it. And for the Cities that came to
require Tissaphernes his name, Alcibiades answers in Tissaphernes name, to
the Cities that call ^on him for money, and puts them off.
and say, namely to the Chians* that they were impudent men, being the richest
of the Grecian States, and preserved by Strangers, to expect nevertheless,
that others, for their liberty, should not only venture their persons, but
maintain them with their purses. And to other States, that they did unjustly,
having laid out their money before they revolted, that they might serve the
Athenians, not to bestow as much, or more now upon themselves. And told them,
that Tissaphernes, King, he would then give them their full pay, and assist the
Cities as should be fit. He counsels Tissaphernes to prolong the War, and
afflict both sides.
Moreover, he advised Tissaphernes not to be too hasty to make an end of the
War, nor to fetch in the Phoenician Fleet which was making ready, nor take
more men into pay, whereby to put the whole power both by Sea and Land, into
the hands of one. But to let the Dominion remain divided into two, that the
King, when one side troubled him, might set upon Grecians one against another,
and himself in the mean time remain in safety.

He said further, He advises him, of the two, to favor the Athenians, the
rather, as fitter to help subdue the Grecians,
that the Athenians were fitter to partake dominion with him then the other,
for that they were less ambitious of power by Land; and that their speeches
Kings purpose: For that they would join with him to subdue the Grecians, that
is to say, for themselves, as touching the dominion by Sea, and for the King,
as touching the Grecians in the Kings Territories. Whereas the Lacedaemonians
on the contrary, were come to set them free. And it was not likely but that
they that were come to deliver the Grecians from the Grecians, will (if they
overcome the Athenians) deliver them also from the Barbarians.

He gave counsel therefore, first to wear them out Athenians, to dismiss the
Peloponnesians out of his Country. Tissaphernes guided by the counsel of
Alcibiades, hinders the success of the Peloponnesians.
And Tissaphernes had a purpose to do accordingly, as far as by his actions
can be coniectured: For hereupon he gave himself to believe Alcibiades, as his
best Counselor in these affairs, and neither paid the Peloponnesians their
wages, nor would suffer them to fight by Sea, but pretending the coming of the
Phoenician Fleet, whereby they might afterward fight with odds, he overthrew
their proceedings, and abated the

Now Alcibiades advised the King and Tissaphernes to this, Alcibiades aymeth at
his return to Athens, by making show of his power with Tissaphernes.
whilst he was with them, partly, because he thought the same to be indded
the best course, but partly also, to make way for his own return into his
Country: knowing, that if he destroyed it not, the time would one day come,
that he might persuade the Athenians to recall him. And the best way to
persuade them to it, he thought was this, Tissaphernes. Which also came to
pass. For after the Athenian Soldiers at Samos saw what power he had with
Alcibiades his own motion, who had sent to the greatest amongst them, that
they should remember him to the best sort, and say, that he desired to come
home, so the government might be in the hands of a Few, Motion made for the
recalling of Alcibiades, and deposing of the People.
not of evil persons, nor yet of the Multitude that cast him out; and that he
would bring Tissaphernes to be their friend, and to war on their side; but
chiefly of their own accords had their minds inclined to the deposing of the
popular government.

This business was set on foot first in the Camp, and from thence proceeded
afterward into the City. And certain persons went over to Alcibiades out of
Samos, and had conference with him. And when he had undertaken to bring to
their friendship, first Tissaphernes, and then the King, in case the Government
were taken from the People, (for then, he said, the King might the better rely
upon them) they that were of most power in the City, who also were the most
toyled out, entered into great hope, both to have the ordering of the State at
home themselves, and victory also over the enemy. Conspiracy in the Army at
Samos, against the Democracie of Athens.
And when they came back Samos, they drew all such as were for their purpose
into an Oath of Conspiracy with themselves, and to the Multitude gave it out
openly, that if Alcibiades might be recalled, and the People put from the
Government, the King would turn their friend, and furnish them with Money.
Though the Multitude were grieved with this proceeding for the present, yet for
the great hope they had of the Kings pay, they stirred not.

But they that were setting up the Oligarchy, when they Alcibiades. And the
rest thought the matter easy, Phrynichus is against the recalling of
Alcibiades.
and worthy to be believed: but Phrynichus, who yet was General of the Army,
liked it not, but thought (as the truth was) that Alcibiades cared no more for
the Oligarchy then the Democracie, nor had any other aim in it, but only by
altering the Government that then was, to be called home by his associates. And
said, they were especially to look to this, that they did not mutiny for King,
who could not very easily be induced (the Peloponnesians being now as much
masters at Sea as themselves, and having no small Cities within his Dominions)
to join with the Athenians, whom he trusted not, and to trouble himself, when
he might have the friendship of the Peloponnesians, that never did him hurt.

As for the Confederate Cities to whom they promise Oligarchy, in that they
themselves do put down the Democracie, he said, he knew full well, that
neither those which were already revolted would the sooner return to, nor
those that remained, be ever the more confirmed in their obedience thereby. For
they would Few, or to the People, as they would be to have their liberty, which
side soever it were that should give it them. But would think, that even those
which are termed the (...). The (...) men, or Aristocracy, a difference from
the Oligarchy, which was of the richest sort only. For the Good men who in the
Democracie are the Peoples mi^^ons, and put the People upon all they do, will
do the same things themselves, when they have the Soueraignety in their hands.
Good men, if they had the Government, would give them as much to do, as the
People, being Contriuers and authors to the People, of doing those mischiefs
against them, out of which they make most profit unto themselves. And that if
the Few had the rule, then they should be put to death unheard, and more
violently then by the former, whereas the People is their refuge, and moderator
of the others insolence. This he said, he Alcibiades, he by no means approved.

But those of the Conspiracy there assembled, not only approved the present
proposition, but also made preparation to send Pisander and others Ambassadors
to Athens, to negotiate concerning the reduction of Alcibiades, the dissolution
of the Democracie, and the procuring unto the Athenians the friendship of
Tissaphernes.

Now Phrynichus knowing that an ouerture was to be made at Athens for the
restoring of Alcibiades, The treason of Phrynichus against the State, for fear
of Alcibiades.
and that the Athenians would embrace it; and fearing lest being recalled he
should do him a mischief (in regard he had spoken against it) as one that
would have hindered the same, betook himself to this course He sends secret
Letters to Astyochus, the Lacedaemonian General, He writes secret Letters to
Astyochus.
who was yet about Miletus, and advertised him, that Alcibiades undid their
affairs, and was procuring the friendship of Tissaphernes for the Athenians,
to his enemy, with some disadvantage to his Country. Astyochus had before
this, laid by the purpose of revenge against Alcibiades, especially when he was
not in his own hands. Astyochus appeacheth him to Alcibiades.
And going to him to Magnesia, and to Tissaphernes, related unto them, what
advertisement he had received from Samos, and made himself the appeacher. For
he adhered (as was said) to Tissaphernes for his private lucre, both in this,
and in diverse other matters, which was also the cause, that concerning the pay,
when the abatement was made, he was not so stout in opposing it, as he ought
to have been. Hereupon Alcibiades sends Letters presently Samos, accusing
Phrynichus of what he had done, and requiring to have him put to death.
Phrynichus perplexed with this discovery, and brought into danger indeed, sends
again to Astyochus, blaming what was past, as not well concealed and promised
now, to be ready to deliver unto him the whole Army at Samos, Phrynichus sends
to Astyochus again, and offers to put the whole army into his hands.
to be destroyed; writing from point to point, ( Samos being unwalled) in what
manner he would do it, and saying, that since his life was brought in danger,
they could not blame him, though he did this, or any other thing, rather then
be Astyochus revealed unto Alcibiades.

The device of Phrynichus to avoid the danger.
But Phrynichus having had notice betimes how he abused him, and that Letters of
this from Alcibiades were in a manner come, he anticipates the news himself,
and tells the Army, That whereas Samos was unwalled, and the Galleys rid not
all within, the Enemy meant to come and assault the Harbor; That he had sure
intelligence hereof; and that they ought therefore with all speed to raise a
Wall about the City, and to put Garrisons into other places Phrynichus was
General himself, and it was in his own power to see it done. They then fell
to walling, whereby Samos (which they meant to have done howsoever) was so much
the sooner walled in. Not long after came Letters from Alcibiades, that the
Army was betrayed by Phrynichus, and that the Enemy purposed to invade the
Harbor where they lay. But now, they thought not Alcibiades worthy to be
believed, but rather that having foreseen the design of the enemy, he went
about out of malice, to fasten it upon Phrynichus, as conscious of it likewise.
Phrynichus had told them of before.

After this Alcibiades endeavored to incline and persuade Tissaphernes to the
friendship of the Athenians; ^
for though Tissaphernes feared the Peloponnesians, because their Fleet was
greater then that of the Athenians, yet if he had been able, he had a good
will to have been persuaded by him* especially in his anger against the
Peloponnesians, after the dissension at Cnidus, about the League made by
Theramenes, (for they were already fallen out, the Peloponnesians being about
this time in Rhodes) wherein that which had Alcibiades, how that the coming of
the Lacedaemonians was to restore all the Cities to their liberty, was now
verifyed by Lichas, in that he said, it was an Article not to be suffered, that
the King should hold those Cities, which he and his Ancestors then or before
had holden. Alcibiades therefore, as one that labored for no trifle, with all
his might applied himself to Tissaphernes.

The Athenian Ambassadors sent from Samos with Pisander, being arrived at
Athens, Pisander gets the Athenians to be content with the Oligarchy, and to
give him and others Commission to treat with Alcibiades.
were making their propositions People. And related unto them summarily the
points of their business, and principally this, That if they would call home
Alcibiades, and not suffer the Government to remain in the hands of the
People, in such manner as it did, they might have the King for their
Confederate, and get the victory of the Peloponnesians. Now when many opposed
that point touching the Democracie, and the enemies of Alcibiades clamoured
withal, that it would be a horrible thing he should return by forcing the
Government, when the Eumolpidae, a Family descended from Eumolpus, the author
at Athens of the Mysteries of Ceres. This Family had (...) chief authority in
matter that concerned those Rites.
Eumolpidae, and Ceryces, Heralds in War, Ambassadors in peace. Suidas They
pronounced all formal words in the Ceremonies of their Religion, and were a
Family descended from Ceryx the son of Mercury.
Ceryces bare witness against him concerning the Mysteries, for which he fled,
and prohibited his return under their curse. Pisander, at this great
opposition and querimony, stood out, and going amongst them, took out one by
one those that were against it, and asked them, Whether, now that the
Peloponnesians had as many Galleys at Sea to oppose them, as they themselves
had, and Confederate Cities, more then they, and were furnished with money by
the King and Tissaphernes, the Athenians being without, they had any other hope
to save their State, but by persuading the King to come about to their side?
And they that were asked having nothing to This you cannot now obtain, except
we administer the State with more moderation, and bring the power into the
hands of a that the King may rely upon us. And we deliberate at this time, not
so much about the form, as about the preservation of the State; for if you
mislike the form, you may change it again hereafter. And let us recall
Alcibiades, who is the only man that can bring this to pass.

The People hearing of the Oligarchy, took it very haynously at first; But
when Pisander had proved evidently, that there was no other way of safety, in
the end, partly for fear, and partly because they hoped again to change the
Government, they yielded thereunto. So Pisander, and ten others, should go,
and treat, both with Tissaphernes, and with Alcibiades, as to them should
seem best, Phrynichus accused by Pisander, and discharged of (...) command.
Withal, upon the accusation of Pisander against Phrynichus, they discharged
both Phrynichus, and Scironidas, his fellow-Commissioner, of their Command, and
made Diomedon and Leon Generals of the Fleet in their places.

Now the cause why Pisander accused Phrynichus, and said he had betrayed Iasus
and Amorges, was only this, he thought him a man unfit for the business now
in hand Alcibiades.

Pisander, after he had gone about to all those Combinations (which were in the
City before, for obtaining of places of Judicature, and of Command) exhorting
them to stand together, and advise about deposing the Democracie; and when he
had dispatched the rest of his business, so as there should be no more cause
for him to stay there, took Sea with those other ten, to go to Tissaphernes.

Leon and Diomedon war upon the Peloponnesian Navy at Rhodes.
Leon and Diomedon arriving the same Winter at the Athenian Fleet, made a
Voyage against Rhodes, and finding Peloponnesian Galleys drawn up to Land,
disbarked, and overcame in battle such of the Rhodians as made head; and then
put to Sea again, and went to Chalce. After this they made sharper War upon
them from Cos. For from thence they could better observe the Peloponnesian
Navy, when it should put off from the Land.

In this while, there arrived at Rhodes, Xenophontidas a Laconian, Chius
distressed* and Paedar^tus the Captain slain.
sent out of Chius from Paedaritus, to advertise them, that the Fortification
of the Athenians there, was now finished, and that unless they came and
relieved them Chius must utterly Paedaritus in the mean time, with the whole
power both of his own auxiliar Forces, and of the Chians, made an assault upon
the Fortification which the Athenians had made about their Navy, part whereof
he won, and had gotten some Galleys that were drawn aland. But the Athenians
issuing out upon them, first put to flight the Chians, and then overcame also
the rest of the Army about Paedaritus, and slew Paedaritus himself, and took
many of the Chians prisoners, and much Armor. After this the Chians

Pisander, Alcibiades unable to make good his word, in bringing Tissaphernes to
the Athenians side, demands excessive conditions, to make the breach appear
to proceed from the Athenians, and to save his own credit.
and the other Athenian Ambassadors that went with him, when they came to
Tissaphernes, began to confer about the agreement. But Alcibiades (for he was
not sure of Tissaphernes, because he stood in fear too much of the
Peloponnesians, and had a purpose besides, as Alcibiades himself had taught
him, to weaken both sides yet more) betook himself to this shift; that
Tissaphernes should break off the Treaty, by making to the Athenians
Tissaphernes and he aimed at the same thing; Tissaphernes for fear; and
Alcibiades, for that when he saw Tissaphernes not desirous to agree, though the
offers were never so great, he was unwilling to have the Athenians think he
could not preswade him to it, but rather that he was already persuaded and
willing, and that the Athenians came not to him with sufficient offers. For
Alcibiades being the man that spoke for Tissaphernes, though he were also
present, made unto them such excessive demands, that though the Athenians That
all Ionia should be rendered. Then again The adjacent Islands, and other things,
which the Athenians stood not against. In fine, at the third meeting, when he
feared now plainly to be found unable to make good his word, he required, That
they should suffer the King to build a Navy, and sail up and down by their
Coast, wheresoever, and with what number soever of Galleys he himself should
think good.

Athenians would treat no longer, esteeming the Conditions intolerable, and
that Alcibiades had abused them; and so went away in a chafe to Samos.

^^^saphernes hearkeneth (...) to the Peloponnesians.
Presently after this the same Winter, Tissaphernes went to Caunus, with intent
both to bring the Peloponnesians back to Miletus, and also, (as soon as he
should have agreed unto new Articles such as he could get) to give the Fleet
their pay; and not to fall directly out with them, for fear, lest so many
Galleys wanting maintenance, should either be forced by the Athenians to
fight, and so be overcome, or empied of men, the business might succeed with
the Athenians according to their own desire, without him. Besides, Grecians.
And sending for the Peloponnesians, he gave them their pay, and now made the
third League, as follows.

The third League between Tissaphernes and the Peloponnesians.
In the thirteenth year of the reign of Darius, Alexippidas being Ephore in
Lacedaemon, Agreement was made in the Plain of Maeander, between the
Lacedaemonians and their Confederates on one part, and Tissaphernes, and
Hieramenes, and the sons of Pharnaces on the other part; concerning the
affairs of the King, and of the Lacedaemonians, and their Confederates.

That whatsoever Country in Asia belongs to the King, shall be the Kings
still. And that concerning his own Countries, it shall be lawful for the
King to do whatsoever he shall think meet.

That the Lacedaemonians and their Confederates shall not invade any the
Territories of the King, to harm them; nor the the Territories of the
Lacedaemonians or their Confederates.

If any of the Lacedaemonians or their Confederates shall invade the Kings
Country to do it hurt, the Lacedaemonians and their Confederates shall oppose
it. And if any of the Kings Country shall invade the Lacedaemonians, or their
Confederates, to do them hurt, the King shall oppose it.

That Tissaphernes shall, according to the rates agreed on, maintain the
present Fleet, till the Kings Fleet arrive.

That when the Kings Navy shall be come, the Lacedaemonians and their
Confederates shall maintain their own Navy themselves, Tissaphernes to
maintain it, he shall do it: And that the Lacedaemonians and their
Confederates, at the end of the War, repay Tissaphernes what soever money
they shall have received of him.

When the Kings Galleys shall be arrived, both they, and the Galleys of the
Lacedaemonians and their Confederates, shall make the War jointly, according
as to Tissaphernes, and the Lacedaemonians and their Confederates shall seem
good. And if they will give over the War against the Athenians, they shall
give it over in the same manner.



After this Tissaphernes prepared for the fetching in of the Phoenician Fleet,
according to the Agreement, and to do whatsoever else he had undertaken,
desiring to have it seen, at least, that he went about it.

In the end of this Winter, Oropus taken by Treason.
the Boeotians took Oropus by Treason. It had in it a Garrison of Athenians.
They that plotted it, were certain Eretrians, and some of Oropus it self, who
were then contriuing the revolt of Euboea. For Eretria in subjection, it was
impossible, as long as the Athenians held it, but that it would much annoy both
Eretria, and the rest of Euboea. Having Oropus in their hands already, they
came to Rhodes to call the Peloponnesians into Euboea. But the Peloponnesians
had a greater inclination to relieve Chius now distressed; and putting to Sea,
departed out of Rhodes with their whole Fleet. When they were come about
Triopium, they discryed the Athenian Fleet in the maine Sea, going from Chalce.
And neither side assaulting other, they put in, the one Fleet Samos, the other
at Miletus, For the Peloponesians saw they could not pass to relieve Chius,
without a Battle. Thus ended this Winter, and the twentieth year of this
War, written by Thucydides.

The next Summer, in the beginning of the Spring, THE ONE AND TWENTIETH YEAR.
Dercylidas a Spartan, was sent by Land into Hellespont, with a small Army, to
work the revolt of Abydus, a Colonie of the Milesians. And the Chians at the
same time, The Chians fight against the Athenians that besieged them.
whilst Astyochus was at a stand how to help them, were compelled by the
pressure of the Siege, to hazard a Battle

Now whilst Astyochus lay in Rhodes, they had received into the City of
Chius, after the death of Paedarit^^, one Leon Spartan, that came along with
Antisthenes as a private Soldier, and with him twelve Galleys that lay at the
guard of Miletus, whereof five were Thurians, four Syracusians, one of Anaea,
one of Miletus, and one of Leons own. whereupon the Chians issuing forth with
the whole force of the City, seized a certain place of strength, and put forth
thirty six Galleys against thirty two of the Athenians, and fought. After a
sharp fight, wherein the Chians and their associates had not the worst; and
when it began to be dark, they retired again into the City.

Abydus and Lampsacus revolt.
Presently after this, Dercylidas being arrived now in Hellespont from Miletus,
by Land, Abydus revolted, to him, and to Pharnabazus. And two days after,
revolted also Lampsacus.

Strombichides recouereth Lampsacus.
Strombichides having intelligence of this, made haste thither from Chius, with
four and twenty Sail of Athenians, (those being also of that number, which
transported his men of Arms.) And when he had overcome the Lampsacens that
came out against him, and taken Lampsacus, being an open Town, at the first
shout of their voices, Abydus. But when that City neither yielded, nor could
be taken by assault, he crossed over from Abydus to the opposite shore, and in
Sestus, a City of Chersonnesus, (possessed heretofore by the Medes) he placed
a Garrison, for the custody of the whole Hellespont.

In the mean time, not only the Chians had the Sea at more command, but
Astyochus also, and the Army at Miletus, having been advertised what past in
the fight by Strombichides and those Galleys with him were gone away, took
heart. And Astyochus going to Chius, with two Galleys fetched away the Galleys
that were there, and with the whole Fleet now together, went against Samos. But
seeing they of Samos, by reason of their jealousy one toward another, came
not against him, he went back again to Miletus. For it was about this time,
that the Democracie was put down at Athens.

The Democracy at Athens put down by Pisander and his fellows.
For after that Pisander and his fellow-Ambassadours that had been with
Tissaphernes, were come to Samos, they Samians to attempt with them the
erecting of the Oligarchy; though there were then an insurrection amongst them
against the Oligarchy. And withal the Athenians at Samos, The authors of the
Oligarchy resolve to leave out Alcibiades* and to govern the State with their
private means for themselves.
in a conference amongst themselves, deliberated, how, since Alcibiades would
not, to let him alone* (for indeed they thought him no fit man to come into an
Oligarchy) but for themselves, seeing they were already engaged in the danger,
to take care, both to keep the business from a relapse, and withal to
sustain the War, and to contribute money, and whatsoever Pisander with half
the Ambassadorus presently home, to follow the business there, with command to
set up the Oligarchy in all Cities they were to touch at by the way, the other
half they sent about, some to one part of the State, and some to another. And
they sent away Diotr^phes to his Charge, who was now about Chius, chosen to go
Governor of the Cities upon Thrace.

Thasus, deposed the People. The Athenians having set up the Oligarchy in
Thasus, it presently reuolteth from them.
And within two months at mos^, after he was gone, the Thasia^s fortified
their City, as needing no longer an Aristocracy with the Athenians, but
expecting liberty every day by the help of the Lacedaemonians. For there were
also certain of them with the Peloponnesians, driven out by the Athenians; and
these practiced with such in the City as were for their purpose, to receive
Galleys into it, and to cause it to revolt. So that it fell out for them just
as they would have it, that that estate of theirs, was set up without their
danger, People was deposed, that would have withstood it. Insomuch as at Thasus
it fell out contrary to what those Athenians thought, which erected the
Oligarchy; and so, in my opinion, it did in many other places of their
Dominion. For the Cities now grown wise, and withal resolut^ in their
proceedings, sought a direct liberty, and preferred not before it, that outside
of a well-ordered Government, introduced by the Athenians.

They with Pisander, The proceeding of Pisander in setting us the Oligarchy.
according to the order given Democracies, and having in some places obtained
also an aid of men of Arms, they came to Athens, and found the Androcles
privily, a principal Patron of the Popular government, and one that had his
hand the farthest in the banishment of Alcibiades; whom they slew for two
causes: for the sway he bare amongst the People, and to gratify Alcibiades,
who they thought would return, and get them the friendship of Tissaphernes;
but had also made away diverse men unfit for their Design, in the same manner.
That there ought none to receive wages, but such as served in the Wars, nor
to participate of the Government, more then 5000, and those, such as by their
purses and persons were best able to serve the Commonwealth.

And this with the most carried a good show, because they that would set
forward the alteration of the State, were to have the mannaging of the same.
Yet the People The Senate or Council of 500.
Council of the Bean, met still, but debated nothing, save what the
Conspirators thought fit. Nay, all that spoke were of that number, and had
considered before what they were to say. Nor would any of the rest speak
against them, for fear, and because they saw the Combination was great; and if
any man did, he was quickly made away by one convenient means or other, and no
inquiry made after the deed doers, nor Justice prosecuted against any that was
suspected.

But the People were so quiet, and so afraid, that every

For the same cause also was it impossible for any man that was angry at it, to
bemone himself, whereby to be revenged on them that conspired. For he must
have told his mind, either to one he knew not, or to one he knew and trusted
Populars approached each other, every one Oligarchy; and those were they that
caused in the Many that diffidence, and by strengthening the jealousy of the
populars one against another, conferred most to the security of the Few. During
this opportunity, Pisander, and they that were with him coming in, fell in
hand presently with the remainder of the business. And first they assembled
the People, and delivered their opinion, for ten men to be chosen People,
touching the best form of government for the City.

Afterward, when that day came, they summoned the Assembly to Colonus, (which
is a place consecrated to Neptune, without the City, about two Furlongs off)
And they that were appointed to write the Laws, presented this, and only
this, That it should be lawful for any Athenian to deliver whatsoever opinion
he pleased, imposing of great That not any Magistracy of the form before
used, might any longer be in force, nor any Fee belong unto it, The form of
the new Oligarchy.
but that five Prytanes might be elected, and these five choose a hundred, and
every one of this hundred take unto him three others. And these 400 entering
into the Councell-house, might have absolute authority to govern the State as
they thought best, and to summon the 5000, as often as to them should seem good.
Pisander a principal man of the Oligarchals.
He that delivered this opinion Pisander, who was also otherwise, openly the
forwardest to put down the Democracie. Antiphon another setter up of the Few.
But he that contrived the whole business, how to bring it to this pass, and
had long thought upon it, was Antiphon, The praise of Antiphon.
a man for virtue not inferior to any Athenian of his time, and the ablest of
any man, both to devise well, and also to express well, what he had devised.
And though he came not into the assemblies of the People, nor willingly to any
other debatings, because the Multitude had him in jealousy for the opinion
they had of the power of his eloquence, yet People, came to him for his
counsel, this one man was able to help People, was heard plead for himself,
when his life was in question for that business, the best of any man to this
day.

(...) another author of the Oligarchy.
Phrynichus also showed himself an earnest man for the Oligarchy, and that
more eminently then any other, because he feared Alcibiades, and knew him to be
acquainted with all his practices at Samos with Astyochus; and thought in all
probability, that he would never return, to live under Few. And this man in
any matter of weight, appeared the most sufficient to be relied on.

Also Theramenes the son of Agnon, an able man both for elocution and
understanding, was another of the Principal of those that overthrew the
Democracie. So that it it is no marvel if the business took effect, being by
many and wise men conducted, though it were a hard one. For it went sore with
the Athenian People, almost a hundred years after the expulsion of the
Tyrants, to be now deprived of their liberty, having not only not been
subject

The 400 enter upon the Senate, and dismiss the Senate of 500, called the
Council of the Bean.
When the Assembly (after it had passed these things, no man contradicting) was
dissolved, then afterward they brought the Four hundred into the
Councell-house, in this manner. The Athenians were evermore partly on the
Walls, and partly at their Arms in the Camp, in regard of the Enemy that
lay at Decelea. Therefore on the day appointed, they suffered such as knew not
their intent, to go forth, as they were wont. But to such as were Andrians,
Tenians, three hundred Carystians, and such of the Colonie of Aegina which the
Athenians had sent thither to inhabit, as came on purpose to this action with
their own Arms. These things thus ordered, the Four hundred, with every man
a secret Greece, (whom they used for occasions of shedding blood) came in upon
the The Senate or Councel^ of 500 (...).
Counselors of the Bean, as they sat in the Counsell-house, and commanded
them to take their Salary, and be gone, which also they brought ready with
them, for the whole time they were behind, and paid it to them as they went
out. And the rest of the Citizens mutined not, but rested quiet.

The 400 being now entered into the Counsell-house, created These were (...)
Council of the 500, in number 50* and in (...) moderated and put the (...) in
that Council, and also in the Assemblies of the (...).
Prytanes amongst themselves by lot* and made their prayers and sacrifices to
the Gods, all that were before People, saving that for Alcibiades his sake,
they recalled not the Outlawes, in other things they governed the Commonwealth
imperiously. And not only slew some, though not many, such as they thought fit
to be made away, and imprisoned some, and confined others to places abroad, but
also sent Heralds to Agis, King of the Lacedaemonians, who was then at Decelea,
signifying that they would come to composition People.

But he, not imagining that the City was yet in quiet, Agis, in hope that the
City was in sedition, comes to assault it, but is repulsed.
nor willing, so soon, to deliver up their ancient liberty, but rather that,
if they saw him approach with great forces, they would be in tumult, not yet
believing fully, but that some stir or other would arise amongst them, gave
no answer at all to those that came from the Fourehundred, touching the
composition; but having sent for new, and Peloponnesus, came down himself not
long after, both with the Army at Decelea, and those new comers, to the
Athenian Walls. Hoping that they would fall into his hands according to his
desire, at least the more easily for their confusion, or perhaps at the very
first shout of their voices; in respect of the tumult that in all likelihood
was to happen both within and without the City. For, as for the Long-walles,
in regard of the few Defendants likely to be found upon them, he thought he
could not fail to take them. But when he came near, Athenians were without
any the least alteration within, and had with their Horsemen which they sent
out, and a part of their men of Arms, and of their Light-armed, Decelea; but,
as for those that came last, after they had stayed a while in the Country, he
sent them home again. The 400* send to Lacedaemon to procure a Peace.
After this, the 400, notwithstanding their former repulse, sent Ambassadors
unto Agis anew, and he now receiving them better, by his advice they sent
Ambassadors also to Lacedaemon, about an agreement,

They sent to Samos, to excuse their doings to the army.
They likewise sent 10 men to Samos, to satisfy the Army, and to tell them,
That the Oligarchy was not set up, to any prejudice of the City, or Citizens,
but for the safety of the whole State. And that they which had their hands in
it, were 5000, and not 400 only. Notwithstanding that the Athenians by reason
of warfare, and employment abroad, never assembled, of how great consequence
soever was the ma^ter to be handled, so frequent, as to be 5000 there at once.
And having in other things instructed them how to make the best of the matter,
Oligarchicall form themselves, but (the mischief beginning there) would
depose them also.

The Oligarchy assaulted at Samos by the Populars.
For in Samos there was a commotion about the Oligarchy already. And this that
follows, happened about the same time that the 400 were set up in Athens.
Those Samians that had risen against the Nobility, and were of the Peoples
side, turning when Pisander came thither, at the Athenians in Samos that were
his Accomplices, conspired together to the number of 300, and were to have
assaulted the rest as Populars; and one Hyperbolus, a lewd fellow, who, not for
any fear of his power, or for any dignity, but for wickedness of life, and
dishonor he did the City, had been banished by Ostracisme, they slew;
abetted therein both by Charminus, one of the Commanders, and by other
Athenians that were amongst them, who had given them their faith; and together
with these they committed other facts of the same Popular Leon, and Diomedon,
(for these being honored by the People, endured the Oligarchy unwillingly) and
also to Thrasibulus, and Thrasi^^us, whereof one was Captain of a Gally, and
the other Captain of a Band of a men of Arms, and to such others continually
as they thought stood in greatest opposition to the Conspirators; and required
of them, that they would not see them destroyed, and Samos alienated from the
Athenians, by the only means of which their Dominion had till this time
Paralians, (who were all Athenians and Freemen, come thither in the Gally
called Paralus, and had always before been enemies to the Oligarchy. And Leon,
and Diomedon, whenever they went forth any whither, left them certain
Galleys for their guard.) So that when the 300 assaulted them, the Commons of
the Samians, with the help of all these, and especially of the Paralians, had
the upper hand, and of the 300, slew 30. Three of the Democratie.

The Paralus, and it Chaereas the son of Archestratus, The Army send to
Athens to signify their doings against the Oligarchy at Samos, not knowing
that the Oligarchy was then in authority at Athens.
a man of Athens, one that had been forward in the making of this change, the
Samians, and the Soldiers dispatched presently away to Athens, to advertise
them of what was done; for they knew not yet that the government was in the
hands of the 400. When they arrived, the 400 cast some two or three of these of
the Paralus into prison; the Euboea. But Chaereas, by some means or other,
getting presently away, seeing how things went, came back to Samos, and
related to the Army all that the Athenians had done, aggravating it to the
utmost; As that they punished every man with stripes, to the end that none
should contradict the doings of those that bore rule; and that their wives and
children at home were abused; and that they had an intention further to take
and imprison all that were of kin to any of Samos would not submit to their
authority. And many other things he told them, adding lies of his own.

The Democracy re-established in the army.
When they heard this, they were ready at first to have fallen upon the chief
authors of the Oligarchy, and upon such of the rest as were partakers of it.
Yet afterward, being hindered by such as came between, and advised them not to
overthrow the State, the enemy lying so nere with their Galleys to assault
them, they gave it over. After this, Thrasybulus the son of Lycas, and
Thrasyllus, (for these were the principal authors of the change) determining
now openly to reduce the State at Samos to a Democracy, took oaths of all the
Soldiers, especially of the Oligarchicals, that they should be subject to the
Democracy, and agree together, and also that they should zealously prosecute
the War against the Peloponnesians, and withal be enemies to the 400, and
not have to do with them by Ambassadors. The same oath was taken by all the
Samians that were of age, and the Athenian Soldiers communicated with them
their whole affairs, together with whatsoever should succeed of their dangers.
For whom and for themselves, they made account there was no refuge of safety,
but that if either the 400, or the enemy, at Miletus,

So there was a contention at this time, one side compelling the City to a
Democracy; the other, the Army to an Oligarchy. And presently there was an
Assembly of the Soldiers called, wherein they deprived the former Commanders,
and such Captains of Galleys as they had in suspicion, of their charge* and
chose others, both Captains of Galleys, and Commanders in their places, of
which Thrasybulus and Thrasyllus were two. And they stood up and encouraged one
another, both otherwise, and with this, That they had no cause to be dejected
for the Cities reuolting from them; The army encourages it self against the
City and State at home, by comparison of their strength.
For they at Athens, being the lesser part, had forsaken them, who were not
only the greater part, but also every way the better provided. For they having
the whole Navy could compel the rest of the cities, subject unto them, to pay
in their money, as well now, as if they were to set out from Athens it self.
And that they also had a City, namely Samos, no weak one, but even such a
one, a^ when they were enemies, wanted little of taking the Dominion of the Sea
from the Athenians. That the seat of the War, was the same it was before; and
that they should be better able to provide Athens were Masters of the entrance
of Piraeus both formerly by the favor of them at Samos, and that now also,
unless they restore them the Government, they shall again be brought to that
pass, that those at Samos shall be better able to bar them the use of the
Sea, then they shall be to bar it them of Samos. That it was a trifle and
worth nothing which was conferred to the ouercomming of the Enemy by the City,
and a small matter it would be to lose it, seeing they had neither any more
Silver to send them (for the Soldiers shifted for themselves) nor yet good
direction Athens, in that they had abrogated the Laws of their Country,
whereas they at Samos did both observe the same themselves, and endeavor to
constrain the other to do so likewise. So that such of them in the Camp as
should give good council, were as good as they in the City. And that
Alcibiades, if they would decree his security and his return, would with all
his heart procure the King to be their Confederate. And that which is the
maine thing, if they failed of all other helps, yet with so great a Fleet,
they could not fail

When they had thus debated the matter in the Assembly, and encouraged one
another, they made ready, as at other times, whatsoever was necessary for the
War. And the ten Ambassadors which were sent to Samos from the
Foure-hundred, hearing of this by the way, at Delos, whither they were come
already, stayed still there.

Upon the murmur of the Soldiers against Astyochus, he goes to Samos to ^ffe^
the Athenians battle, who refuse it.
the Soldiers of the Peloponnesian Fleet at Miletus murmured amongst
themselves, that Astyochus and Tissaphernes overthrew the state of their
Affairs. Astyochus, in refusing to fight, both before, when their own Fleet
was stronger, and that of the Athenians but small, and also now, whilst they
were said to be in sedition, and their Fleet divided; and in expecting the
Phoenician Fleet, in fame, not in fact to come from Tissaphernes; And
Tissaphernes, in that he not only brought not in that Fleet of his, ought no
longer to delay time, but to hazard battle. This Syracusians.

Astyochus and the Confederates, when they heard of the murmur, and had in
Counsel resolved to fight, especially after they were informed that Samos was
in a tumult, putting forth with their whole Fleet, to the number of 121 Sail,
with order given to the Milesians to march by Land to the same place, went to
Mycale. But the Athenians being come out from Samos with their Fleet of 82
Galleys, and riding now at Glauce of the Territory of Mycale, (for in this part
toward Mycale, Samos is but a little Peloponnesian Fleet coming against them,
put in again to Samos as not esteeming themselves a sufficient number to
hazard their whole fortune on the Battle. Besides, they stayed for the coming
of Strombichides from Hellespont to their aid, (for they saw that they of
Miletus had a desire to fight) with those Galleys that went from Chius against
Abydus; for they had sent unto him before. So these retired into Samos. And the
Peloponnesians putting in at Mycale, there encamped, as also did the
Landforces of the Milesians, Samos, they received news that Strombichides
with his Galleys was arrived out of Hellespont, and thereupon returned
presently to Miletus. The Athenians offer battle to the Peloponnesians and
they refuse it.
Then the Athenians on the other side, with the addition of these Galleys, went
to Miletus, being now one hundred and eight Sail, intending to fight: but when
no body came out against them, they likewise went back to Samos.

The Peloponnesians send part of their Fleet toward the Hellespont, but there
went through but only ten Galleys.
Immediately after this, the same Summer, the Peloponnesians, Clearchus the
son of Rhamphias with forty Galleys (according to the order at first from
Peloponnesus) to Pharnabazus. For not only Pharnabazus himself had sent for,
and promised to pay them, but they were advertised besides, by Ambassadors,
that Byzantium had a purpose to revolt. Hereupon these Peloponnesian Clearchus
with them, got into Delos, and came afterward to Miletus again: (but
Clearchus went thence again into the Hellespont by Land, and had the command
there,) and part under the charge of Elixus a Megarean (which were ten Sail,
went safely through into the Hellespont, and caused Byzantium to revolt. And
after this, when they of Samos heard of it, they sent certain Galleys into
Hellespont, to oppose them, and to be a guard to the Cities Byzantium.

In the mean time, they that were in authority at Samos, Alcibiades i^
recalled, and comes to Samos.
and especially Thrasybulus, who after the form of Government changed, was
still of the mind to have Alcibiades recalled, at length in an Assembly
persuaded the Soldiers to the same. And when they had decreed for Alcibiades,
both his return, and his security, he went to Tissaphernes, and fetched
Alcibiades to Samos, accounting it Tissaphernes from the Peloponnesians to
themselves. An Assembly being called, Alcibiades complained of, and lamented,
the calamity of his own exile, and speaking much of the business of the
State, gave them no small hopes of the future time, hyperbolically magnifying
his own power with Tissaphernes, to the end that both they which held the
Oligarchy at home, might the more fear him, He manifests his power with
Tissaphernes*
and so the Conspiracies dissolve, and also those at Samos the more honor him,
and take better heart unto themselves: and withal, Tissaphernes, and fall from
their present hopes. Alcibiades therefore, with the greatest boast that could
be, affirmed that Tissaphernes had undertaken to him, that as long as he had
any thing left, if he might but trust the Athenians, they should never want
for maintenance, no, though he should be constrained to make Money of his
own bed; and that he would fetch the Phoenician Fleet now at Aspendus, not to
the Peloponnesians, but to the Athenians. And that then only he would rely
upon the Athenians, when Alcibiades called home, should undertake for them.

Alcibiades General of the Athenian army.
Hearing this and much more, they chose him presently Foure-hundred, for any
good in the world; and were ready even then, upon those words of his,
contemning the Enemy there present, to set sail for Piraeus. But he, though
many pressed it, by all means forbade their going against Piraeus, being to
leave their Enemies so near; but since they had chosen him General,
Tissaphernes first, and to dispatch such business with him as concerned the
War. And as soon as the Assembly brake up, he took his journey accordingly,
to the end that he might seem to communicate every thing with him, and for
that he desired also to be in more honor with him, and to show that he was
General, and a man capable to do him good or hurt. And it happened to
Alcibiades, that he awed the Athenians with Tissaphernes, and Tissaphernes with
the Athenians.

The Peloponnesians murmur against Tissaphernes and As^yochus.
When the Peloponnesians that were at Miletus heard that Alcibiades was gone
home, whereas they mistrusted Tissaphernes before, now they much more accused
him. For it fell out, that when at the coming of the Athenians with their
Fleet before Miletus, they refused to give them Battle, Tissaphernes became
thereby a great deal slacker in his payment, and besides that he was hated by
them before this, for Alcibiades sake, the Soldiers now, meeting in Companies
apart, reckoned up one to another, the same matters which they had noted
before, and some also, men of value, Astyochus, who for private lucre gave way
to the humor of Tissaphernes. Whilst these were upon this consideration,
there happened also a certain tumult about Astyochus. For the Mariners of the
Syracusians and Thurians, Dorieus, that amongst the rest spoke for the
Soldiers under himself, and lift up his staff against him. Mutiny against
(...)*
When the Soldiers saw that, they took up a cry like Seamen indeed, all at
once, and were running upon Astyochus, to have stricken him. But foreseeing it,
he fled to an Altar, and was not stricken, but they were parted again.

The Milesians also took in, a certain Fort in Miletus, The Milesians take in
the Fort made in (...) City by Tissaphernes.
Tissaphernes, having privily assaulted it, and cast out the Garrison that was
within it. These things were by the rest of the Confederates, and especially by
the Syracusians, well approved of, but Lichas liked them not; saying, it
behooved the Milesians, and the rest dwelling within the Kings Dominion, to have
obeyed Tissaphernes in all moderate things, and till such time as the War
should have been well dispatched, to have courted him. And the Milesians, for
this and other things of this kind were offended with Lichas, and afterward
when he dyed of sickness, Lacaedaemonians then present, would have had him.

Whilst they were quarrelling about their business with Astyochus and
Tissaphernes, Mindarus successor to Astyochus, takes charge of the Army, and
Astyochus goes home.
Mindarus comes in from Lacedaemon to succeed Astyochus in his charge of the
Fleet. And as soon as he had taken the Command upon him, Astyochus departed.
But with him Tissaphernes sent a Carian, named Cauleites, one that spoke Both
Greek and Persian.
both the Languages, both to accuse the Milesians about the Fort, and also to
make Milesians went principally to exclaim upon him, and that Hermocrates went
with them, and would bewray how Tissaphernes undid the business of the
Peloponnesians, with Alcibiades, and dealt on both hands. For he was
continually at enimity with him, about the payment of the Soldiers wages; and
in the end, when Hermocrates was banished from Syracuse, and other Commanders
of the Syracusian Fleet, namely, Potamis, Miscon, and Demarchus, were arrived
at Miletus, Tissaphernes lay more heavy upon him, being an Outlaw his Enemy.
So Astyochus and Hermocrat^s and the Milesians went their way to Lacedaemon.

The Ambassassadours from the 400 to excuse the change at Athens.
Alcibiades by this time was come back from Tissaphernes, to Samos* And those
Ambassadors of the Foure-hundred, which had been sent out before to mollify
and to inform those of Samos, came from Delos, now, whilst Alcibiades was
present.

An Assembly being called, they were offering to speak, but the Soldiers at
first would not hear them, but cried out to have them put to death, for that
they had deposed the People; yet afterward with much ado they were That the
change had been made for the preservation of the City, not to destroy it, nor
to deliver it to the Enemy; for they could have done that before now, when the
Enemy during their government assaulted it. That every one of the 5000 was to
participate of the Government in their turns. And their friends were not (as
Chaereas had laid to their charge) abused, nor had any wrong at all, but
remained every one quietly upon his own.

Though they delivered this and much more, yet the Piraeus* Alcibiades saves
the Athenian State.
And now Alcibiades appeared to be the first and principal man in doing
service to the Commonwealth. For when the Athenians at Samos were carried
headlong to invade themselves, (in which case most manifestly the Enemy had
presently possessed himself of Ionia and Hellespont) it was thought that he
was the man that kept them from it. Nor was there any man at that time able to
have held in the Multitude, That he opposed not the government of the 5000, but
willed them to remove the 400, and to establish the Council that was before of
500. That if they had frugally cut off any expense, so that such as were
employed in the Wars might be the better maintained, he did much commend them
for it. And withal he exhorted them to stand out, and give no ground to their
Enemies; for that as long as Samos, or the other at Athens, there would none be
left for the Enemy to compound withal.

There chanced to be present also the Ambassadors of the Argiues, sent unto the
Popular faction of the Athenians in Samos, to assist them. These Alcibiades
commended, and appointed to be ready when they should be called for, and so
dismissed them. These Argiues came in with those of the Paralus, that had been
bestowed formerly in the military Gally by the Foure-hundred, to go about
Euboea, and Lespodias, Aristophon, and Melesias, Ambassadors from the
Foure-hundred, to Lacedaemon. These as they sailed by Argos, seized on the
Ambassadors, and delivered them as principal men in deposing of the People,
to the Argiues, and returned no more to Athens, but came with the Gallie they
then were in, to Samos, and brought with them these Ambassadors from the
Argiues.

The same Summer, Tissaphernes, Tissaphernes goes to the Phoenician Fleet at
Aspendus.
at the time that the Peloponnesians were offended with him most, both for the
going home of Alcibiades, and diverse other things, as now Atticizing, with
purpose, as indeed it seeemed, to clear himself to them, concerning his
accusations, made ready for his journey to Aspendus for the Phoenician Fleet,
and willed Lichas to go along with him; saying that he would substitute Tamos
his Deputy Lieutenant over the Army, to pay the Fleet whilst himself was
absent.

This matter is diversely reported, and it is hard to know with what purpose he
went to Aspendus, and yet brought not the Fleet away with him. For it is known
that 147 Phoenicians were come forward as far as Aspendus, but why thy came not
through, the conjectures are various. Some think it was upon design (as he
formerly intended) to wear out the Peloponnesian Forces, Conjectures of diverse
upon his going.
(for which cause also, Tamos, who had that charge, made no better, but rather
worse payment then himself.) Others, that having brought the Phoenicians as
far as Aspendus, he might dismiss them for money; (for he never meant to use
their service.) Some again said, it was because they exclaimed so against it
a^ Lacedaemon, and that it might not be

The opinion of the Author.
For my own part, I think it most clear, that it was Grecians, that he
brought not those Galleys in. Consuming them, in that he went thither, and
delayed the time; and equalizing them, in that bringing them to neither, he
made neither party the stronger. For if he had had a mind to end the War, it
is manifest he might have been sure to have done it. For if he had brought
them to the Lacedaemonians, in all reason he had given them the victory, who
had a Navy already, rather equal then inferior to that of their Enemies.

But that which hurt them most, was the pretense he alleged for not bringing
the Fleet in, for he said they were not so many sail as the King had ordained
to be gotten together. But sure he might have ingratiated himself more in this
business, by dispatching it with less of the Kings Money, then by spending
more. But whatsoever was his purpose, Tissaphernes went to Aspendus, and was
with the Phoenicians, and by his own appointment, the Peloponnesians sent
Philip a Lacedaemonian with him with two Galleys, as to take charge of the
Fleet.

Alcibiades, knowing that Tissaphernes would never bring on the Fleet, goes
after him, to make the Peloponnesians think, the Fleet was stand for his and
the Athenians sakes.
Alcibiades, when he heard that Tissaphernes was gone to Aspendus, goes after
him with thirteen Galleys, promising to those at Samos, a safe and great
benefit, which was, that he would either bring those Phoenician Galleys to the
service of the Athenians, or at least hinder their coming to the
Peloponnesians; knowing, as is likely, the mind of Tissaphernes by long
acquaintance, that he meant not to bring them on, and desiring, as much as he
could, to procure him the ill will of the Peloponnesians, for the friendship
shown to himself and to the Athenians, that he might Phaselis and Caunus
upwards.

Sedition at Athens, about the change of the Oligarchy into Democracy again.
The Ambassadors of the Foure-hundred being returned from Samos to Athens, and
having related what they had in charge from Alcibiades, how that he exhorted
them to hold out, and not give ground to the Enemy, and that he had great hopes
to reconcile them to the army, and to overcome the Peloponnesians; whereas many
of the sharers in the Oligarchy, were formerly discontented, and would gladly,
if they could Oligarchicals, and such as bare Office amongst them, as
Theramenes the son of Agnon, and Aristocrates the son of Sicelias, and
others, who though they were partakers with the foremost in the affairs of
State, yet feared, as they said, Alcibiades, and the Army at Samos; and joined
in the sending of Ambassadors to Lacedaemon, because they were loath, by
singling themselves Oligarchy made out of a Democracy, is chiefly overthrown.
Ambition of the Oligarchicals amongst themselves, overthrows their Government.
For at once they claymed every one, not to be equal, but to be far the
chief. Whereas in a Democracie, when election is made, Alcibiades at Samos,
and the opinion they had that the Oligarchy was not like to last, was it that
most evidently encouraged them; and thereupon they every one contended, who
should most eminently become the Patron of the People.

But those of the Foure-hundred that were most opposite to such a form of
Government, and the principal of them, both Phrynichus, (who had been
General at Samos, and was ever since at difference with Alcibiades) and
Aristarchus, People, both in the greatest manner, and for the longest time; and
Pisander and Antiphon, and others of the greatest power, not only formerly, as
soon as they entered into authority, and afterward when the State at Samos
revolted to the People, sent Ambassadors to Lacedaemon, and bestirred
themselves for the Oligarchy, and built a wall in the place called Eetioneia,
but much more afterward, when their Ambassadors were come from Samos, and
that they saw not only the Populars, but also some others of their own party,
thought Lacedaemon they sent Antiphon and Phrynichus, with ten others, with
all possible speed, as fearing their adversaries, both at home Samos, (...)
fortify the ^^^th of the Haven (...).
with Commission to make a Peace with the Lacedaemonians on any tolerable
conditions whatsoever, or howsoever, and in this time went on with the building
of the Wall in Eeteoneia with greater diligence then before. The scope they had
in this Wall, as it was given out by Theramenes the son of Agnon was not so
much to keep out those of Samos, in case they should attempt by force to enter
into Piraeus, as at their pleasure to be able to let in both the Galleys, and
the Landforces of the Enemies. For this Eetionea is the Peer of the Piraeus,
close unto which is the ^
ground-gallery, an exceeding great one, and close to their new Wall within
Piraeus, and were Masters of it, and constrained all men, as well to bring
thither their corn, which

These things Theramenes murmured at long before, and when the Ambassadors
returned from Lacedaemon, Theramenes murmureth against their fortifying in
Eetioneia.
without compounding for them all in general, he gave out, that this Wall
would endanger the undoing of the City. For at this very instant, there happened
to be riding on the Coast of Laconia, 42 Galleys, (amongst which were some of
Tarentum, some of Locri, some Italians, and some Sicilians) set out from
Peloponnesus, at the instance of the Euboeans, bound Euboea, and commanded by
Hegesandridas the son of Hegesander, a Spartan. And these Theramenes said
were coming, not so much toward Euboea, as toward those that fortified in
Eetioneia, and that if they were not looked to, they would surprise the City.
Now some matter might indeed be gathered also from those that were accused, so
that it was not a mere slander. For their principal design was to retain
the Oligarchy, with dominion over their Confederates; but if they failed of
that, yet being masters of the Galleys and of the fortification* to have The
scope of the Oligarchicals.
If barred of that, then, rather Democracie, to let in the Enemy, and without
either Navy or Fortification, to have let what would have become of the City,
and to have compounded for the safety of their own persons.

Therefore they went diligently on with the Fortification, wherein were Wickets
and Entries, and backewayes for the Enemy, and desired to have it finished in
time. And though these things were spoken but amongst a few before, and in
secret, yet when Phrynichus, after his Lacedaemonian Embassage, was by a
certain Watchman wounded trecherously in the Marketplace, when it was full,
Phrynichus murdered.
as he went from the Councell-house, and not far from it, fell instantly
dead, and the murderer gone; and that one of his Accomplices, an Argiue, taken
by the Foure-hundred, and put to the torture, would confess no man of those
named to him, nor any thing else, saving this, that many men used to assemble
at the house of the Captain of the Watch, and at other houses, then at length,
because this accident bred no alteration, Theramenes, and Aristocrates, and as
many other, either of the 400, or out of that number, as were of the same
faction, proceeded more boldly to assault the Government. For now also the
Fleet being come about from Laconia, and lying upon the Coast of Epidaurus, had
made incursions upon Aegina. And Theramenes thereupon alleged, that it was
improbable that those Galleys holding their course for Euboea, would have put
in at Aegina, and then have gone back again to lie at Epidaurus, unless they
had been sent for by such men as he had ever accused of the Theramenes and his
Faction set themselves against the rest of the 400.
they fell upon the State in good earnest. For the Soldiers that were in
Piraeus, employed in fortifying Eetioneia, (amongst whom was also Aristocrates,
Captain of a Band of men, and his Band with him) seized on Alexicles,
principal Commander of the Soldiers under the Foure-hundred, an eminent man
of the other side, and carrying him into a house, kept him in hold. As soon as
the news hereof was brought unto the Foure-hundred, (who chanced at the same
time to be sitting in the Councel-house) they were ready al of them presently
to have taken Arms, threatening Theramenes and his

He to purge himself was ready to go with them, and to help to rescue
Alexicles, and taking with him one of the Commanders, who was also of his
Faction, went down into Piraeus. To help him went also Aristarchus, and
certain Horsemen of the younger sort.

Great and terrible was the tumult. For in the City they thouhht Piraeus was
already taken, and him that was laid in hold, slain. And in Piraeus they
expected every Thucydides of Pharsalus, the Cities (...). He that lodged the
Athenians, when any of them came to Pharsalus.
Host, being then there, going boldly and close up to every one he met, and
crying out unto them, not to destroy their Country, when the Enemy lay so
near waiting for an advantage with much ado quieted them, and held their
hands from spilling their own blood. Theramenes coming into Piraeus, for he
also had command over the Soldiers, made a show by his exclaiming, of being
Aristarchus and those that were of the contrary side, were extremely angry in
good earnest. Nevertheless the Soldiers went on with their business, and
repented not a jot of what they had done. Then they asked Theramenes, if he
thought this Fortification were made to any good end, and whether it were not
better to have it demolished. And he answered, that if they thought good to
demolish it, he also thought the same. At which word they presently got up,
both the Soldiers, and also many others, of Piraeus, and fell a digging down
of the

Now the provocation that they used to the Multitude, was in these words: The
soldiers pull down the Wall they had built in Eetioneia.
That whosoever desired that the Soueraignety should be in the 5000 in stead of
the 400, ought also to set himself to the work in hand. For notwithstanding
all this, they thought fit as yet to veil the Democracie with the name of the
Fiue-thousand, and not to say plainly, Whosoever will have the Soueraignety in
the People, lest the 5000. should have bin extant indeed, and so a man by
speaking to some or other of them, might do hurt to the business,
Foure-hundred would neither let the Fiue-thousand be extant, nor yet let it
be known that they were not. For to make so many participant of the affairs
of State, they thought was a direct Democracie, but to have it doubtful, would
make them afraid of one another. The next day* the Foure-hundred, though out of
order, yet met together in the Councell-house, and the Soldiers in Piraeus
having enlarged Alexicles, whom they had before imprisoned, and quite razed the
Fortification, came into the Theater of Bacchus, near to Munychia, and there
sat down with their Castor and Pollux. To this place came unto them certain
men elected by the Foure-hundred, and man to man reasoned and persuaded with
such as they saw to be of the mildest temper, both to be quiet themselves, and
to restrain the rest; saying, that not only the Fiue-thousand should be made
known who they were, but that out of these, such should be chosen in turns,
to be of the Foure-hundred, as the Fiue-thousand should A day appointed for an
assembly, wherein to treat of agreement.
that an Assembly should be held, for making of accord, in the Temple of
Bacchus at a day assigned.

When they came to the Temple of Bacchus, and wanted Hegesandridas with his 42
Galleys, came from Megara along the Coast toward Salamis. And now there was
not a Soldier, but thought it the very same thing that Theramenes and his
party had before told them, That those Galleys were to come to the
Fortification, and that it was now demolished to good purpose. But
Hegesandridas, perhaps upon appointment, houered upon the Coast of Epidaurus,
and thereabouts; but it is likely, that in respect of the sedition of the
Athenians, he staid in those parts, with hope to take hold of Athenians, as
soon as it was told them, ran presently with all the power of the City, down
to Piraeus; less esteeming their domestique

But the Peloponnesian Galleys being now gone by, and gotten about the
Promontory of Sunium, The battle between the Athenians and the Fleet of
Hegesandridas at Eretria.
cast Anchor between Thoricus and Prasiae, and put in afterward at Oropus The
Athenians with all speed, constrained to make use of tumultuary Forces, such
as a City in time Euboea, since they were shut out of Attica, was all they
had) sent a Fleet under the command of Timocharis, to Eretria. Which arriving*
with those Galleys that were in Euboea before, made up the number of six and
thirty Sail; and they were presently constrained to hazard Battle. For
Hegesandridas brought out his Galleys from Oropus, when he had first there
dined.

Now Oropus is from Eretria about threescore Furlongs of Sea. Whereupon the
Athenians also, as the Enemy Eretrians, to the end that the Enemy might fall
upon the Athenians that embarked slowly, before they were ready, and force them
to come out and fight nothing was there to be sold) but in the utmost Houses
of the City. There was besides a sign set up at Eretria, to Oropus, at what
time to set forward.

The Athenians drawn out by this device, and fighting before the Haven of
Eretria, made resistance nevertheless for a while, but afterward they turned
their backs, and were chased ashore. The Athenians defeated.
Such as fled to the City of the Eretrians, taking it for their friend, were
handled most cruelly, and slaughtered by them of the Town; but such as got to
the Fort in Eretria, holden by the Athenians, saved themselves: And so did so
many of their Galleys as got Chalcis.

Peloponnesians, after they had taken twelve Athenian Galleys with the men,
whereof some they slew, and some they took prisoners, erected a Trophie; and
not long after, having caused all Euboea to revolt, Euboea reuolteth.
save only Oreus (which the Athenians held with their own forces) they
settled the rest of their business there.

When the news of that which had happened in Euboea, The lament (...) the
Athenians upon the loss of Euboea.
was brought to Athens, it put the Athenians into the greatest astonishment
that ever they had been in before. For neither did their loss in Sicily,
though then thought great, Samos was in rebellion, when they had no more
Galleys, nor men to put aboard, when they were in Sedition amonst themselves,
and in continual expectation of falling together by the ears* then in the
neck of all, arrived this great Calamity; wherein they not only lost their
Galleys, but also, which was worst of all, Euboea, by which they had received
more Commodity then by Attica. How then could they choose but be dejected? But
most of all they were troubled, Piraeus, now empty of Shipping, of which they
thought nothing wanting, but that they were not there already. And had they
been any thing aduenturous, they might easily have done it, and then, had they
stayed there and besieged them, they had not only increased the Sedition, but
also compelled the Fleet to come away from Ionia, to the aid of their kindred
and of the whole City, though Enemies to the Oligarchy; and Hellespont, Ionia,
the Islands and all places even to Euboea, and as one may say, the whole
Athenian Empire into their power. But the Lacedaemonians not only in this, The
Lacedaemonians commodious enemies to the Athenians.
but in many other things were most commodious enemies to the Athenians to
War withal. For being of most different humors, The Lacedaemonians let slip
the advantage which they might have had, if in prosecution of the victory, they
had come to Piraeus*
the one swift, the other slow, the one aduenturous, the other timorous, the
Lacedaemonians gave them great advantage, especially when their greatness was
by Sea. This was evident in the Syracusians, who being in condition like unto

The Athenians upon this news, made ready notwithstanding twenty Galleys, The
Athenians settle their Government, and put an end to the Sedition, by deposing
the 400, and setting up the 5000.
and called an Assembly, one Pnyx, where they were wont to assemble at other
times, in which having deposed the Foure-hundred, they decreed the Soueraignety
to the Fiue-thousand, of which number were all such to be, as were charged
with Arms; and from that time forward to Salariate no man for Magistracy, with
a penalty on the Magistrate receiving the Salary, to be held for an execrable
person. There were also diverse other Assemblies held afterward, wherein they
elected Lawmakers, and enacted other things concerning the Government. And now
first, (at least Athenians seem to have ordered their State aright; which
consisted now of a moderate temper, both of the Few, and of the Many. And this
was the first thing, that after so many misfortunes past, made the City again
to raise her head.

They recall Alcibiades.
They decreed also the recalling of Alcibiades, and those that were in exile
with him; and sending to him, and to the Army at Samos, willed them to fall in
hand with their business.

Most of the Oligarchicals ^ly to the enemy.
In this change, Pisander and Alexicles, and such as were with them, and they
that had been principal in the Oligarchy, immediately withdrew themselves to
Decelea. Aristarchus betrayeth Oenoe.
Only Aristarchus (for it chanced that he had charge of the Soldiers) took
with him certain Archers, of the most Barbarous, and went with all speed to
Oenoe. This was a Fort of the Athenians in the Confines of Boeotia, and (for
the loss that the Corinthians had received by the Garrison of Oenoe,) was, by
voluntary Corinthians, and by some Boeotians by them called in to Aristarchus
therefore having treated with these, deceived those in Oenoe, and told them,
that the City of Athens had compounded with the Lacaedaemonians, and that they
were to render up the place to the Boeotians, for that it was so conditioned in
the Agreement. Whereupon, believing him, as one that had authority over the
Soldiery, and knowing nothing because besieged, upon security for their pass,
they gave up the Fort. So the Boeotians receive Oenoe; and the Oligarchy and
Athens cease.

Mindarus with the Peloponnesian Fleet, seeing Tissaphernes and the Phoenician
Fleet came not, resolves to go to Pharnabazus in the Hellespont.
when none of those, whom Tissaphernes, at his going to Aspendus, had
substituted to pay the Peloponnesian Navy, at Miletus, did it; and seeing
neither the Phoenician Fleet, nor Tissaphernes came to them; and seeing Philip,
that was sent along with him, and also another, one Hippocrates a Spartan, that
was lying in Phaselis, had written to Mindarus the General, That the Fleet
was not to come at all, and in every thing Tissaphernes abused them; seeing
also that Pharnabazus had sent Tissaphernes, to cause the rest of the Cities
within his own Province to revolt from the Athenians; Then at length, Mindarus
hoping for benefit by him, with good order, and sudden warning, that the
Athenians at Samos might not be aware of their setting forth, went into the
Hellespont with seauenty three Galleys, besides sixteen, which the same Summer
were gone into the Hellespont before, and had overrun Chersonnesus. But
tossed with the Winds, he was forced to put in at Icarus, and after he had
staid there through ill weather some five or six days, he arrived at Chios.

Thrasyllus having been advertised of his departure from Miletus, he also
puts to Sea from Samos, Mindarus stays by the way at Chius, Thrasyllus in the
mean time out-goes him, and watches for his going by at Lesbos.
with five and fifty Sail, hasting to be in the Hellespont before him. But
hearing that he was in Chios, and conceiving that he would stay there, he
appointed Lesbos, and in the Continent over against it, that the Fleet of the
Enemy might not remove without his knowledge; and he himself going to
Methymna, commanded provision to be made of Meal, and other necessaries,
intending, if they stayed there long, to go from Lesbos, and invade them in
Chios.

Withal, because Eressus was revolted from Lesbos, he purposed to go thither
with his Fleet, if he could, Methymnaean Exiles had gotten into their society,
about fifty men of Arms, out of Cyme, and hired others out of the Continent,
Anaxarchus a Theban, chosen in respect of their descent from the Thebans, first
assaulted Methymna, but beaten in the attempt, by the Athenian Garrison that
came against them from Mitylene, and again in a Skirmish without the City,
driven quite away, they passed by the way of the Mountain to Eressus, and
caused it to revolt. Thrasyllus therefore intended to go thither with his
Galleys, and to assault it. At his coming, he found Thrasybulus there also
before him, Samos: For he had been advertised of the Out-lawes coming over;
but being too late to prevent them, he went to Eressus, and lay before it at
Anchor. Hither also came two Galleys of Methymna, that were going home from the
Hellespont; so that they were in all threescore and seven Sail, out of which
they made an Army, intending with Engines, or any other way they could, to
take Eressus by assault.

Mindarus and his fleet steal by into the Hellespont unseen of those that
watched their going, in Lesbos.
In the mean time, Mindarus, and the Peloponnesian Fleet that was at Chios,
when they had spent two days in victualling their Galleys, and had received of
the Chians Chian a Tessaracoste, seems (...) b^ne a coin amongst the Chians
and the fortieth part of some other greater coin.
Tessaracostes a man, on the third day put speedily off from Chius; and kept
far from the shore, that they might not fall amongst the Galleys at Eressus.
And leaving Lesbos on the left hand, went to the Continent side, and putting in
at a Haven in Craterei, belonging to the Territory of Phocaea, and there
dining, passed along the Territory of Cyme, and came to Arginusae in the
Continent, over against Mitylene, where they supped. From thence they put forth
late in the night, and came to Harmatus, Methymna, and after dinner going a
great pace by Lectus, Larissa, Hamaxitus, and other the Towns in those parts,
came before midnight to Rhaetium; this now is in Hellespont. But some of his
Galleys put in at Sigeum, and other places thereabouts.

The Athenians at Sestus with 18 Galleys steal out of the Hellespont, but are
met by Mindarus, and 4 of them taken.
The Athenians that lay with eighteen Galleys at Sestus, knew that the
Peloponnesians were entering into the Hellespont, by the Fires* both those which
their own Watchmen put up, and by the many which appeared on the Enemies
shore* and therefore the same night, in all haste, Chersonnesus, toward
Elaeus, Abydus, (though these had warning before from the Fleet of their
friends that came on, to watch them narrowly, that they went not out) but in
the morning, being in sight of the Fleet with Mindarus, and chased by him,
they could not all escape, but the most of them got to the Continent, and into
Lemnos; only four of the hindmost were taken near Elaeus; whereof the
Peloponnesians Protesilaus, and two other without the men, and set fire on a
fourth, abandoned upon the shore of Imbrus.

After this they besieged Elaeus the same day, with those Galleys of Abydus,
which were with them, and with the rest, being now all together fourscore and
six Sail. But seeing it would not yield, they went away to Abydus.

Athenians, The Athenians have from Lesbos after the Peloponnesians into
Hellespont.
who had been deceived by their Spies, and not imagining that the Enemies
Fleet could have gone by without their knowledge, and attended at leisure the
assault of Eressus, when now they knew they were gone, immediately left
Eressus, and hasted to the defense of Hellespont. By the way they took two
Galleys of the Peloponnesians, that having ventured into the Maine more boldly
in following the Enemy, then the rest had done, chanced to light upon the Flett
of the Athenians.

Elaeus, and stayed, and thither, from Imbrus, came unto them those other
Galleys that had escaped from the Enemy. Here they spent five days in
preparation for a Battle. After this, they fought in this manner. The
Athenians went by the shore, ordering their Galleys one by one, toward Sestus.
The Peloponnesians also, when they saw this, brought out their Fleet against
them from Abydus.

Being sure to fight, The Athenians and Peloponnesians fight, and the
Athenians get the victory.
they drew out their Fleet^ in Athenians along the shore of Chersonnesus,
beginning at Idacus, and reaching as far as Arrhianae, threescore and six
Galleys. And the Peloponnesians, Abydus to Dardanus, fourscore and six
Galleys. In the right Wing of the Peloponnesians, were the Syracusians; in the
other, Mindarus himself, and those Galleys that were nimblest. Amongst the
Athenians, Thrasyllus had the left Wing, and Thrasybulus the right, and the
rest of the Commanders, every one the place assigned him.

Now the Peloponnesians labored to give the first onset, and with their left
Wing to ouer-reach the right Wing of the Athenians, and keep them from going
Athenians, who perceived it, where the Enemy went about to cut off their way
out, put forth the same way that they did, and out-went them.

The left Wing of the Athenians was also gone forward by this time, beyond the
point called The Sepulcher of Hecuba. (...)*
Cynos-sema, by means whereof that part of the Fleet which was in the midst,
became both weak and divided, especially when theirs was the less Fleet; and
the sharp Cymos-sema took away the sight of what passed there, from those
that were on the other side.

The Peloponnesians therefore charging this middle part, both drove their
Galleys to the dry Land, and being far superior in fight, went out after
them, and assaulted them upon the shore. And to help them, neither was
Thrasibulus able, who was in the right Wing, for the multitude of the Enemies
that pressed him; nor Thrasyllus in the left Wing, both because he could
Cynos-sema, and because also he was kept from it by the Syracusians and
others, lying upon his hands, no fewer in number then themselves. Till at last
the Peloponnesians, bold upon their victory, chasing some one Gally, some
another, fell into some disorder, in a part of their Army. And then those
about Thrasybulus, having observed that the opposite Galleys sought now no more
to go beyond them, turned upon them, and fighting, put them presently to
flight. And having also cut off from the rest of the Peloponnesians, of that
part Syracusians also, whom those about Thrasyllus had already caused to
shrink, when they saw the rest fly, fled outright.

This defeat being given, and the Peloponnesians having for the most part
escaped, first to the River Pydius, and afterward to Abydus; though the
Athenians took but few of their Galleys, (for the narrowness of the
Hellespont afforded to the Enemy a short retreat) yet the Victory was the most
seasonable to them that could be. The courage of the Athenians erected with
this victory.
For having till this day stood in fear of the Peloponnesian Navy, both for
the loss which they had received by little and little, and also for their
great loss in Sicily, they now ceased either to accuse themselves, or to
think highly any longer of the Nauall power of their Enemies. The Galleys they
took were these; eight of Chios, five of Corinth, of Ambracia two, of Leucas,
Laconia, Syracuse, and Pellene, one apiece. Of their own

When they had set up a Trophie in the Promontory of Cynos-sema, and taken up
the wreckes, and given truce to the Enemies to fecth away the bodies of their
dead, they presently sent away a Gally with a Messenger, to carry news of the
Victory to Athens. The Athenians, upon the coming in of this Gally, hearing of
their unexpected good fortune, were encouraged much, after their loss in
Euboea, and after their sedition, and conceived that their estate might yet
keep up, if they plied

The fourth day after this Battle, the Athenians that were in Sestus, having
hastily prepared their Fleet, The Athenians recover Cyzicus, and take 8 Galleys
of the Peloponnesians.
went to Cyzicus which was revolted, and espying as they past by, the eight
Galleys come from Byzantium, riding under Harpagium and Priapus, set upon them,
and having also overcome those that came to their aid from the Land, took
them. Then coming to Cyzicus, being an open Town, they brought it again into
their own power,

The Peloponnesians recover some of their Galleys taken, at Elaeus.
The Peloponnesians in the mean time going from Abydus Elaeus, recovered as
many of their Galleys formerly taken, as remained whole. The rest, the
Eleusians had burnt. They send for the Fleet with Hegesand^id^ out of Euboea.
They also sent Hippocrates and Epicles into Euboea, to fetch away the Fleet
that was there.

Alcibiades returns from Aspendus to Samos.
About the same time also, returned Alcibiades to Samos, with his thirteen
Galleys from Caunus and Phaselis, reporting that he had diuerted the Phoenician
Fleet from coming to the Peloponnesians, and that he had inclined
Tissaphernes to the friendship of the Athenians, more then Halicarnasseans, He
fortifieth Cos*
and fortified Cos. Being now almost Autumn, he returned to Samos.

The Antandri^ns put out the Garrison of Tissaphernes out of their Cittadell.
The Peloponnesians being now in Hellespont, the Antandrians (who are Aeolians)
received into the City men of Arms from Abydus by Land, through Mount Ida,
upon injury that had been done them by Arsaces, a Deputy Lieutenant of
Tissaphernes. This Arsaces having fained a certain War, not declared against
whom, had formerly Delians, (the which in hallowing of Delos by the Athenians
were turned out, and had planted themselves in Adramyttium) to go with him to
this War. And when under color of amity and confederacy he had drawn them
out, he observed a time when they were at dinner, and having hemmed them in
with his own Soldiers murdered them with darts. And therefore, for this acts
sake, fearing lest he might do some unlawful pranke against them also, and
for that he had otherwise done them injury, they cast his Garrison out of
their Cittadell.

Tissaphernes goes toward Hellespont, to recover the favor of the
Peloponnesians.
Tissaphernes hearing of this, (being the act of the Peloponnesians, as well as
that at Miletus, or that at Cnidus, for in those Cities his Garrisons had also
been cast out in the same manner) and conceiving that he was deeply charged
to them, and fearing lest they should do him some other hurt; and withal not
enduring that Pharnabazus should receive them, and with less time and cost,
speed better against the Athenians then he had done, resolved Hellespont, both
to Antandrus, and to clear himself of his accusations, the best he could, as
well concerning the Phoenician Fleet, as other matters. The end of the one and
twentieth Summer.
And first he put in at Ephesus, and offered Sacrifice to Diana.

When the Winter following, this Summer shall be ended, the one and twentieth
year [of this Warre] shall be complete.

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
A
ABdera. 138. B. Abydus, reuolteth from the Athenians. 504. B. Acanthus
reuolteth from the Athenians 260. C. Acarnamans. why so called. 143. A. Thieves
4. C. their League with Athens. 119. B. good slingers. 127. D. Acesi^e, a River
of Sicily. 225. D. Achaia, Oligarchized. 339. A. Acharnae, a great part of the
Athenian City 94. A.B. Ache^^us. 14^. B. Acheron. 26. B. Acherusia. ibid.
Acrae, when and by whom built. 352. D. Aeragante, when and by whom built. 352.
A. Act* 272. D. Actium. 18. A. Aeg^netae. They incense the Lacedaemonians
against the Athenians. 35. C. Aegina, yielded to the Athenians. 57. A. They are
received by the Lacedaemonians into Thyrea. 97. B. and taken by the Athenians,
are put to death. 243. C. Aegitium. 197. E. 198. A. Egypt. The Athenians in
Egypt defeated. 57. D. Aemus. 137* D. Aenus. 228. D. Aeolian Islands. 192. B.
Aetna, burns. 209. B. Aetolia. 196. B. Agamemnon his power. 6. A. Agis
withdraws his Army from Argos, and why* 327. B. he leuieth money in Thessaly.
471. B. his power when he was at Decelea. 472. B. Agraei. 142. B. Agraeis. 203.
B. Agrianes. 138. A. Alcamenes slain. 475. C. Alcibiades, how he crosses
Nicias, and deceiving the Lacedaemoan Ambassadors, procures a League between
the Athenians and Argiues. 316. C. and sequ. he goes with charge into
Peloponnesus. 323. B. presses the Sicilian expedition, and why. 358. B. is
accused for the defacing of the Mercuries. 365. D. his opinion touching the
mannaging of the Sicilian War. 377. A. is called home to his trial. 379. B.
he vnbetrayeth Messana. 392. A. his advice to the Lacedaemonians, to fortify
Decelea. 402. C. He flies to Tissaphernes. 493. E he counsels Tissaphernes
against the Lacedaemonians. 494. D. seeks to return to Athens. 495. D. he
deludeth the Athenians, in demand of intolerable conditions, and why. 501. B.
his return propounded at Athens. 499. C. he is made General of the Athenian
Army at Samos. 516. A. his return decreed at Athens. 528. B. he hinders the
Army of the Athenians, from inuading the City of Athens. 518. C. he goes
after Tissaphernes to Aspendus, and why. 520. C. Alcidas sent to relieve
Mitylene. 158. B. his behavior in that voyage. 160. C. his return with his
Fleet into Peloponnesus, 182. B. his charge against Corcyra at Sybota. 185. B.
Al^maeon, 143. A. Almopia. 140. B. Alope. 97. B. Alyzea* 431. A. Ambrabian
Gulf. 18. A. 118. D. Ambraciotes War against the Acarnanians. 125. D. are
defeated at Idomenae. 206. D. Amorges, a Rebel against the King of Persia.
485. B. Amphipolis, called the Ninewayes. 53. A. taken by Brasidas. 271. A.
refuses to be rendered to the Athenians. 302. B. Anactorium. 18. A. 3. B. C.
208. C. 239. E. 431. A. Anaea. A City over against Samo^. 253. C. the Anaeans
were Samians. 160. C. Anapus, a River in Acarnania 128. A. a River near
Syracuse. 387. D. 405. B. Androsthenes, Victor in the Olympique Games. 321. B.
Antandrus, taken by the Outlawes of Mitylene. 240. E. Anthemus, 140. B.
Anthesterion, 91. D. Antiphon, 497 D. 498. A. Antitanes, 126. C. Aphrodisia,
242. D. Aphytis, 34. C. Apidanus, 255. E. Apodoti, 196. C. Apollo Maloeis, 146.
E. Arcadians, borrowed Ships for the Trojan War. 6. D. Archedice, daughter of
Hippias, her Epitaph. 383. A. Archidamus, King of Lacedaemon, General of the
Peloponnesians, 87. C. blamed for his delay at Oenoe, 93. A. his purpose in
staying at Acharn^. 94. A. his protestation against Plataea. 122. B. Archon.
the nine Archontes. 66. A. Arcturus, 124. C. An Argilian betrayeth Pausania^.
70. C. Argenum, 487. E. Argiues. They refuse to renew the Truce with Sparta,
and why. 298. B. they treat of League against the Lacedaemonians, with the rest
of the Grecians. 306. B. they seek Peace with Sparta, 314. C. they make League
with Athens. 319. A. their Army intercepted, between the Armies of their
enemies, 326. C. they renounce their League with the (...), 337. B. (...)* 6.
C. Argos Amphilochicum, 11^. D. invaded by the Ambraciotes* 2^^. C. Argos
Oligarchized, again ^^lapseth into a Democracy, 239* A. (...), 17. D. 32. C.
33. E. 34* D. (...)* 12. D* his fact against the Tyrants, 379* D. and
sequen^^^. (...) his Stratagem, 4^6. A. (...). A property of all Armies (...)*
what it is, 33^. A. greatness of the Athenian Army set forth for Sicily, 374.
D. (...) ordinarily worn, 4. C. (...) by first, by the Athenians, 9. C. (...),
Ambassador from the King of Persia, to Sparta* taken by the Athenians, and his
Letters read, 240. A. (...), 73. B. his death, 240 B. (...), a Magistracy in
Argos, 220. B. (...), 242. A. (...)* the son of Phormio, ^38. D (...) 49. C*
98. D. 142. A. (...), General of the (...)* 480. A. his danger, 487. C. he
discloseth the Treason of (...) to Alcibiades, 49^. A. in danger to be slain
by mutiny* 517. A. discharged of his command, 517* C. (...)* 99. C. ^92. E.
(...), the first of the Grecians that g^ew civil, 4. C. they wore the
Grasshopper in their (...) 4 D. their manner of governing their Confederates,
(...). their di^position, 37. D. 3^ A. ^0^. A. B. C. they ^^eake the League by
ayding the (...), 27. D. they wall their City, 47. B. their victory at the
River (...), 52. D. their reputat^on for Murall assaults, 5^. D. how they gat
the leading of Gr^ece, 51. A. the Grecians hate them in the beginning of this
War. 78. D. 79. B. they refuse to hear the messenger from Archid^mus, 88. D.
their custom of living in the Country Towns, 91. A. 9^. A. their revenue and
treasure. 89. D. their forces, 90. C. they loved to hear and tell news, 103.
A. they seek peace with the Lacedaemonians, 112. C. they question their
Commanders for compounding with Potid^ea, 120. B. they desire to Conquer
Sicily, 191. D. they banish their Commanders for returning out of Sicily, 247
B. they withhold the Galleys of the Peloponnesians at Pylus, upon a Cavil,
224. A. they refuse to render Pylus, and why, 311. B. they War on Macedonia,
354. B. they break the Peace with Lacedaemon, 411. A, Their miserable rising
from Syracuse, and their final defeat, 459 A. and sequ. they were fitter to
be friends of the Persians, then were the Lacedaemonians, and why, 495. A. and
sequentia. Athens, made great by Theseus, 91. B. greatest in the time of
Pericles, 116. B. Athos, 272. D. by what Nations inhabited, 273. A. Atreus, 6.
B. Attica, sterile ground, 2. D. how it became populous, 3. A. invaded, 59. D.
93. C. 106. C. 145. D. 158. C. 212. B. 422. E. Ax^us, 140. A.
B
BAcchanal Holidaies 91. D. City Bacchanals celebrated in the end of Winter,
302. B. Battles, by Sea between the Corcyraeans and Corinthians, 18. B. 27. A.
between the Athenians and Aegine^ae, 55 A. between the Athenians and
Peloponnesians, at Cecryphaleia, 55. A. at Halias, 54. E. between the
Athenians and the Samians, 60. C. between the Athenians and Phoenicians, etc.
58. D. between Phormio and the Peloponnesians, 128. B. again, 134. B. between
the Peloponnesians and Corcyraeans, 185. C. between the Lacedaemonians and
Athenians at Pylus, 218. C. between the Syracusians, and Athenians in the
Straight of Messana, 225. A. between the Syracusians and Athenians, in the
great Haven. 424. D. again, 436. A. again, 444. D. again* 455. A. between
the Athenians and Corinthians, 432. D. between the Athenians and
Peloponnesians at Eretria, 526. C. at Cynossema, 532. A. by Land, between the
Athenians and Corinthians at Potidaea, 33. C. between the Athenians and
Peloponnesians in Megaris, 55. C. at Tanagra, 56. D. between the Athenians and
Boeotians at Coronea, 59. A. between the Ambraciotes and Acarnanians, 204. A
between the Athenians and Corinthians, at Solygia, 236. C. between the
Athenians and Boeotians at Delium, 265. A. between the Lacedaemonians and
Argiues* 332. D between the Syracusians and Athenians, 389. C. between the
same by night, 439. A. between the Athenians and Peloponnesians at Miletus,
483. B. Berrhoea, 32. E. a Bell used in going the round, 287. D. the Best man,
45. B. Birds dyed of the Pestilence, 108 B. Bisaltia, 140. B. Bithynians, are
Thracians on Asia side of the Bosphorus, 253. D. Boeotarchontes, 262. A.
Boeotia, firtile ground, 2. C. called formerly, Cadme^s, 8 D. The Boeotians,
came from Arne, in Thessaly, ibi^. are overcome in battle at Oenophyta, 56. E.
they overcome at Coronea* 59. A. they take Heraclea into protection, 323. A.
Boium, 56. A. Bolbe, the Lake, 32. A. Bolissus, 482. B. Bomians, 197. C.
Bottiaeis reuolteth from the Athenians, 31. E. the Athenians and Bottiaeans
fight, 125. A. Bottia, 140. A. Brasidas saues Methone, and is publicly praised
at Sparta, 96. C. joined as a Counselor with Cnemus, 185. C. swowneth of his
wounds at Pylus, 218. B. he passes through Thessaly, ^55. A. refuses to aid
Perdiccas, 258. A. takes Acanthus, 258. B. is praised by the Author, 257. A.
is enuyed at Sparta, 272. C. he takes Torone, 274. A. and Lecythus, 275. D. is
honored by the Scionaeans, 279. he receives Me^da that revolted from the
Athenians, 280. B. his retreat out of Lyncus, 283. C. he attempteth Potidaea by
night, 287. C. his Stratagem against Cleon at Amphipolis. 293. D. his death,
burial, and honors, 296. A. and seqn. Bucolium, 287. B. Budorus, 136. E.
Buphr^s, 277. A. Burial. How the C^rians were buried. 5. D.
L
CAEadas* 71. C. Callians, 197. C. Callias General of the Athenians at
Potidaea, 33. B. 34. B. Calliroc, a Fountain, or the Nine^pipes, 91. D.
Calydon, 200. B. Camarina, when, and by whom built, 352. D. refuses to receive
the Athenians, 379. D. Canastraea, 273. C. Cardamylae, 482. A. Caria^s,
inhabited the Cyclades, 3. D. addicted to robbery, 5. c. expelled the Cyclades
by Minos, 3. E. known by their form of burial* 5. D. Carneius, a Month kept
holy by the Doreans, 323. E. Carneian Holidayes, 335. C.D. Caryae, 324, C. 50.
Carystus, 52. A. Catalogue of the Confederates of both sides at Syracuse, 446,
D. Catalogue of the Confederates of the Lacedaemonians and Athenians, 86. D.
and sequ. Catana surprised by the Athenians, 378.D. when and by whom built.
351. C. Caulonia, 426. C. Cause of the Peloponnesian War. 14. C. 46. D.
Cen^hreae. 236. B. Cephallenia, 98. D. 99. D. Cerdylium, 292. C. Cestrine, 26.
B. Cercine, 139. B. Cheronaea, 58. ^. taken by the Athenians, 59. A. the
Boeotian Outlawes seek to betray it. 254. A. subject to the City of
Orchomenus, 253. D. Chalcideans, they revolt from the Athenians, 3^. E. they
retire to Olynthus, 32. A. they procure an Army out of Peloponnesus, and why,
265. B. they League with the Argiues, 308. D. Chalcideus slain. 481. E.
Chalcis, 57. A. 128. C. Challaeans, 199. C. Chaonians, 125. D. 126. C. defended
by the men of Stratus, 127. C. Cheimerium, 18 D. 26. B. Chians not deprived of
liberty by the Athenians, and why, 150. C. forced to raze their City Wall. 240.
C. desire to be protected by the Lacedaemonians, 472. C. revolt from the
Athenians. 473. C. 477. B. kept by the Athenians from the use of the Sea. 482.
D. Chrusis a Territory, 125. B. Chrysis, woman Priest of Juno at Argos, slept
whilst the Temple was fired. 287. A. Cimon, 53. C. takes Eion, 51. E. warreth
on Cyprus, 58. C. dies before Citium, ibid. Cithaeron, 122. D. Claros the
City, 161. A. Clazomenae, 486. C. Cl^aridas endeavors to dissolve the Peace,
303. A. Cleobulus, 311. D. Cleon hinders the Peace with the Lacedaemonians,
223. B. undertakes the expugning of Sphacteria, 228. c. his boast, ibid. D he
warreth on Amphipolis, 292. B. is in contempt with his Army, 293. A. wins
Torone, 291. A. is slain at Amphipolis, 296. B. Cleonae, 273. A. Cnemus
overcome at Sea by Phormio, 135. B. his journey against Argos Amphilochicum,
126. A. Colon^, 69. A. Colophon, 161, B. Haven of the Colophonian^, near
Torone, 290. B^ Combinations for Offices. 500. C. Corcyra Metrapolitan of
Epidamnus, 15. A. strong in shipping, 15. D. called of old Ph^^^ia, 15. E.
conuenie^tly situated, for passage into Sicily, 25, D. Corcyraeans not
accustomed to league with others, 22 B. 19. D. masters of the Sea, 18. D.
diverse of them taken by the Corinthians in A^actorium. 30. C. their sedition
begins, 182. D* the great men take Sanctuary, 185. A. they encampe on
Istone, 191. B. Corinthians protect Epidamnus, ^5. C. their expostulation with
the Athenians, 29. C. Corinthia invaded by the Athenians, 235. D. Corinth how
far from the Sea that looks toward Athens, 236. A. Corinthians fall off
from the Lacedaemonians to the Argiues, and why. 305. D. they fall off again
from the Argiues, and why, 321. A. they resolve to aid the Syracusians, 400.
B. Coron^a, 53. A. Corontae, 142. A. Cortyta, 242. D. Corycus, 476. D. 487.
C.E. Coryphasium, 213. A. Cos, 491. D. Council of the Bean 509. A. Cranij*
98. D. 99. D. 31^. D. Crissaean Gulf, 56. B. 128. A. 126. A. 131. D.
Crocylium, 197. C. In Customs, as in Arts, the newest prevail, 35. C. Cu^^ome
of the Lacedaemonians, not hastily to condemn a Spartan, 70. B. Custom of the
Thracians touching gifts, 138. D. Cyclades governed by the sons of Minos, 3.
E. Cyclopes, 350 A. Cydonia, 130. B. Cyllene, 18. C. 130. C. Cylon, 66. B.
Cyme, 486. D. Cynossem^, 532. B. Cynuria, 24^. A. 315. A. Cyreneans, 443. C.
Cyrrhus, 140. D. Cythera, opposite to Mal^^, 241. B. taken by the Athenians,
141. ^^ Cytherodices, 241. B. Cytheraeans removed into the Cyclades, 243. D.
(...), 56. A. (...) recovered by the Athenians. 533. D.
D
DAphnus, 486. C. D^sco^, 387. D. Da^lia, 98. A. Decel^a. The incommodities
arising to the Athenians by the fortification there, 428. B.D. Delphi, 17. B.
De^os* the Treasury of the Athenian Tributes, 53. C. Delos consecrated, 200. E.
no man might be borne, or suffered to dye in Delos, 201. B. Delian Games, 201.
B. Delians driven out of Delos, are received into A^^^myttium, 290. A.
replanted in Delos, 309. A. (...), in the Territory of (...), 254. B. taken by
the (...). ^61. B. Battle at Deli^^, 265. A. (...). Democracy conspired
against at Athens, 56. C. Democracy dissolved at Argos, 338. E. D^mocracy what
it is. 401. B. Demosthenes inuadeth Aetolia, 196 B. is defeated, 198 D. fears
to return to Athens, 198. E. he makes Peace with the Peloponnesians shut up
in Olpae, and why, 205^ B. his acts in Acarnania, 202. D. and sequ. he
attempteth Siph^ in Boeotia, 261. A. he takes in Pylus, 212. D. he puts the
Fo^t before Epidaurus into the hands of the Epidaurians, and how, 338. he
arriueth at Syracuse, 437. C. his attempt on Epipolae, 438. C. advises to rise
from before Syracuse, 441. C. is taken Prisoner, 464. D. (...), 141 C. (...)
brother to Perdiccas. 31. B. Dialogue between the Athenians and Melians, 341.
A. D^^tyia^s, 339. A. Didyme, ^92. B. (...), 137. E. Diomilus. a Fugitive of
A^dres, 405. C. slain at Epipolae, 406. A. Dion in Macedonie, 256. A. Dion in
Mount Athos, 273. A. Doberus, 139. C. Dolopia, 142. B. Dorieus of Rhodes victor
in the Olympian Games, 149. B. Doris, Metrapolitan of the Lacedaemonians. 56.
A. Drabescus, 53. A. Droans, 141, C. Drimyssa, 486. D. Dyme, 129. D.
E
EArthquake attributed to the violation of Religion, 67. A. Earthquake at
Delos, 86. B. Earthquake hinders the Lacedaemonians from inuading Attica 53.
B. 192. D. Earthquakes 240. C. 232. D. 318. A. 192. A. 193. A. their natural
cause, 193. B. Echinades. 142. B. C. Eclipse of the Sun, 97. D. 240. C. of
the Moon, 444, A. it keeps Nicias from removing from before Syracuse. ibib.
E^tioneia fortifyed, by whom, and why, 522. A. Egestaean Ambassadors at
Athens, 354. C. the Egestaeans deceive the Athenians, and how, 376. B.
Eidomene, 140. C. Eidonia, 140. B Eidonians, 53. A. Eion, 51, E. 214. C. 240.
A. Elaph^bolion, 302. A.B. Eleans, their League with Corinth 308. A. their
quarrel with the Lepreates, 308. B. and with the Lacedaemonians, 308. C. they
leave the Argiue Army, and why, 328. D. they refuse to be comprehended in the
Peace between the Lacedaemonians and Athenians, 300. A. Eleatis, 26. B. 93. C.
Eleus, an Island adjacent to Miletus, 483. E. E^ipeus, 255. C. Eorda, 140. B.
Ephesus, 73. A. Ephori, their power to imprison their King, 69. B. Ephyre, 26.
B. Epidamnus, 14. D. Epidamnians implore the aid of the Corcyraeans, 15. B.
they put themselves into the protection of the Corinthians, ibid. Epidaurus
taken by the Corcyraeans, 18. B. Epidaurus, 111. C. Epidaurian war, 323. C.
Epidaurus besieged by the Athenians, 335. D. Epidaurus Limera, 242. E.
Epidemiurgi, Magistrates, 31. A. Epipolae, 405. B. Erae reuolteth from the
Athenians, 479. D. Eressus, 162. A. reuolteth, 481. B. 529. D. Eretrians betray
the Athenians, 526. C. Erineus, 56. A. Erythrae, 157. D. 161. A. Euarchus,
Tyrant of Astacus, 98. D. 99. C. Euboea reuolteth from the Athenians, 59. B.
recovered by Pericles, 59. C. Euboea, 147. B. Euboeans send to Agis for
protection, 472. A. Euenus, 128. C. Euesperitae, 443. C. Eupolium, 199. D.
Euristheus, 6. B.C. Europus, 140 D. Euryalus, 405. D. 415. A* Eurymedon slain,
444. D. Eurytanians, 196. C. Euxine Sea, 137. D. Exaction cause of revolt. 52.
B.
F
FAble of Alcmaeon, 142. D. Factions of the Grecians, 12. A. Fattest soyles
most subject to change of inhabitants, 2. C. Fear the cause of faith in
Leagues, 150. C. Fear of injury to come, cause of War, 151. B. Fire. A great
fire in Plataea, 124. ^. Fires significant, 136. C. 187. A. Fire breaks out
of Aetna, 209. B. Fleet of Athenians at Salamis, how great, 40. B. the Fleet
for Sicily, 366. C. how great, 374. D. not received by the cities of Sicily,
375. B.C. Fort before Epidaurus, 335. E. the Fortification of the
Peloponnesians about Plataea, 155. A. Funeral at Athens for the first slain
in the War. 100. A.
G
GA^^es Olympian* 5. A. Gapselus, 271. C. 292. B. Garments of the Lacedaemonian
Nobility, 5. A. Gela, when, and by whom built, 352. A. Geomori, 480. C.
Geraestus, 147. B. Geranea, 55. B. 56. B. D. 250. C. Getes, 139. C. Gigonus,
33. A. Gongylus, keeps the Syracusians from yielding to the Athenians, 414.
D. Gortynia, 140. D. Grasshoppers worn by the Athenians, 4. D. Greece, divided
into Leagues, 11. D. Grestonia, 140. B. Guif^s, the custom of the Thracians to
take gifts 38. D. Gylippus, General of the Peloponnesians at Syracuse, 404* A*
arriueth at Syracuse, 415. A. his message to the Athenians, 415. B.
H
HAlias, 54. E. 111. C. Harmodius, 12. C. solicited to love by Hipparchus, 380.
A. Hellanicus the Historiographer* 51. D. Hellas, whence so called. 3. B.
Hellen, the son of Deucalion, 3. B. Helorine way, 388. A. Helotes, 33. B. why
called Messenians, ib. the plots of the Lacedaemonians to keep them weak,
256. D. Heraclea, when, and by whom built, 195. C. infested by the Thessalians,
ibid. commodiously seated for the War against Athens, 194. D. Heraclea, 255,
A. weakened by the Dolopians, 322. D. Heracleides, 3. B. 8. D. Hermione, 111. C.
Hermocrates banished, 517. D. Hestiaeans put out of Euboea by the Athenians,
59. C. Hirea, Vulcans shop, 192. B. Himera, when and by whom built, 352, C.
invaded by the Athenians, 208. C. it aydeth Gylippus, 414. B. Hipparchus
brother to Hippias the Tyrant of Athens slain by Harmodius and Aristogiton,
12, D. solliciteth Harmodius for love, and is denied, 380* A. disgraceth
Harmodius, 381. C. how slain, 38^. B. why thought afterward to have been the
Tyrant* 381. C. Hippias, Tyrant of Athens, 12. C. 380. E. eldest son of
Pisistratus, ibid. driven out of Athens by the Lacedaemonians, returns with
the Persians to Marathon, 383. B. Hippias, an Arcadian, slain by Paches,
contrary to faith, 161. E. Hippocrates takes Delium, 261. B. Holy War, 58.
D. some Holiday or other at Athens continually, 102. B. Homer, 3. B. Hope, 343.
C. D. Horsemen. 400. Horsemen ordained by the Lacedaemonians. 242. B. Horsemen,
a degree in estate at Athens, 153. A. Hyccara, 385. C. Hyperbolus, 510. D.
Hysiae of Attica, 157. D. Hysiae of Argia, taken by the Lacedaemonians 340. A.
Hyperbolus, 510. D.
I
IAssus taken by the Peloponnesians, 489. B. I^thys Promontory, 96. E. Ida,
241. A. Idomenae, 206. B. Iegas, 414 E. Jllyrians betray Perdiccas, 281. C.
Jmages of Mercury at Athens defaced, 365 B. Imbrians, 148. A. Jmbros, 128 D.
Inarus a Rebel, crucified, 57. D. Inessa, 200. C. Inessaeans, 404. Inscription
on the Tripode by Pausanias, 69. E. by the Lacedaemonians, 70. A. Jnvndation at
Orobiae, 192. D. at Atalanta, 192 E. Ionia, planted with Athenians, 3. A. 8. E.
Jsthmi, taken by the building of Cities, 5. B. Jsthmus of Pallene, 30. D.
Istone, 191. B. Italy, whence so named, 350. D. Jthome, 53. B. yielded up. 54.
A. Itonians, 292. B. Iunoes Temple at Argos, burnt, 287. A.
K
KIng of Lacedaemon had but one Vote in Council* 12. D. Kingdoms with honors
limited, 11. D.
L
LAcedaemonians* Lacedaemonian Noblemen, plain in their garments, 4. A
Lacedaemonians pulled down the Tyrants of Greece, 11. B. how they governed
their Confederates. 12. A. their disposition, 37. D. slow to War without
necessity, 61. C. Pretend the liberty of Greece, 86. C. they would have no
walled Cities without Peloponnesus, and why, 47. C. they are hindered from the
invasion of Atcica, by an Earthquake, 192. D. their government always severe,
not always just, 195. D. 400 Lacedaemonians put into the I Will Sphacteria, 215.
D. they desire to treat for their men at Pylus, with a private Committee. 223
C. their men taken in Sphacteria, put in bonds, 235. B. they seek Peace
secretly* 235 D* their policy in destroying their He^otes, 256. D. they seek
Peace, and why, 298* A. their men taken in Pylus, delivered, 304. C. they seek
League with the Argiues* and why* 312 A. their Ambassadors roughly used at
Athens, 316 B. they make League privately with the Boeotian, 314. B. they war
on Argos, 325. C. their Army at Leu^tra, 323. D. they are excluded from the
Olym^ian Games 322. A. and fined in a Sum of money, 321. C. their Discipline
in charging the enemy, 332. D. they fight long for a victory, but follow the
enemy not far, 334. D they make ready 100 Galleys for the Jonian war, 471.
C. commodious enemies for the Athenians, 527. D. Labdalum, 406. A. Lada, 478.
D. Laestrigones. 350. A. Lamachus, his opinion touching the Conduction of the
Sicilian War, 377. C. slain. 408. D. Lampsacus, 74. C. reuolteth from the
Athenians, 504 recovered again, ibid. Laotheca, 287. B. Larissa, 255. B.
Lati^os, the land, 161. B. L^ae^^s 138 A. (...), Two great Leagues in Greece,
11. D. League defensive between the Athenians, and Corcy^^^^ns, 25. B. League
between the Ambraciotes, and Acarnanians, 208. B. between the Athenians and
Lacedaemonians, 303. C. between the Argiues, and Eleans, etc. 308. A. between
the A^gi^es and Lacedaemonians, 337. B. between the Lacedaemonians and
Tissaphernes, 479. A. again. 489. A. again, 502. B. (...) reuolteth from the
Athenians, 479. D. Lecythu^, 274. B 275. D. L^mn^s, 60. B. 148. A. 228. D.
Leocorium, 12. D. (...), near Syracuse 405. C Leortines aided by the Athenians
191. D. Leontine Commons driven out by the Few. 291. B. the Leo^tine Nobility
go to dwell at Syracus^. 291. C. they seize on certain places of their own
Territory, ibid. Leontium. 351. C Leotychides, General at Mycale. 47. A.
Leprea^es, quarrel with the Eleans ^08 B. Lesb^s, 148. A. received into the
League of the Peloponnesians, 152. C. reuolteth from the Athenians* 472. A.
Letter* Letter of Nicias to the Athenian People, 419. A. of Xexes to Pausanias.
68 B. Leucas, ^8. D. 26. B. 149. A. 196. A Leuc^mna, 18. D. 26. C. Leuconium
482. B. Leuctra of Arcadia, 323. D. Lichas, a Lacedaemonian whipped, 322. A.
sent with authority into Ionia. 490. B. C. hated by the Milesians, 517. C.
Limnaea, 126. D. Lipara, 192. B. Lochagi, 331. B. Locri Ozolae. Thieves* 4. C.
Locris in Italy, Confederate with Syracuse, 191, C* Locrians make Peace with
the Athenians, 292. B. Lycaeum, 299. C. 323. D. Lynchestians, 139. D* 256 B.
257. D.
M
MAcedonia. The beginning of the Reign of the Temenidae, 139^ D. the
description of that Kingdom* 140. B. Maedi, 139. B. Maenalia, 329. C.
Magistracy* A new Magistracy erected at Athens, 470. C. Epidemiurgi Magistrates
at Potidaea. 31. A. Cytherodices, a Magistracy; 241. B. Magnesia of Asia, 74 B.
Magnetians 141. B. Maleu, 147. E 148. D. Malocis Apollo, 146. E. 147. B.
Mantineans and Tegeates fight, 287. B. their League with the Argiues, 306. D.
their League with the Lacedaemonians, 338. D. Marathusa, 486 D. Mecyberne taken
from the Athenians, 313 D, Medeon, 203. B. Megareans forbidden commerce in
Attica, 35 D. they revolt from the Corinthians, 54. B. they revolt from the
Athenians, 59. B. they expect the event of battle between Brasidas and the
Athenians, 251. A. Megarean Outlawes recalled, 252. E. set up the Oligarchy.
253. B. they refuse to be comprehended in the Peace between the Athenians and
Lacedaemonians, 300. A. Megaris invaded by the Athenians, 98. E. Megara
attempted by the Athenians, 248. A. Treason in Megara discovered, 250. B.
Megara Hyblaea, 404. B. when and by whom built, 351. D. Melicis, 194. C. Melij,
292. B. their Dialogue with the Athenians, 341. A. Meliteia, 255. B. Melos, 87.
B. 193. E. besieged by the Athenians, 346. B. taken and sacked, 347. B. Menda
reuolteth from the Athenians, 280. B. Messana, 193. C. reuolteth from the
Athenians, 211. D. Messanians invade Naxus, 225. C. Messana, why called Zancle.
352. C Messapians, 199. C. Methone, 96. C. 237. D. 354. C. Methymne, 148. A.
reuolteth from the rest of Lesbos, 146. A. Methymnaeans War on Antissa. 154.
A. Methydrium, 325. D. Miletus reuolteth from the Athenians, 478 D. Mindarus,
General of the Peloponnesians, 517. C. goes into Hellespont, 529. A. Minoa,
248. B. taken by Nicias. 172. A. Minos, first that had a great Navy, 5 D, 3. D.
freed the Sea of Pirates, 5. D. Master of the Sea. 3. D. Mitylenians, 147. B.
why not deprived of liberty, 150. D. Mitylenian Commons yield the City to the
Athenians, 158. D. sentence at Athens against Mitylene, 162. C. 1000
Mitylenians put to death. 171. C. Mitylenian Outlawes lose Antandrus, 253. B.
Molossians, 126. C. Molychrium, 129 D. 199. E. Month. Elaphebolium, 278. A.
302. A. Gerastion, 278 B. Artemisium 302. A. Carneius, 323. E Mount raised
against Plataea, 122 C. Mycale, 47. A. Mycalessus, 429. E. Mycenae, 3. C.
Mygdonia, 32. A. 140 A. Mylae, 193. C. Myonnesus, 160. C. Myrcinus, 271. C.
Myronides, 55. C. Myus, 74. C. 154. C.
N
Navy first built by Minos, 3. D The Nauies of old time in Greece, 10. B. the
Navy of the Athenians at the greatest when, 153. C. Naupactus, 54. B. 119. C.
defended by Demosthenes, 200. A. Naxus, the Island, first of the Athenian
Confederates, that was brought in to servitude, 52. A. Naxus of Sicily, 225. C.
when, and by whom built, 351. B. Neapolis of Afric, 443. C. Nemea the
Forest, 326. B. Neritum, 149. A. Nicias goes with an Army to Melos, 193. D.
gives his power to leuy Soldiers, to Cleon, 228. C. wins Cythera, 241. D.
goes Ambassador to Lacedaemon, 318. B. chosen General for the Sicilian
voyage, 354. D. his opinion touching the mannaging of that War 376. D. his
Stratagem to get landing at Syracuse, 386. B. is assaulted in his Camp, 409.
A. why unwilling to rise from before Syracuse, 442. A. he yields himself to
Gylippus, 466. A. his death, 467. A. Nicias of Crete, 130 B. Nisaea besieged by
the Athenians, 249. D. rendered. 250. B. Notium, 161. B. 162. A. the Number of
the Lacedaemonian Army against the Argiues, how computed, 332. A. Nymphodorus
of Abdera, 97. D.
O
Oar. One man to one Oar in a Trireme, 136. A. Oath. Form of the Oath at the
making of the Peace between the Lacedaemonians and the Athenians, 301. D.
Odomantians, 141. C. 292. C. Odrysae, 98. A. B. 137. D. Oeantheans, 199. C.
Oeneon, 199. D. Oenias, 58. B. 128. A. compelled by the Acarnanians into the
Athenian League, 254. D. Oenoe, 92. D. betrayed to the Boeotians. 528. C.
Oenophyta, 56 E. Oenussae, 482. A. Oezyme, 271. C. Oligarchy, of the 400 at
Athens, 507. C. and sequ. they enter the Senate house, 508. C. they begin to
decline, 520. D. are assaulted by the Populars, 523. C. Olophyxus, 273. A.
Olpae, 203. A. taken by the Ambraciotes, 202. C. Olympia, 149. B. Olympian
Games, 5. A. 321. B. Olympiade, eighty eighth, 149. C. Olympiaeum, 386. C. 387.
C. 392. C. Olympus, 256, A. Olynthus, 32. A. 34. A. 280. D. Oneius, 237 B.
Ophionians, 196. C. 197. C. Opus, 57. A. Oracle. The Corcyraeans refer their
cause to the Oracle at Delphi, 17. B. Oracle at Delphi consulted by the
Epidamnians, 15. C. Oracle at Delphi encourages the Lacedaemonians, 61. D.
110, D. Oraedus, King of the Parauaeans, 126. C. Oration of the Corinthians at
Athens, 22. B. at Sparta, 62. A. of the Corcyraeans at Athens, 19 C. of the
Athenians at Lacedaemon, 34 C. of Archidamus, 43. A. of Sthenclaidas, 45. D. of
Pericles at Athens, 75. C. of Archidamus to his Army* 87. D. of Pericles at the
Funeral, 100. D. of Pericles to the incensed People, 112. D. of Phormio to his
Soldiers, 132. C. of Cnemus to his Soldiers, 131. B. of the Mitylenians at
Olympia, 149 B. of Cleon against the Mitylenians, 163* of Diodotus for them,
167. of the Plataeans, 173. of the Thebans, 177. of Demosthenes to his
Soldiers, 216. C. of the Lacedaemonians at Athens, 221. A. of Hermocrates to
the Sicilians at Gela, 244. of Pagondas to his Soldiers, 262. of Hippocrates
to his Soldiers, 264. of Brasidas to the Acanthians, 258. D. to the
Scionaeans, 278. to the Toronaeans, 274. to his Soldiers in Lyncus, 282. B. to
his Soldiers in Amph^polis, 294. A. Of Nicias against the Sicilian voyage,
355. again, 362. to his Soldiers, 388. to his Soldiers about to fight in the
great Haven, 450. B. to his Soldiers when he rose from before Syracuse, 460.
B. Of Alcibiades for the Sicilian Voyage, 359. against the Athenians at
Lacedaemon, 400. D. of Hermocrates in Syracuse, 369. A at Camarina, 393. A of
Athenagoras, 371. D. of a Syracusian General, 374 A. of Euphemus at Camarina,
396. A. Orchomenus seized by the Boeotian Outlawes, 58. E. Orchomenus of
Arcadia, besieged by the Argiues, and taken, 328. B.C. Orestes King of
Thessaly, 58. A. Orestis of Ep^^us, 287. B. Orestium, 329. C. Orneae pulled
down, 354. B. Orobiae, 192. D. Oropus, 96. A. taken from the Athenians by
treason, 503. B.
P
PAches, kills Hippias, Captain of the Arcadians in Notium, by fraud, 162.
A. Paedaritus slain, 501. A. Paeonia, 140. A. Paeonians, 139. B. Pallas
Chalci^ca 67. A. 71. B. Pallene, 30. D. 34. C. Panactum taken by the Boeotians,
291. A pulled down, and why, 315. D. Panathenaea, 1^. D. 320. C. Pancratium,
32^, C. Palenses, 98. D. Palirenses, 98. D. Pangaeum, 140. A. Panormus of
Achaia, 130. C. of Milesia, 481. D. Paralia, 111. A.C. Paralians, 194 C.
Paralus, the name of a Gally, 160. E. Patrae, 128 C. 129. C. 323. B. Pausanias
hated by the Confederates, 51. B. wins most of Cypru^, 50. C. his insolent
behavior, ibid. sent for home, 50. D. his pride, 68. C. driven out of
Byzantium, he goes to Colonae, 69. B. his Inscription on the Tripode, 69. D.
his Medizing, 67. C. his letter to Xerxes, 67. D he conspireth with the
Helotes, 70. B is betrayed by an Argilian, 70. C. takes Sanctuary, 71. A. his
death, 71. B. Peace between the Lacedaemonians and Athenians for 30 years, 59.
D. Peace in Sicily, made by Hermocrates, 247. A. Peace between the
Lacedaemonians and Athenians, for 50 years, 300. B not liked by the
Confederates, 302. D why desired by the Lacedaemonians, 297. D. 298. D. crossed
by the Ephores, 311. D. the Peace made after the first ten years War, no
Peace, 305. B. broken in the M^ntinean and Epidaurus War, ibid. P^g^, 56. B.
Pe^^^ce, 96. A. Pelasgium, 92. B. Pelia, 140. A. P^lopi^es, 6. C. Peloponnesus,
whence so called, 6. B inhabited by the Doreans, 8. D. Peloponnesian War,
after the Persian 50 years, 61. B. Peloponnesus invaded by the Athenians, 9^.
B. 111. B. Pe^^ris, 225. B. Pel^ps, ^. B. Pen^acos^omedimni, 153. A.
Pep^rethus* 193. A. Perdiccas, King of Macedony, solliciteth the Lacedaemonians
to the War, 12. B. reuolteth from the Athenians, 33. B. procures an Army out
of Peloponnesus, 256. B. declared by the Athenians for their enemy, 257. C.
betrayed by the Illyrians, 281. D. flies out of Lyncus, and deserteth
Prasida^, 281. E. makes Peace with the Athenians, 286. B. stops the passage
of the Lacedaemonians through Thessa^^, 286. C. is barred the use of the Sea by
the Athenians, and why, ^40, B. Per^^lis warreth on Samos, 60. B. besieges
Oeneus, 58* B. descended of a Stock that was under the curse for violation of
Sanctuary* 66. ^. enemy to the Lacedaemonians, 66. E. blamed by the Athenians,
as author of the War, 95. A. gives his Land to the State, in case it were
spared by the Enemy, 89. C. his death, and praise, 116. B. and sequ.
Peripolium, 199. A. Pero^hia, 285. E. Perseides, 6. E. Pestilence at Athens,
106. C. 121. E. Phacium, 255. E. Phaeax sent into Sicily, 291. B. moves War
against Syracuse, 291. D. Phaecinis. Priest of Juno, 287. A. Phagres, 140. A.
Phalcron, 56. A. Phanotis, 254. B. Pharsalus, 58. A. 215. D. Phaselis, 119. D.
Pheia, 96. D. Philip, brother to Perdiccas, 31. B. Phliasia, wasted by the
Argiues, 340. A. Phlius, 326. A. Phoceae, 291. C. Phoc^^a, 486. D. Phoenicians,
addicted to Robbery, 5. C. their Cities in Sicily, 351. A. Phoenicia, 119. D.
Phoenicus, a Haven, 488 A. Phormio wastes Ch^lcidea, 35. A. sent to Potidaea.
34 C. sent to Naupactus, 119* C. fights with the Corinthians, 128. B. with
Cn^mus, 135. B. puts suspected persons out of Stratus and Corontae, 141. E.
Phryg^j a place in Corinthia, 95 B. Phrynichus, refuses battle, and why. 484
B. his art to elude the accusation of Alcibiades, 498. C his death ^23. B.
Phthiotis, 3 B. Phyr^on, 32. B. Physca, 140. B. Phytia, 203. B. Picria, 140. D.
Piraeus, better to the Athenians the^ their City, 50. A. when walled in, 49.
C. attempted by the Peloponnesians, 135. D. Piraeus of Corinthia. 475. B.
Pisander labors the recalling of Alcibiades, and deposing of the People,
499. C. accuses Phnynichus, 500. B. is a principal man in the setting up of
the 400 at Athens, 507 C. Pisistratus, the son of Hippias the Tyrant, 380. C.
Pitanate, 12. E. Pithius, with 60 more Senators slain in Corcyra, in the
Senate, 123. B. Pits. Men thrown into Pits, 118. C. Plague, vide Pestilence.
Plataea surprised, 82. A. victualled by the Atheniaas, 85. C. attempby fire,
124 B, by Engines, 123. C. besieged, 124. C. yielded, 172 C. escape of 212
Plataeans, 155. C. Platae demolished, 181. D. Plataeis invaded by the
Lacedaemonians, 120. C. Pleisto^nax banished, 94. C. desires Peace, and why,
299. B. Plemmyrium fortified by Nicias, 416. A. taken by the Sy^acusians, 425.
D. Pleuron, 200. B. Polis Argi^is, 117. D. Poppy tempered with honey sent over
into Sphacteri^, 227. B. Potidania, 197. C. Potidaea, 30. D. reuolteth 31. D.
is besieged, 34. D. the Potidaeans eat one another, 119. E. they yield, 120.
A. Prasiae, 111. C. Priene, 59. D. Pronaei. 98. D. Prophecies rife before great
Wars, 86. B. Prophecy at Delphi, procured by subordination, 292. B.
Proschio^, 200. B. 203. A. Prote, 218 D. P^tanes, 509. A. P^eleum, 301. B. 482*
A. 486. C. Pydna, 32. D. Pylus, 213. A. fortified by the Athenians, 213. C.
kept by Messenians, 235. B. Pyrrha, 162. A.
Q
the Quarrel about Epidamnus, 14. D the Quarries a prison at Syracuse, 466. C.
the Question how put in the Asse^bly at Sparta, 46. B. Question to be answered
by the Plataeans, 173. A.
R
REligion neglected in the time of the Pestilence, 110. B. the opinion of the
Athenians, touching the Gods, 344. A. Revolt. Causes of reuolts, 52. B.
Rhegium, 191. C. 234. D. Rheiti, 93 D. Rheitas, 235. E. Rhenea, tied to Delos,
with a chain, 201. B. Rhium Molychricum, 130. D. Rhium Acha^cum, 130. D. 323.
B. Rhodes, 493. C. Rhodope, 137. D. 139. C. Rhoetium, 240. D. Robbing had in
honou, 4. B.
S
SAbylinthus King of the Agraeans, 126. C. Sadocus made free of the City of
Athens. 98. B betraieth the Lacedaemonian Ambassadors. 118. B. Salaethus,
enters secretly into Mitylene, and confirms it against the Athenians. 158.
A is taken. 162. A. and put to death. at Athens. 162. B. Salaminia, the name of
a Trireme. 160. E. Salamis ouer-run by the Peloponnesians. 136. B. Samos
besieged. 60 C. yielded. 61. A. Samos in Sedition. 510. C Sane. 272. E.
Sanctuary, 15. B. 66. B Scione, 278. C. besieged by the Athenians, 286. B.
expugned, and given to the Plataeans, 309. A. Sciritae, 331. B. Scomius, 138.
D. Scyllaeum, 323. D. Scyros, 52. A. Scytale, 69. A. Scythians. their power.
139. A. Sea. The Argiues acknowledge the dominion of the Sea upon their own
Coast, to belong to the Athenians, 314. D. Seditions most incident to fertile
Countries, 2. C. Sedition in Corcyra, 182. C. manners of the seditious
described, 187. D. and sequ. the No^ility in the sedition of Corcyra how
destroyed. 239. A. Selinus, 443. A. when built, 351. E. Sentence. The cruel
sentence of the Athenians against the Mitylenians, 162. C. Sermyla, 35. A.
Shipping of Greece what it was before the Peloponnesian War, 10. A Sicani,
350. B. Sicily described, 349. and sequ. Sicilians make peace amongst
themselves at Gela, 243. C. the Sicilian Voyage resolved on at Athens, 354. D.
Siculi, 350. C. Sicyon Oligarchized. 338. D. Sidussa, 482. A. Sintians, 139. B.
Siphae, 254. B. Sitalces King of Thrace leagues with the Athenians, 98. C.
warreth on Macedonie, 137. B. retireth thence, 141. D. Solium, 98. D. Solygia,
236. A. Spartans taken in Sphacteria. 298. C. Spartolus, 12^. B. Sphacteria how
situate, 215. A. B. Stagirus reuolteth, 260. D. assaulted by Cleon, 292. B.
The Standard in battle, 27. A. Sthenelaidas, 45. D. Stratagem of Ariston* 436.
A. Stratus. The Chaonians overthrown by Ambush at Stratus, 127. C. Strymon,
52. C. 138. A. 271. D. 293. B. Sybota, the Islands. 26. C. 30. A. Sybota the
Haven, 28. B. 185. C. Syca, 406. B. Syme, 492. A. C. Synoecia, why, and by whom
instituted, 91. C. Syracuse, when and by whom built, 351. C. the Syracusians
displace their Generals, and why, 410. A. Syracuse how near to being taken by
the Athenians, 415. B. the Syracusians begin to treat with Nicias, 409. D. they
shut up the mouth of the Great Haven. 449. B.
T
TAges, Deputy Lieutenant to Tissaphernes, 478. B. Talent. A Talent pay for a
month to a Gallie, 354. C. a Ship of 500 Talents burden, 276. C. Tnaearus.
Temple of Neptune at Taenarus, 67. A. Tanagra, 56, D. 194. B. 254. B. 429 C.
Tantalus, a Lacedaemonian, taken, and added to the prisoners taken at Pylus,
243. D. Tegea, 328. D. 336. A. 339. B. Tegeans and Mantineans fight at
Orestium, 287. B. Tegeans refuse the Argiue League, 309. B. Temple of Juno
built in the ruins of Platea, 182. A. A Tenth of the Land in Lesbos
consecrated, 171. D. Tereas, 404. C. Teres, 98. A. Tereus, ibid. Teuglussa,
492. B. Teus reuolteth, 478. A. Teutiaplus his advice to Alcidas, 169. D.
Thalamij, 230. D. Thapsus, when and by whom built, 351. D. Thapsus* 405. C.
Tharups, King of the M^^^ssians and Antitanes, 126. C. Thassus reuolteth from
the Athenians, 52. D. is subdued, 53. B. Oligarchized by the Athe^ians,
reuolteth from them. ^05. ^ Thebes, seat of the War mad^ by Xerxes, 47. D.
distant from Plataea 70 furlongs. 84. C. Thebans, attempting to surpriz
Plataea, taken Prisoners, 84. ^ slain, 85. A. Themistocles, 10. B. 40. C.
advises to wall in the City of Athens, 47. D. deludeth the Lacedaemonians, 48.
A. C. addicted to the affairs by Sea, 50. A author to the Athenians to take
upon them the Dominion of the Sea, 49. D. his Letter to Artaxerxes, 73. A. his
praise, 73. E. his death and burial, 74. B. C. Theramenes a Lacedaemonian cast
away at Sea, 489. D. Theramenes the Athenian, 522. C. Therme, 32. D. 98. C.
Thermopylae, 195. B. 141. B. Theseus, reduces the Athenians to one City, 91.
B. Thespiae, 254. B. the Walls of Thespiae razed, 286. E. Thespian Commons
assault the Few, 405. A. Thesprotis, 18. D. 26. B. Thessalians, 141. B. they
infest Heraclea, 195. C. Thyamus, 203. B. Thrace described, 138. C. Thracian
custom in receiving gifts, 138. D. the Thracian Army in Macedonie, 139. C.
Thracians sack Mycalessus, 429. E. Thriasian fields. 93. C. Thronium, 97. B.
Thucydides his diligence in writing this History, 13. C. is sick of the
Pestilence, 107. B. he defends Eion, 271. A* B. is banished for twenty
years, and when, 305. C. lived throughout the whole War, ibid. Th^rea, 97,
C. 315. A. 243. A. C. Th^ssus, 273. A. T^chium, 197. C. T^mocrates, 135 C.
Tissaphernes seeks the Lacedaemonian League, 472. C. is well affected to the
Athenians, 499 A. why he brought not the Phoenician Fleet from Aspe^dus, 519.
D. T^lophonians, 199. C. Ton^^us, 277. A. T^rone, 263. B 274. A. Trachinians,
194. C. Tribute, when first assessed by the Athenians. 51. B. Tri^^^ria, 350.
B. Triopium, 488. B. Tripodis^us, 250 C. Tritaeans, 199. C. T^^^zen, 111. C.
Trogalus, 406. B. The Trojan War, first joint actiof the Grecians, 3. A. the
Trojan Fleet, 7. C. Trotilu^, when and by whom built 351. D. Truce for 5 years
between the Lacedaemonians and Athenians, 58. C. Truce at Pylus, 220. B. Truce
for a year between the Lacedaemonians and the Athenia^s, 276 B. ended, 289.
D. Truce between the Lacedaemonian and Argiue Armies* 327. A. Tyrants, 11. A.
Tyranny of the Pis^stratides easy, 380. D. Tyranny opposite to Democracy, 401.
B.
W
WAlling of Towns when it began in Greece, 6. A. the Walls of Athens built
in have, 48 A. 49. B. the Wall about Piraeus, 49. D. the Long-walles of Athens
begun, 56. A. finished, 57. A. inhabited, 92. D. the Long-walles of Megara
built by the Athenians, 54 C. Long-walles at Argos, 339. C. razed, 340 A.
Long-walles from Patrae to Rhium, 323 B. the Walls of Tanagra razed, 57 A. a
new Wall before Syracuse, 302 B. the Walls of the Athenians to encloze
Syracuse, 406 D. 415 A. Wall of the racusians, to cut off the Walls of the
Athenians, 407 A. E. 415 D. 417. D. War. The Wars of old time* 10 C.
between the Chalcideans and Eretrians, 10 D. War against Sparta decreed at
Athens, 46 D. the holy War, 58 D. War of the Athenians against Samos, 59 E.
War of the Athenians in Egypt, ended, 57 C. beginning of the Peloponnesian
War, 81 D. War preuentiue justified, 151 B. War between the Argiues and
Epidaurians, 223 C. the children of such as dyed in the War, kept by the
Athenian People, till they were at man's estate, 106 D. Watchword. 440 A. Wind.
A set wind every morning blowing from the mouth of the Crissaean Bay, 129 A.
Woods. The advantage of Woods in fight. 22^ B. the Woods in Sphacteri^ set on
fire; and burnt up by accident, 229 D.
X
XEna^es, Ephore of Lacedaemon seeks to dissolve the Peace, 311. D. 318. D.
Xerxes his Fleet, 11 C. his Letter to Pausanias, 68. B.
G
Year. The first Year of the Peloponnesian War, 81 D. the second, 106 C.
the third, year, 120 B. the fourth, 145 D. the fifth, 158 B. the sixth, 192 C.
the seventh, 211 D. the eighth, 240 C the ninth, 276 B. the tenth, 289 D. the
eleventh, 304 C. the twelfth, 314 B. the thirteenth, 323 A. the foureteenth,
325 B. the fifteenth, 339 A. the sixteenth, 340 C, the seventeenth, 354 C, the
eighteenth, 404 B. the nineteenth, 422 D. the twentieth, 473 D. the one and
twentieth, 503 D. the number of years that the whole War lasted, 305 A. B.
how the years of the War ought to be reckoned, 302 B. C. Yongmen for want of
experience love War, 86 B. Young men made Governors of Cities, contrary to
the Laws, 286. D.
Z
ZAcynthus, 117. C. Zancle, 352. B.
FINIS.
The MAP of Ancient GREECE Expressinge especially the Places mentioned in
THVCYDIDES by THO: HOBBESby THO: HOBBES
map of ancient Greece


