To the Right Worshipful M. George Speak Esquier, H. T* wishes this worlds
bliss, and in the world to come, the life that is Christ Jesus.
SAint Paul (right Worshipful) the elect and chosen vessel of God, Acts. 9.
to bear his name a far off, before the Gentiles, among his sundry, and
godly counsels, has this good lesson also: 1. Tim. 4.
Ineptas and aniles fabulas deuita: exerce autem te ipsum ad pietatem: Avoid
foolish and old wives fables, and exercise thy self unto godliness. Wherein is
plainly set down unto us, what we must avoid, refuse, and eschew, and also
what we must follow, embrace, and exercise. In the first part of his counsel,
there is forbidden not only all foolish tales, vain speeches, and idle
talk, which is accomptable before God: Matthew. 12.
but also all infamous papers and books, filthy songs and sonnets, unchaste
fables and tragedies, which may be well comprised therein: though some of late
years are found so impudent, and past shame, that they have nothing doubted to
entitle their pamphlets, the Castle of love, and Court of venus, which do not
only offend the chaste ears of the godly reader, but also give an offense to
his good conscience. Because they be not to the mind of the holy Apostle,
which teaches us thus: Ephesians. 4.
Omnis sermo malus ex ore vestro non procedat: Let no filthy communication
proceed out of your mouths, but that which is good to edify withal, as often
as need is, that it may minister grace unto the hearers. But what edifieng, and
what ministering of grace is found and had in these and the like works, the Lord
knows that it is too too pitious and lamentable. And in the second clause of
his counsel is contained the only scope and end whereunto all men's actions and
deeds ought to be directed; namely, that they should exercise themselves unto
godliness all their life long, as they promise in their new birth, wrought by
doctrine in the holy Ghost and faith at Baptism, John. 3. Coloss. 2.
which represents in us the renewing of the spirit, and mortifieng our
members in Christ, by the which we are buried in death with him. And right
blessed is he verelie, that so walks in godly exercises in the course of his
pilgrimage, Psalm. 119. Psalm. 41.
that in the end he may be found undefiled in the way, and not have his sins
imputed unto him. For the Lord shall deliver all such in the time of trouble.
This considered, and mine office remembered, I was the more willing to deal (as
I could) in these scripture questions and chalenges; which ended, duty
commanded me to offer the same unto your tuition, as a manifest token of good
will, knowing that you are a zealous lover of Gods holy word, a diligent
reader, and a gladsome follower of the same, even from your childhood, when you
were delivered to my government, to be instructed in good literature, and
induced to virtue. And experience has taught me, that your courtesies are
such, that you allow of every man's good meaning (though far your inferiors)
with favorable acceptance. The Lord therefore ever so preserve your Worship, 1 Thessalonians. 5.
that in nothing you may be blamed, or accused in the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ, 2 Thessalonians. 1.
when he shall show him self from heaven, with the Angels of his power, and
flaming fire.

Your Worships in all loialtie HENRY THORN.

To the vnlatined Reader.
GEntle reader, he that required these answers of me, was by function and
office such a one, as had vowed and promised the promoting of Gods truth and
gospel. But when thou have perused the sum, the circumstance thereof (I doubt
me) will prove the old said saw to be true: Cauda de vulpe testatur: That the
fox is known by his tail. Yet the Lord forbid, that we should rashly judge
of any man, seeing that God has ordained one to be the judge of the quick
and the dead, the good and the evil, Acts. 10. Romans 12. John. 8.
to whom it is given to give judgment. And as they were at diverse times
proponed in writing: so they were at diverse times of leisure again answered
and rescribed, without observing any good order of a catechism. Therefore thou
must not look to find any such method, or observation of an orderly teaching
herein. It was done (happily) to appose him, which had been much practiced in
the school of humanity, but lately (in comparison thereof) called to the
study of divinity. Whereby he was driven to the more diligent turning, and
search of scripture books, least he should have appeared in his answers Asinus
ad lyram positus, as sit thereunto, as an ass is to play on the harp: or
else to have said nothing, but laid his finger on his lip, as Harpocrates used,
when he would have silence. For as long as a fool is silent, he differs not
among strangers, from the wise. And as it is easier for malignant Momus, to
find a fault sometimes, than to mend it: so is it easier always to ask an hard
question of any man, than to answer it discreetlie according to the truth. And
for that the whole consists in questions, answers, and syllogisticall
objections, dialogwise, I have imagined Falsiloquus, which is a speaker of
falsehood, to demand, and object: and Veriloquus a speaker of the truth, to
answer him again. The Lord give us his truth and peace, John. 14.
which gives not his peace, as the world gives peace. It was not meant at the
first that this should have come unto thine hands, but now, if thou gently
accept of it (such as it is) I am sufficiently acquitted and recompensed.

Farewell. H.T.

Ad candidum lectorem libelli Prosopopoeia.
NOn mea laethiferum cantabit pagina Martem,
Altaue victrici maenia rupta manu.
Non heroas auis, reges atauisque potentes,
Sanguine non longo stemmata ducta canet.
Turpia deliri non tela Cupidinis arcus,
Non quae dementant pectora caeca faces,
Non Epicureae documenta nefanda culinae,
Non Ganimedaeo pocula plena mero.
Non vanos superos, Scyllas, vastosque Cyclopas,
Non fert gentilis mollia scripta chori.
Clauigeri non bis senos Alcidis honores,
Non vasto varios panderit orb situs.
Non gelidas Hyades, taurina per ora micantes,
Non vt vertenti voluitur axe polus.
Lurida non methodum sanandi vulnera rectam,
Non hic dulcisonae musica plectra chelys.
Non Aesculapios placido medicamine claros,
Non been Circeis toxica mista modis:
Spurca prophanorum (breuiter) non somnia vatum,
Non quicquid Stygio fundit Apollo vado.
Tale etenim crassum rudis haec mea chartula temnit,
Ne Iouis aeterni spreta sit ante thronum:
Sana ego sed sanctae doceo te dogmata vitae,
Me vt lecto sanctus, sanctior esse queas.
Vale. H.T.

The Confutation of Folly.
FALSILOQVVS. FIrst tell me (friend Veriloquus) what opinion ought men to have
of the holy Trinity?


VERILOQVVS. THe same which the Church holds and allows of, that there is
one, true, living and eternal God, John. 4. John 1. 1. Tim. 6. 2. Cor. 13.
Ioh. 1.4.6. Sap. 11.
the which is without body, parts and passions, because he is a spirit, whom
never any man yet saw neither can see, nor know, but Christ; for he can not be
seen with carnal eyes, and he is the God of peace and love, loving all, and
hating nothing that he has made: he is of infinite power, wisdom, goodness,
and mercy, the creator, preserver, and nourisher of all things, visible and
invisible, which delivers us from evil. Esai. 43. John. 3. Romans 5.
And in the unity of this same divine nature, there are three distinct
persons, of the like power, essence, wisdom, glory, and eternity, that is to
say, the Father, the Son, and the Holie-ghost, which are the blessed
Trinity.

And the son of God, (...) patris, John. 1.
the word of the father, is the second person in this Trinity, the true,
everlasting, glorious, and omnipotent God, 2. Cor. 4. Col. 1.
begotten before all worlds of his eternal father, and is his very image,
being of like substance together with him: Col. 2.
in whom are the treasures of wisdom, and of knowledge, and fulness of divine
power. He took upon him, in the womb of the blessed virgin Marie humane
nature of her substance, and was borne in the world: in so much that there is
conioined fully and perfectly in the unity of person, a double nature never
to be separated, that is the nature of God and of man, whereof is made one
Christ, perfect God, and perfect man (sin only excepted) who suffered under
Pontius Pilate, 1. Tim 2. 1. Ioh. 2.4. Ephesians. 3. Romans 5.8. Act. 2.
and became the mediator between God and man, that in him only should be
found the sufficiency of remission of all sins, both original and actual,
for all them that ever were, or shall be upon the face of the earth. And the
Holie-ghost is the third person in this Trinity, which proceeds from the
father and the son, and is the holy and divine power, 1. Romans 10
whereby men's hearts are renewed from heaven, he is of like essence, power,
glory and majesty, with the father, and the son, with whom he is coequall,
coeternall, and God everlasting, by whom we comprehend the things of God, for
he gives witness to our hearts, 1. John. 2.
that we are of God, by the which also, Romans 1. Gal. 5. 1. Pet. 2.
we call upon the father with confidence and faith to be saved by Christ, which
is the bishop of our souls.


FALSIL. God made all things, and without him was made nothing, that was made,
John. 1. Wisd. 1.


But God made not death, sin, nor the devil,

Therefore God made not all things.


VERIL. The fallacy lies in the consequent which must be denied. Almighty
God, that is all wisdom, infinite power and goodness, created all things in such
excellent goodness, that it is said: Valde sunt bona, Genesis 1.
They were all passing good, and God saw that they were good; then he blessed
them, and his sentence is not to be revoked, because he being without body,
parts and passions, cannot repent. And as the devil was not ever a devil from
the beginning (for the Apostle says Angeli qui non seruarunt originem suam:
Jude.
The Angels which kept not there first estate) so he was created, and that an
Angel of light, and not a devil. Colos. 3.
For God being most perfectly good, could not consent to make any thing but
that, which was good, and his own pride made himself a devil, the author of
sin, the heir of eternal fire. Matt. 25.
Then he tempting our first parents, by the apple of disobedience, made them
likewise so sinful, that by Adam we are all sinners, Romans 5.
of whom we have the inclination to do evil, and then consequently followed
death, and was engendered of our said parents deeds, as the only fruit of
their lewd and stubborn disobedience, which they learned of Satan's
disobedience: Sic diaboli inuidia, Wisd. 2.
mors intrauit in mundum: So by the envy of the devil, death entered into the
world. Romans 6.
And S. Paul says: Stipendium peccati mors est: Death is the reward of sin,
which still increased, and wickedness multiplied, by the reason men were
tempted, drawn away and entised of their own concupiscence; Jacob. 1.
then lust conceived and brought forth sin, and sin, when it was finished,
brought forth death. So that then God took unto him death, for the punishment
of sin, that therewith he might correct the wicked, teaching them that
transgressors might not lawfully sin without punishment. So it is said in
another place: Ignis, Eccle. 39.
grando, fames, and mors, omnia haec creata sunt ad vindictam: Fire, hail,
hunger and death, all these are created for vengeance; that is to say, after
the fall of man, God appointed and exercised all these things for the
punishment of the wicked, whereby he took vengeance of his enemies, Romans 1.
and does use them as an instrument to strike the wicked withal: and
oftentimes does punish one sin with another. Thus we do now see, Iaco. 1.17.
that Omne donum bonum ac perfectum a patre luminum: Every good and perfect
gift comes down from the father of lights, and that he made not death,
sin, nor the devil in his diuelishnes, from the beginning; Wisd. 1.
for he is not delighted in Perditione viuorum, in the destruction of the
living, nor can be the author of any damnation, though his wrath and justice
powers down his plagues upon the children of disobedience and unbelief
daily, Esaie. 5.
because they draw sin unto them, as it were with a cart rope, according to
the prophets saying.


FALSIL. How much shall adultery be punished by the censure of Gods holy word?


VERIL. Adultery (which is the violation and breach of the faith promised in
marriage) a thing odious and forbidden of God, Exodus 20. Leui. 18. Deuteronomy. 5.
is so greeuouslie punished of him, that all adulterers shall (without they do
truly repent) be cast away into utter darkness, 1. Corin. 6. Hebru. 13.
Ierem. 8.
which is without the kingdom of God. And if men do not punish adulterers,
God himself will surely punish them. 2. Reg. 12.
As we have an example of king David's son, which Vrias wife bare unto him,
whom the Lord so stroke with sickness, for the adultery of his father, that it
fell sick and died the seventh day after. Mala. 3.
Thus the Lord himself verelie will be a swift witness against all adulterers.


FALSIL. Carnal copulation is the ordinary means only for mankind to be
increased and multiplied, and to fill the world,

Genesi. 1.
God commanded Adam and Eve to increase and multiply, and fill the world,

Therefore God commanded carnal copulation.


VERIL. The inconvenience lies in the consequent, which ought to be denied.
For though the minor be true, that God commanded them to increase and
multiply, and fill the world: yet he would have it to be done by such lawful
means, as he himself has ordained, and not by evil any other ways.
Because he cannot agree unto sin, nor allow thereof in any case, his
commandment in these words was so holy, Genesi. 1.
that he blessed them a little before in the same chapter, for that they should
increase and multiply, to acknowledge him, and to yield him the more honor,
which was the final end of their creation, and must be the scope of all their
actions. And then he ordained the honorable estate of matrimony, Hebru. 13.
Genesi. 2. 1. These. 4.
and the bed undefiled shortly after, that every one should know how to
keep his vessel in holiness, which he constituted in such a mystery and
virtue, that man and wife are made thereby one flesh, and so to increase and
multiply, and to live together in the fear of God, Mark. 10.
and procreation of children in such a mutual society each to other, Matt. 19.
that they ought rather to forsake father and mother than to forsake each
other. Wherefore, such as commit carnal copulation, contrary to this
ordinance, wresting the sacred scriptures thereby to maintain their
sensuality, do incur the heavy wrath of God, and have no part in the
kingdom of heaven, as it is written: 1. Cor. 10. Hebru. 13.
Fornicatores and adulteros iudicabit Deus: God will judge fornicators and
adulterers, and their children shall not prosper, as it is likewise said: Wisd.
3.
Filij adulteroru^ in consumatione erunt: The children of adulterers shall come
to an end. So that they shall not only have any joy and comfort of their
children, as other parents have, but they shall be a testimony of their
wickedness against them, as it is said: Ex iniquis qui nascuntur, testes sunt
nequitiae aduersus parents: All the children that are borne of the wicked,
must bear record of the wickedness, against their fathers and mothers. And to
conclude: Eccle. 15.
Nemini mandauit Dominus impie agere: The Lord has commanded no man to do
evil.


FALSIL. Ought christian folks children to be baptized or no?


VERIL. Yes verelie: for though parents be themselves baptized before the birth
of their children, yet must their children be baptized likewise, seeing that
they be conceived and borne in sin original, which lives in them, as soon
as they come into this world. Because baptism (which is a wetting or washing)
is so necessary to follow faith and belief, that they two joined together,
have the most certain and sure promise by Christ, Marc. 16.
of salvation and eternal life. And it is not the parents holiness that can
hallowe and sanctify their children: wherefore we must fly unto faith, and
then baptism must be had, the outward sign whereof represents in us the
renewing of the spirit, Romans 6. Colos. 2.
and mortifieng of our members in Christ Jesus (as we are bound to do) whereby
we are buried in death with him. God ordained baptism, and it was ministered by
S. John the baptist: John. 1.
yet it brings not grace with it, as it appears by Simon Magus the
southsaier and sorcerer. Act. 8.
But belief, mercy, grace, and the Holie-ghost himself is received before
baptism, as it appeared in S. Paul, which believed and then received the
Holie-ghost, Act. 9.
before he was baptized. Cornelius the centurion captain received the
Holie-ghost, Act. 10.
before he was baptized. And the gelded chamberlain of Candace the queen of
the Aethiopians believed, Act. 8.
and therefore had grace before he was baptized. But baptism is so necessary,
that Christ says: John. 3.
Nisi quis renatus fuerit ex aqua and spiritu, non potest intrare in regnum
Dei: Except a man be borne again of water and of the Holie-ghost, he cannot
enter into the kingdom of God.


FALSIL. Christ said: All they which believe and are baptized shall be saved,

Thieves and harlots believe and are baptized, Marc. 16. New birth is in
doctrine by the holie-ghost.


Therefore thieves and harlots shall be saved.


VERIL. The consequent is false: and the minor may be answered by distinction.
There is a double faith and belief. The one being grounded on the testimony
of a good conscience, is not only the common belief of all the articles of
our christian faith, but it is also a sure confidence and trust of the mercy
of God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, and a steadfast hope of all good things
to be received at Gods hand, for Christ's sake. This faith is a most strong
brazen wall against the assaults of the devil, and is not idle, but always
works in charity and love, still ready to do our brother good, and seeks
opportunity thereto, wherefore, it is a lively faith, and comprehends all
the merits and mercies of God, bestowed on mankind, as our creation,
redemption, and sanctification. But the other is the faith and belief of
harlots and devils; Jacob. 2.
Qui credunt and contremiscunt: Which believe and tremble, knowing that God is
true, and just, yet have they no goodness at all joined with their faith, but
doing all evil, and nothing well, therefore it is dead in it self: whereby
it comes to pass, that their faith and baptism does nothing prevail, or
further them unto salvation: because they have no desire to continue in that
estate of innocence, and perfection, which they promise at the time of their
new birth in baptism, but they revolt from God, John. 3.
and turn away from his mercies. And as Christ died for none, but for such as
lay hold on him by a lively faith (for his death shall be rather to the death
of infidels, than to their life) so the faith and belief of hypocrites,
thieves, and harlots, which have an outward show, and nothing in substance,
covered over (as it were) with the smooth skin of words, is nothing worth.
For the people of Israel in the old time could say; Iere. 7. Matt. 7.
Templum Domini, templum Domini; The temple of the Lord, the temple of the
Lord. And we can say now a days, Domine, Domine, Lord, Lord; and hypocrites
will so say to the worlds end. But here is no new obedience to God, nor his
word, which is required of the penitent; here is no love to God nor man, which
God commands; here is no goodness toward God, nor man, therefore it nothing
avails them to their salvation.


FALSIL. How necessary is invocation and prayer?


VERIL. So necessary, 1. These. 5. Colos. 4.
that S. Paul says: Sine intermissione orate: Pray without ceasing. And
again: Orationi instate, vigilantes in ea: Continue in prayer, and watch in
the same, meaning thereby, that in all our actions and attempts, we must still
be pressed and ready to pray, Luke. 12.
seeking after the kingdom of God first before all things in faith. Romans 10.
For he calls not truly upon the name of God, which believes not in him;
and without a sure confidence in God, that he is both omnipotent, whereby he is
able to do it, and also merciful, whereby he is willing to do it, when it
shall seem good to his infinite wisdom, and that our prayer be so made in
acknowledging of our sins, that it may redound to Gods glory, to the
furtherance of our salvation, and the promoting of his church, else is it but
vain, and lip labor. Christ prays for us, that be his: John. 16.17. Hebr.
7.9. John. 11. Romans 8.
for he knows that he is heard of his father. We many times know not what
to pray for, but the spirit aideth our infirmity. And prayer is of four
kinds. Deprecation, which is to beg, either to mitigate the punishment due for
our sins, or else that God will turn away his heavy displeasure conceived
for our sins. Supplications are requests whereby we crave such things as be
necessary, either for the sustentation of this life, or for the life to come.
Intercessions, are prayers made in the behalf of others. And thanks giving is
when we praise God, and celebrate his name, for all his benefits conferred both
upon our souls, and also upon our bodies.


FALSIL. 1. Cor. 12.
S. Paul writes: No man can say that Jesus is the Lord but by the
Holie-ghost,

Hypocrites, thieves, and harlots, do say that Jesus is the Lord,

Therefore hypocrites, thieves, and harlots, have the Holie-ghost, and by a
consequent do believe, and they calling upon God, do please him, are heard of
him, and so be saved.


VERIL. I answer by distinction: for Paul speaks of the true invocation,
according to this saying: Zachar. 12.
Effundam super eos spiritum gratiae and pre^^m: I will power out upon them the
spirit of grace and prayer. Again, Romans 8.
Accepistis spiritum adoptionis, per quem clamamus Abba Pater: Ye have received
the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father. But the counterfeit and
false invocation nothing avails at all, which is not done by the confidence,
and in the knowledge of our mediator the son of God, but in the trust of
their own merits and worthiness, as plainly it appears in the gospel by
the talk of the Pharisie. Luc. 18.



FALSIL. What is the gospel of Christ?


VERIL. It is the glad tidings of the forgiveness of our sins, the gift of
grace, and eternal life, freely by the death and passion of Christ the son
of God, and our mediator, of the Greek word (...). And it is the power of God
to salvation, for all them that believe; as S. Paul says: Romans 1.
Virtus Dei est in salutem omni credenti: by the voice whereof, the church and
household of God is congregated, and gathered together.


FALSIL. Christ said to his disciples: Marc. 6.
Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to all creatures,

Beasts are Gods creatures, comprised in the generality of all,

Therefore we may preach the gospel to brute beasts.


VERIL. The consequent much deceives: and the minor may be answered by
distinction. For God made his creatures of two sorts, namely reasonable, as
men and angels: and unreasonable, as brute beasts, which though they be Gods
creatures, and have many senses common together with man, as their being,
moving, seeing, tasting, hearing, smelling, and feeling; yet they can not in
any case be capeable of the gospel, which is eternal life for all believers,
and was ordained only for the comfort of man, that did bear the lively
image of God, which is most absolute righteousness, and most perfect holiness,
until man by blots of sin did mar that image, and has yet some semblance
with God in the eternity of the soul, consisting of these powers, will, wit
and memory, whereof beasts are deprived, and can neither have ability of
reason, of number, or of belief. If such cauillers as propound these
syllogisticall objections and quarrels, had but a little more wit than beasts,
they might understand by these words following, Marc. 16.
Qui crediderit, and baptisatus fuerit, saluus erit: He that believes, and is
baptized shall be saved, that this later clause clean takes away this
cavil, and expounds that which goes before, and that brute beasts have no
possibility of either of these two conditions, as to believe or to be
baptized. But there are some happily of the same folly, as I read a learned
mistres had, who finding in S. Paul's epistles these words: Si vir dormierit,
mulier est liberata: 1. Cor. 7.
If the husband sleep, the wife is at liberty, used (by the authority of
these words) licentious and incontinent living, when her husband slept, as well
by night as by day, and being reproved thereof by the Ordinary, she alleged
the same scripture, affirming that she had done nothing, but that which was
lawful and allowable by the testimony of Gods word. Turn the leaf and read
further (says the judge) and you shall see, that by this word (Sleep) is meant
the natural death. Nay sir (quoth she) turn you, and read you, for I take
that which best serves for my purpose. Thus we see that there be some: Qui
deprauant scripturas, 2. Pet. 3.
ad suam ipsorum perditionem, which pervert the scriptures unto there own
destruction. And further, though it be written, that: Fides ex auditu, Romans 10.
auditus autem per verlum Dei: Faith comes by hearing and hearing by the word
of God: Hebr, 4.
yet such as hear the word of God, and couple it not with faith, take no more
profit thereby than the brute beasts do by hearing, which have no proportion
of reason in understanding such mysteries. The popes holy power.
And the old popish Sancters took upon them to bless, consecrate, hollow, and
sanctify crosses, wood, metal, stones, belles and bones, yea (and whatsoever
ye will) by sprinkling over of holy water, crossing, anointing and blessing:
yet all these trumperies could take no more holiness and goodness by all their
circumstance of charmings, than beasts can by offering them the word of God.
For brute beasts have no hearing with understanding of such matters. Dead and
senseles things have no hearing at all. If they have no hearing, they have no
faith; if they have no faith, they have no goodness; if they have no goodness in
them, then sprinkling over of water, crossing, anointing, blessing of words,
can not make them better than trumperies, as they were before.


FALSIL. When, and how was the Holie-ghost made manifest and known?


VERIL. First, in the work of the creation, where it is said: Genesis 1.
Spiritus Domini ferebatur super aquas: The spirit of the Lord was carried upon
the waters, that is to wit, he nourished all the work that was made, as an hen
nourishes her chickens, which general act of the Holie-ghost was after
transferred to the Church, which he nourishes by singular means, and
defends it. Next the holie-ghost spoke by the prophets. Thirdly, he appeered
in the likeness of a dooue, at the baptism of Christ. Fourthlie, Matt. 3.
he was manifested to the disciples in the day of pentecost, in the shape of
fiery toongs, Act. 2.
which patefactions are certain testimonies that the Holie-ghost is an other
person than the father and the son.


FALSIL. Christ says: John. 16.
The Holie-ghost shall lead you into all truth,

Therefore Christ taught not his disciples all truth: but the Holie-ghost will
reveal some new things, as the mass, traditions, and worshipping of the
papisticall church.


VERIL. I deny the consequent, and answer by distinction: for Christ speaks
of the same verity which is revealed in his word, as he says in another
place, Sermo tuus est veritas, John. 17.
quam spiritus sanctus illustrabit: Thy word is the truth, which the
Holie-ghost shall open. He speaks not of those things which God has not
opened to his church in his holy word, as to know the time of our deaths, when
the day of judgment shall be, or such like, the curious searching out whereof
is the rashness of man, forbidden by this saying: Scrutator maiestatis
opprimetur a gloria: The searcher out of the majesty of God shall be
confounded with his glory.


FALSIL. What is the certain note and mark of the presence of the Holie-ghost?


VERIL. The spiritual or good motions of the heart, as is prayer and
invocation, the love to hear the word of God, and the true embracing of the
same: whereas there are no such motions felt, there the Holie-ghost is not, and
such as are without these good feelings are no true members of the church,
according to that saying: Romans 8.
Qui non habet spiritum Christi, non est eius: He that has not the spirit of
Christ, is none of his: 2. Reg. 11. John. 18.
except they do return to God by repentance and conversion, as David,
Manasses, Peter, and such other did, which received again the Holie-ghost by
repentance and faith, that was put away from them by their falls, contrary
to their own conscience.


FALSIL. What is the office of Christ?


VERIL. First, Christ's office is by his preaching to open to us and his church,
his fathers eternal will. Next, to offer him self up a sacrifice to his
father, for the redemption of all the world, and to deliver his universal
church from death, sin, and the tyranny of the devil.


FALSIL. Act. 12.
Nero killed Paul, Herod killed John and James,

Therefore Christ delivers not his church, gives her no peace, nor victory
against her enemies.


VERIL. Christ gives us the eternal victory, which hereafter we shall
behold. And now we have the victory also, howbeit we can not see it with
corporal eyes, for the church is preserved, though the devil rage and
horribly invade it. God defends it marvelously, without any man's power or
strength: as the father himself says: Seruabo vos non in arcu, Ose. 1.
nec in gladio, sed in Domino Deo vestro: I will not deliver you through my
bow or sword, but in the Lord your God, that is, in my son, which is your
Lord and your God. Also God says in Zachary: Ego ero igneus murus vester:
Zachar. 2.
I will be to you a wall of fire round about.


FALSIL. When began the kingdom of Christ in mankind?


VERIL. The kingdom of Christ, or the presence of the son of God, was in
mankind streightwaies from the beginning of the making and receiving of man
among the fathers, prophets, and the godly people of the old Testament, as
Irenaeus says, Semper adest (...) humano generi: The word (that is the son
of God) was always present with mankind. Also S. Paul says: Christus hodie
and heri, Hebr. 13.
and in omnia secula: Christ yesterdaie and to day, and the same continues
for ever the author of truth and goodness.


FALSIL. The taking away of an other man's thing against the owners will, is
theft,

Matthew. 21.
Christ commanded the ass and her colt to be brought unto him, and that against
the owners will,

Therefore Christ did not well.


VERIL. The minor is to be denied, Christ was the superior Lord of this people,
although he used not that his external power and right, because he came to be
made a sacrifice for our sins: yet notwithstanding he had power over this
people, as he himself says: Dominus hijs opus habet: Matthew. 21.
The Lord has need of them. Again, he took not away the ass against the
owners will, but with his good will, when the disciples had alleged unto him
the cause of taking her away, declaring their message, which the Lord gave
them in charge to do.


FALSIL. When shall the kingdom of Christ (which is the collecting of his
church) end?


VERIL. In the last day, when as the Apostle says: 1. Cor. 15.
Regnum patri suo tradet: He shall deliver up the kingdom to his father,
ouercomming all his enemies, and his churches, as sin, death, satan, hell, and
all tyrants, for then shall we see the very son of God, which is corporal,
and he will bring us unto his father, there shall he present his church before
his eternal father, then shall we begin to see and know the father visiblie,
whose fruition is eternal life. In the mean season, the kingdom of Christ is
named in us, because it dwells in us by his ministry. And truly therefore
is his word sent unto us, for he is called (...), both in respect of us, and of
his father also. And the Apostle here speaks of Christ's kingdom in this
world, 1. Cor. 15.
whereby he congregateth his church together, and does mightily defend it by
his infinite power and mercy without corporal violence.


FALSIL. The minister of the gospel ought not to use corporal violence,

Christ used corporal violence in whipping the biers and fellers out of the
temple, John. 2.


Therefore Christ did not well.


VERIL. This may be answered three Act. 5.
But as Peter killed Ananias and Saphira his wife, without corporal violence
(yea God him self quickly destroyed them) so Christ here says: Zelus domus
tuae comodit me: Psalm. 69.
The zeal of thine house has eaten me, that was a certain divine force and
indignation, enflamed with the love and desire of the affirming, and
propagation of the honor of God.

John. 2.
because it was his house and his place.




FALSIL. Wherefore does God take men to grace and mercy, and not the devils?


VERIL. Because the sin of the devils is blasphemy, and the sin of our
first parents was imbecillitie and weakness. God also shows his justice in
the eternal punishment of the devil, and his mercy in delivering of man.
Matt. 25.
And Christ said: Ite in ignem aternum, qui paratus est diabolo and angelis
suis: Go into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the devil and his
angels. Again, Jude.
Seruabit diabolos aeternis vinculis: God will reserve the devils to
everlasting chains. Thirdly the devil sinned against God wittinglie and
willingly, both in pride and contempt of the son of God, whom therefore he
contemns, because he cast him away to be worse than all creatures; and man
sinned by the instigation and deceit of the devil. Genesi. 3.
And because the devil sinned both of malice, and wittinglie, and hates the
son of God our mediator, with a perpetual and insatiable hatred, God
receives him not into favor. For that the only son of God is the only
mediator between God offended, and his creatures offending, which mediator
the devils persecute and blaspheme, to the uttermost of their power, always
laboring to contrary the immutable will of God.


FALSILOQVVS. The will of God is immutable, Prou. 19.


Moses government was appointed by the will of God,

Therefore it is immutable.


VERILOQVVS. I answer to the minor by distinction. The will of God is immutable
as he himself has decreed. To the minor, the politic government of Moses
was ordained by the will of God, but so, that it should be abolished again,
when the Messiah came, which is the savior of mankind, and that by three
ways; first, by merit; next, by efficacy; and thirdly, by intercession, when
he wrought in the world the mystery of our redemption, with other his signs,
wonders and miracles.


FALSIL. What are miracles?


VERIL. Miracles are the works of God, such as creatures, No imitation of Gods
miracles.
men, and angels cannot imitate. That is to say, the creation of the world,
the stopping of the course of the sun, the continual moving of the
celestial bodies, the raising up of the dead, and to make the fruitful
barren. And miracles are of two sorts, ordinary, and inordinarie; ordinary
are the creation, the preserving, and propagation of mankind; inordinarie, to
stop the course of the sun, to make the fruitful barren, and to raise up the
dead, which the devil can in no case imitate and follow. Therefore he does
always malign and take an offense against God.


FALSIL. Matt. 18.
He that gives cause of an offense does evil,

Christ give cause of an offense,

Therefore Christ did evil.


VERIL. I deny the minor; for Christ is no cause of an offense given. There is
a double offense, one given, and an other taken. The offense given, is an evil
doctrine, or a wicked example of life, whereby others deceived are made the
worse. In Catalogo haereticorum, lib. 2.
As Arrius the heretic bishop of Alexandria was the author of a most horrible
offense given, which affirmed Christ to be a creature only, and confounded his
Godhead. It is written therefore, that he burst asunder in the midst, and his
bowels gushed out. Of which offense it is said, Vae mundo a scandalis: Woe unto
the world, because of offenses. And again: Vae illi per quem scandala fiunt:
Matthew. 18.
Woe unto the man by whom offenses do come. The offense taken is, when some are
offended in hatred of the true doctrine, as the Bishops, the Pharisees, the
Saduces, and the Scribes were with the gospel. Therefore Christ said, Sinite
eos, Matthew. 23.
caeci sunt, and duces caecorum: Let them alone, they are blind, and the guides
of the blind.


FALSIL. What is the law?


VERIL. The moral law, which is holy, and is established by the gospel (as
S. Paul says) is the eternal, Romans 7.
and immovable wisdom in God, and the rule of righteousness in the will of
God, discerning the good from the evil, the which law is made manifest to the
reasonable nature in his creation, and after oftentimes repeated, and
established by the voice of God, showing in the church, that God is a judge,
binding all natural creatures, that they shall be conformable to that rule of
the commandments of God, declaring his horrible destruction to all them which
will not reform themselves according to that rule, except they have remission
for Christ's sake.


FALSIL. Luke. 16.
Christ said: The prophets and the law reigned to John the baptist,

Matthew. 11.
Therefore the moral law is abrogated, and must no more be preached.


VERIL. I deny the consequent, and answer to the antecedent by distinction.
Christ speaks of Moses policy, that is, the ceremonial and judicial law,
and not of the ten commandments, which are the steadfast and perpetual
wisdom, justice, and will of God, which is immutable: and God will have all
men to obeie his wisdom and justice, and would have all men, at all times, to
be in their manners and usage conformable unto the same, Exodus 20.
wherefore he says by Moses: Ego sum Dominus Deus tuus: I am the Lord thy God.


FALSIL. What is the peace of God?


VERIL. It is the tranquillity of conscience, and joy, resting and reposing it
in God, that he is at peace with us, by his son Christ, of the which peace
Christ himself speaks saying: Pacem meam do vobis, John. 14.
pacem meam relinquo vobis: I give you my peace, I leave you my peace, which is
without all grudge, worm, Marc. 9.
or sting of conscience, and without all contrariety, division, or schism.


FALSIL. It was not lawful to depart from the temple of Jerusalem, and to
make a schism,

John the baptist departed from the temple, Christian men's ceremonies are
spiritual things. 1. Cor. 10.
and made a schism, because he taught not in the temple but in the desert, and
ordained a new ceremony of baptism, and misliked the sacrifices commanded by
God,

Therefore John the baptist did not well.


VERIL. I deny the consequent, and answer by distinction. There is a double
schism. One is necessary, which is done by the commandment of God, peculiar
vocation and calling. So John the baptist departed from the temple of
Jerusalem in which his father Zacharias the priest taught and sacrificed,
because he was called thereunto by the most excellent and singular commandment
of God. The other is schism rash and unadvised, having no commandment, nor
just cause of reuolting, which is to be denied and utterly to be eschued.


FALSIL. Tyndall and Luther had no commandment of God, nor especial calling,

Therefore they did naught, in separating themselves from the holy father the
popes church.


VERIL. I deny the consequent, because that separation or schism was
necessary and godly. For either it was a singular calling, as John the
baptist departed from the ordinary power: or else they did it for the
universal commandment of God, which binds and compels all men, that they
must depart from the company which imbraseth wicked doctrine, and false
worshippings, according to such commandment as this is: Fuge idola, and Non
habebis deos alienos coram me. Exodus 20.
Thou shall have none other gods but me. This universal commandment is
greater, and of more force than a singular calling, therefore all men must
willingly obeie it.


FALSIL. What is the cause that Turks, Jews, Infidels, and many Christians
are not partakers of Christ's benefits, but are damned?


VERIL. The cause is, they cannot a^^^e unto themselves the benefits of the
son of God by faith, which is the redeemer of all men. Et dedit vita^sua^
redemptione^ pro multis; 2. Cor. 1.
And gave his life a redemption for many, 1. Tim. 2. Matt. 20. Exodus 15.
and it was prefigured in the delivering of the children of Israel. But they
being reprobates contemn these things, and as it were cast away from them,
the son of God, blaspheming him, as the Turks, Jews, and many others do,
which bear the only names and outward shows of Christians, but in their
deeds and actions they are worse than Pharisees, that outwardly seem to
bless him with their mouths, and curse him with their lives and manners.
Therefore they are not heard of God, when they ask of him.


FALSIL. Whatsoever (says Christ) ye shall ask the Father in my name, John.
16.
he will give it you,

If I ask a kingdom of him, he will give it me,

Because he is true.


VERIL. The minor is not true. And distinction may be used in answering hereof.
For though that God be the author and giver of every good and perfect gift,
both spiritual, Jacob. 1.
and bodily, yet he gives them and bestows them on such as pleases him,
when, where, and in such sort and quantity as it best seems to his good and
fatherly providence. So that we must not appoint him either the time, measure,
or mean of his gifts: but in all causes whatsoever we must tarry the leisure
of the Lord: Qui benedictus est in omnibus vijs suis, Psalm. 145.
and sanctus in operibus: Which is blessed in all his ways, and holy in all
his works. And as his gifts be in number infinite, in quantity unmeasurable,
and in nature every one most excellent good, both spiritual and corporal: so
he bestows them always upon his, both spirituallie and corporally.
Spirituallie, for the furniture and beautifieng of the mind and soul of man,
as faith, grace, will, wit, memory, learning, cunning and science. And
corporally, for the endowing and increasing the outward happiness of the body
of man, as health, beauty, strength, riches, power and possessions. In all
which petitions made for the gifts of God, we must follow the general rule
that our savior Christ has prescribed unto all flesh: saying, Primum quaerite
regnum Dei and iustitiam eius, Matthew. 6.
and adijcientur vobis omnia haec: First seek ye the kingdom of God and the
righteousness thereof, and all these things shall be given you; meaning thereby
that we shall have all worldly things the easier and with less travel. Then
we must ask nothing hurtful to the right of the church, whereby the service of
God shall be diminished, our neighbor or common wealth impaired, nor any
thing that should be an hinderance to our own salvation. To ask a kingdom,
when we cannot well guide our own private estate, we shall offend God; because
we have not to appoint him the measure of his gifts, happily hurt the
condition of many, and hazard our own souls. Therefore we must content our
selves with our own calling, remembering the holy Apostles saying: 1. Tim. 6.
Quastus magnus pietas cum sufficientia: Godliness is great riches, if a man
be contented with that he has. For, 1. Cor. 7.
Vnusquisque donum suum proprium habet ex Deo: Every man has his proper gift
of God, and he does sometimes (as it were) bridle and hold back his servants
from committing sin and wickedness together with the world, by the bit and
bridle of scarsitie and penury, knowing (because he is the searcher of the
heart and reins) that if some might have their hearts desire, and might enjoy
the fruit of their own inventions, they would ignorantly seek their own
destruction by excess. Therefore it is written: Romans 8.
Penuriam multo melius feras quam saturitatem: A man may better away with
penury than with saturitie. God that made man knows what is in man, and what
estate is best for every man.


FALSIL. Wherefore do the philosophers say, that man's will is cause of his
own miseries?


VERIL. Because men willingly (though unawares) procure to themselves many
miseries, as for example. Antonius at Rome willing to wage war against
Augustus, was causer of his own harms. 2. Reg. 11.
King David, by taking away Vrias wife, procured himself many calamities.
Thus oftentimes man's wilful mind is his own misery, for that they are snared
with pleasures and voluptuous living without Gods spirit; as fishes are taken
with the bait.


FALSIL. He calls upon the true God, which calls upon one God maker of
heaven and earth, which is almighty, wise, just, and good,

The Turks and the present Jews do call upon one God maker of heaven and
earth, which is almighty, just and good,

Therefore they call upon the true God, and shall be heard.


VERIL. I deny the minor: because the Turks do call upon their idol, yea
(rather I may say) they do call upon nothing. For they do not call upon that
God, which is the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, or which is the father, the
son, and the Holie-ghost, the which God has manifested or opened himself in
his word. And because they do not call upon God in faith and knowledge of our
mediator, they are not heard, for Christ says: John. 16.
Nemo venit ad patrem nisi per me: No man comes unto the father but by me.
Again, John. 14.
Quicquid petieritis patrem in nomine meo dabit vobis: What so ever ye shall
ask the father in my name, he will give it you. Therefore Turks and Jews do
err from God two ways, in essence and will: whereof, without Christ our
mediator, there can be nothing rightly determined.


FALSIL. What are the true and principal causes of death, and other the
calamities of mankind?


VERIL. There be two causes, the first and principal cause is sin, which Adam
committing departed from God, and afterward spread into all men, that is to
say, the infirmity of our corrupt nature, and inclination to all evil. The
second cause is, Romans 5.
the tyranny of the devil increasing by Gods wrath, man's misery and horrible
fast, and stirring up still in mankind, anger, fury, war, slaughters,
murders, and such like, with all other kind of wickedness.


FALSIL. Had not the old fathers the true worshipping of God, before the
politic governance of Moses?


VERIL. Yes verelie: because they had first the moral law, or knowledge
thereof, whereby they should live virtuously. For God said in paradise: Genesi.
3.
Erunt duo in carne vna: They shall be two in one flesh, which saying
forbids all wandering lusts and licentious appetites. Also they had the
doctrine of the promises, Genesi. 22.
De semine contrituro caput serpentis: Of the seed that should quash the
serpents head, wherein all the nations of the earth shall be blessed. Thirdly,
they called upon the same God, which declared himself to his church, in his
most certain word, and by many excellent testimonies, and that in knowledge
and trust of his son, the promised redeemer of the world.


FALSIL. Wherefore was the Jews politic governance ordained, seeing that it
should be afterward abolished?


VERIL. It was ordained, because God would have the place to be certain, where
his son should be borne, where he should teach, and show forth the
testimonies of his doctrine, where he should be crucified and rise again, and
from whence the gospel should be first sent into all the rest of the world,
according to the prophets saying: Psalm. 18.
Exiuit sonus eorum in omnem terram; Their sound went out into all the world.
Therefore Jerusalem was (as it were) the tower of the church, where the true
doctrine was manifested, opened and purged by Christ and his Apostles. But when
Christ was exhibited and proffered, and the voice of the gospel was published
in all the world, then it behooued this politic governance to be put away and
abolished. First, that there might a testimony remain, that Christ was
offered to all the world, and that the Leuiticall worshipping was not the true
and principal worshipping of the eternal and spiritual worshipping of the
kingdom of Messiah: but the true acknowledging of God and his son,
invocation, setting forth and confessing the heavenly doctrine, the fear of
God, patience in adversity, and other spiritual motions agreeing with Gods
mind and will. As Christ says: John. 4.
Very adoratores Deum adorabunt spiritu and veritate: The true worshippers
shall worship God in spirit and in truth.


FALSIL. Whether was the sin of Eve greater in eating the apple forbidden by
God, Luke. 2.
or the sin of the virgin Marie, in leesing the child Jesus in Jerusalem?


VERIL. The sin of Eve was the greater sin.


FALSIL. Objects discern sins according to maius and minus. Objection is any
thing that may be seen before our eyes.


The sin of Marie was greater in object, for the child Jesus was the son of
God, and better than an apple, as a man excels a beast,

Therefore Marie sinned more grieuouslie, in leesing by negligence the child
Jesus, which is the son of God, than Eve did in eating the apple.


VERIL. First, the mayor may be thus answered. Objects discern sins,
according to maius and minus, but not principally. And a principal
distinction of she causes of good or evil works must be had, and the mind
understanding what they are, and considering the commandment, and then the
will obeieng or repugning, chooses some thing, either contrary to the
commandment of God, or according to his commandment. He therefore that sins
willingly and wittinglie, commits a more grievous sin, than he that
sins by ignorance, Diversity of sin.
and common imbecillitie and weakness. Again, answer may be made to the minor:
Marie sinned ignorantly and not wittinglie, because she thought that the child
Jesus had been with Joseph: but Eve sinned willingly and wittinglie,
contrary to her conscience, breaking the commandment of God, freely choosing
the eating of the apple forbidden of God. He that so sins, puts away his
faith, the Holie-ghost, and loses the favor of God, and is damned without
repentance, because: Stipendium peccati mors est: Romans 6.
The reward of sin is death. Of the sins of ignorance, which are not
committed wittinglie and willingly, the prophet speaks thus: Psalm. 18.
Delicta quis intelligit? Who understands his offenses? And, Ab occultis meis
munda me Domine: Psalm. 19.
Lord cleanse me from my secret sins. Affectate or coueted ignorance is a
sin against our conscience, but ignorance not affectate is man's weakness,
which does not condemn us, so that we acknowledge it, and ask forgiveness
thereof at Gods hand, with faith and repentance in newnes of life following.
But to speak briefly of our first parents offense, no man ought to make it a
small fault, weighing it by the eating of an apple, seeing that by Satan's
allurements they revolted and turned away from Gods truth to a lie by
infidelity: and gave credence to the wicked and false suggestions of the old
serpent the devil, which accused God of untruth, envy, and of malicious
withdrawing some goodness from them: and so much they forgot Gods great goodness
and benefits, which had made them after his own image, Genesis 1. Coloss. 3.
that by pride and ambition they sought to be equal with his majesty also.


FALSIL. What does marriage signify?


VERIL. First, it signifies the coupling together of the divine nature with
man's nature, and that marvelous league, true, and ardent love, wherewith the
son of God entierlie loves man's nature, which he took upon him. Next, it
signifies the love of the son of God, the defense and preservation of his
church, whereof S. Paul speaks: Ephesians. 5.
Christus dilexit ecclesiam, and semetipsum tradidit pro ea: Christ loved his
church, and gave himself for it.


FALSIL. The consequent is not good from a particularitie, to a generality,

Matt. 8.
Miracles are particular deliuerings, as of the leper and palsy man,

Therefore, we make an evil argument of these examples, to say: that God will
likewise deliver all other men.


VERIL. First, I deny the consequent. Although examples be particular, yet the
promise is universal, Romans 10.
as: Omnis qui inuocauerit nomen Domini saluus erit: Every one that calls on
the name of God shall be saved. Again, Venite ad me omnes qui laboratis, Matt.
11.
and ego reficiam vos: Come unto me all ye that be heavy laden, and I will
refresh you. These promises are declared by examples, which therefore are not
universal, because all men do not receive them in faith. Next, there is
unlikeness in bodily aids and cures: for God delivers not us by one means
always. So Ionathas, 1. Macab. 12
although he were good and godly, was killed together with his father, by a
crafty policy. Manasses, who repented, was brought out of captivity, and
many other saints carried away into captivity to Babylon, never returned
again. Thirdly, a spiritual promise simply made is universal, and is Gods
commandment, and is immovable, that we should believe to receive forgiveness
of our sins, righteousness and everlasting life, freely by faith, only for
Christ's sake our mediator, John. 3.
according unto these words: Sic Deus dilexit mundum, vt filium suum daret, vt
omni qui credit in eum non pereat, sed vitam habeat aeternam: So God loved the
world, that he gave his son, that every one that believes in him, should not
perish, but have life everlasting. Also: Romans 5.
Omnes qui credunt in eum habent vitam aeternam: All that believe in him, have
everlasting life. And: Iustificati fide, pacem habemus: We are at peace with
him, being justified by faith. The psalmist says: Psalm. 1.
Beati omnes qui confidunt in eo: Blessed are all they that put their trust in
him.


FALSIL. What is circumcision?


VERIL. It is the cutting of the foreskin of the privy member, which is called
in Latin Praeputium: and it was commanded Abraham and his posterity, that they
might be admonished by this outward sign, chiefly of the promise made unto
Abraham, that Messiah the promised seed should be borne of his posterity.
Next, that it should be a sign of increasing his posterity as the stars of
heaven, and the sand of the sea. Genesis 22.
Thirdly, of giving the land of Chanaan to his successors, that it might be
certeinlie known, in what place the Messiah should be borne, Genesis 17.
teach, and die. Abraham was ninety year old and nine, when the flesh of his
foreskin was circumcised, and the mankind, observing this ceremony, did
sanctify their women thereby. For the manchild only was commanded to be
circumcised, when he was eight days old, being bond or free, without exception.


FALSIL. Wherefore should not circumcision be yet used among us that be
Christians?


VERIL. Gala. 5.
Because S. Paul does say: Quod si circumcidamini, Christus pro vobis frustra
mortuus est: If you be circumcised, Christ is become but in vain unto you. For
the law containing the ceremonies, decrees and commandments, Ephesians. 2. 2.
Cor. 3. Act. 15.
is abolished by Christ. Because the law brought no man unto the perfection of
christianity, which the knowledge of Christ requires generally of every
man, for that it is said: Estote vos perfecti, Matt. 5.
sicut pater vester coelestis perfectus est: Be you perfect, even as your
heavenly father is perfect.


FALSIL. Why does S. Paul call circumcision then the seal of righteousness,
if it bring us not unto righteousness?


VERIL. Not because Abraham by this external sign was justified before God,
or pleased God, as the Jews supposed: but that by this sign he applied unto
himself the promise of GOD of the reconciliation, atonement, forgiveness of
sins, Genesis 22.
and the gift of eternal life freely for the promised seed unto him, and that
he should by this sign confirm his faith. For the sacraments are testimonies,
pledges and tokens of the applieng of the benefits of God unto us, and
confirmation of our faith.


FALSIL. The law forbids us to touch lepers, Leuit. 13.


Christ touched a leper, Matthew. 8.


Therefore Christ did not well.


VERIL. I deny the consequent. First, because the law forbids the touching
of lepers to this end, not for that it is sin or evil, but that the harm
and contagiousnes of the leprosy, should not spread it self abroad further
among the people. Therefore it is lawful to touch lepers to cure them. For
morals are to be preferred before ceremonials, as the prophet says: Ose. 6.
Misericordiam volo, non sacrificia, scientiam Dei volo non holocausta: I will
have mercy and not sacrifice, I will have the knowledge of God and not burnt
sacrifices: which saying comprehends both tables, whereof the first speaks
of the knowledge of GOD, Two tables of comma^dements.
and his true worshippings, by the means whereof we deal with God, as in
fear, faith, love, invocation, giving of thanks, and so forth. The second
table contains the works of mercy, or of love toward our neighbor, and so
did Christ reason when he cured the man of the dropsy on the sabbath day:
Luc. 14.
Vos extrahitis pecudes in sabbato ex fosis, quanto magis licet in eo sanare
hominem? You pluck beasts out of the pit on the sabbath day, how much more is
it lawful to cure a man on the sabbath day? Also Christ was not tied unto
this law, which was ordained of God for the politic governance of the Jews:
and Christ was the son of God, and therefore as he says in another place:
Matthew. 12. Luc. 6.
Dominus erat sabbati: He was Lord of the sabbath. Thirdly, the curing of the
sick man so presently was the work of God, and the confirming of Christ's
vocation and calling. Therefore Christ was not tied unto the ceremonial law.


FALSILOQVVS. What is the church visible?


VERILOQVVS. The church visible is a company of people imbrasing and
professing openly the pure doctrine of the gospel, confessing the son of
God, his benefits, and reteining of a lawful and perfect use of the sacraments
of Christ, according to this saying: Oues meae vocem meam audiunt: John. 10.
My sheep do hear my voice. And this church of Christ is but little,
contemned, and subject to persecution in this world. Therefore it is said: Luc.
12.
Noli timere pusille grex: Fear not little flock. Again, Non multi sapientes
secundum carnem, 1. Cor. 1.
non multi nobiles, sed quae contempta, and ignobilia coram mundo, elegit Deus:
God has not chosen many wisemen according to the flesh, not many of high
degree, but the despised and foolish things of the world. And in another place:
John. 16.
In mundo afflictiones habebitis: You shall have trouble in this world, and
that chiefly before potentates, and monarchs.


FALSIL. How many monarchies has there been in time past?


VERIL. There has been four monarchies. Babylon, which continued a thousand
years, even until the time of Cyrus, from the days of Abraham, who lived in
the time of Ninus the first king of the Babylonians.

Persia, which continued two hundred years, Cyrus was the first governor
thereof.

Graecians, which continued three hundred years, Alexander Magnus was the
first governor thereof.

Rome, which began from Julius Caesar, and continued about four hundred years
unto Constantinus, or Valentianus the later, and a monarchy is the rule of
one, of whom all other do hold.


FALSIL. Saint Paul was beheaded at Rome, after Christ 37. years by Nero.
Good and just men ought to be well used,

S. Paul was a good and just man,

Therefore he ought to have been well used, and not to have lost his head.


VERIL. The mayor may thus be answered. Good and just men ought to be well
used, but according to the will and ordinance of God, and that truly in their
due season. And God will have his church in this life to be subject to
persecution. For the blood of martyrs is the seed of the gospel. And God does
suffer almost the chiefest members of his church, and his best servants, to be
murdered of tyrants for their good and well doings, and not for any faults
that the persecutors can find in them, that they should confirm their doctrine
with their own deaths, and that they might be made somewhat like unto Christ
upon the cross, by the sealing up of their words and works in their blood.
But after this life certeinelie good and just men shall be well used, and
contrariwise, wicked men shall be evil used, as the example of the rich
glutton and poor Lazarus does witness the same. Luc. 16,



FALSIL. Wherefore does God suffer his church, which he loves, to be so
hardly entreated, seeing she is just in afflictions, as he says in the
prophet: Ierem. 12.
Dedi dilectam meam in manum inimitorum meorum: I have delivered my beloved
into the hand of mine enemies?


VERIL. There be two especial causes. The first is, that the church has yet
sins and much filthiness, which God would have to be acknowledged, purged and
mortified in the godly. As the Apostle says: Romans ^.
Corpus destinatum est morti propter peccatum: The body is dead because of
sin which hangs in our nature. And S. Peter says: 1. Pet. 4.
Iudicium (id est poena) incipit a domo Dei: Judgment (that is to say
punishment) shall begin at the household of God. The second cause is, for that
God would have the power of his son, by that means to be the more manifest,
when he overcomes the devil by the weak, as he delivers and preserves
his church, against the which the devil and his members with great fury does
rage and stir; as he restored our first parents falling away from him, and
preserves his church at all seasons, by his divine and mighty power.


FALSIL. God always hears us not beneuolentlie, neither delivers he us in
afflictions,

Therefore it is lawful for us to doubt of him.


VERIL. The consequent must be denied. Because, although God does sometimes
defer our deliverance in corporal perils, yet we ought not doubt of his good
will and deliverance in the end. Let us commit our souls to God with well
doing. 1. Pet. 4.
For God would have us in corporal things to be subject to his will, and that
we should be prepared to obedience, and he does not deliver us, or mitigate
our calamities after one manner always. Therefore we ought first to determine
in faith, that God will receive us, and forgive us our sins for his sons
sake our mediator. Next, that we should crave deliverance at Gods hands
only, and none other ways, and that we should expect the same according to
his good will and pleasure. Thirdly, that we should obeie, and emploie our
calling, and then commit all corporal success unto God. Fourthlie, we must
put our selves in subjection to the pleasure of God, and show our obedience in
afflictions, and tarry his leisure, until that he delivers us, and does
mitigate our sorrows. As David says: Si velit Dominus, reducet me: si non
velit, 1. Reg. 15.
fiat voluntas Domini: If it please the Lord, he will bring me out of
captivity; if not, the will of the Lord be fulfilled. Therefore, although God
delivers us not presently in bodily harms, yet we ought not be doubtful
of his deliverance in the end, neither of his promise of grace, which is the
fruit of the gospel, but most certeinelie to determine that God will receive
us, be merciful to us, and forgive us our sins for his sons sake. As it is
written: Omnis qui credit in filium habet vitam aeternam: John. 3.
Every one that believes in the son of God has eternal life. And again:
Job. 13.
Etiamsi occiderit me Dominus, tamen sperabo in eum: Although the Lord kill me,
yet I will put my trust in him.


FALSIL. Did you ever hear or read of a river or poole called Asphaltites?


VERIL. Yea, it is a place mentioned in Genesis, and a poole in the later part
of the tribe of Judah: and this Asphaltites is otherwise called either the salt
sea, or the dead sea: for in this place the flue cities, Sodom, Gomorrha,
Adama, Seboim, and Segor, were destroyed with fire from God, for their
incestuous lusts and other sins, Genesi. 19.
as it is mentioned. And this poole is a monument of the punishment and wrath
of God, against the sins of that time, and all others: it is in bigness about
the space of eight miles, it does smoke and breath out fiery pitch and
brimstone of a most stinking savor, by a secret and a marvelous working of God
even to this day. Moses writes thereof thus: Pluit Dominus ignem a Domino:
Genesi. 19.
The Lord rained upon them brimstone and fire from the Lord; that is to say:
The son of God received fire of his eternal father, and was the executor of
that fire and punishment.


FALSIL. Matthew. 9.
Whosoever does attribute unto him self that which is proper to God, he is a
blasphemer,

Christ did attribute that unto himself which was proper to God,

Therefore (say the Phariseis) Christ was a blasphemer.


VERIL. I deny the consequent. Yet this kind of reasoning were true, if Christ
had been like unto the Phariseis, that is, if Christ had been a mere man,
and not God withal. Because he said unto the sick of the palsy; Fili
confide, remittuntur tibi peccata: Ibidem.
Son be of good cheer, thy sins be forgiven thee, they thought him to be a
blasphemer. But see (I pray you) how much worse our papists and monks are, than
the Scribes and Phariseis. For they being instructed by Gods word could say:
Quis potest remittere peccata nisi solus Deus? Marc. 2.
Who can forgive sins but God only? Yet our papists attribute the forgiveness
of sins to the merits of saints, masses and indulgences, which they depart
not with for naught, but sell this trash very dear. Sure it is a strange kind
of merchandise, they sell that which they have not they sell smoke and receive
gold, they promise men heaven but deliver them hell. But what shall we say
concerning the ministers of the word of God? Do they forgive sins or no?
They themselves as of themselves do not forgive sins, Matt. 9.
but they pronounce and declare the remission of sins to all such as they find
like to the man sick of the palsy; they give nothing of their own, but offer
that which is another, by the commandment of Christ. They offer the release
and forgiveness of sins in the voice of the gospel. Whosoever receives this
voice faithfully, doubtless he receives the full forgiveness of all his sins.
For Christ himself does say: Luc. 10.
Qui vos audit me audit: He that hears you hears me.


FALSIL. Tell me I pray you, are all christian men priests or no?


VERIL. Yea that they are truly. For, as every one regenerate by the
participation of water and the Holie-ghost is called a Christian, of Christ; so
by him, he is made a king and a priest, Apoc. 1.
as it is written: Fecit nos reges and sacerdotes patri suo: He has made us
kings and priests to his father. And hereof S. Peter calls us Regale
sacerdotium, 1. Pet. 2.
A royal priesthood. For by Christ, we have right and authority to preach the
word of God, yet every man in his calling. We have right and liberty to call
upon God, according to this saying: Inuoca me in die tribulationis: Call upon
me in the day of trouble. Again: Quicquid petieritis patrem in nomine meo
dabit vobis: Whatsoever ye ask the father in my name he will give it you. We
have also power and authority to offer up sacrifice of praise and
thanksgiving. Propitiatory is pacifieng Gods wrath.
For no mortal man can offer up a propitiatory sacrifice, because that honor
only belongs to Christ, our high bishop and Lord. There are five kinds of
christian men's sacrifices: a troubled spirit, the sacrifice of righteousness,
the sacrifice of praise or the calves of our lips, confessing the name of God,
the sacrifice of beneficence and communion, and our own body which is a
reasonable sacrifice. The prophet Micheas asked the Lord, what acceptable thing
he should offer unto him? His answer was; I will show thee (O man) what thing
is good, and what the Lord requires of thee: Vtique facere iudicium, Mich. 6.
and diligere misericordiam, and humilem ambulare coram Deo tuo: Namely that
thou do right, love mercy, and walk humbly before thy God. But touching
them which are called priests amongst us now adays, you shall understand that
they are so called for three causes. First, because they are dedicated to
Christ, togithers with other Christians, and are rightly called priests,
because and in as much as they are true Christians. Next, in imitation of the
people of Israel, which called them priests that were occupied in the
ministry of the word of God, and in the sacrifices of the law, and this honor
was only granted unto the tribe of Leuy. Thirdly, it pleased the holy
fathers, the successors of the Apostles, to adorn before others, with this
worthy sacerdotall title, those which teach the word of God, minister the
sacraments, and declare unto men, that sin, death, and damnation, are
abolished by the only sacrifice of Christ our high priest. The old priests of
the law did offer up beasts, but the Apostles and other priests of Christ and
his gospel, do as it were slay men, and offer up a lively sacrifice to God
by the gospel. S. Paul testifies that he made the like sacrifice, when he
slew the Gentiles with the sword of the gospel: Romans 15.
Vt fieret oblatio acceptabilis Deo, sanctificata per spiritum sanctum: That
the offering of the Gentiles might be acceptable to God, and sanctified by the
Holie-ghost. The papists would so make a sacrifice, of a sacrament.
But the papisticall sacrifice is plain sacrilege, for it was not ordained to
teach Christ, and to slay men to God by the sword of the gospel; but to offer
up Christ for the quick and the dead: by that means defiling, and treading
under foot the sacrifice of Christ, which by his priesthood has found
eternal redemption, for it is written: Hic autem vnam pro peccatis offerens
hostiam in sempiternum sedet ad dextram Dei: Hebr. 10.
This man after he has offered one sacrifice for sins, is set down for ever
on the right hand of God, and from henceforth tarieth till his foes be made his
footestoole. For with one offering he has made them perfect for ever that are
sanctified. Therefore the popish priests are very wicked, which impudentlie
dare reiterat, and eftsoons begin afresh that which is made perfect for ever
by Christ our high priest.


FALSIL. The scripture reports Abraham, Noe and Job, with others, to be good
men and just,

But Christ says, Marc. 10.
there is none good but God only, and Christ is true,

Therefore Abraham, Noe, and Job, with others, are not good men and just.


VERIL. I deny the consequent. For as no man shines but by Christ Jesus,
John. 1.
which is the true light, lightening every man coming into this world, and
believing in him: so, there is none good, godly and holy, but by Christ
only, which is Summum bonum, The chiefest felicity, the truth, the
righteousness, the life, wisdom, and the word of the father: 1. Cor. 1.
Qui factus fuit nobis sapientia a Deo, iustitiaque, and sanctificatio and
redemptio: Which is of God made wisdom unto us, and also righteousness, and
sanctifieng, and redemption. Iam vos mundi estis, John. 15.
propter sermonem quem loquutus sum vobis: Now you are clean through the word
which I have spoken unto you. The gospel of Christ Jesus does cleanse us and
sanctify us, if it be received in faith: Romans 1.
Est enim virtus Dei ad salutem omni credenti: For it is the power of God unto
salvation to every one that believes, Marc. 16.
Cui qui crediderit saluus erit, Whom who so belieueth shall be saved. Jacob. 1.
So we see, Omne bonum esse a Deo: That all goodness comes of God, which only
does purge us, and regenerate us by his word, to be made the sons of God, of
the children of wrath. There is none good but whom Gods goodness does make
good; there is none holy but whom God does make holy; there is none virtuous
but by Gods virtue. No man by nature is good, but only God, which is almighty
and omnipotent. Man is changed by the spirit and grace of God, and is made a
good tree, righteous and holy, as man may be good, and as it were in a second
kind of goodness, not comparable to Gods most excellent goodness in any case.


FALSIL. How many causes be there of civil punishments?


VERIL.

Next, the public peace and tranquillity,

Thirdly, example; that others, by the punishments


FALSIL. The tares in the gospel must not be taken away, Matthew. 13.


Adulterers be the same tares spirituallie,

Therefore adulterers must not be taken away.


VERIL. The consequent is false. And an answer may be made to the mayor, by
distinction. The tares, as the adulterers, and such other wicked and
disobedient to the gospel, are not to be taken away of the apostles and
ministers of the gospel, touching the ministry of the word, but touching the
civil power. Because the civil magistrate has authority to take away
adulterers, mankillers, thieves and such other wicked, as the apostle says:
Magistratum gerere gladium in terrorem malis, Romans 13.
vt puniar eos: That the magistrate bears the sword for the terror of the
wicked, to punish them. And again: Lex est iniustis posita, 1. Tim. 1.
inobsequentibus, impijs, parricidis, matricidis, homicidis, scortatoribus: The
law is given to the unrighteous and disobedient, to the ungodly, and to the
sinners, to murderers of fathers, and murderers of mothers, to mansleiers,
and whooremongers.


FALSIL. What think you? Is it not lawful for a man some times to make a lie
for advantage and profit, or for pleasure?


VERIL. No truly; it is not lawful in any case for christian men to lie,
howsoever the matter stands. There be some that make such distinction of
lies, Three kind of lies.
that they hold opinion that there be three kinds of lies, sporting lies,
officious, and pernicious lies: but of what sort so ever they be, truly they
be not tolerable, nor to be borne withal amongst such as profess God: Ephe.
4.
because he has forbidden it by the apostle, writing thus: Deponite mendacium,
loquimini veritatem cum proximo suo vnusquisque: Lay away lieng, and speak
every man truth to his neighbor. The mouth that speaks lies does slaie the
soul.


FALSIL. Psalm. 5.
God will destroy all them that speak lies,

Genesi. 12.
Abraham did lie, and yet was not destroyed,

Therefore God does not destroy all them that speak lies.


VERIL. The consequent is not true* And distinction may be well used in this
answer. Exodus 23. Leuit. 19.
For though in the law lieng be forbidden, and that every man should speak
truth unto his neighbor: Quando sumus inuicem membra: Seeing that we are one
another members, yet is it difference, when men lie to save life by
compulsion: and when they do it of a set purpose and a malicious mind to
destroy life. And David says: Psalm. 5.
Thou hate all them that work iniquity, Et perdes omnes qui loquuntur
mendacium: Thou will destroy all them that speak lies. Therefore S. Peter by
his apostolical authority (or rather God himself) slew Ananias and Saphira
his wife, Act. 5.
because they lied by agreement, and of a set purpose to tempt the spirit of
the Lord. Abraham and other saints of the Lord, taken in this fault, perished
not, because the Lord imputed not their sins unto them: and they committed
not lieng in the malice of their mind, or for any pleasure they had in sin,
but for bare need to save their own lives and others. Ge. 12. and, 20
So Abraham lied unto Pharao and Abimelech, to save his own life, and Sara his
wives. Gene. 26.
Likewise Isaac his son lied, in denieng his wife Rebecca to Abimelech king
of the Philistines in Gerar. And David counterfeited himself to be mad before
Achis the king of Geth. 1. Reg. 21. Iudit. 11.
Judith likewise deceived Holophernes, to save her citizens by craft, falselie
declaring the cause of her coming. Prou. 24.
Furthermore: Septies in die cadit iustus, and resurgit: The righteous falls
seven times a day, 3. Reg. 8.
and rises again. There is no man that sins not, yet the Lord imputes not
our sins unto us, but rather forgiueth the same, when he sees and tries our
hearts, knowing in what intent and mind we commit evil. Esaie. 43. Titus. 1.
He it is that puts away our iniquities; Peccatorum nostrorum non recordans
amplius: Romans 8.
And no more remembers our sins. Mundis omnia munda: To the clean all
things are clean. And all things work for the best, to them that love God.
But the Lord destroieth them that delight in wickedness, and have a pleasure in
their mind to lie in their ordinary traffike and talk, to deceive others
thereby.


FALSIL. Seeing that Christ was not subject to Moses laws, why did he then
obeie them?


VERIL.

Next, that he might show himself the only and first begotten son of the
eternal father, Romans 8. 1. Pet. 2. 2. Cor. 5.
that is to say, a satisfaction for our sins; and even so by sin, that is
by sacrifice offered upon the tree of the cross, he has taken away,
condemned, and done away our sin.


FALSIL. It is wrong to give to equals unequally,

God saving David, and damning Saul, gave to equals unequally,

Therefore God is unjust, receiving some, and saving them, and casting away
others, and damning them.


VERIL. I answer first to the mayor, which is not true universally: because
that God gives diverse gifts to equals, for diverse functions and ministeries,
as God gave king Cyrus more and greater gifts than to any of his common
soldiers for the government of his kingdom. Therefore the mayor is not true
in things not necessary to all men's salvation. God is equal to all men in
things necessary to all men's salvation. God is equal to all men in things
necessary to their salvation, saving repentant David, David repented and not
Saul.
and condemning Saul that did not repent. And yet David and Saul were not
equals touching repentance. Therefore God is equal to all men, according to
this immutable rule; that he receives all them to salvation, which believe on
our mediator: and contrariwise, he casts all them away, Hebr. 4. and 7. 1.
Tim. 2.
which believe not on our only mediator Christ Jesus. For God would have all
men to repent, and apply the promise of grace in faith unto themselves, and so
consequently to be saved. And S. Chrysostom says: Quem Deus trahit, volentem
trahit, non repugnantem: Whom God draws, he draws him willingly, and not
against his will. Therefore, there is no cause of damnation in God, but in
themselves which are damned, because they do not repent and receive the
promise of grace in says. John. 3.
For he that believes in Christ shall not die, that is, he shall not be
damned, and the wrath of GOD shall not abide upon him. Matthew. 4. Deuteronomy. 8. Luke.
4.



FALSIL. How does a man live by the word of God?


VERIL. Seeing that (...), the word, is the second person of the divinity, it
is immediately effectual in them that believe, when it is spoken: susteining
and comforting them, and bringing it to pass maruellouslie, that they are
nourished and defended thereby: as Christ speaks of himself: Ego sum via,
John. 14.
veritas, and vita: I am she way, the verity, and the life. And in another
place: John. 10.
Ego vitam aeternam do eis: I give them eternal life.


FALSIL. The church is the house of God, 2. Reg. 12.
and the pillar of truth,

Therefore the church does not err.


VERIL. I may answer the mayor by distinction. First, the church is the house
of God, Marie, Joseph, Zachary, Elizabeth, John the baptist, Simeon, Anna the
prophetess, and others, in the time of Christ. So John the baptist certeinlie
knew the Messiah to be the sacrifice for all the world, when he said: John. 1.
Ecce agnus Dei, qui tollit peccata mundi: Behold the lamb of God that takes
away the sins of the world. Which thing the apostles knew not, before the
Holie-ghost was given them. And except this error had been corrected amongst
them, they had perished. Secondly, many do err in the church, yet
diversely, some in the foundation, that is, in the knowledge of the law, and
of the gospel, or in the articles of our faith, and stubbornly defend their
error, as the papists defend their error, of the doubt whether we be in the
favor and grace of God or no, Articl. 10.
contrary to the article of our faith: Credo remissionem peccatorum: I believe
the forgiveness of sins. Also they maintain invocation, and prayer to saints.
As long as they wilfully continue in these errors, and others like, they are
no true members of the church. And others err in common traditions, as about
eating of flesh, and such others: as S. Peter noluit edere de immundis, Acts.
10.
would not eat of unclean things.


FALSIL. Does the devil give the kingdoms and riches of this world?


VERIL. No, because it is written in the prophet: Dani. 2.
Dominus transfert regna, atque constituit illa: The Lord does transfer
kingdoms, and appoint them. And again it is said: Domini est terra, Psalm. 33.
and plenitudo eius: The earth is the Lords, and the fulness thereof.


FALSIL. Abraham believed that his posterity should inherit the promised land
of Canaan: Genesis 12.
and that his posterity should be increased as the stars of heaven, and as
the sand of the sea,

Therefore S. Paul erred, in applieng the example of Abraham to the faith of
spiritual things, as the forgiveness of sins, and eternal life.


VERIL. I deny the consequent. Because corporal promises do include in them
the spiritual promise; namely, the reconciliation of sins: for without
that, the corporal promise is unprofitable. If truly a man do not
determine, that God is at peace with us, and does justify us, for the love of
Christ Jesus, Romans 8.
he can neither ask, neither believe to receive corporal gifts, as his
living, and defensement in safeguard. Therefore it is very requisite, that
faith touching spiritual things be manifest in our prayer. Hereof it is, that
Abraham believed the first and principal promise of God, Gene. 22.
for the seed that should be borne of his posterity, whereby he himself, and
all his offspring, with all nations should be blessed: likewise it is said: Ero
Deus tuus, and seminis tui post te: I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed
after thee.


FALSILOQVVS. What be the causes of our temptations, and falling away from God?


VERILOQVVS. There be two chief Adam we are all sinners, and have of him the
inclination to do evil. And the apostle says: Romans 5.
Vnusquisque dum tentatur a propria concupiscentia abstrahitur and inescatur:
Every one, when he is tempted, he is drawn away, and entised of his own
concupiscence. Then sin grows consequently: Jacob. 1.
first by suggestion, next by consent of our spirit, and last of all by the
pleasure that our flesh takes to fulfill that suggestion and consent. Then we
fulfill our lewd desires with greediness, contrary to the mind of the apostle
which says: Desideria carnis non perficietis: Galat. 5.
Ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh.

Medea by temptation killed her own children. Sodom, Gomorrha, Adama, Sebim,
and Segor sinned against nature; and also Judas in betraieng Christ his
redeemer, of whom the evangelist says: John. 13.
Diabolus in Iudam post sumptam offulam ingressus est: The devil entered into
Judas, after that he had received the sop. So the devil still lets our
right judgment, in the understanding of the doctrine necessary for our
salvation, he puts darkness into our hearts, and confirms errors in our
minds, wherefore S. Peter says: Diabolus circuit nos, 1. Pet. 5.
quaerens quem deuoret: The devil goes about us, seeking whom he may devour,
and spreddeth abroad such nets of temptations and vices always, as he
perceives us to be most addicted and given unto.


FALSIL. What ought christian men to do, when the sting of sin and worm of
conscience does bite them?


VERIL. First, they must in no case despair, Romans 5.
Exsuperat gratia super peccatum: Grace is more abundant than sin, we must
confess our sins, and be truly repentant for them, then may we, Cum fiducia
ad thronum gratiae accedere: Hebru. 4.
Draw near to the throne of grace, with hope and confidence in him that is
the only propitiation and obteiner of mercy for them all that be such. We
must set before us the example of such as truly repented, as Manasses, Marie
Magdalene, Peter, and the thief upon the cross: we must fully persuade our
selves to be predestinate and elected to salvation, if we assent to the word of
God, and believe the gospel: according to this saying: Quos elegit, hos and
vocauit: Whom he has chosen, those has he also called.

Matthew. 18.
Vt pereat vnus de pusillis istis: That one of these little ones should perish.

Venite ad me omnes: Matt. 11. Esaie. 53.
Come unto me all ye. And again, Delicta omnium nostrum tulit: He has borne
all our sins. Thus have the servants of God always wrestled with sin, that
the pricking thereof should not perse them to death. Thus did the woman the
Cananite, which acknowledged her self unworthy of Christ's benefits, obtain
grace and mercy by faith, and constancy in her invocation and prayer.


FALSIL. The devil does miracles and strange works, what difference therefore
is there between true miracles and false?


VERIL. imitate or follow the true miracles, or the miracles of the church: as
to raise up the dead to life again, to let the course of the sun, to stop the
course of floods, and to make the barren to bear children.

The second difference may be taken of the Exodus 20.
And this rule is always immutablie to be observed: that we must believe no
miracle done contrary to the express word of God. Also, Deuteronomy. 18.
Thou shall not enquire the truth of the dead.

The third difference is, that the miracles in Luc. 11.
as Christ did cast out the dum devil, and afterward the dum spoke, and the
people marvelled, the like he did other times also.


FALSIL. Can the holy and elect people of God fall, and leese the Holie-ghost,
their faith, (...) grace of God, and be damned?


VERIL. No, they cannot, for our savior Christ has said; Matthew. 24.
Except those days (of trouble) should be shortened, no flesh (that is, no
man) should be saved: but for the sake of the elected, those days shall be
shortened. And again, False christ's and false prophets shall arise, and shall
give great signs and wonders, insomuch that (if it were possible) the very
elect should be brought into error. By these words it appears manifestly,
that God in merciful providence will shorten the days of trouble that shall
be toward the end of the world, because his elected and holy people may not
thereby be brought to everlasting destruction: and that it is not possible for
them to be so brought into error by false christ's, and false prophets, that
they should by error be brought into everlasting damnation. 1. Cor. 10.
And S. Paul has written thus to the Corinthians; God is faithful, and will
not suffer you to be tempted above your power, but even in the midst of the
temptation he will make a way, that you may be able to bear it. Romans 8.
And again to the Romans; Who will lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect?
2. Tim. 2.
And again to Timothy; The firm foundation of God stands steadfastly,
having this seal; God knows who be his. But least this doctrine should
encourage any man to lead a careless life, the apostle says in the next
sentence; Let every one that calls upon the name of the Lord, depart from
iniquity. And to the Romans, There is no condemnation to them that be in
Christ Jesus, which walk not after the flesh. Ephesians. 4.
And to the Ephesians the apostle says; Grieve not the holy spirit of GOD, in
whom you are sealed against the day of redemption. Our care is to live without
sin, according to the exhortation of the apostle John, 1. Ioh. 2.
My little babes, I write these words to you, that you should not sin: but if
any man do sin, we have an advocate with the father, even Jesus Christ the
righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins. Gods elected do sin (as
the wise man says) very often: but they rise again by repentance. Prou. 24.
The righteous person (says he) falls seven times, and rises again, but
the ungodly fall down headlong into mischief.


FALSIL. The elect people are always beloved of God: therefore they cannot
fall.


VERIL. The elect people are indeed beloved of God, and so beloved, that
nothing can separate them from his love. Romans 8.
As the apostle writes; I am sure that neither death, neither life, neither
angels, neither principalities, neither powers, neither things present, nor
things to come, neither fortitude, neither higth, neither depth, neither any
other creature can separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus
our Lord. But yet they may and do fall ^s Solomon says, Prou. 24.
and being down they rise again, being lifted up by that loving Father, from
whose love their often and horrible falls cannot separate them. For so God
loved the world (that is, John. 3.
his elect in the world) that he gave his only begotten son, that all that
believe in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.


FALSIL. Tell me, what is blasphemy, and whether the sin thereof be
remissible and pardonable, or no?


VERIL. Blasphemare, est maledicere ac male precari al^js, per nomen seu
inuocationem Dei.
Blasphemy is a sin against the Holie-ghost: a curssing and reproching,
commonly referred unto the despite of GOD: when one knowing and willingly
would adnihilate and make void the power of God, and withstand the truth that a
man knows; as the Phariseis reviled and rejected Christ, oppugning the truth
manifested unto them by the testimonies of God, and attributed the works of
Christ to the devil; Matthew. 12. Marc. 3. Luc. 11. Exodus 10.
and to take upon him above the might of God, as Pharao, Senacherib, and
Holophernes did. And touching pardon thereof, I answer by distinction, that
they are forgiven which sin therein by ignorance, and afterward truly
repent them thereof, as S. Paul did, 1. Tim. 1.
which says, that he was a blasphemer, but yet he received mercy and
forgiveness of his sin; because he persecuted the congregation of GOD
ignorantly. And this is a general rule, ever inuiolablie to be observed
Venite ad me omnes, qui laboratis: Matthew. 11.
Come unto me all ye that are heavy laden with the burden of sin, etc: Vius
ego dicit Dominus: Eze. 18.33. 1. Tim. 2. Romans 5.
As sure as I live (says the Lord) I will not have the death of a sinner, but
rather that he should convert and live. And that God would have all men to be
saved. Again: Gratia exuberat super delictum: Grace is more abundant than
sin. We must deem of the will of God according to these saiengs of scripture
and promises; and not after our own opinions, or according to the omnipotency
of God, which although he can condemn some, and can save other some, yet he
only saves those that undoubtedly believe the voice of his only Son
Jesus, and condemns them that strive against him, and withstand his divine
calling of them, perseuering still in their blasphemies, as the apostle says:
Nolite errare, non enim idololatrae, 1. Cor. 6.
moechi, homicidae, etc. Be ye not deceived, for neither idolaters,
whooremongers, mankillers, neither thieves, neither the covetous, nor
droonkards, neither cursed speakers, nor pillars and pollers shall inherit the
kingdom of heaven. And there is no sin so great and horrible, but that the
death of Christ, the only son of God, is a sufficient price and redemption
thereof. As the holy apostle says: 1. John. 2.
Ipse est propitiatio pro peccatis nostris: He is the obteiner of mercy for
our sins, and not for our sins only, but for all the sins that ever were
or shall be done in the whole world, from the first Adam to the last man, if
we our selves lees^ not the benefit of his passion, death, resurrection, and
ascension, by our own wilful contempt and disobedience.


FALSIL. No man ought to praise himself,

John. 8.
Christ praised himself, when he said, Which o^ you can reprove me of sin?

Therefore Christ did not well.


VERIL. I answer unto the mayor by distinction. No man ought to praise
himself, that is to wit, for his own righteousness, or for his own private
virtues, except it be for that every one ought to keep a good conscience
before all men, according to the saying of the apostle: Haec est gloriatio
nostra, testimonium conscientiae nostrae: This is our reioising, even the
testimony of our conscience. And S. Augustine says: Bona conscientia mihi
opus est, propter me ipsum, sicilicet coram Deo; bona fama propter proximum: I
have need of a good conscience for my self, that is before God; I have need of
a good name, for my neighbor. But the teacher of the congregation of God ought
to boast of the truth and certeintie of his doctrine, that he teaches no
foolish vanities, nor is a false pro^het. So Christ boasts here, of the truth
and verity of his doctrine, saying: Quis arguet me de peccato? Who can
reprove me of sin? John. 8.
That is, of error in my doctrine, or of any false opinion. Which thing when
the Jews could not do, yet notwithstanding they accused Christ without cause,
reproved, and persecuted his doctrine, which is the very voice and
commandment of almighty God the heavenly father.


FALSIL. I have heard of Neuters in religion: I pray you tell me what are they?


VERIL. Neuters are epicures, scorners and contemners of the true religion and
heavenly doctrine, and there are found too many such now a days, which are
of no religion, and such force not whether there be any serving of God or no,
so that they may live in iolitie, and feed the humor of their lewd lusts and
concupiscence. Of whom Christ speaks thus: Luc. 11.
Qui non est mecum, contra me est: He that is not with me, is against me; and
he that does not gather with me, scatters abroad. Contrariewise, there be
some that be weak, which do not scorn at religion, but yet for fear they
do not profess the true doctrine, but fall by frailty, and would happily
learn, if they were better taught, of whom the holy apostle speaks thus:
Romans 14.
Infirmum in fide assumite: Take him unto you, that is weak in faith, that is
to say, help and aid him, that he may increase further in faith. Luc. 17.
And the apostles themselves were frail and weak, before they had received
the gift of the Holie-ghost: wherefore they prayed; Domine adauge nobis fidem:
Lord increase our faith. So likewise God received Darius to repentance, Dan. 6.
which cast away Daniel to be destroyed of the lions, because he knew not that
Daniel was innocent and guiltless in the crime that was laid against him;
wherefore the kings sin therein was committed by ignorance.


FALSIL. What is Christian religion: and how many parts be there of religion?


VERIL. Christian religion is the true worshipping of God, and keeping of his
commandments. There be four parts thereof. Obedience, Parts of religion.
which the law of God commands; faith, which the gospel requires; prayer,
and sacraments, which Christ has ordained, and left unto his church, there to
be used until his second coming to judgment.


FALSIL. I have heard some to have been doubtful of Christ's descension into
hell, but tell me what think you thereof?


VERIL. I think it is lamentable, that curious heads should spread such a
schism, and put such error into the minds of men simple and unlettered. And I
believe that as Christ in his body descended into the bowels of the earth, so
his soul severed from the body, he descended into hell. And after the same
sort, he kept his promise with the thief upon the cross, when he said: Hodie
mecum eris in paradiso: To day thou shall be with me in paradise. Although his
body was committed to the grave, yet was his soul, his power, and his Godhead
in paradise, and wheresoever else it pleased himself to be. Therefore, there be
some that affirm that he descended into hell three ways: in power, spirit,
and person. In power, when the veil of the temple did rent; Matthew. 26.
in spirit, when he said, Tristis est anima mea vsque ad mortem: My soul is
heavy even to the death; and in person, when he was laid in the grave.


FALSIL. Christ says: John. 8.
If a man keep my saiengs, he shall never see death. But no man does keep
the word of Christ, because it is impossible to satisfy the law of God,
through our corrupt nature. Therefore no man does live by keeping the word of
Christ, and by a consequent, Christ's promise is impossible, absurd, and vain.


VERIL. I deny the minor, because Christ speaks here not properly of the
law, which requires perfect obedience, as it is said: Qui facit legem, Leuit.
18. Deuteronomy. 15.
viuet in ea: He that fulfilleth the law, shall live thereby: but of the
Gospel, which is a free promise of remission of our sins, the gift of
righteousness, and of eternal life, in faith, for Christ, and by Christ, the
son of Go^ our mediator and redeemer. And they do observe the Gospel and
keep the word of Christ, which assent and agree to the promise of God,
touching his mercy, and do begin a new obedience, as Marie Magdalen, Zachee,
the thief upon the gibbet, Paul, and such other truly repentant did: all
which received forgiveness of their sins, according to this promise of
Christ, and did not see death; that is, they tasted not of the horrors of
death, though the remnant of sin (to wit) natural weakness did still hang
upon them, whereby they fell sometime into external or actual sin, but they
repented, Romans 8.
asked forgiveness, and believed in Christ according to this saying: Nulla est
condemnatio his, qui insiti sunt in Jesus Christo, qui non secundum carnem
viuunt, sed secundu^ spiritum: There is no condemnation for them that be
grafted in Christ Jesus, which live not according to the flesh, but according to
the spirit. So the apostles also did keep the word of Christ, as Christ
himself says: Tui erant, and mihi dedisti eos, John. 17.
and serm^nem tuum seruarunt. They were thine (O father) and thou gave them
me, and they have kept thy word: that is as much to say as, They had the
beginning of their faith of me, and new obedience, although there were in them
much infirmity, darkness, and doubtfulnes, and their faith very feeble,
Luke. 17.
as they themselves did testify, saying: Domine adauge nobis fidem? Lord
increase our faith.


FALSIL. Is it not lawful to give men thanks, since we receive benefits of them?


VERIL. Whatsoever benefits and goodness men do to us, 1. Cor. 12. 2. Cor. 9.
we ought to account them received of GOD, because he alone in very deed does
give us them, by the ministry of men, which are second means and
isntrumental causes therein; so that our thankfulness redoundeth to the
glory of God, Matt. 5. 1. Pet. 2.
the true and final end of all our actions or doings.


FALSIL. The gentiles knew the power of God, Christ is the power of God,
therefore the gentiles know the power of Christ; and by a consequent, the
gentiles are saved.


VERIL. I deny the consequent, because there is a double power of God, that is
to wit; there is one power of his creation described in the law, and this
power only did the Gentiles know, without the promise of the mediator, how
that God requires righteousness, and punishes the unrighteous. Gods double
power.
And there is another power of salvation by Christ the son of God, which is two
ways called the power of the father, first natural, and next of salvation.
For although the son was with the father, yet the scripture speaks of him
that he is God and man, which was sent into the world for this purpose, that he
should be the propitiatour, or obteiner of mercy, and the quickener of
mankind. Therefore there was a far other and greater light of the knowledge
of God and faith in Abraham, than there was in Cicero, Plato, and Xenophon, etc.


FALSIL. What is it to keep the word of Christ?


VERIL. It is not to keep his testament safe in our bosom, or in our chests:
but it is certeinlie to determine in our faith, that God is reconciled and at
peace with us, and that our sins are freely forgiven us for his son
Christ's sake, and that righteousness is imputed unto us by him, whereby we have
eternal life, and also do begin a new obedience, without the which no man
can have the true faith, as the apostle says: 1. Tim. 1.
Milita bonam militum, retinens fidem and bonam conscientiam: Fight a good
fight, keeping the faith, and a good conscience.


FALSIL. Tell me, John. 8.
what is it never to see death, nor to taste of her, as Christ says?


VERIL. It is, not to feel the sorrows of death, and of hell, whereof the
psalmist says: Circundederunt me dolores mortis, and dolores inferni
inuenerunt me: Psalm. 17.
The sorrows of death have compassed me round about, and the pains of hell
have gotten hold on me. Those that are quickened in their faith, do not see
nor taste of such sorrows: Quia pacem habent cum Deo per fidem: Romans 5.
Because they are at peace with God thorough faith.


FALSIL. Wherein ought a man to take comfort in the time of his persecution?
John. 8.



VERIL. In the example of Christ, at whom the Jews did cast stones, but Christ
escaped from the hands of his enemies, without any harm. First, because the
time of his passion appointed of God his father from the beginning was not yet
come. Next, because that the Messiah or the savior ought not to die with any
kind of death, Deuteronomy. 21. Gala. 3.
but by hanging on the tree of the cross, as it is said: Maledictus pro nobis
factus est: He is made accurssed for us. 1. Cor. 15.



FALSIL. 1. Cor. 15.
Saint Paul says, that in the later day, the son will deliver up the
kingdom to God the father,

Luke. 1.
Therefore, the kingdom of Christ shall not be everlasting, as the angel said
it should be.


VERIL. In this place S. Paul speaks of the kingdom of Christ in this
world, whereby he gathers together his church and preserves it against her
enemies. This kingdom of Christ's truly shall end in the last day, and then
he will present his church before his father, who together with the son and
the Holie-ghost shall be all in all.


FALSILOQVVS. Exodus 12.
When did the Jews offer up their pascall, or figurative lamb?


VERILOQVVS. Ever in the first month of the year, which is March with us,
upon the twelfe day in the vernall equinoctium, which lamb signified Christ,
whose death is called sin, Romans 8.
as the apostle says: Peccato damnauit peccatum in carne: By sin he damned
sin in the flesh, Hebr. 10. Hebr. 8.
when he was offered up once sufficiently for our sins. No sacrifice then is
left us after the death of Christ, but the sacrifice of righteousness, and of
thanks giving. Further, Psalm: 4. Psalm. 50.
as the Jews were wont to offer up lambs in their ordinary sacrifices, and
ever one lamb at Easter: so Christ is our pascall lamb, as it is said: Ecce
agnus Dei, John. 1.
qui tollit peccata mundi: Behold the lamb of God, that takes away the sins
of the world. The Jews kept this ceremony about 1540. years. For there are
so many years from their coming out of Egypt, to the year of the passion
and resurrection of Christ, after which time the ceremony of eating the
pascall or typical lamb ceased.


FALSIL. No man is justified by only knowledge, as the devil is not just,
nor saved, although there be excellent knowledge in him,

Therefore, it is not rightly said, The knowledge of God shall justify many.
Esai. 53.



VERIL. I answer to the antecedent. It is a figure of speech: for the Hebrews
in their words of knowing, do comprehend the effect: as in this saying: Nouit
viam Dominus iustorum: The Lord knows the way of the righteous, Psalm. 1.
that is to say; The Lord considers and regards their way. Also,
knowledge here does signify light in our minds; next, the motion of our
heart, or the trust of our mind resting on God the father, 1. Tim. 2. Hebr.
4.7.8.9.12. 1. John. 2. Ephesians. 3. Romans 5.8. John. 15.
through Christ the only mediator between God and man. The devil and the
wicked people have not this trust and confidence in God, because they do not
apprehend and take hold on the son of God by faith, neither do they comfort
themselves by his benefits, in the time of fearefulnes of death and sin; for
it is thus said of the devils: Damines credunt and contremiscunt: Jacob. 2.
The devils believe and tremble.


FALSIL. Esaie. 53.
Esaie says of Christ, that he did bear the sins of many,

Therefore, he did not bear the sins of all,

(...).
And by a consequent, Christ's death is not a sufficient sacrifice for all men,
and God has a scroll of those that be elected to eternal life, for which
only the son of God died.


VERIL. I deny the consequent. For the promise of the gospel is universal,
as Christ says: Matthew. 11.
Venite ad me omnes, qui laboratis: Come unto me all ye that labor. Romans 3.
S. Paul says: Non est distinctio: There is no difference. Again: Romans 10.
Deus est dives in omnes: God is rich toward all. Therefore the prophet makes
no distinction touching the benefits of Christ his death, which is available
and sufficient for all men, 1. Ioh. 2.
as the apostle says: Et ipse est propitiatio pro peccatis totius mundi: And
he is the propitiation, and the obteinment of mercy for the sins of all the
whole world: but touching the men themselves, whereof some apprehend the
benefits of Christ by faith, and other some willingly reject and cast away
the same from them, so that they themselves be the causers ^o themselves of
their own damnation, making Christ's death rather to serve to their damnation,
than to their salvation by their disobedience, and lack of faith, as it
appears by them in the parable that were bidden to the marriage, and yet they
would not come. Matthew. 22.
Others expound this word [manie] for all mankind, as here is the like: Matthew.
26.
Hic calix est noui testamenti, qui pro vobis, and pro multis effunditur in
remissionem peccatorum: This cup is of the new testament, which is shed for you
and for many (that is) for all, for the forgiveness of sins.


FALSIL. Died Christ (I pray you tell me) then for all men, or no?


VERIL. No. Christ died for none, John. 3. Act. 13.
but for such as lay hold on him by a lively faith, and as for infidels,
blasphemers, obstinate sinners, and all such as take pleasure to persevere and
continue wilfully and greedily in wickedness, contrary to their own
conscience, contemptuously casting (as it were) Gods mercies from them, his
death truly shall be to them death, and not life.


FALSIL. He that is dead (says S. Paul) is justified from sin, Romans 5.


Judas is dead,

Therefore he is justified, and by a consequent is righteous.


VERIL. I deny the consequent. First, because there is an unlikeness in the
example. For Christ (of whom the apostle speaks here) died innocentlie and
willingly, as it is written: Hebru. 5.
Voluntate eius sanctificati sumus: We are sanctified by his will. He prayed
for us with tears, Et exauditus est propter reuerentiam: And was heard for his
reverence or willing obedience. But Judas and all other wicked do die
unwillingly, and against their wills, by the compulsion of satan, with
fretting and repining against God. Christ truly perceived and felt (as it
were) a struggling and wrestling in his flesh, Matt. 26.
like as he says: Spiritus est promptus, caro autem infirma: The spirit is
willing, but the flesh is frail: yet notwithstanding he fretted not, nor was
angry with God; as were Judas, Saul, and Caine: but willingly made himself
obedient to his fathers will, as he himself confessed: Non voluntas mea, sed
tua fiat: Not my will, but thine (oh father) be fulfilled. Again, it is
written: Oblatus est, quia voluit: He was offered up, because he would
willingly. And so the saints of God, as John, Paul, Peter, and such others,
were obedient to the will of God, in their death, and cross; but yet their
will and obedience was far otherways, and differing from the will of the
son of God, as Christ himself said to Peter: Alius te cinget, and ducet quo
non vis: John. 21.
Another shall girt thee, and lead thee whither thou would not. Further, all
saints also are sinners and trespassers, and therefore their obedience is no
merit or desert sufficient to purchase either their own righteousness, or
any other man's: as the obedience of Christ is a sufficient merit or desert for
to work the righteousness of all the true faithful people dispersed through
the whole world, upon the face of the earth wheresoever.


FALSIL. What is that which we do call the propitiation of sins?


VERIL. It is the death of the son of God, which in Greek is (...), a
satisfaction and a sacrifice for the sins of mankind. Therefore it comprehends
both the cause efficient promeriting for us the forgiveness of our sins, and the
effect, which is the reconciliation of us with God, and the gift of eternal
life.


FALSIL. We are the sweet bread (as S. Paul says) therefore we need not to be
purged. 1. Cor. 5.



VERIL. I answer by distinction, we are indeed the sweet bread by imputation,
and inchoation, but not in perfection. Therefore it is necessary that we
always increase in new obedience, as the prophets, Christ, and the apostles
do still cry unto us, saying: Agite poenitentiam: Repent, repent; and our
sin therefore is not imputed to us, because Christ is offered up for us, Et
deleuit chirographum aduersus nos scriptum: And has put out the hand writing
that was written against us, and has fastened it to his cross, whereby he
has wiped away our sins. The thief hanging with Christ upon the cross is
a sufficient testimony thereof. And further, S. Paul says: Exuite veterem
hominem, and induite nouum: Put off the old man, and put on the new man.


FALSIL. What use and fruit have we Christians of the resurrection of Christ?


VERIL. We have our justification. For God does forgive us our sins for
Christ's sake, which died for us, and rose again for our justification, and
reckons us righteous, though the remnant of sin still hangs on us, as S.
Paul says: Christus traditus est in mortem propter peccata nostra, Romans 4.
and resurrexit propter iustificationem nostram: Christ was put to death for
our sins, and rose again for our justification, that is to say, Christ's
death is a satisfaction for our sins, whereby the wrath of God the father is
pacified, and by Christ's resurrection, the righteousness of Christ is imputed
unto us, which is begun in us here in this world, and finished and perfected
with eternal life in the world to come. Whereby Jeremy calls Christ our
justification. Ierem. 33.
And Christ himself speaks of this righteousness in Oseas, where as it is
said: O mors ero mors tua, Ose. 13.
morsus tuus ero inferne: Oh death I will be thy death, oh hell I will be thy
destruction; that is to say: I will destroy and abolish death and hell, in
such sort that they shall not any more be able to hurt me, nor my church or
congregation from henceforth.


FALSIL. Why did there many others rise with Christ after his passion, Matt.
27.
as the evangelists do make mention, and came into the holy city?


VERIL. To the end that we should believe, This was a figure of the
resurrection.
that Christ would raise up his whole church in the latter day, and that his
church should have eternal salvation, wherein the faithful shall enioie the
fruition and the sight of God, with the most sweet love of him, during all
eternity; the beginning of which estate of life is perceived and known in the
resurrection of Christ, that we should not be doubtful of the remainder of
another and better life, after our temporal death in this world, and that at
the general resurrection, all, both the quick and dead, shall be rewarded
according to their works done here in this world, good or evil.


FALSIL. He that calls upon one God, the maker of heaven and earth, calls
upon the true God,

The Turks and Jews call upon one God, the maker of heaven and earth,

Therefore they call upon the true God.


VERIL. I deny the minor. For the Turks and Jews calling upon one God, they
deny him to be the true God, the maker of all things, which is the father of
our Lord Jesus Christ. The infidels call not upon the true God.
Therefore they call upon an idol, and not upon the true God. Further, they
cannot be certain by hearesaie; first, because they have no promise; next,
because they reject, and (as it were) cast from them the son of God, the
mediator, cruelly blaspheme him, and tyrannouslie persecute him in the
members of his church, and chosen vessels to salvation.


FALSIL. What is the final end of Christ's incarnation?


VERIL. It is to beecome a sacrifice for his church, and that he might be
present with her, quicken her by the gift of the Holie-ghost, and might raise
us up unto eternal life. Therefore the son of God is not only a redeemer
reconciling us to his father by the merit of his death, but he is a savior in
effect, Esaie. 7. Matthew 1. Dani. 12.
whereby he is called Emanuell, that is to say, God with us. And the prophet
says, Christ stands: Pro filijs populi, propugnans eos: For to defend the
children of the people.


FALSILOQVVS. For how many causes is the church of God subject to the cross
of afflictions?


VERILOQVVS. There be six causes of the churches afflictions. The first cause
is Gene. 3.
In quacunque die comederis, morte morieris: Whenever thou do eat of the
tree, thou shall die the death. And again: Romans 5.
Per vnum hominem peccatum in mundum intrauit, and per peccatum mors: By one
man sin came into the world, and by sin came death. The philosophers make
will and matter the cause of sickness and of death, as the substance of an
apple is the cause of his putrefaction. But these are not the principal
causes. The principal and chief cause of sickness and death, is sin, for
the which man's nature is subject to corruption and death.









John the baptist and Paul with others shall be rewarded; and the wicked, as
Herod, Nero, and such other shall be punished with eternal death: because it
is impossible, that the godly people should be always in misery, and the
wicked contrariewise should be still in pleasure.


FALSIL. Why does Christ call the devil, John. 16.
the prince of the world?


VERIL. He does not call him so, in respect that he is the maker and the
guider of the world, which is the only work of God; but because he does
bear rule in worldly men, and such as are not newborn, which securely give
themselves over to sin, whom the devil leads whither it lists him,
according to his will and pleasure, holding them still to be his bondslaues,
captives, and thralles, as long as they live licentiously. The holy apostle
also calls him the governor of such livers, Ephe. 2.
saying: Ye walked in time past according to the course of this world: Ac iuxta
principem, cui potestas est aeris, qui est spiritus nunc agens in filijs
co^tumacibus: And after the governor that rules in the aier, the spirit that
now works in the children of unbelief and disobedience.


FALSIL. What does Christ mean by the world, in the gospel? John. 16.



VERIL. He means worldly and carnal men, which falsely and wickedlie judge
of Christ, and of the doctrine of his church, of whom there be four sorts.
First, the mighty men of power judge the doctrine of the gospel to be
Seditiosam, Luc. 23.
seditious.

1. Cor. 1.
The wisemen of the world suppose it to be Stultitiam, foolishness.

Matt. 26.
The iusticiaries account it to be Blasphemiam in Deum, blasphemy against God.

The Epicures do esteem the gospel to be Anilem fabulam commentitiam, an old
wines fained fable; Psalm. 14.
as for example: The fool said in his heart, Non est Deus: There is no God.
And the first psalm calls such persons, Derisores, scorners. Thus we see
that these four kind of people; mighty men of power; worldly wisemen;
iusticiaries, that is, such as suppose they can make themselves righteous in
the sight of God, by the merit of their own works; and Epicures, which do
make Summum bonum, their chief felicity, to be in all voluptuous, carnal,
and licentious living, with greedines thereof, believing as the Saduces did,
that after our death there is no part of man remaining. These four sorts are
taken for the world, in the scriptures of God.


FALSIL. John. 9.
God does not hear sinners, All men are sinners,

God therefore does hear no man.


VERIL. I will answer by distinction: first unto the mayor, God does not hear
sinners, that is; such sinners as do not repent. Again, to the minor: All men
are sinners in respect of their corrupt nature, but such as do repent, that is
to wit, such as acknowledge their sins, convert from them, and fly unto God
for the mediators sake, and have not again any purpose of wickedness in
their minds, such certeinlie are heard of God, not for their own worthiness,
but for Christ's sake, as he himself says: John. 16.
Quaecunque petieritis patrem in nomine meo, dabit vobis: Whatsoever ye shall
ask the father in my name, he will give it you.


FALSIL. Many martyrs prayed to be delivered from tyrants, but they were not
heard,

Therefore this promise of Christ: John. 16.
Whatsoever ye shall ask the father in my name, he will give it you, is not
universally true.


VERIL. I answer to the antecedent by distinction. The things which we desire
of God, are of two sorts. Some be spiritual, as the forgiveness of our
sins, and the inheritance of eternal life, which are granted us, according
to this saying: Nolo mortem impij, Ezech. 18.
sed vt conuertatur ac viuat: I will not the death of a sinner, but that he
should convert and live. Again, My sheep hear my voice, John. 10.
Et ego do eis vitam aeternam: And I give them eternal life. Other gifts of
God are corporal, which he does not streightwaie give them when we ask them,
or not after that sort as we do ask them, because God will have his church
subject to afflictions, and to show her obedience unto him therein. Therefore
corporal things are to be asked with the condition of the glory of God, of
our salvation, and the profit of our neighbor. And often times God gives not
that that we ask, but that which is much better than that we ask: because we
have not the perfect knowledge, to ask such gifts as are most requisite and
necessary for us. As it well appears by the answer that Christ made unto the
mother of Zebedeis children, which would have her two sons John and James, to
sit the one on his right hand, and the other on his left hand, in his kingdom,
saying unto them: Matt. 20.
Nescitis quid petitis: Ye wot not what ye ask.


FALSIL. What is the kingdom of Christ?


VERIL. The kingdom of Christ is to sit at the right hand of his eternal
father, defending his church, preserving the ministry of his gospel,
gathering together his congregation by the voice of his word, quickening the
hearts of his faithful people by the gift of the Holie-ghost, and finally
raising them up from death, and afterward giving them eternal life. And
therefore he is called Emanuell, Matthew. 1.
that is, God with us. And S. Paul speaks of the ascension of Christ, and of
his spiritual kingdom out of the psalm: saying; Psalm. 68.
He ascended on high, and led captivity captive, Ephe. 4.
that is to wit: he has overcome, and as it were carried away in a triumph,
sin, death, hell, and the devil, his enemies and his churches, which before
held us captives; and has given gifts unto men, as the Holie-ghost, prophets,
apostles, evangelists, doctors, and pastors, for the edifieng of the saints,
and is effectual in them, ever preserving his church. This is the spiritual
kingdom of Christ, even unto the latter day: and then this kingdom shall
cease, as S. Paul says: 1. Cor. 15.
Tunc tradet regnum patri: Then he shall deliver up the kingdom to his father,
that is to say, this spiritual kingdom, which in his church is gathered
together by the outward voice of his gospel, he always preserving and
defending the same. And afterward, the father, the son, and the Holie-ghost,
visiblie shall reign together in their saints, and that kingdom then shall be
for ever without end: 1. Cor. 15.
Quum Deus erit omnia in omnibus: When God shall be all in all. This is, that
kingdom which all true christians do hope to have, earnestly look for, and
daily pray for in the Lords prayer, Matthew. 6.
saying: Adu^niat regnum tuum: Thy kingdom come, which is also in this world,
by promoting and setting forth of his glorious word.


FALSIL. John. 17.
Christ said, he prayed not for his disciples, that is, for his church,

And S. Paul says, that Christ still makes intercession for us,

Therefore Christ and Paul are contrary.


VERIL. This saying of Christ is not to be understood exclusiuelie, but
comprehensiuelie. Because he does not exclude himself, which says: Ego non
solum oraturus pro vobis, I will not only pray for you, but you also
believing in me, shall pray, and you shall come unto the father, which will
hear you calling on him, because you have confidence and trust in mine
intercession and merits.


FALSIL. Exodus 14.
Must men pray in express words, or only in their thought, after the example
of Moses?


VERIL. No, but we must use the recital of words, because the Holie-ghost, and
affect is stirred up and kindled by the word, as David soong his psalms not
only in heart and spirit, but also with voice and musical instrument. And so
Christ prescribed a certain form of praieng to his disciples and church,
Matthew. 6.
saying; Ye shall pray thus: Our father, etc.


FALSIL. Christ said to his disciples: Hitherto ye have asked nothing in my
name.

Therefore, John. 16.
the apostles did not truly call on Christ, neither were they heard before
this time.


VERIL. Christ here speaks of the crosses, corporal afflictions, and the
necessaries of this world, which they had plentiouslie while Christ was present
with them; therefore they trusting in his visible presence, did ask by Christ
no corporal gifts of God, for that they thought with themselves they could
lack nothing as long as they had such a Lord and master present with them,
which gave them all things necessary for this life, and always defended them
against their Judicial enemies and others, and finally would give them
eternal life.


FALSIL. Christ makes intercession for us to his father, Romans 5.


The Holie-ghost also prays for us with unspeakable gronings,

What difference is there then, between the prayer of Christ and the
Holie-ghost?


VERIL. I do answer: that the Holie-ghost is not the mediator between God
and man, neither offers he up any merit, or price of our redemption to the
father. But the son is our mediator and redeemer, because he has pacified
the wrath of his father. The Holie-ghosts prayer is the inclining of our hearts
by the voice of the gospel, with a certain inward motion to invocation, and
calling upon God, and helps all such as call upon him. The son of God
offers up (...), or the price of our redemption for us, as Christ himself
says: John. 17.
Ego meipsum sanctifico pro eis: I do sanctify my self for them, that is as
much to say, as I die for them, and do pacify the wrath of mine eternal
father by the sacrifice of my death.


FALSIL. The rich man that wore purple and silk, and banketted delicatelie,
was damned,

Luc. 16.
Therefore fine clothes, as silk and purple, with delicate fare, are naught,
and damned things.


VERIL. I deny the consequent: because it is the fallacy of the accident. For
the rich man was not damned for his purple and silk, neither for his delicate
fare, which indeed are all the good creatures of God, and many good and godly
men have well used the same, as David, Solomon, and others. But first he was
damned, for that he did abuse the ^ame good gifts, to wit: he put his whole
trust and confidence in those things, as though they should help and deliver
him in the day of wrath and vengeance. Next he was damned for his security,
and the contempt of God and his neighbor, whom he did not succor with his
riches as he ought to do, therefore he was cast away from God, and damned,
according as the holy apostle says: Jacob. 2.
Iudicium absque misericordia erit ei, qui misericordiam non praestiterit: He
shall have judgment without mercy, which shows no mercy. The same sins
therefore were reigning in this rich man, which God reproved in the Sodomites,
saying: Ezech. 6.
Peccatum Sodomae, superbia, saturitas panis, prosperitas and otium, and manum
pauperi non porrigebant: The sin of Sodom, was pride, fullness of bread,
prosperity, and idleness, and they did not reach out their hands to the
poor. These were the sins wherefore the rich glutton was damned, and not his
riches, good clothes, and delicate fare, which are the great blessings of God,
and are to be used always with thanks giving, without any offense. For thus
it is written of riches: Benedictio Domini diuites facit: Prou. 10.
The blessing of the Lord makes men rich. And out of all question, if men
would follow Christ's proposition and rule, touching riches, where he says:
Primum quaerite regnum Dei, and iustici^^ eius: First seek ye the kingdom of
God, and the righteousness thereof, and then all these other things, meaning
thereby riches, and worldly blessings, shall be given unto us more easily,
and with the less travel, because it is a small thing in the sight of the
Lord, to make a poor man rich, and a rich man poor.


FALSIL. The Stoiks argument.
That thing is good, which makes men good,

Riches do not make men good,

Therefore riches are not good.


VERIL. First I answer by distinction to the mayor. A good thing is twofold,
moral and natural: moral, which makes good things, as virtues; and a
natural good thing, as riches, health, and honors. These do not make things
good, yet they are themselves the excellent and good gifts of God, which men
oftentimes abuse to evil purpose, Luc. 16.
as did the rich man in the gospel to his own destruction.


FALSIL. What is meant in the scripture of God, by the bosom of Abraham?


VERIL. Thereby is meant the gathering together of them which are graffed into
the promise of Abraham: into this company (to wit) of the holy patriarchs,
prophets, apostles, martyrs, and saints, all they are carried by the angels of
God, that depart out of this life in ^he true state of faith and salvation,
because ^uch cannot miscarrie, as do commit them^elues in sure confidence to
the merciful tui^ion of Christ.


FALSIL. What is the cheifest thing, whereof every one ought to be most
careful ^uring all his life time?


VERIL. Every one ought to be most careful; first, Matthew. 16.
how he can be saved in the day of judgment, before Gods tribunal seat, and
so to come to everlasting life; next, to ^iue according to Gods holy will,
during our ^ife, 1. Pet. 5.
whereby we shall receive an incorruptible crown in the end, when every man
shall go to the reaping of that fruit which he has sown in this world.


FALSIL. Are not all people discharged of their sin, Romans 8.
seeing that Christ has paid the punishment due for them?


VERIL. None are discharged from the pains which our sins deserve, John. 3.
Colos. 2.
saving those that take hold upon Christ and his mercies with a true faith.


FALSIL. Lazarus is saved,

Lazarus was a poor man, etc. Luke. 16.


Therefore poverty does save us, and by a consequent, other good works also,
so that we are not justified and saved by faith only.


VERIL. I deny the consequent, for that there is a fallacy in the word,
according that it is simply spoken. And the evangelist making mention of
Lazarus poverty, compriseth therein all his obedience, that is to say, his
repentance, his faith in the promised Messiah his deliverer, his patience, and
other virtues, which were testimonies and signs of his faith. Romans 3.4.5.
For we are justified and saved by faith only, therefore, because faith
takes handfast on Christ; not for any merit or virtues of ours, which are too
weak and beggarly to satisfy the wrath of God expressed in his law.


FALSIL. Luke. 14.
Wherefore is God the father in the parable meant to be the rich man, which had
his ghests to supper?


VERIL. Genesi. 2.
Because God has made man after his own image. Then next, because God does
love man well being made after his image for Christ's sake, which took upon
him the massy lump of our flesh. John. 14. 1. Cor. 6.
And thirdly, because man is, Templum Dei, the temple of God.


FALSIL. Such things as hinder and let the study and love of godliness, are
evil, meet to be refused and rejected,

Riches, power, honors, and marriage do hinder and let the study and love of
godliness, Luc. 14.
as in the parable of the gospel,

Therefore they are evil, and to be refused of Christians.


VERIL. I deny the consequent, because riches, power, honors, and marriage do
not hinder and let the study and love of godliness only of themselves, or of
their own nature, but by an accident, that is to say, through the evil
disposition of men, which prefer bodily gifts before heavenly and eternal
gifts. The abuse therefore of these things is reproved, and not the things
themselves, which are the good gifts of God: and all the good gifts and
creatures of God may be used, as meat, drink, cloth, and so forth; yet not
for pleasure, and unto riot, but for necessity, Matthew. 14.
and that with thanks giving always, as Christ himself gives us in example,
that he never brake bread, without the giving of thanks. Ephe. 5.
And the holy apostle also teaches us always to use Gratiarum action: The
giving of thanks.


FALSIL. What is the house of God and who are they that are called into it?


VERIL. The house of God, is the number of the elected people, or the church,
or congregation, which is congregated or gathered together unto repentance, and
to the knowledge of the truth in Christ; first by the prophets, next by John
the baptist, thirdly by Christ himself and his apostles: and there are some
daily called into that household, by the ministers of the church. But because
the Jews did not obeie the calling of God, he rejected and refused them, Act.
14.
as S. Paul says: Vobis oportebat primum loqui sermonem Dei: It was meet
that the word of God should be first preached unto you: but seeing you put it
from you and think your selves unworthy of everlasting life; lo, we turn
unto the gentiles: S^^ enim nobis praecepit Dominus: For so the Lo^^ commanded
us. Again the prophet says Posui te in lucem gentium, Esaie. 49.
vt sis salus mea, vsque (...) extremum terrae: I have made thee the light
(...) the gentiles, that thou may be my health, unto to the end of the world.


FALSIL. Contrition, faith, and new obedience, are the three parts of
repentance but can thou make me a several description of these three
particularly?


VERIL. Contrition.
I can. Contrition is therefore a compunction and pricking in our conscience,
rising and coming of the knowledge of the wrath of God against sin and
wickedness, and a certain sorrow, for that w^ have offended God, as the
prodigal son said to his father, when he did acknowledge his sins: Pater
peccaui in coelum and coram te, Luke. 15.
and non sum dignus vocari filius tuus: Father I have sinned against heaven and
against thee, and I am no more worthy to be called thy son. 1. Cor. 5. Colo.
3. Romans 6.8. Ephe. 4.
And S. Paul calls contrition the mortification or killing of the old man,
meaning thereby our fleshly lusts, sensuality, and carnal living.

Next, Faith.
faith is the assenting and agreeing to every word of God, and to his promise
of grace made unto us in his gospel, whereby we have an assured knowledge of
his fatherly good will toward us, Coloss. 2. Hebru. 10.
through the blood of Christ, and an affiance in the same fatherly goodness
toward us always witnessed in his said gospel, for Christ's sake only, and
not for any merit or virtue of ours, which we unprofitable servants can be
able to do.

And thirdly new obedience is described by S. Paul, where he says: New
obedience.
Milita bonam militiam, retineto fidem, and bonam conscientiam: 1. Tim. 1.
Fight a good fight, keep the faith, and a good conscience, that is to say:
when we obeie our vocation or calling, and commit nothing wickedlie and
contrary to the testimony of a pure and a good conscience, then we show that
new obedience. For the performance whereof we have need of the presence and aid
of the Holie-ghost, John. 15.
in the infirmity and weakness of our nature, as it is said: Sine me nihil
potestis facere: Without me ye can do nothing. Romans 8. Phil. 2.
Again, Spiritus opem fert infirmitati nostrae: The Holie-ghost helps our
infirmity. Therefore it is God which works in us both the will and also the
deed, even of good will, whereby we are able to do such things as may be
acceptable in his sight. And then this obedience is the fruit and testimony of
a true faith, and of our conversion to God, which has coupled with it always
an endeavor of godly life.


FALSIL. How many errors do the papists use and teach, touching the doctrine
of repentance?


VERIL. Joel. 1.
as the prophet says, Scindite corda vestra, Rent your hearts and not your
garments; again, Tristitia quae ad poenitentiam est, vtilis est, The sorrow
that causes repentance is profitable: yet contrition is not sufficient to
merit or deserve any goodness at Gods hand.

Their second is, they say that contrition is (...),


Their third error is, that they make no Repentance is, to lament our sins
that be past, and not to commit and do again ^he same lamented sins. This
is an insuffi^ient and false definition; because it is not suf^^cient to
acknowledge our sins, and to be ^orie for the committing of them, Genesi. 4.
Matt. 10.26.
as Caine, A^hitophel, and Judas was; but it is requisite that we fly unto
faith, which rests in the promises of God, and susteineth her self therein,
that she should not despair in the terrors of ^nne, as Peter and the thief
on the cross did, John. 21.
through their faith, rid themselves from the dread and fear of sin and
death.

De licta quis intelligit? Psalm. 18.
Who knows his sins* And, Ab occultis meis munda me: Cleanse m^ from my
secret sins. Yet private confession is to be retained; first, for the
utility and profit of private communication; next, (...) the reteining of
absolution and concord of the church.

Frustrame colunt ma^datis hominum: They worship me in vain aft^^ men's
traditions.

Their sixth error is, they teach men, that although John. 3.
Sic Deus dilexit mundum, vt filium suum vnigenitum daret, vt omnis qui credit
in eum, non pereat, sed vitam habeat aeternam: So God loved the world, that he
gave his only begotten son, to the end that all that believe in him should
not perish, but have life everlasting.


Touching canonical satisfactions.
FALSIL. The restitution of theft is necessary; because (as it is said) The
sin is not forgiven, except the thing taken away be restored,

The restitution of theft, is a satisfaction,

Therefore a canonical satisfaction is necessary.


VERIL. I deny the consequent. For in the minor, satisfaction does signify a
work of duty, and commanded of God, perteining to contrition and new
obedience, according to this saying: Ephesians. 4.
Qui furatus est, non furetur amplius: Let him that stole, steal no more. And
in the conclusion, satisfaction is taken for a work, not of duty, or
commanded of God, whereby the papists signify, that God is pacified thereby,
and that the pains of hell and purgatory are recompensed and taken away
therein. And the mayor is universally true; because it is requisite in our
conversion to GOD, that we cast from us the purpose of perseuering and
continuing in wickedness, contrary to our conscience, as we are taught thus:
Milita bonam militiam, 1. Tim. 1.
retinens fidem, and bonam conscientiam: Fight a good fight, keeping the faith,
and a good conscience. And if it may be, and possible to be done, the thing
that is taken away, must be restored again.


FALSILOQVVS. What does the parable of the prodigal son in the gospel
teach us?


VERILOQVVS. It teaches us that God receives into grace and favor for Christ
his sake, all them that convert and turn unto him after their fall; as the
loving father received his prodigal son that came unto him, and asked pardon
for his sins, Luc. 15.
which he forgave him, and took him into his continual favor again:
contrary to the heretical opinion of Nouatianus, which was a priest of Rome,
and sometime chapleine to S. Cyprian, and afterward began an heresy called
Catharon, which was, that they that had renounced the faith by sin after
baptism, should not be received to repentance again.


FALSIL. Saint Paul says, 1. Cor. 11.
If we judge our selves, we shall not be punished of the Lord,

We judge our selves, that is, we punish our selves by satisfactions,

Therefore eternal pains are recompensed and taken away by canonical
satisfactions.


VERIL. I deny the minor; because we judge not our selves by canonical
satisfactions devised by man, according to that saying: Frustra me colunt
mandatis hominum: They worship me in vain after the traditions of men. Again,
I answer to the saying of S. Paul, which he speaks not of the external and
feined rites, but of the true and perfect repentance or turning unto God,
whereby eternal punishment is utterly taken away. Moreover, corporal
punishments are appointed us, to put us in remembrance of the greatness of
sin, and of the wrath of God, which he bears against sinners; 2 Reg. 11. 4.
Reg. 21. Zachar 1.
as David, Manasses, and the Niniuits were punished for their amendment. When
men do earnestly repent, God withdraws his punishments, as it is written:
Conuertimini ad me, and ego conuertar ad v^^ Turn ye unto me, and I will turn
me unto you, says the Lord.


FALSIL. When we consider the afflictions, perils and death of John Baptist,
Esaie was Manasses father in law, who commanded him to be cut in sunder with a
saw.
Esaie, Jeremy slain of his own people.
Jeremy, Paul beheaded under Nero.
Paul, and such other doctors of the church, which were murdered of tyrants,
what ought we thereby to learn?


VERIL. We ought to learn thereby, that there remains a life after this
world, wherein God will glorify John the baptist, Esaie, Jeremy, Paul, and
such others, which received testimony that they pleased God in their life
time: and that there is a judgment also, wherein God will take vengeance of
all tyrants, as of Herod, Nero, Dioclesian, and such others. Again, it is
necessary that we be made like unto the image of the son of God in
afflictions, that we may be made partakers also of his glory, according to
this saying: Quodsi mortui sumus cum Christo, Romans 6.
credimus quod viuemus cum illo: If so be that we be dead with Christ, we
believe that we also shall live with him. Further: Si sufferimus, 2. Tim. 2.
and conregnabimus: If we suffer with him, we shall also reign together with
him.


FALSIL. Christ says: Judge not, Luke. 6.
and you shall not be judged,

Therefore the judgment of the magistrate and of the church are forbidden
thereby.


VERIL. I deny the consequent; because Christ forbids private judgments,
which are done of private affections, without vocation or order appointed of
God. Also rash judgments, as false accusations, suspicions, and slanders.
Therefore this general saying of Christ is to be restrained into a certain
species or kind of judgments. And he adds a promise: Et non iudicabimini:
Luke. 6.
And you shall not be judged, that is to say, God also will cover your sins,
and will mitigate the punishment due for them. For look how we show our selves
to our neighbors, so God will show himself to us. As Christ says: Qua
mensura mensi fueritis, remetietur vobis: Matthew. 18.
Look what measure ye mete, you shall have the like measure again. And
moreover: Si non remiseritus quisque fratrisuo, neque pater vester remittet
vobis: If every one forgive not his brother, neither shall your heavenly
father forgive you.


FALSIL. Luke. 6.
Christ says: Judge not, and ye shall not be judged; forgive, and ye shall be
forgiven; give and it shall be given you,

Therefore our courtesy, equity, and the forgiving of our neighbors
offenses, and our almesdeeds do merit and deserve the forgiveness of our
sins.


VERIL. I deny the consequent; because the promises of God are double, and of
two sorts: the one promise is of grace, of the forgiveness of our sins, and
of eternal life, which spiritual gifts are freely given us for our mediators
sake the son of God, to the end they should be certain, and that Christ
thereby might have his due honor. Other of his promises are bodily gifts,
whereby God does garnish and recompense good works in this life, Pro. 19.
as it is said of almesdeeds and liberality toward the poor: Qui dat pauperi
foeneratur Domino: He that gives to the poor lends unto the Lord; that is
as much to say: God does the more increase his substance with gains, that he
shall not be brought unto poverty.


FALSIL. How can our good works, or our obedience toward the law of God, be
acceptable or pleasant unto him?


VERIL. When our person is righteous or accepted unto God by faith in Christ,
then our works please him, as it is said of Abel: Respexit Deus ad Abel and
sacrificia eius: Genesi. 4.
The Lord regarded Abel and his sacrifices, because the person of Abel was
righteous, through his faith in the promised seed: therefore his sacrifices and
works were pleasant unto GOD. But Caines sacrifices pleased not God, because
his person was not righteous, that is, he was not accepted with God, through
his incredulity and unbelief. For whatsoever is not done of faith, is sin,
and displeases God, although it shine never so much in outward show, and
seems to be good in the sight and judgment of man.


FALSIL. What difference is there (I pray you show me) between the spirit and
the soul?


VERIL. The spirit represents in us the nature of God, and works in us a
spiritual life, or the renewing of our mind, which is brought to pass by the
Holie-ghost, and the external voice of the gospel: and the spirit is one
substance with the soul. But in the soul there are many powers, as wit,
will, and memory: yet the spirit is the most pure and furthest from
corruption, the most high and divine portion of our soul. Our soul is the
cause of our natural life, and of all the powers and actions thereof: yet in
us she does neither good nor evil, though she takes part of the sensible
wits and natural motions, but she makes us indifferent, so that if she take
part with the spirit, then she is her self become spiritual also, and makes
us virtuous and obedient to God; but if she take part with the flesh, she shall
grow out of kind into the manner of the flesh, and so to become disobedient and
rebellious to God and his laws. The spirit desires nothing, but supernatural
and heavenly things; the flesh delights in worldly pleasures, and desires
to have delicate things. But our soul desires to have nothing but necessary
things. Esai. 26.
Esaie makes mention of the soul and spirit, saying: My soul shall desire
and long for thee in the night, and in my spirit and my heart strings I will
wake in the morning to please thee. Daniel says also: In cant. 3. puerorum.
Spiritus and animae iustorum laudent Dominum: Let the spirits and souls of
the just men praise the Lord. Luke. 1.
The blessed virgin Marie in her canticle recites the soul and the spirit.
In libro primo.
Saint Origin writing upon the Epistle to the Romans divides man into three
parts, to wit, the spirit, the soul, and the flesh; happily following the
opinion of S. Paul, who writes thus: Vt integer spiritus vester, 1. These. 5.
and anima, and corpus, sine querela in aduentu Domini nostri Jesus Christi
conseruetur: That your spirit, your soul, and your body, may be kept clean
and vncorrupt, that ye be not blamed or accused at the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ. This (I hope) is sufficient to prove the three parts of man, and
also suffices for the description of the spirit and the soul of man.


FALSIL. Again, what difference is there between Animus and Anima: for I have
heard schoolmen say there is a difference between them?


VERIL. In deed the schoolmen do say, that Animus is the mind, the will of
man, affection, delectation, wrath: and sometime they take it for the soul it
self. But Anima is life, breath, and the very soul, which is a substance
created, invisible, most like unto our immortal God, having none image or
figure, but only of her immortal creator. And they say that Anima viuimus,
we live by the soul; Ac animo sapimus, and are wise by the mind.


FALSIL. Are all men received of God into grace, and so saved, or no?


VERIL. All men are not received in the grace of God, and so saved, but only
(...) as do acknowledge their sins and infirm^ties, and do fly for succor
in all afflictions both of body and of mind, unto Christ our only mediator.
Esaie. 57.
For the prophet does say: V^ habitat Dominus? Where dwells the Lord? H^
makes answer himself, and says: In spirit contrito and cord humiliato: In
a contrite spir^^ and an humble heart.


FALSIL. How many sorts or degrees (...) men are there, touching acceptance
wi^^ God?


VERIL. 1. Cor. 6.
Nolite errar^ Be not deceived; Scortatores and adulteri non possunt intrare in
regnum Dei; Whoremongers and adulterers, cannot enter into the kingdom of God.
Romans 5.
Again: Si secundum carnem vixeritie, moriemini: If ye live after the flesh,
ye shall die. For carnal livers cannot (without true repentance) receive a
spiritual reward after this life.

and wisdom, and have good opinion of themselves, despising all others in
respect of themselves, perceiving a moth in other men's eyes, that is, Matt. 7.
finding a small fault in an other man's life, and yet not willing to see the
beam that is in their own eyes. These two sorts of people, carnal epicures,
and proud hypocrites, as long as they be such and so continue, they are not
received of God, and so saved in the end.

The third sort are conuerts, such as turn Matthew. 11.
Venite ad me omnes qui laboratis, and onerati estis, and ego reficiam vos:
Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will refresh you.


FALSIL. How many things are requisite and necessary for such as truly
repent and turn unto God?


VERIL. They must have two things: first contrition, or the acknowledging of
their unworthiness, as S. Peter acknowledged himself not to be worthy of the
presence of Christ, saying: Exi a me Domine: Luke. 5.
Lord depart away from me: and then he sets down a reason, why he would
have him depart: Quia homo peccator sum: Because I am (says he) a sinful
man. Next, they must have faith, whereby we are out of all doubt, that God
receives us freely, for and by his son Christ, and by confidence in him we
come unto God the father, desiring his grace and aid, as the apostle says:
Per hunc filium habemus accessum ad patrem: Romans 5.
We have access to God the father by his son, and by faith in him we draw
nigh unto God with a sure confidence, Ephe. 2.3.
knowing that God the father does hear us for his Christ's sake. Contrition
and faith are joined together in the psalm, Psalm. 146.
where it is said: Beneplacitum est Domino super timentes eum, and in eis
quisperant super misericordiam eius: The Lord is well pleased with them that
do fear him, and in all them that put their trust in his mercy. All the
scripture does preach of the fear of God, of contrition, and of faith,
whereunto are referred (as to the chief causes of our salvation) all the
saiengs and examples of the holy scripture.

Because such do bear Aesops wallet upon their shoulders, into the former
part whereof they put other men's faults, and be ever tooting and prieng upon
them, being still before their eyes: and into the hinder part they put their
own faults, and cast them behind them: whereby it comes to pass, that they
quickly forget their own lewdness, and yet have an hundred eyes as Argos
had, to look upon other men's actions, but are as blind as wants in
consideration of their own doings.


FALSIL. Christ says: Matthew. 5.
It was said unto men of the old time, Thou shall not kill,

Therefore it was not spoken unto us.


VERIL. The fallacy lies in equivocation; that is, in diverse significations
to one word or matter. Christ does not signify here any certain time or age
of men, but the order, course, or sequel of time; to wit, the moral law was
published or recited by Moses unto the Israelites, by the express voice of
God: which law was first graffed in the minds of men, and afterward obscured
again, wherefore it was often repeated. Therefore the moral law, Exodus 20.
or the law of the ten commandments, does obligate and bind all men, of what
time or estate so ever they be, either to obedience, or to abide the punishment
that is due for their disobedience. Because that law is the eternal and the
immovable rule of the wisdom and righteousness of God, whereunto he will
have all men to be conformable and obedient.


FALSIL. Romans 6.
Paul says: Ye are not under the law, but under grace,

Therefore we are not bound to the law.


VERIL. I deny the consequent, because the fallacy lies in the figure of his
Species. For the apostle signifies by (not to be under the law) not to be
under the condemnation of the law; but to be delivered by Christ from the
curse of the law, unto the obedience whereof, or to the punishment all people
are bound, according to this saying: Deuteronomy. 37.
Maledictus omnis, qui non manserit in omnibus his, quae scripta sunt in libro
legis, vt faciat ea: Curssed be every one that abides not in all those things
that be written in the book of the law, to do them.


FALSIL. It is a rule among the lawyers: that no man ought to be punished for
his thoughts, Affections are natural motions, as gladness, sorrow, desire,
wrath, hope and fear.


Therefore wrath and such other affections are no sins, and ought not to be
punished.


VERIL. I answer by distinction. The lawyers mean as touching political or
worldly judgments, which do only punish external and outward offenses;
but God does punish also our inward thoughts, for it is written: Deus est
scrutator cordium: Psalm. 7.
God is the searcher of our hearts. And S. Paul says: Non solum morte digni
sunt, Romans 1.
qui faciunt peccata, sed etiam qui facientibus consentiunt: They are not
only worthy of death which do evil, but they also which do agree and
consent to them that do evil. Again, Romans 7.
Nesciuissem concupiscentiam esse peccatum, nisi lex dixisset, Non concupisces:
I had not known that concupiscence was sin, except that the law had said
unto me; Thou shall not covet nor use concupiscence.


FALSIL. Wherefore and to what use do we receive the Lords supper?


VERIL. Because Christ commands us so to do, Luc. 22. 1. Cor. 11.
and also for a thankful and continual remembrance of Christ's death, and of
the diverse benefits that all mankind receives thereby: and the faithful do
take, eat, and drink the Lords supper after a heavenly and spiritual sort,
but yet verelie and indeed, therefore we are therewith fed to everlasting life.
It is enough once to be baptized, as once to be borne into this world. But as
we need in this world often times to be fed and nourished: so the Lords supper
must be often times received.


FALSILOQVVS. The Stoiks opinion of putting away of affections is foolish and
impossible,

Matthew. 5.
Christ wills us to put away affections, as wrath, and such other like,

Therefore the opinion of Christ, of putting away wrath, agrees with the
Stoiks, and is impossible.


VERILOQVVS. I answer by distinction: The Stoiks, which affirm that no grief
or affection can happen unto a wise man, do command us utterly to take away
from man's nature all affections, yea though they be ordinary and good, as
natural love toward our wives, children and friends, Matt. 22. Luke. 10.
which is not only impossible, but also wicked; because God says: Diliges
proximum tuum sicut te ipsum: Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. And
the apostle says: Ephe. 5.
Vni diligite vxores vestras: Ye husbands love your wives. And Christ does not
bid us utterly to take away out of our nature all affections, but only
those which be inordinate, as private wrath or hatred. But Christ commands us
to guide and augment our ordinary affections, as our love toward our wives
and children, that they may be also conformable unto the law of God. So then
all wrath is not forbidden, for that it is said: Irascimini and nolite peccare:
Be angry and sin not.


FALSIL. Of how many sorts are the promises of God?


VERIL. They are of two sorts, the promise of grace, and the promise of
corporal benefits and goodness. The promise of grace is the reconciliation,
forgiveness of sins, righteousness, and eternal life, which is promised
and given freely to all them that truly repent, gladly hear the voice of
the gospel, and believe on the son of God our mediator and redeemer, as it
is witnessed in the first promise made in paradise: Semen mulieris conteret
caput serpentis: Gene. 3.
The seed of the woman shall bruise the head of the serpent. And Christ says:
Number. 21.
As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, so must the son of man be
lifted up: John. 3.
Vt omnis qui credit in eum non pereat, sed vitam habeat aeternam: To the end
that all that believe in him should not perish, but have life everlasting. And
his promises of corporal goodness are the collecting and gathering together
of his church out of mankind, and the preserving of the same, in the which he
would be known and glorified; howbeit, it is oftentimes a small company: as
it is said, Grex meus pusillus grex: My flock is a little flock, oppressed
diverse times in diverse places by sorrows and persecutions. Yet God
notwithstanding defends it, and preserves it marvelously, so that all the
tyrants in the world are not able to destroy the least members of Christ's
mystical body, before they have finished the course of their lives and
ministeries: Matthew. 10.
for Christ says: Capilli capitis vestri numerati sunt omnes: All the hairs
of your heads be numbered, meaning all those that be his servants, upon whom
nothing comes, but by the sufferance and visitation of GOD their heavenly
father.


FALSIL. S. Hierom says: Let him be accurssed, which says, The law is
impossible, or that God commands things impossible,

Therefore men may fulfill the law, and by fulfilling of the law they are
righteous before God, and do obtain by their obedience toward the law,
remission of their sins, and eternal life.


VERIL. I answer first by distinction. The law is possible to be fulfilled by
the grace of God, cheeflie because we are reputed and taken to be righteous
freely, through faith in the son of God. Next, the obedience of the law
begins in us through the Holie-ghost, the which obedience though it be
imperfect and unclean; yet it pleases God for the person which is reconciled
to him by faith in his son our mediator: by this way the law is possible.
But it is impossible touching perfect obedience, which man can neither do nor
begin in this life, for the corruption of our nature which lets us so to
do, without the aid of the Holie-ghost: for it is written: Animalis homo non
percipit ea quae spiritus sancti sunt: 1. Cor. 2.
The natural man perceives not the things which belong unto the Holie-ghost.
Again: Affectus carnis est inimicitia aduersus Deum: The desire or lust of the
flesh is an enemy against God. For the flesh is not subject to the law of
God, neither truly will it be so willingly. Therefore God commands that
which is impossible to be done by the only power of the flesh; first,
because we should acknowledge our own infirmities; next, because we should
ask forgiveness of him for Christ his sake; thirdly, for that we should
always endeavor to amend our lives here in this world. Howbeit, the papists in
no case will have it thus to be. But we that truly profess this gospel, do
acknowledge and confess, that we cannot absolutely observe the law, because
God does not only require of us an outward observing of the same, but also
an inward observing: for not only he is guilty of whoredom that commits
the act, but he also that lusts after an other man's wife. Matthew. 5.
He is not only a murderer that kills a man: but he also that hates his
brother in his heart. 1. Ioh. 3.
And who can say he lusts not, etc. Let the papists find such a one among
the children of men, and then we will grant that the law is not impossible to
be kept of us which be frail miserable, earth, Luc. 17.
ashes, and all of us unprofitable servants.


FALSIL. How many uses and final ends be there of miracles?


VERIL. John. 5.
as it is written; The works that my father gave me to finish, the same works
that I do: Testificantur de me, quod pater miserit me: Bear witness of me,
that the father has sent me.

Secondly, that miracles should be examples, Psalm. 33.
Non est inopia timentibus eum: They feel no scarsitie that fear him, and the
eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him, and upon them that put their trust
in his mercy, to deliver their souls from death, and to feed them in the time
of dearth. Further, Christ's rule is immovable, saying: Matthew. 6.
Primum quaerite regnum Dei: First seek ye the kingdom of God, and the
righteousness thereof, and all these things necessary for us shall be
ministered unto us. Christ confirmed these and such other his promises, by
feeding the people miraculouslie in the wilderness, and the children of
Israel with Manna: Marc. 8.
also by sustaining and defending of Elias the prophet, whom God fed by the
ministry of a raven: and by the increasing of the poor widows meal in her
barrel, 3. Reg. 17. This widow was the prophet Jonas his mother.
and her oil in her cruse, which poor woman dwelt in the city of Sarepta in
the country of Sydon, where Elias raised up her dead son to life again.

Dani. 1.3.
as Daniel from the lions teeth, the three children from the burning oven; an^
Jonas from drowning, and has fed them: so he will likewise ever defend his
church, and feed us, if we will be diligent hearers, faithful believers,
obedient folowers, and gladsome dooers of his holy gospel, so fa^ forth as
our frail weakness will give us leave so to do.


FALSILOQVVS. We must serve God freely, and without looking for any reward,

Therefore we must not desire nor look^ for corporal benefits.


VERILOQVVS. I deny the consequent. We must first and principally serve God
freely, without respect or looking for any commodity or reward, but only
therefore, because the reasonable creature owes obedience to GOD his creator.
Also we must desire and look for corporal benefits, both for the conservation
of our selves and the church, which have need of corporal benefits in this
life, as Christ says himself: Nouit pater vester coelestis, Matthew. 6.
quod opus habetis his om^ibus: Your heavenly father knows that you have
need of all these things. Therefore ^e commands us to ask for daily bread,
and not for monethlie or yearly bread, because we have need daily to depend
of his heavenly goodness, and because he would have us daily and always to
pray unto him. It is written: Psalm. 49.
Inuoca me in die tribulationis, and ego eripiam te, and glorificabis me: Thou
shall call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee, and thou
shall glorify me.


FALSIL. What is repentance, which is so often mentioned in the scriptures?


VERIL. It is the conversion or the returning of a sinner unto God,
acknowledging his sins, and desiring pardon and forgiveness of them at Gods
hands, Luke. 7.
for Christ's sake, and is the beginning of a new obedience toward God and his
holy laws, 2. Reg. 11. 2. Par. 33. Luc. 19. John. 18.
as we have examples of Marie Magdalen, David, Manasses, Zache, Peter, the
thief, S. Paul, and such others, which truly repented, and received
therefore the fruit and benefit of their repentance.


FALSIL. Christ says, Matt. 20.
To sit at my right hand or at my left, is not mine to give,

Therefore Christ is not omnipotent.


VERIL. The fallacy lies in the consequent, and we must answer herein by
distinction. First, it is not Christ's to give this, according to the time of
his ministry and humility. Next, it was not his to give unto James the
less, and his brother John, for the prerogative of their kindred, supposing
themselves to be Christ's cousens, because their mother Solome was Joseph's
sister, and therefore they were high-minded, and would have a principality
before the rest of the apostles in the kingdom of Christ. Further, Christ
speaks not in this place of his divine power, wherein he is equal with his
father, and works all things as his father does; for the evangelist says:
John. 5.
Pater meus ad hoc vsque tempus operatur, and ego operor: My father works
even unto this time, and I work also. And as the father raises up the dead,
and quickens them: Sic and filius quos vult viuificat: So the son also
quickens such as lists him; John. 10.
saying: Ego do eis vitam aeternam: I give them eternal life: Neque rapiet eos
quisquam de manu mea: And no man shall take them out of my hand.


FALSIL. Luke. 7.
Christ said to Marie Magdalen, that her sins were forgiven her, because she
loved much,

Therefore her sins were forgiven her for her loves sake.


VERIL. I deny the consequent, because the figure Synecdoche is here used,
which is as much to say as a part for the whole, or the whole for a part; for
under the name of love, is contained our whole conversion and turning to God.
And Christ says afterward: Fides tua saluam te fecit: Thy faith has made
thee safe. Also there is a double absolution, the first is of our own
conscience before God, which comes only by our steadfast faith in Christ our
mediator. The other absolution must be done before the congregation, where
there must be declared the testimonies of true conversion or repentance: as
Christ alleged and commended before the Pharisie and other his ghests, the
works of this conuertant Marie. Luke. 7.
Therefore love is the effect or the fruit of the remission of our sins, and
not the merit or the cause efficient.


FALSIL. Christ commended the false steward, Luke 16.


The same steward was a thief,

Therefore he commended a thief.


VERIL. I deny the consequent: because the fallacy lies in the accident. For
he does not commend the Species, that is, the theft, but the Genus, that is
the providence of the steward which he would have every man to follow, but in
a contrary matter; to wit, in the procuring and getting of eternal aids and
helps unto everlasting life, which men in the church that are called to the
knowledge of the gospel do more neglect, than worldly men which are out of
the church do these temporal goods. For worldly goods and temporal
blessings, which are seen, tasted, and perceived with our outward senses,
because they are external, do more mightily move us than heavenly things,
which are only seen with the eye of faith, being very blind and dim in
carnal and worldly minded men, as the scripture says: ^. Cor. 2.
Animalis homo non percipit ea quae spiritus Dei sunt: A worldly man
perceives not the things which belong unto the spirit of God.


FALSIL. Luke. 16.
Christ says, that the poor do receive their benefactors into everlasting
tabernacles,

Therefore saints shall receive us into everlasting life, and not Christ.

Also, almesdeeds and good works shall merit and deserve eternal life.


FALSIL. I deny the consequent, because Christ in this speech uses the figure
Synecdoche (which is a part for the whole, or the whole for a part) and therein
he compriseth both himself and his saints. John. 14.1. Coloss. 3.
For Christ receives them, as the true author and only giver of eternal
life. But the saints, or the congregation of Christ, are as witnesses of our
beneficence, or liberality toward them, whereby we have declared our lively
faith: and they also pray together with us in this world; for us, for our
parents, for the politic governance, and for all such as give enterteinment to
the afflicted members of Christ. And God does bless and prosper both priuatlie
and publikelie for the liberality extended to his church: as the kingdom of
Assyria fared the better, Dan. 1.
for that Daniel was well used there. And all the land of Egypt sped the
better likewise for the favor and courtesy that king Pharao showed unto
Joseph the son of Jacob and Rachael, Ge. 3. and, 41.
when he was in his country. Therefore both Christ and his saints must needs
be comprised in both members of this sentence: as, Facite vobis amicos: Make
you friends, that is, Christ and his congregation: Vt recipiant vos: That they
receive you (that is; that Christ, both the author and giver, and his saints,
the witnesses of your good works) into everlasting habitations. And the apostle
does sufficiently testify, that good works cannot merit or deserve eternal
life, where he says: Vita aeterna est donum Dei: Romans 6.
Eternal life is the gift of God, so that there can be no deserving in us. We
are saved by grace through faith, and that not of our selves: because, Dei
donum est, Ephesians. 2.
non ex operibus, ne quis glorietur* It is the gift of God, and not of works,
least any should boast of their works. Thus now we plainly see, how much the
iusticiarie papists or rather Sadduces mistake this place, which draw the words
of Christ even as it were by the hair of the head, to prove the valor of
their works, which they say they have of supererogation, to wit, such works as
do not only suffice to save themselves, but also their friends, and such
other as it shall please them to save. But note ever by the way, that they
save none without money, receiving men's gold, and returning them chafe back
again: a very bad exchange.


FALSIL. Again, the adversary reasons thus:

Christ said unto the lawyer reciting the sum of the law, Luke. 10.
consisting in the love of God and of our neighbor: Hoc fac and viues: Do
this and thou shall live,

Therefore eternal life is given us for our works sake, or for the fulfilling
of the law.


VERIL. I deny the consequent; because there is no man living (for the
corruption of our nature) able perfectly to fulfill the law of God, which
requires of us the full, whole, and perfect obedience of all our power and
strength. And Christ saying to the lawyer: Hoc fac and viues: Do this and thou
shall live, beats down his pride, which had not fulfilled the law, though
he affirmed the contrary: for he was guilty of transgressing both the tables
of Gods commandments (as all men are) and therefore he had need of the Messiah
to be his mediator, for whose sake God forgiueth us our sins, and reckons
us to be righteous freely through his mercy, which when it comes to pass,
afterward our new obedience toward the law pleases God. And this obedience is
necessary in them that are newborn, and come to the knowledge of God, and
yet not to obtain thereby eternal life, which is the only gift of God, and
is given us through Christ freely by faith in him, Romans 6. Ephe. 2.
but to declare the present righteousness or faith in Christ, which works
and is effectual by the love of God and of our neighbor.


FALSIL. Luke. 10.
The Samaritane (that is Christ) said, that he would repaie his host whatsoever
he laid out, more than the two pence he took him,

Therefore we may teach more and other things than are delivered to the church
in the old and new testament: and man also may do more than God requires,
which are called the works of supererogation.


VERIL. I deny the consequent. First Christ speaks of no new or other
doctrine, beside the same which is already of God by inspiration manifested;
but he means it of a more large and fruitful exposition of the heavenly
doctrine, which ought to be done according to the proportion of faith, as the
holy apostle says. Romans 15.
Therefore the adversary does lewdlie expound that place touching works more
than due. Again, Christ speaks not of the merit of eternal life, but of the
good success which we have in our vocation and counselles, whereof S. Paul
speaks thus: Labor vester non erit inanis in Domino: Your labor shall not be
vain in the Lord. And Christ says: Ero vobiscum vsque ad consummationem
saeculi: I will be with you unto the end of the world. And: Non relinquam vos
orphanos, sed veniam ad vos: I will not leave you comfortless, but I will come
again unto you.


FALSIL. How shall we assure our selves that we must desire and look for all
goodness at Gods hands, touching the necessities of this life?


VERIL. First, every man must endeavor subjection in his cross, and
afflictions to the will of God, humbly desiring and looking for deliverance
and mitigation of his sorrows, according to the good pleasure of God,
patiently abiding his leisure, and not appointing him either the time or
means of his deliverance; which being so done, God certeinlie does hear us,
help us, and deliver us maruellouslie, yea although we be destitute of all
worldly help and succor. For God is almighty, and the most free agent, not
tied to any second causes, as the philosophers of the Stoiks sect wickedlie
dreamed. Therefore, the Christians have a most sure consolation and comfort in
all afflictions and sorrows, in scarsitie, in contagious diseases, in
pestilence, in wars, and spoiling of the church, in the furies of tyrants, yea
in death it self; that God is ever omnipotent, and that he is our susteiner
and defense, and as it were our pleasant shadow place, so that no discommoditie
can happen unto us by any creature, contrary to the fatherly pleasure of our
God, as the apostle says: Romans 8.
Si Deus nobiscum, quis contra nos? If God be on our side, who can be against
us? And the Lord himself says: Matthew. 10.
Vestri etiam capilli capitis omnes numerati sunt: All the hairs of your heads
are numbered, fear not therefore.


FALSIL. Christ says; Matt. 6
Be not careful for to morrow, for to morrow day shall care for it self,

Therefore Christ forbids us to be careful of our living.


VERIL. I deny the consequent, and do answer by distinction. For there is a
double kind of carfulness. There is one kind of carfulness about our labor
and art, which is not forbidden but commanded of God, as S. Paul says: Romans
12.
Qui praesit cum solicitudine in diligentia, non ignauia: Let him that rules
do it with diligence, and not with sluggishnes. And the care of our labor or
art is the diligence of understanding what thing is good in our art, and which
is the way to do the work of our calling in the fear and invocation of God.
The other carfulness is heathenish, as though we could provide for our selves
by our carefulnes, with a diffidence also in God, Matthew. 6.
which is denied of Christ, as in Matthew, so in many other places. For it is
a torment of mind, which rises either for the fear of discommoditie, or for
the hope of some commodity, without the true notice and knowledge of the will
of God. This carfulness doubleth our sorrows and harm, for the present
grief and torment of the imminent danger which by our own wisdom and
strength we are not able to eschew. The effect of this carfulness is a
fretting and a repining against God, working woefulness in us, and many other
errors.


FALSIL. Luke. 7.
Why does the evangelist say, that Christ delivered the widow her son at
Naim, when he was raised up from death?


VERIL. Because the yoongman now being raised up from death, was Christ's, and
not his mothers, which had lost all her right and interest in him, for that he
was naturally dead. Children belong not unto their parents again after they
are dead, for if we die in the Lord, we are ever afterward the Lords, and not
our parents children.


FALSIL. Christ's miracles are the tokens that he is the true Messiah,

The devil also did miracles among the Gentiles sometimes,

Therefore miracles are doubtful signs sometimes of the Messiah.


VERIL. I deny the consequent, and do answer by distinction; because the
devil is not able to imitate or follow the miracles of Christ or of his
church, as to raise up the dead, to stop the course of the sun, to make the
dry and barren fertile and fruitful. And whereas we do read, that the dead
were raised up among the gentiles, and miracles were showed; they were only
the mere illusions of the devils, which are not able to make any thing of
nothing, neither to corrupt or destroy the good creatures of God without his
sufferance. For as the herdsman holds back his cur in the chain: Jude.
so the Lord has in subjection reserved the devils in everlasting chains
under darkness, unto the judgment of the great day.


FALSIL. Seeing angels be good and evil, what is the office of good angels?


VERIL. The office of good angels, is to preserve and defend Gods people,
namely the church, the political governance and commons; as the prophet
says: Psalm. 33.
Circumuallat angelus domini timentes eum, and eripiet eos; The angel of the
Lord tarrieth round about them that fear him, and will deliver them. Again:
Angelis suis mandauit de te, Psalm. 91.
vt custodiant te in omnibus vijs tuis: He has given his angels charge over
thee, that they shall keep thee in all thy ways. And Christ himself speaks
most comfortablie of children: Amen dico vobis, quod angeli puerorum semper
vident faciem patru mei, Matthew. 18.
qui in coelis est: Verelie I say unto you, that the angels of children behold
the face of my father which is in heaven. Such is the great humility of these
most excellent spirits, that they be the keepers of children, they sit about
their cradels, they walk with us, they be with us in our beds, at the fire, at
the table, and every where, always resisting the wicked angels, that they
should not hurt us in body or in goods: which they always diligently
endeavor to do, according to this saying: Diabolus circuit nos, 1. Pet. 5.
tanquam leo rugiens, quarens quem deuoret: The devil goes round about us
like a roaring lion seeking whom he may devour. Thus he does, not moved
thereunto by any pleasure or commodity that he has thereby; but only for
the insatiable hatred that he bears against God, and his son Christ, whom
he would not have to be glorified in mankind, but that all men should blaspheme
God, as he does himself, because he knows to be still in a damnable state.


FALSIL. Matthew. 18.
Christ bids us cut off our hands and feet, also to pluck out our eyes, if
they be a let unto us,

Therefore these members must be destroyed and cast away.


VERIL. I deny the consequent, because it is a metaphorical speech. For our
hands and feet do signify our fellows and friends, our eyes do signify our
admonishers and counsell-giuers, which would abduce us and lead us away from
God, his doctrine, true religion, or from a godly life. Therefore we must cut
off, relinquish, and avoid their companies and counsels. And it is not only
our outward parts, that be lets and hindrances unto us, to travel toward the
celestial Jerusalem; but also even our hearts, Matthew. 12.
out of the which do come evil thoughts and offenses.


FALSILOQVVS. If sin be the cause of sickness and death, Matthew. 9.
why are christians subject to death, sorrows, and other infirmities incident
to mankind, seeing their sins are forgiven them?


VERILOQVVS. First, because the remnant of sins hangs and cleaves fast yet
in the nature of those that are regenerate and newborn, which must be
mortified and abolished by death and other calamities, as the apostle says:
Romans 7.
Corpus mortificatur propter peccatum: The body must be mortified for sin,
which sticks fast in our flesh or nature. Next, that God might show his power
infinite in the delivering of the good, contrary to the power, fury, and
tyranny of the devil and his members, according as it is written: Psalm. 5.
Mirificauit Dominus sanctum suum: The Lord has maruellouslie wrought with his
saints; that is, he has wonderfully delivered his servant. Thirdly, because
the faith and prayer of the godly might shine, and be exercised in calamities,
as it is said: Vexatio dat intellectum: Vexation gives understanding. Esai.
29.26.
Again: Domine in tribulatione visitant te: Lord the people in their trouble
will visit thee. The misery wherein mankind make their prayers unto God, is a
discipline and correction to them, to wake them out of their security and
careless slumbering in sin.


FALSIL. Their sins must be forgiven them, which do acknowledge the same,
and do promise amendment of life, according to this saying: Quorumcunque
peccata remiseritis, remittentur eis: Whose sins so ever ye shall forgive,
they shall be forgiven them. Again; Luke. 24.
Preach repentance and forgiveness of sins in my name. Therefore there ought
to be no excommunication in the church, or punishment to be executed upon the
wicked by the magistrate.


VERIL. I deny the consequent. First, because there is a double ministry of
the gospel: the one is the declaration of the gospel, by the which the sins
known and the sins unknown are forgiven to all them that do truly
repent, according to the former saying: Whose sins so ever ye forgive, they
are forgiven them. But such as do manifestly offend, and be often admonished,
yet will not repent and amend, they are to be excommunicated; that is, they are
to be cast out of the society of the church, until they do amend their
lives, and show public signs and tokens of their amendment. So Christ
commands him that falls, first to be admonished, that he may of his own
accord return into the way; if he return, he commands him to be received;
if not, to be excommunicated: as the Corinthians excommunicated the incestuous
person at the commandment of S. Paul, and as Ambrose excommunicated Stilicons
scribe. Next, the magistrate has a commandment to punish the wicked, for it
is written: Qui gladium accipit gladio perilit: He that takes the sword shall
perish with the sword. Also, Romans 13.
Magistratus Dei minister est, vltor ad iram ei, qui quod malum est fecerit:
The magistrate is Gods minister to take vengeance of him that does evil.


FALSIL. How shall the judgment be in the end of the world?


VERIL. Matthew. 24.
In the end of the world, Christ shall come in the clouds of heaven, accompanied
with the holy angels of his power and flaming fire: and at the horrible sound
and dreadful blast of the trumpet, which shall then sound as it were these
words: Surgite mortui, 2. These. 1.
venite ad iudicium omnes: Arise you dead, and come all unto judgment. All
mankind that have lived from the creation of the world to that time, shall rise
again whole and perfect, with their bodies and souls before the judgment
seat of God, and shall go to reaping of the fruits that they have sown in this
world: namely, they that have sown in the flesh, Galar. 6.
shall reap corruption of the flesh; and those that have sown in the spirit,
shall reap life everlasting.


FALSIL. 1. Cor. 15.
We shall all rise again at the last day, The wicked shall not stand in the
judgment, Psalm. 1.
Therefore all shall not rise again.


VERIL. The consequent truly, is in this place nothing true. Psalm. 1.
For the prophet speaks not here of the general judgment that shall be at
the end of the world, when Christ shall appear in the majesty of his glory,
to judge the quick and the dead; for then all without exception, both good and
evil, shall rise again to receive the reward of the works of their bodies. Of
this resurrection S. Paul speaks abundantly, 1. These. 4. 1. Cor. 15.
and David compares in this scripture the good with the wicked, praising the
virtues of the good: saying; His leaf shall not fall away. And in the same
place a little after by a pretty antithesis he describes the wicked,
Antitheton: a figure, when contraries be compared.
recording: Non sic impij, non sic: The wicked shall be nothing so, nor shall
prosper in any their doings and studies like the godly, but they shall be
scattered as most vain, like dust upon the face of the earth, and shall not
continue in the function of judgment, and ministry of office, as other men
do: but they shall be cut off, 1. Reg. 31. 3. Reg. 12.
as Saul and Jeroboam were, with their posterity; and David continued in his
seed, and reigned continually. Again, the wicked shall not arise in
judgment, when they shall be given to be judged by the word of God, and yet
will not amend their lives, but will fly from the face of the earth with a
troubled conscience; they will not be reproved, but hate correction, and when
Gods word condemns them, they will grow into the fury of madness, they
will not hear wholesome doctrine, but blaspheme it and persecute it even to the
death, like swine and mad dogs. As for example. The Phariseis stirred against
the Lord and his Christ, they came together, they consulted, they practiced
althings to keep the pomp of their own glory and lucre: and to destroy
Christ and his gospel. This is the meaning of the psalmograph. The wicked do
not arise and ascend into judgment, to judge themselves to amendment of life,
but lie in blindness, and harden themselves in wickedness, not suffering the
judgment of the spirit: whereas every good man will gladly have all his own
righteousness (which is like a defiled cloth) to be condemned, Esaie. 64.
and to appeal to the righteousness which we have in Christ Jesus, to whom
with the father and the Holie-ghost be all power, honor and glory, now and for
ever and ever, Amen.


FINIS.
Imprinted at London by H. Denham.


