THE True Copy of two Letters, with their several Answers, containing the
late Apostasy of the Earl of Lauall, after his return from Italy.

Wherein the principal points in controversy with the Papists, are learnedly
and fully confuted, By D. TILENVS.

Faithfully translated by D. D. S.

LONDON, Printed by Simon Stafford, for Nathanael Butter, and are to be sold at
his shop in Paul's Churchyard, near S. Austens Gate. 1605.

To the most Christian and mighty Monarch, James, by the grace of God, King of
great Brittayne, France and Ireland, Defender of the true, ancient, and
Catholic Faith.
MOst mighty and renowned King, behold, I offer to your Majesty these
unexpected and vntimeous letters, wherein the fine and pure gold of Saba, is
mingled with the old and corrupt dross of Egypt, to be tryde by the divine
touchstone of your sacred wisdom, persuading myself, that the reading of them
shall not be so picasant to your Majesty's ears, as the coffeehouse, in
beholding the sudden fall, and miserable Apostasy of so great a personage, and
of my knowledge, so greatly devoted to your Majesty's service: besides that
great hope and expectation, which was had throughout all France of him, to be
(one day) a help and comfort to Christ's true Church there. I may here very
well compare him to the folly of the Lark, which, while it plays with the
feather, and stoopeth, is caught in the Fowlers net: so he, dallying in his
youth and prime of years, being deceived by the beautiful feathers and glasses
of pleasant Italy, was caught by the charming intiseme^ts of those
Antichristian Vipers, with whose venom being once stung, hard was it to find
such medicine, for the cure of so dangerous a discase: not doubting in this
mean time, but as your Majesty would be glad to hear of his healing and rising
again to the embracing of the truth, from whence he fell: so likewise on the
other part, I am fully persuaded, that your Majesty's wonted care shall
continue in this your new Monarchy, that no person of any quality and mark
hereafter, shall be licenced to travel, especially to Spain and Italy
(places most dangerous for practicing of treasons, and betraying of their own
souls; yea, the lives of their own Kings and countries) but with such a
strict caveat, that if they continue not constant in the profession of the
truth, wherein they have bin taught, that at their return, They shall expect the
rigor of your laws, to be executed against them more severely then heretofore
have bin, lest by their oversight and daily increase, they may not only
endanger Christ's Church in your dominions, but also your Majesty's person and
state, which God forbid should ever come to pass in this our age, or in any
other following. I crave humble pardon, that reme^bers other men's matters to
your Majesty, in forgetting my self; for charity should begin at her self,
praying in all submission, that this small mite of mine may be received with
that accustomed favor (which sometime I inioyed more liberally,) as your
Majesty uses to accept the rich treasures of others daily offered to your
Majesty, and this to be but the earnest of a better work to follow, and a
remembrance of my dutiful affection, humbly submitting my self, and this my
rude Translation, to the royal and most learned censure of your Majesty, who
can far better judge thereof, then I have delivered it. I make an end,
beseeching the Almighty King of Kings, long to preserve your Majesty's life,
and to prosper all your good actions and godly enterprises, to his glory, to
the comfort and good of the Church and Commonwealth.

Your Majesty's most humble and loyal Servant, D. D. S.

The Translator
NO man (Christian Reader) can serve two masters, says our Savior Christ; for
the comfort that is of God is sweet and delectable: but this is not for all men,
but for those only, which despise the vanities of this world. It is impossible
to taste of God and his pleasures, and to love disordinately the things of this
life. All men would enjoy gladly the sweet conversation of our Lord; but few
there be that will forgo their own worldly desires, and willingly despise
their earthly contentme^ts: they desire greatly to have the inward comfort of
the soul; but withal, they desire to satisfy their own extraordinary lusts
and appetites. This may well appear in the Apostasy of this Noble man, very
godly and carefully brought up in his tender years in the true Religion, who
casting off all true fear of God, love of true Religion, and the great honor
and commendations that his house and predecessors had, for professing and
maintaining the same against the enemies thereof, suffering himself in the
prime of his years, with pride and prejudice, two of his chief guides into
Italy, to be bereft of that precious and inestimable pearl of Christ's verity:
for pride insinuating her self, crept into his soul (a most dangerous ghest)
and taking once possession, is very hard to be expelled again. Prejudice on
the other part, so great an enemy to the truth, that it makes the mind
incapable of it; for if in his heart he had laid a sure ground, all his enemies
had not shaken it, much less over thrown his Religion. Ye see, be loved, what
it is to serve two masters, as he would have done. I compare him unto those,
who kindles a fire under green wood, and leaves it so soon as it begins to
flame, leaving off a good beginning, for want of seconding it with a suitable
proceeding: but rather lazily and cowardly being overcome with the pleasures of
the country, and the curiosity of his young and vain conceits, forgetting the
service of God, wherein he had lived before, betook him to the service of
Antichrist, and withdrew himself, as with a discontented mind, from the
company of his chief Governor, both grave, wise, and godly, giving himself
over to the company of those devouring Serpents, who never left him, until he
was brought into the endless Laborinth of their superstitious Idolatry, and
made his soul drunk with the new wine of the cup of the Beast. I beseech you
therefore, all that love your own salvation, to take here your example, and
eschew the company of the ungodly and wicked, but especially such, as in the
habits of simple Lambs, come secretly as Wolves, to infect and devour your
souls, under the pretense of holiness and devotion: and so I bid you farewell.

The Translator to D. Tilenus, his ancient acquaintance, the Author hereof.
THou true TILENVS to thy Lord LAVALL,
And faithful Teacher of his tender years,
Thy learning great, and piety appears,
By divine answers to repair his fall:
Thy truth does shine, his untruth to deface.
Thy heavenly dew distilleth from above,
To heal his soul, whom thou so dear did love,
And leads him the way to saving grace:
But if so be thy counsel he neglect,
Yet thousand eyes shall read thy leaves and lindes,
And shall be scanned by a thousand minds,
With endless praise thy Trophies to erect:
Where your great fame, and his disgrace shall stand,
Inrol'd fer ever with a Brittaynes hand.
D. D. S.

The Advertisement of the Author to the Christian Reader.
CVriosity and pleasure are two dangerous diseases, and every one apart, is
strong enough to overcome his patient: how much more, while being both
together, they conioyne to assail him, as it were, agreeing both by the body
and the soul; the one ingendring himself within the spirit, the other within
the flesh, each of them consuming and destroying the parts that breed it; even
as the Worm destroys the Apple, the Viper, her mother: They symbolize in
many things, and as two sister-like twins, they attire themselves with one
self same habit; the definition of the one, not much disagreeing from the
nature of the other: So that to this end an ancient Father said, That Adultery
was nothing else, but a curiosity of an other man's pleasure; the one alienating
the spirit of the patient from the knowledge of salvation, and causing him to
take appetite to those things, whereof the ignorance is wisdom, and the
practice damnable, makes him the disciple of the father of lies, subject to
the Prince of darkness, the first inuenter of those mysteries of hell: the
other changes his body, which ought to be the member of Jesus Christ, the
temple of the holy Ghost, into the member of an harlot, and habitation of
unclean spirits: both of them be bad, very fit to corrupt youth, to seduce it
to the stews of Antichrist, where there is somewhat to please both those
intising humors: for what does more resemble the curiosity of Magic, then
the charms of hallowed Agnus Dei, of the Transsubstantiation? to the
characters of Soccrers, then the marks of the beast, deciphered in the book of
Revelation? A great part of this deuillish Art bewrays itself by auricular
confession, imitating the form of interrogatories, registered in the decrees of
Buchart, Bishop of Lib. 9. cap. 5^.
Worms. As touching the pleasure of the flesh, where may a man find the
exercise more free, the excess more enormous, then within the great Babylon,
where the bodily lust has no less sway, then the spiritual: Where have bin
invented these sacred Canons, which do not only with the Council of Toledo,
Did. 3. C. 4. Is qui non habet Cause. 12. q. 1. c. dilectissionis.
permit concubines, but also command and ordain the community of wives with
Plato, and of goods with the Anabaptists? Behold these two rocks, which, as well
as ambition and covetousness, ouerwhelme the faith of many by lamentable
shipwreck. This is the course, wherein lately the Earl of Laual overthrew
himself, to the great grief of those, who hoped he would one day succeed to
the piety and virtue of his predecessors: but these qualities are gifts
personal, not hereditary, as the name and temporal goods. After that he had
languished a long time in these diseases, possessing both his spirit and his
flesh, there was also marked in him diverse symptoms and signs of an evil
success; and among other things, was perceived a fact direct contrary to that
which S. Luke describes: for having past to change the air in Italy, a country
which is not thought very good for those persons that be most Act. 19. 19.
wholesome and whole, he did not refuse all kind of pleasures for his body; and
besides, made provision of mortal receipts for his soul, buying at a high
rate, writings, like to those, which the disciples of the Apostles cast into
the fire, notwithstanding they were of great value, so soon as they did
embrace the christian faith at Ephesus: by which purchase, he declared very
well, to be more disposed to take place in the Temple of the great Diana of the
Papists, the^ to have preserved that wherewith it pleased God to have honored
him in his true Church, who conde^neth those detestable curiosities: and in the
end, the Apostem beginning to grow and gorge forth the venom contained in
these his two letters, in which he propou^deth diverse questions, not so much as
to receive light of his doubts, wherein such diseases had taken away both his
desire and understanding: but because after a just refusal of a verbal
conference made unto his unjust demau^ds, being addressed to those who
understood that resolution which he had already taken, he had need the^ of some
other mask to end the Catastrophe of his Tragedy, instead of extreme unction,
and funeral preparations of his religion dead in his soul long time before,
dissembling in the mean time this spiritual death toward these, who did their
endeavor for his preservation, as appears in matters of estate, who co^ceale,
for certain days, the death of their great Princes: but seeing he could not
so well cou^terfet the voice of Jacob, but that the hands of Esau did discover
him: neither was he able himself to support any longer the pestilent smell which
his neutrality did breathe forth among the living and the dead, betwixt the
preaching of the Gospel, and the Idolatrous mass, but that he was forced to
discover his mask.

And having tra^sported himself to the Covent of the Capucians in Paris, he
burted solemnly his religion, accompanied with many exorcismes, abiurations,
confessions, pentiencies, and such ceremonies: which did serve him no less to
his obsequ^es, the^ did the desperate painting and attiRes to Iesabel, which
she did take in the instant hour she was to be cast Forth of the window to
break her neck. They had great desire to adorn the lamentable pomp of the
poor young Earl, by some pray, which they thought to have caught on our
professors: and to this effect, after the refusal of the verbal conference
which he demanded, the Jesuits had persuaded him to advise in that same instant
upon the said doubts, with diverse persons in diverse places, hoping that in
diversity of style, they might incou^ter certain differences of believing in
those that should answer: but not finding one just subject on our part, to fall
in any such inconvenience, but rather to alienate him from the wickedness of the
corrupters of his youth: We supposed nothing should divert us from putting to
light, the objections made on the one part, and the answers given on the other
side; to the end, that co^Ferring the one with the other, every one who has
eyes to see, may understand, that those which will not know that which is,
should imagine to themselves, to see that which they see not; which be the two
kinds of blindness, wherewith God by his just judgment does punish those that
forsake the spirit for the flesh, the truth for vanity; the light for darkness,
the Savior of the world, for the son of perdition: nevertheless, we hope, God
willing, that those, who have not much edified Christ's Church by their life,
shall far less ruin the same by their death, seeing that their voluntary
separation from our communion, does no other thing then ease us from the
necessary trouble of cutting the^ off from our society; no more then the wind,
which drives away the chafe in the air, easing the^ which in the mean time
are about to cleanse the floor.

Farewell.
The first letter of the Earl of Lauall, to his master D. Telenus.
SIR, I am to render you exceeding great thanks, for the receiving in so good
part, the news of my return: but if any other has noted the contrary in you,
that has bin against my intention and meaning, who have nothing in more
respect, then to serve you, and not in any sort to offend you. These fair
instructions which pleased you to give me, have brought into me a great joy and
contentment, imagining with my self, that they have proceeded from a person of
such learning, as you be; and that bear me such good will, as to love me: the
one, known to the whole world, the other believed of me with a great
satisfaction. But this discourse, which it has pleased you to propound,
touching the manifest difference of 2. Religions, has moved in me a desire to
learn more of you, who has left in me such a taste, that I desire rather to
make the demands of an ignorant, then to be made wise in any thing by your
answer. I will rather entreat you to instruct me in the controversies, then to
strengthen me in my belief. And first, to show me, if the visible Church has
remained any space of time in her purity, and how long? or if she has euerso
remained; or if she has had only that quality of purity since Caluins time?
Secondly, if ye hold for constant and firm, the heads of Religion, that were
debated and resolved upon, in the sour first general Councils? Thirdly, if
the calling or sending be necessary to Ministers, and of whom had Calvin it?
Fourthly, if the sacred Scriptures interpret them, then every one is capable
for the understanding thereof. Fifthly, all the Heresies that have been
confuted, do we not hold them justly and well overthrown? Sixthly, if we
receive the Fathers as witnesses only of matters of their time, and as
Historiographers, or not? Seventhly, if the invocation of Saints be evil,
because it steals away the honor, which is due unto God: or if it be
superfluous and to no purpose, because they understand us not? Eyghtly, if all
bodies be circumscribed or not? I pray you now, not to answer so subtly,
that I cannot understand you, lest perhaps, you may distrust, that some other,
and not my self have made them: as you may judge, that the order and the style
cannot proceed but from such an ignorant person as I: so also, the subject and
matter is conceived in my spirit, by writing of that, to which, for the most
part, there is need of no other answer, but your nay. I crave your pardon for
disturbing you from your grave and weighty affairs, to learn me the A. B. C.
and am, and shall be more then any person,

Your most affectionate and bound disciple, to serve you, LAVALL.


D. Telenus Answer to the Earl of Laualls first Letter.
SIR, I praise God with my whole heart, that in the end he has put in your
mind, this just and right resolution, as to keep one ear for the truth, the
which being in this world, as in a strange and for rain country, or as it were
imprisoned by the father of lies, incounters more enemies that accuse her, then
of advocates that defend her. I know her accusatio^s by those questions, which
it has pleased you to demand of me: your modesty requires, that I receive
them, as from the part of an ignorant: but it is a long time since I learned,
that the most profound Doctors of Sorbon could not bring forth more better, nor
more beautiful. Nevertheless, I rejoice to behold you to take on the quality of
a disciple, that binds your conscience to delay all reuolting at least, until
that time, that sure knowledge shall teach you both the reason and the ground
thereof: but I beseech you to pardon me, if my answers surpass a little the
limits of yea and nay, which your letter has prescribed me, considering, that
there requires a little more time to draw a stone out of a pit, then in
casting of it in; and that the center and the circumference of an answer, well
made, is not only so much the will of him that makes, the demand, but
principally the need he has to know and understand it. Also I persuade my
self, that ye understand not the name of disciple after the manner of the
Pithagoreans, that allege for all reasons and answers, the yea and the nay of
their master: a style, which for the present is not fitting but to the
disciples of the Pope, of whom only selfewil holds the place of all reason and
authority. And although you desire to be rather instructed in the
controversies, then fortified in your belief: and that you perceiving so
clearly, that such answers, upon doubtful and intricate questions, should
serve merely all, either for the one, or for the other, and would increase in
you, rather the number of your doubts, then lighten the darkness of your
ignorance, by the light of that same knowledge, which consists not in the
simple affirmation or negation, but in solid and necessary demonstration. Such
was the opinion of S. Austen praising Nebridius, which hated greatly a short
answer to a great question, judging him that knew not how many things might
and ought thereupon be spoken, was not worthy to have propounded them. And
since that the almighty God would not permit that I should remain near your
person, until that time, that your age should be more capable of more exact
instructions: I thought, notwithstanding my far absence, I was bound to
repair that breach, that in taking upon you the title of a disciple in your
letter, you have honored me in that, which sometime I inioyed: and having not
since changed any thing, except my dwelling, and not my affections to continue
my service toward you, I should be thought unworthy of your good will and
kindness, if I should content me, after the manner of Trumpets, to have given
you courage by my former letter, without bringing now the help and succor,
which you crave against the assaults of your doubts.

The first Question, or rather doubt, which you demand of me, is this, If the
Church visible has remained any certain time in her purity, and how long? Or
if she has remained continually? Or whether she has this purity since
Caluins time?

To them then who assault you, and that make no other Buckler but of the
Fathers, they shall suffer me to answer to this question by the mouth of
Eusebius, or by Egysippus, who is more ancient then Eusebius; and very near to
the age of the Apostles themselves, who says in his History ecclesiastical,
that the Church has remained virgin-pure, chaste, and whole, so long as the
Apostles did live; and after the generation of those, who had heard that
heavenly wisdom with their own ears, then error entered, and took
possession within the Church: but to others that desire instruction, there is
required a more particular answer, lest they should think, that we desire
rather to cut the knots, then to loose them: I say then, that this purity is to
be considered, either in regard of the doctrine, or good life; and that both
the one and the other is in the Church, according to the condition and measure,
which is assigned to her, during the space of her residence here on the earth:
2. Cor. 11.
in the which estate, as touching her head, who is Jesus Christ, she is ever
pure; but not altogether pure in herself: for seeing every member of the same
is subject to fail, as well in doctrine, as in life, and that we know her
here but in part; the body which is composed of these members, cannot be
Ephesians. 4. 7.
wholly pure and perfect: and to consider the body of the Church, without her
members particular, whereof she is compound, were as much, as to transform
her into an Idea Platonica, only the Prophets and Apostles, by a vocation, and
special prerogative, and by an assistance and help immediate and
extraordinary of the holy Spirit, were exempt and free of all error in the
doctrine, the which in this respect, and by good reason, is the true and only
rule of all purity: and according as the Church draws either near, or is far
distant, the measure of her purity increases or decreaseth: and when she is
called pure, that is, either in respect of her head, or in regard of a part
thereof, which is received in the heavens, which they call the Church
Triumphant; or, rather in regard of the end she aims at in this world; even
so, as they call a house, an edifice, which is but yet in building, and before
it be complete and ended. And like as the purity of the Church is subject to
alteration; even so is her form or external behavior, in respect whereof,
they call it visible: for although she remain ever visible in her self, yet
so is it, that she is not always visible to others, especially to those that
have not the eyes which be requisite for the seeing of her; as the Sun it
self is not to be seen by Heb. 18. 38. Apoc. 12. 14. Math. 2. 13.
a blind man: and the Almighty, for the preserving of her from her persecutors,
retired her sometimes to the wilderness, to secret caves and dens, even as
he did withdraw his Son Christ Jesus into Egypt, to preserve him from the
rage of Herod: And then she became invisible, but not to God, neither to
herself, but only to the eyes and judgment of the blind world. I say then,
that the Church militant has ever retained that measure of purity, which the
holy Ghost has communicated to her, not only since Caluins time, but the
Apostles days, even to us present this day: As also the said measure was much
different and diverse in sundry times and places, the which undoubtedly did move
the ancient Fathers, to compare the Church unto the Moon, which shows her
self sometimes of more, otherwhiles of less light, as it were eclipsed, and
hides herself altogether, as it were, from the world, without danger
notwithstanding all this, either to be lost or scattered, as well appeared in
the Church of Israel, in the time of Ely the Prophet, where there was a Church
of seven thousand, that did not bow their knees to Baal, which was not
perceived there externally. If your pretended teachers shall not grant unto
me, that which heretofore is alleged, I shall cause them, by the authority of
Bellarmine, to deny the purity of their own Roman Church, and after this
manner I will prove it: The Church that may altogether be compounded of
unfaithful persons, wicked and reprobates, can have, neither purity in her
faith, nor in her life.

But so it is, that the church so described by Bellarmine, may be wholly
composed of such people: therefore she can have no kind of purity. The
Assumption is proved and made clear in his book of the Church, in the last
Bellar. li. 3. cap. 2. de eccl.
Paragraph, where Bellarmine says, that is the definition of the Church,
according to the which, some be of the body, and not of the soul thereof,
having no internal virtue, and being as it were, the hair, the nails, and
corrupt humors of the body of man: and of such sort be the Infidels, wicked
and reprobates, as Bellarmine himself expresses them, who may make external
profession of faith, communicate to the Sacraments, and subject themselves to
the Pope, which be the 3. essential conditions and only necessaries according
to this Cardinal, for to be in the Church. By the same Author, I will argue
again after another manner.

That which may be destitute of faith, hope and charity, cannot remain in
purity, yea, rather may lose all.

But the church according to Bellarmine, may be void of al those qualities:
therefore she may lose al her purity.

But if any shall reply, that Bellarmine adioynes, that the said virtues are to
be found nevertheless in the Church. I ask, whether they be of the essence
of the Church, or not? If the first, wherefore says he in his definition, that
they be not necessary? But if the second, how can a Church without faith, hope
and charity, be thought pure?

Learn then (sir) by these two arguments, as by two marks, or rather ensigns,
the purity of the place, where those people would lodge you: nevertheless, this
is that Annal. tom. 6. an. 484.. 4. and tom. 7 an. 530.. 5.
Church which Cardinal Baronius maintaynes and defends to have neither spot
nor blemish.

Whereas ye write and desire, that the time may be showed and marked, in the
which errors and uncleanness have entered into the Church of Rome: surely, this
discourse would prolong too much my letter, which you desire me to make short,
and would importune more by her prolixity, then it should instruct you by her
vtility, more proper to a history then to doctrine. Is it enough, that a poor
Hydropique should believe to be sick, and to have need of phisike, when he is
so swollen, that he is almost in danger to burst, although none can precisely
mark and show him the hour when as his liver began to be consumed? Surely,
while as the fire is in the house, the water within the ship, the enemies
within the town, the Wolf within the fold, those that hope to prevent the
danger, or rather to preserve them be more advised and circu^spect, then those
that will believe nothing, unless they show them at what time, and how that is
come to pass, and who busies themselves in searching the causes and the
beginnings. we know, that already in the days of the Apostles, the mystery of
iniquity began to work 2. These. 27. Acts. 20. 2^
it self, which S. Paul foretold, that after his departure, there should enter
ravenous wolves among the flocks; and in that night, after the husbandman had
sown the good seed, behold, the enemy also did sow the Tares. Mat. 13. 25.
Sur. tom. 1. die 8. Ian. Bar. Tom. 9. Anno. 805.. 3.


The Antichrist was not begotten in one day. This Bear was not so soon
licked, and put in form, as he of whom speaks Surius and the Cardinal
Baronius, who of a wild beast, became a reasonable creature, made himself also
Friar in that same instant, after he had prostrated himself before the relikes
of a certain Lady, and having beside entertained the Nuns of the Covent. The
Romance Bear ought to be some other thing beside, then a simple shorn Munke.

Your second demand is touching the 4. first general 2
Councils, to wit, If we hold for certain, that which was there treated and
resolved? I answer, that those points concern either the doctrine, or policy
of the Church: those then be collected in the Symboles, composed in the said
Councils, and we hold them for true, so far as they are agreeing to the holy
Scriptures. In this here we will use the liberty which Bellarmine takes, after
the manner of Pope Gelasus, saying, That in the Council of Conc. Chal. de
Laicis cap. 20. Praef. in lib. de Pontif.
Calcedon, there is something good, and something evil, and that we may
receive the one, and refuse the other: and in another place he dispenses with
himself, to reprove in the same manner the Council of Constantinople, for
having attempted somewhat, that did not please the Church of Rome. Behold then,
how he handles these two of the first 4. general Councils: for the rest judge,
if ye please, which is most reasonable, to submit themselves to the Cou^cils,
because the Pope does approve them, who maintains himself to be above the^;
or because the Councils have submitted themselves to the word of GOD; the one,
which is taught in the Church of Rome; the other, in our Church.

The third question is, Concerning the sending of the Ministers, 3
if it be necessary for them, and of whom Calvin had it? I answer, that it is
necessary; and that Calvin had it of the Church of Geneua, and of Farel his
predecessor, who had also his of the people of Geneua, who had right and
authority to institute and depose Ministers: for so declares S. Ciprian,
saying, that the people obeying to the Lib. 1. Epist. 4.
commandments of God, should separate themselves from a wicked guide, and not
to meddle with the sacrifices of any sacrilegious Priest, considering that the
said people have chief authority to make choice of worthy persons, and to
reject the unworthy. This was so practiced by the people of Geneua, and in
diverse other parts of Europe, where in these latter times they did forsake
those sacrilegious Priests, and sacrifices of the Pope, for to establish
faithful Ministers and proclaimers of the gospel. And to be short, the reformed
Churches had their calling and sending, partly from God, and partly from their
people, and partly from the Church of Rome: from God, as the chief cause; from
the people, as by lawful instrument. from the Church of Rome, as by a corrupt
instrument. God gave the essence, and the form interior to this sending: the
reformed Church gave the testimonies and approbations, and the exterior form:
the Church of Rome has added thereto, abuses and corruptions, which our
succeeding Ministers have renounced.

The fourth question is touching the interpretation 4
and understanding of the Scriptures, to wit, If every one be capable of the
understanding of it, interpreting it by it self?

I answer, that if by this capacity, ye mean a natural faculty of man, and by
the understanding, a knowledge to salvation: so far off is it that every one is
capable to the understanding thereof, or to purchase this intelligence by his
study and travels: but rather herein all be naturally blind and foolish; and it
is necessarily requisite, that which our Savior Christ did to his Apostles,
opening their understandings to conceive the Scriptures, should be done to all
them, which desire to understand them wholsomely: for as the bodily light
cannot be received, but by eyes corporal, that be open; even so, the spiritual
light of the Scriptures cannot be seen, but by the spiritual eyes of faith,
which God opens to his own elect, in giving them so much thereof, as is
necessary for them to salvation: in doing whereof, he works oftentimes by
degrees, as he did with the blind man, spoken of in the Gospel, whom he
lightened by little. Whosoever Mark. 8. 24.
be the meanest of the world, understand these passages, which defend the
bowing down before Images: who command to give the cup of the Lord to all:
which bear also, that this is the docttine of devils, for to forbid marriage,
and the use of certain meats, etc. The Gospel is not hid but to those who
perish, and whom the God of this world has blinded. This 2. Cor. 4. 5.
says S. Paul.

The fifth demand is, touching the confuting of heresies, to wit, If that we
hold them not for well and justly 5 Orat. 2. in Arrianos. 2. Tom. 3. 6.
confuted. I answer, that these heresies refuted by the word of God, or as S.
Athanasius says, stoned by arguments taken out of the holy Scripture, are well
and justly convinced: for this is one of the uses, wherefore it was given by
heavenly inspiration; neither hold we that for refuted or overcome, which is
only done by the witnesses of man, and by the authority of the Pope, who does
not condemn heresies, but in seeming to be an enemy to them, to the end the
better he may establish his own: as did Zophyrus, that by such slights won
Babylon. The most ordinary and common argument of the Pope, for to refute
heresies, is by the faggot, and the hand of the hangman, according to the Logic
of the Inquisition of Spain, and the practice of the Jesuits, their Apostles
in the New found world, against the poor Pagans; notwithstanding that the
scholasticke divines maintain, that the Infideis ought not in any The 21. 9 O
art. 8.
case to beforced to receive the faith; yea, not after ye have overcome them in
war, and made them slaves. But in this there appears to us yet one of the
conformities of the pretended Vicar of Jesus Christ, with his master the
commission which the one gives to his Apostles, bears this; Go ye, teach all
nations, etc. That which Mat. 28.
the other gives to his, is, Go kill, massacre, poison all people, who will not
obey me.

Now follows the sixth question, Of the authority of 6
the Fathers. The opinion of the Church of Rome is diverse upon this point.
There be that hold, that all the writings of the Fathers be true and
authenticke, and it behooves to maintain all their opinions to be true, even
D^ft 9. C. uoli meis.
to the last jot. This is it which the gloss says up on the decree
authenticke in the Church of Rome, without teaching of us, how we may observe
this ordinance, when the opinions of the Fathers be contrary one to another.
The more modest and best advised says, they should be esteemed for Historians,
and witnesses of matters of their time. We say, that in regard of the questions
of right, that be in controversy, the Fathers 1 Cor. 13 9.
have been, and should be esteemed for disciples of the truth, and not for
Masters, knowing in a part, and prophesying in a part, and that they have not
comprehended the whole truth, but only according to the measure of the grace
of Jesus Christ: we esteem them for Instruments of God, where they have spoken
the Ephe. 4. 7.
truth; but where they have a little erred, in going out of the right way, we
cease not nevertheless to hold them for the children of God, believing that
the heavenly Father has covered their infirmities: neither do we despise the
fair harvest of learning, that abounds in their writings, for certain cares
of cockle, which are mingled with them: but we do hate those, who gather
nothing but the Cockle and their errors, who defile and corrupt, as much as
they may, by their Index expurgatorius, the good grain, which is there, who
prefer their Briers to their Roses, and in stead of concealing their own
shame, kissed it, and caused it to be reverenced by the people. As for their
testimonies in questions concerning the matter of fact, we accept them in
things of their times, and that be of their knowledge, especially when it is
well grounded and assured: for it shall be proved, that they have mistaken
themselves both in the one and in the other; and there is none, except the
Prophets and the Apostles, to whom, by a special prerogative, pertains the
condition of witness without reproof, Luke 24. 48. Act. 1. 8
and free of exception. Otherwise, the writings of the Fathers, at least, those
who write the History of their times, should be equal to the Canonical
Scriptures. I report me herein to the testimony of that great Cardinal Annal.
tom. 1. an. 34. An. 39.. 22.
Baronius, having spoken in one place, that the Catholic Church falls not at
all times, nor in all things: yea, the holiest Fathers themselves say in another
place, that the Acts of the Apostles written by S. Luke, merit more faith, then
any authority of the Ancients; and in another place, that which the most true
and sincerest writers have reported of the Apostles, has not remained in her
own integrity, without corruption.

As touching The Invocation of Saints, your seventh question: I answer, It
should be rejected in regard of both the two reasons alleged by your self;
to wit, as well, because it is sacrilege against God, as also, unprofitable
for us: for to see, hear, understand, receive, and to hear the requests of
all apart, al at one time, and in all times; this is a propriety belonging
only to God, and his Son Jesus Christ, from whom they steal his honor, and
make the Saints to usurp his office, when one S. James, another S. Clowd, is
called upon in one same time, in a thousand places, from the East to the West,
of a million of persons, for thousand and thousands of diverse things: also,
when they believe that the Saints can understand, and are sufficient to
satisfy and content every one. And by this you may perceive the abuses of the
Jesuits, who persuade you, seeing it is permitted to ask the help of the
living, that it cannot be prohibited to call upon the dead also, of whom we
have as little certainty that they can hear us, as of commandment that we
should reclayme them.

Your last question, is, Of the circumscription of the body. To which I
answer, that every true body is circumscribed; and to be a body and not to be
circumscribed, that is to say, limited and bounded, imports contradiction: for
if the dimensions be essentials to a body; and if it be necessary, that the
dimensions be terminable, which was never yet denied, it follows then of
necessity, that it is bounded and circumscribed: and if this necessity
accompanies all bodies in general, how much more, a humane body, or body of
man, which is not Mathematical, neither composed only of matter and of form;
but which is organick, composed of unlike parts and of diverse kinds? of which
then follows, that those that take from him the circumscriptio^, to the end,
to lodge him in one time and instant in diners places: and insted to amplify
the power of God, destroys thereby both his verity and wisdom, his might and
his Godhead altogether: His verity, in so much as he should have in him, yea
and no: if that he might say of one self same body, that he is circumscribed,
and not circumscribed; one, and none; organick, and not organick: His wisdom,
because there would be disorder and confusion in his works: his power, because
it should have imperfection, to wit, a humane body, not having that, Didy. de
Spirit. S. Virgil. cont. Sabel. etc.
which made her to be so. To conclude his Godhead, because the creature finite
should be equal to the Creator, who is only infinite; by the which argument,
the Ancients foresaw the Deity of the holy Ghost: but if they will say, that
the place is not of the essence of the body, and consequently, that the one may
be without the other: it must be demanded, if the time is not as well out of
the essence of the body, as a body may be then without time? Conclude so,
should not this be without time and without sense: if they reply again, that
the heaven, although a true body, yet it is not contained by any place, that
inuirons it without. The answer is, that for all that it is not exe^pt of
circumscription, being circu^scribed by the limits of her proper greatness, and
form inseparable from it: and even so, the bodies of the faithful, that while
they shall be transported above the heavens, which we see shall not be without
their circu^scriptions, although it be that an other body compass them bout,
as the air does us below, or that it be that nothing compass us. I believe ye
have oftentimes heard this sentence of S. Austen, Take away the room from a
body, August. ad Dard.
and there shall be then no part at all in them. We say with the said Father,
that this circumscription agrees with the body of our Lord, who is above
clothed with heavenly glory, yet not spoiled of his humane nature; neither can
we read without horzor, that which the Pope commands to be believed in this
point, to wit, That De consocrat. did. 2. C. ego Bereng.
he is handled by the hands of the Priests, torn and broken by the teeth of
the faithful, sensually and carnally: Terms and speeches according to the
Roman Church, must be taken precizely: for as Bellarmine teaches us, there is
no Bellar. de Imag. l. 2 cap. 22.
form in speaking in the matter of faith more exact, the^ that which they use,
who abjure an heresy: whereof follows, that this manner of speaking by Pope
Nicholas to Berengare, for the abiuring of his pretended Heresy, admits not the
gloss adjoined to the margent; that is to say, whosoever should take these
terms by the meaning of the letter, should fall in heresy, worse then that
of Barengarius. But what is this? says not your pretended teachers, with a
high and clear voice, That the glorious body of our Lord may be eaten by a
mouse, devoured by a dog. Then behold, I pray you, how they circumscribe it,
inuironing and bounding it in the intrailes of a filthy beast, which is the
place and the lodging, which these honest Harbengers assign unto him. Behold,
there is the fair Hellen of their doctrine, with whom they would make you
inamored; shall you then receive for principles of faith, the barking of such
Cerbres?

You have here my answers unto your 8. demands, which you shall find more
clear then subtle, more gentle then ingenious, more necessary then tedious:
and if the desire of learning be as well graven in your heart, as it is
represented in your letter, as a charitable Christian, I will believe you, not
withstanding the assurance of your friends and servants, who in all parts
publish and lament your revolt wholly resolved on. I shallbe very glad, that
this written answer to your letter, may be communicated to those, whom ye
esteem most capable for the examination thereof. I am not ignorant of their
ordinary replies. Also I know for the overthrowing of them, it shall suffice to
apply thereunto, the conclusions, which may be drawn from the principals, set
down by me: and to do them a little, and a little by degrees, it would exceed
the bounds of a letter, and your own ordinance and desire: but if there rests
yet any doubt on these points, or others; and that the assurance which ye have
of my particular affection to your service, and to your salvation, may make you
desire the true light, rather by my pen, the^ by the mouth of some other more
near unto you: I shall esteem it for singular great honor, the commandment
which it shall please you to give me: for to God it is not acceptable, that I
should esteem that voyage of Rome, or the air of the Court, or the vain hope
of I wot not what, to have so changed that natural inclination, which I was
wont in some other time heretofore to mark in you, that ye would enter into
into a new Religion, traversing amids these mists of uncertain doubts and
irresolutions, without any assurance in your spirit, of any received knowledge,
with these remorses of conscience in your heart, with a brain full of doubts,
which you say, to have grown in you, even while ye were writing unto me.
Herein you would resemble the sun in March, which remoues the humors,
without bringing force to resolve them: or to do as those, whom curiosity makes
to taste of a drug unknown, the effect whereof cannot be known but by their
death. No, no, I cannot believe it; I know what a poor Pagan has heretofore
taught Cic 1. Off.
you, that it behooves never to undertake any thing, which is doubted to be
just, because that Justice shines of her self by the contrary; all doubts show
that therein is evil: how much less then, those that have been learned in a
better school, that whatsoever is done without Romans 14. 13.
faith, is sin? and would they resolve themselves without this certainty to
alteration, where they go either to life, or to death eternal, if they have
any remainder, I will not say of godliness and Religion, but of honor and
courage? And hereupon I pray the Father of light, who illuminates the blind,
who, when he pleases, Ioh. 11. 29. Mat. 13. 46.
rayses the dead, although they were dead four days, to open your eyes, to
discern well that Pearl, which they would bereave you of, with the false and
counterfeit dross which they offer to you in excha^ge, to open and perce your
ears, that you might discern the voice of the Shepherd, from the howling of
the Wolf, and to touch your heart, for to arrest and stay you rather with his
Son, who has given his life for you, than to the son of perdition, who
has pursued the corporal death of your Predecessors, and now again
conspireth and lies in wait, by all the subtle practices and devices he
can, for the spiritual death of your soul.

Surely, this is our honor and profit, and not that of Gods, when as he
speaks to us, our shame and damage, not his, when as we disdain to hear
him, he can better pass our shame, then we can his grace. But advise we
ourselves, lest our contempt of his mercy kindle the just wrath of his anger
making himself to be felt, by afflicting those, who in his speaking to them,
rejected him. I cannot think without amazing (says the Prophet David) Psa. 119
of the righteous judgment, which thou shall cause, and the great fear,
wherewith all my body trembles as it were. These be the verses which your
father (now departed) of good memory, had oftentimes in his mouth, when as he
heard speaking of such reuolting from the Religion, as master Merlin your late
master told me. God grant, that the remembrance of his death may help your
life, in following that same verse, which this Psalm recommendeth to us. I
beseech you excuse my boldness, and lay the reason on your own goodness, who
has given it to him, who fearing lest abusing of it in a danger so perilous,
should be construed a kind of treason, not only by your faithful servants, and
true friends, but also by your self one day, when the truth, now smoothered in
your spirit by the deceiuings of Sophisters, shall raise it self, and
according to his nature, shall obtain to swim above falsehood and untruth. This
shall be at that time, when as appealing from your self, to your self, I
remit and promise to my self, the right understanding of the public cause,
with an acknowledgement of my particular zeal, and so have been, and with a
will to remain

Your most humble; and most faithful servant, D. TILENVS.


The second letter of the Earl of Lauall, to his master D. Tilenus.
SIR, I think my self very much bound to you, in that you have taken the
pains and the care, to answer to the points, wherein I craved some light. You
say to the first, which is of the purity of the church, that incontinent after
the death of the Apostles, that it was corrupted: And Calvin referres himself
to the Call. lib. 4 sect. 3.
ancient Church of S. Basil, S. Ambrose, S. Chrysostom, and S. Austen. This is
in his book of Institutions, and Lord Du Plessis affirms the first eight
hundred years, who was the first that gave me the occasion, to read the
History of that age. In another point, touching the sending of the Ministers,
you say that Farrel had it from the people: it behooves then, that either the
people there were Catholics, or that they were instructed in the religion by
some Doctor; and by consequence it is necessary, that a Doctor of the Religion
proceeded the people of the Religion, and so without any sending or calling
unless it was extraordinary, or else from the Church of Rome. You allege a
passage of S. Ciprian, who says, the people obedient to Gods Commandment,
should separate themselves from a wicked guide, and not to meddle with a
sacrilegious Priest. If ye receive after that meaning, where he says that the
people may discharge their guide, that is to say, a Pastor: wherefore also
receive ye him not in that which he says, that the Priest sacrifices, and that
shows at least, that this was holde^ certain in those days. Finally, for what
defect or error was it of the reformed Church, that it behooves, that her
pastors should have their sending (as you say) in a part from the Church of
Rome, as from an instrument corrupt? This is to do, as the Church of the
Husseits in Germany, whereof all the Doctors for the most part, had their order
of Priesthood from the Church of Rome, fayning to be thereof, at the least, as
I heard it, of the greatest part of their own country people: but whether that
be or not, it imports not much. Beside this, I demand you, the way of
salvation being in all ages open, and our Savior Christ having suffered for all
them, who should apply unto themselves the merit of his death, what doctrine, I
pray ye, held they that were the faithful, three or four hundred years since?
And if you had been in that time there, in what Vessel had you put your
self, to have arrived to the port of safety? Touching the Testimony of the
Fathers, you say, you accept of them, upon the questions of the fact of the
things done in their time. Saint Austin says, that he caused the Mass to be
celebrated. This is a question of fact, and a thing done in his time.

I abuse your patience, in detayning you so long, to read nothing that is worth
your pains, and I demand you no farther, but to assure you, that I am more
then any person

Your most affectionate and bound Disciple to do you service, LAVALL.


The second answer, of the second letter, written by Telenus to the Earl of
Lauall.
SIr, I perceive by that which it pleased you to write to me by the Gentleman
coming to this place, that with my answer upon your honest demaundes, ye are
satisfied with that which I have spoken concerning five of them, to wit, 1
Of the authority of the four general Counsels: the interpretation of the
holy Scriptures: 2
the the refutation of Heresies. 3
The invocation of Saints, 4
the circumscription of Bodies: 5
The doubts which remain, be concerning these three, 1
Of the purity of the Church. 2
The sending of the ministry. 3
Of the authority of the Fatherst. Touching the first, ye pretend
contradiction, as appears in that which I have spoken, that the purity of the
Church did not continue, but for the time of the Apostles, and whereas Calvin
enlarges it to continue three hundredth, and Lord du Plessis to eight hundredth
years. I answer, if so be that ye consider rightly of my letter: ye shall
find it is not I that pronounce the sentence, but Egesippus and after him,
Eusebius and Nicephorus: and that my intention is to put that sentence in your
hands, only to close the mouths of those who estourdissis and deaffes you with
their stir of the Fathers: But for the chief poinct of the question, and for
your instruction, I have answered, altogether otherwise, and largely enough,
to the which ye reply nothing at all, the substance of my answer is, that the
Church militant has retained even to our time without interruption, the
measure of purity which the holy Ghost has given her: But to have reserved
this pureness, it follows not, that she has conserved nothing which is not
pure: or that the inventions of men, or the ordinances of the Popes do make
part of the purity, no more the^ Hydropsie makes part of the health of a man's
body, although it be therein contained and enclosed. Even as the health of
man's body consists not in a poinct indivisible, also neither makes the
purity of the mystical body of the Church militante, and compassed with her
infirmities, as well the faith as in the life; and as they call a man whole,
who nevertheless is not without some evil humors in his body, comparing him
to a sick patient, fast tied to the bed, and consumed with the pocks. So do
we call the Church, that was nerest to the Apostles pure, in regard of the
ages following, in the which the mystery of iniquity was converted in the
ministry, or rather into the kingdom of wickedness and Idolatry, the one and
the other is a noisome humor in the body of the Church, but the one is in
secret, and the other in public, the one in seed, and the other springing up,
the one in the parts indifferents, the other in the noble parts: the one a
scabbe, the other a spreading cancre, the one proceeding for lack of
knowledge, in those who were come from heathen custom, the other in lack of
conscience in them, who would from Christianisme, bring us to Paganism,
Epicurisme and Atheism.

Touching that which I have answered to your demand, concerning the calling of
the ministry, and especially of Farrell, who had it of the people,
sufficiently authorized to give him the same, according to the testimony of
S. Cyprian. You answer two things First, that it is necessary that a Doctor
of the religion 1
go before a people of the religion, for to teach them. 2. the second that by
the testimony which I allege, forth of the said Father, it apeareth, that in
those times the Priests sacrificed. To the first poinct I answer four things.
First that in which you say that it ought to be done, it is done when the order
is in his entier: But that in a general disorder and confusion, such as was
the Popish in the time of the reformation, all the formalities of order, should
no more be required, then they may be observed.

Secondly that the Doctors sent by God ought not 2
at all times to acknowledge the cornet cappes, the forket mi^res, neither
their triple crowns. And that those that first revealed the birth of Jesus
Christ, was neyther^Priest of the law, neither pastors of the Church, but
Pastors and shepherds of the field: So the Heretics Origenists were
discovered, and refuted by a woman, while as the Pope of Rome, the pretended
head Tom. 5. an. 399. s. 19. 20.
of the Church was sleeping as Baronius him self confesses: God serving
himself sometimes of instruments very contemptible to effect his work, in
confounding his enemies, by the goade of an ox, in the hand of Samgar, by an
hammer in the hand of Iahell: by the chaftblade of an ass in the hand of
Sampson, by a stone, in the hand of David, against Golyah.

Thirdly, such like proceedings has been before times approved, even before
the destruction of order, 3 Theodor. lib. 16. 23. and 24.
to wit in Edesius and Frumentius, preaching the Euangile to the Indians,
without being sent or called: also in a poor woman a slave, who planted the
same in the kingdom of the Iberians.

Fourthly, that by the propre confessiion of diverse 4
and many Doctors of the Roman Church, yea even Cardinals, disorder was
very great and extreme in the said Church, and that she had need of
reformation, as well in the head as in the members, as well in the Faith as in
the manners. Behold in the Friar Onuphrius this notable apothegme of Pope
Adrian 4. repeated and confirmed by the pope Marcell. That there is Oauph. In
vita marcil: lib. 2. non video q^uo^modo quolocum hunc altissimu^tonent slu^ri
possunt. I see not how those which hold this high place can be safe.
no mean to be Pope, and to work his salvation: shall we believe that he who
cannot make his own, has any care of ours, and of that of the whole Church.

As touching that where ye say that it is a great fault to the reformed Church
that it behooves that her Pastors had her sending in a part from the Church
of Rome, as from a corrupt instrument: I answer, that my letter bears not,
that it is necessary of right; but that this was found wanting in our first
pastors: this was not any want, but to acknowledge the fault to amend it, our
chief perfection consisting to acknowledge and to correct our imperfectio^s,
seeing we be neither Anabaptists who acknowledge not the Church, where there is
a great and notable want in manners, neither Papist, who maintains that their
Church cannot err in the faith, an error, or rather a receptacle, couertour
and goulf of all the errors of the world, which carry away with it not only the
feeling of the disease, but also the hope of their healing. He that furnished
to you this point, should consider, that in throwing it against the Church
reformed, he might very well retorqueted against the Roman church, in the
which we find the Popes themselves to have been made by instruments very
corrupt: and among others the Pope Simmachus was confirmed by King Theodorick
who was an Arrian, Theod. le. ior. lib. 3.
leaving to speak of those that were rather monsters then Bishops or men, has
given the sending or calling to the whole race of their Hierarchy. And as
concerning the feminine Papesse Jane, ye have learned in your voyage that in
Rome, they hold not the whores there for corrupt instruments, and by the
testimony of Cardinal Bellarmine, the magistrates sin not, in assigni^g Bell.
de a miss. in great. and statum pro 2. 18. Beron, tom. 9. Ang. 26. and verse 54.
to them to have a quarter within the City, for their dwelling, albeit he
know perfectly that they would abuse it to an evil purpose.

The Clergy of the holy city, not being so superstitious as were they of
Greece, in the time of Theodorus Studites, who said that it was a dangerous
thing for the soul of a Friar to have but one beast of the feminine kind.

And to the second point of your Reply, I say, that we avowe that there was
sacrifices in the time of S. Cyprian and that there shall be sacrifices to the
consummation of the world. But yet that concludes no thing for the Sacrifice of
the Mass, pretended real, propitiatory for the living and for the dead, for
their sins pains, and satisfactions: good to conjure storms, to heal
diseases, to win Battles, to purge the great crimes to draw the souls out of
purgatory, to find things lost, etc. The word sacrifice is taken sometime for
the whole office and divine service: Saint Paul says, that he sacrificed the
Gospel. And he called Romans 15. Philips 3.
sacrifice the faith of the faithful, also their prayers to God, their alms
for the poor, their collecting for the Ministry, the offerings that were
made to the holy assemblies, and from whence they took the Euchariste, was
called Sacrifices: and this is one of the occasions, for the which the name was
attributed to the holy Supper. The same answer may serve to your last Reply.
As touching that which I spoke of the testimony of the Fathers: whereon you
conclude, seeing that I accept then on the questions of fact in matters of their
time, I ought the^ accept the Mass, which S. August. witnesses to have caused
to be celebrated in his time, I say that the same equivocation which is in the
word of sacrifice, is in the word of Mess: albeit the usage of this here, is
far more new in the Christian Church, then that was of theirs. In diverse
Fathers, it is not found at all, and only but touched in S. Augustine, and
that but in a written work which the most learned holds to be counterfeit:
and that always in a far different signification than it is taken for now
adays. I counsel you to take it into that same sense which S. Augustine does,
by the proper confession of of Bellarmine, (that is) Promissione for one
dismissing, and that you give one fare well to the Mass, which is called in
Lattine, Missam facere missam.

Touching that new question, which you make in your letter: to wit, seeing
that the way to salvation has been open in all Ages: to all those who will
apply unto them the mirrit of the death of our Lord. What doctrine (I pray you)
professed they who were of the choosen number, three or four hundred years
since: and if I had been in those days, in what vessel should I have cast
me into, for coming to the port of salvation.

I answer that the great Doctor of the Elect in all Ages, is the holy Spirit:
for they are taught of God, John 6. ver. 11.
as witnessed Jesus Christ: and all their doctrine in all times is that of the
old and new Testament: which neither Satan, neither his Vicar the
Antichrist, could ever destroy.

Of this doctrine, God has always revealed as much as was necessary for the^
to salvation; whether they did read by themselves, or that they understood it
by others: you have an notable example in the History of S. Barnard, who being
a little while before the time which you set down perceiving the corruptions
of In the life of S. Barnard near the mids thereof.
his time, at the very hour of his death (rempted by Satan) he cleansed
himself of that filthiness, confessing that he could not obtain salvation by
his merits, (which was the doctrine publicly taught in the Schools at that
time) neither pretending it but by grace: declaring that our Savior possesses
it by a a double right, by the inheritage of the Father: and by the merit of
his Passion, and that contenting himself with the one, he gave him the other,
if you desire a more particular clearing of this question; see the Book of the
Cathologue of the witnesses of the troth, and you shall find that there has
been no age so dark, wherein the troth has not spread some beams amids the
smoakes which arise out of the bottomless pit of Rome: And if God had given me
life in those times, I believe assuredly, that he would have given me the
grace, either to abstain from this Papisticall poison; or to vomit it up in
time, preserving me from this infection: as he preserved his children from the
fire of the Babylonian Furnace. In brief, I would have done that, which
afterward I did in Spain, and at Rome, and that which I wish you had
performed in the same place, by the example of some of your followers, making
their prayers, and exercises of godliness in private, without defiling
themselves with idolatry, which is committed in public: and to go out of
this Babylon in heart, though they found them as touching the body, there
engaged. The total sum is: to sail in the sea of this world which is
visible, and material is required a ship visible and material: but to arrive
at the haven of salvation, as this port is spiritual, and in no wise of this
world: so many enter there without material and visible vessel: that is,
without being locally, and corporally in any certain material Temple, or
visible Church. And this I maintain is happened to many, during this great and
general revolt, under the tyranny of Antichrist, foretold in the Scripture;
which like a long and furious tempest has rent and strangely disfigured the
ship of the visible Church, by the wines and waves of human inventions which
have made many both Pilots, and passengers, for to loose the Loadstarre of Gods
ordinances.

But suffer me I (pray you) Sir, to ask you, to what port, or haven you
pretend to attain in this ship of neutralitie, in which you stay so long in
the road, between the two barques of Preaching, and the Mass, And if he, who
judges men such as he finds them, calling you vnexpectly to appear before
his throne, find you thus disposed, what sentence would you hope from his
mouth. I beseech him with all my heart, to cause you to think upon it, and so
to prepare and direct you, rather by change of life, then Religion. In the
mean time, I rest:

SIR, Your most humble and affectionate Seruitour: D. TILENVS.

FINIS.


