A brief and pleasant discourse of duties in Marriage, called the Flower of
Friendship.

Imprinted at London by Henry Denham, dwelling in Pater noster Row, at the
Sign of the Star. Anno. 1571.

Cum Priuilegio.



To the Noble and most Uertuous Princess Elizabeth, by the grace of God, of
England, France, and Irelande Que^ne, de^ender of the Faith. etc. Be long
^y^e. quiet raig^^ and per^^^ health.
WHEN I CONsider, most noble Queen and Sovereign that within your Majesty's
sacred breast, wisdom, adourned with Noble virtues, is only harbored. From
whence as from a pure Fountain, does flow, the deeds of a Noble heart, waying
therewithal your Majesty's high dignity, and the lowness of my estate, with
my simple skill: I stood as one dismayde, not daring to adventure to put this
my base style to the hearing either of your majesty's reverent ears, or to the
judgment of your skillful eyes: so well otherwise, with the learned labors of
more excellent authors satisfied. Yet daily perceiving the clemency of your
highness most noble mind conjoined with so high an estate of Soueraignetie,
and noting your princ^ lie courtesy, and as it were, a heavenly humility
matched with the great knowledge, graffed in the root of your majesty's royal
heart, I was by this, though before discouraged, boldened to presume so far,
as humblye to offer this my simple present unto your Highness, expressing my
good will, which of my fruitless Garden, and barren soil have found out
this fragrant Flower of Friendship craving the only accepting of the same, no
otherwise, than that Noble Alexander of Macedon, Alexander
who greatly esteemed the poor Poem given him by the philosopher Pirrho, or
Antoninus the Emperor, Antoninus.
that considering the giuers good will, highly regarded a few simple Meters
offered unto him. Wherefore, redoubted Sovereign ^ noble Alexander, my hope is,
for that in the person of your Majesty, are assembled the rare virtues, not
only of those Princes, but of many others, you will amongst the Noble
presents of more higher estate, receive these few simple lines, as from him
that continuallye prays for the long and prosperous continuance of your
Majesty's happy reign.

Your Majesty's most humble Subject, Edmonde Tilnay.

A brief and pleasant discourse of duties in Marriage.
WHAT TIME that Flora had clothed the ^arth and braunchesse of the new
springing trees, with leaves of liuelye grene and being as it were in the prime
of his delights, had garnished the pleasant fields a new with fragrant
flowers, early on a morning when Phoebus also had spread abroad his blisfull
rays, and comfortable beams, I with a friend of mine, called Master Pedro
di luxan, devised how to enjoy some part* of that delightful season, and in
the end concluded to walk, and range abroad in the fields, and pleasant
Groves, where we were not only pertakers with y^ sweet recording birds, in
the wonderful works of the almighty: but were thereby also occasioned, to
glorify the Creator thereof. Thus consuming the time, till it was near Noone,
and when the Sun began to wax somewhat warm, we determined to go from
thence, unto a worthy Ladies house thereby called the Lady Iulia, where we
might rest us the heat of the day, and as it chanced, we came in very good
time. For even as we entered the Ladies house, they had newly washed, and were
ready to sit down to dinner, where we found a joyful company assembled
togithers, both Ladies, and Gentlemen, amongst the which, was Madame Iulias
daughter, called the Lady Isabella a very fair gentle woman. There was also y^
Lady Aloisa with many other Ladies, and their lincked Mates, beside M. Lodouic
Viues, and an old Gentleman called M. Erasmus, of whom after we had taken
acquaintance, and used such courtesy as the time, and place required, we sat
all down orderly to dinner, where there was such exceeding cheer, such
pleasant talk, such melody, and such sweet cheering of y^ Ladies, that it
was a world to see how merry we were. And being thus in our pleasures, y^ Lady
Iulia devised with the company in what pastimes we should spend the after noone.
Some lyked well of carding, and dicing, some of dancing, and other some of
Chestes, al which were condemned by the most part, who alleged that those
Pastimes were not aunswerable to the time of the year, but more meet for
Christmas: and therefore such game were fittest, that might be used abroad in
the fields, as bowling, shooting and such other like. But M. Pedro nothing at
all lyking of such devises, wherein the Ladies should be left out, said y^ he
well remembered how Boccace and County Baltizar with others recou^ted many
porper devises for exercise, both pleasant, and profitable, which quoth he,
were used in y^ courts of Italy, and some much like to them, are practiced at
this day in the English court, wherein is not only delectable, but pleasure
joined with profit, and exercise of the wit. With that all the whole
assembly, both Ladies, and Gentlemen, desired him, for that they were
unskillful in those devises, he would put some one of them in (...), which he
best lyked off, and they all would be obedient to his determination. At the
first he utterly refused it, but in the end at their often entreaties, Master
Pedro (...) the pastime.
he answered, that he would do his diligence. So in haste the table was taken
away, and the company having washed, the Ladies wythdrewe them for a while
into their Chambers, at whose return we went al into the Garden, a place
marvelous delectable (wherein was a passing fair arbor, The description of
the Arbor.
at the entrance whereof, on each side sprung up two pleasant trees, whose
green leaves much delighted our eyes, and were supported with two statelye
Pillars, curiously painted with diverse devises. All the whole arbor above over
our heads, and on each side was powdered with sundry flowers, and wreathed
about with the sweet Bryer or Eglantine, between the branches whereof the
cheerful Sun laid in his beams, here and there, so that the heat did not
molest us, n^^ther did the Sun want to cheer us. (...) shall I say? It
might be called a terrestrial paradise. And when the whole company were
orderly marshalled by M. Pedro on the benches, which were trimly set with
Camamile, and Das^^s, he gathered from the top of the Arbor, three, or four
branches of Roses w^^h their green leaves, whereof he wreathed a Garlande,
and demanded of the whole company, if they would consent to his election, and
obey whom so^^^r (...) did choose for their Sovereign, whereto they all
answered that they would. And then turning toward the Lady Iulia, The Lady
Iulia chos^n Sovereign.
said that he in the name of them all, for sundry respects presented unto
her, that garland, and therewith the sovereignty over them for that day. And
when he bad set y^ same upon her head, said that whereas they had willed him to
devise their pastime, he thought it best, the company being so apt for that
purpose, they should by course either rehearse some pleasant stories, or
debate upon some such matter as the Lady Iulia their sovereign should
command. And my opinion is, quoth he, forasmuch (...) every thing shows now
a certain natural amity amongst themselves, yea the trees, Pliny.
says Pliny, has a natural instinct of friendship, the sweet flowers, the
pleasant herbs, declares the same also, that we entreat somewhat of
friendship, and because no friendship, or amity is, or ought to be more dear,
and surer, than the love of man and wife, let this treatise be thereof, wherein
I would the duty of the married man to be described. For the knowledge of
duty is the maintenance of friendship. All the company commended Master
Pedro for his pleasant devise, and the Lady Iulia standing up said, that
for so much, as the souer aigntie, thought not with her will, was committed unto
her with consent of them all, and due obedience promised, I like well quoth
she, of this which Master Pedro has already devised, touching friendship,
and duty of the married man. Wherefore by the same authority, which I have
received, I command you Sir, and turned her toward Master Pedro, to
perform this charge, which you have devised of the married man, not for that I
think you to be a better husband, Master Pedro is commanded to describe the
married m^
that any of the reast here. But because we being yet wholly ignorant in this
kind of pastymes, you may as the principal author thereof, instruct us in the
whole circumstance: and again, being so well languaged, as you are, we shall
have good sport, to hear you interlarde our Country speech with some
Spanish tricks. As I do, quoth Master Pedro, utterly deny to be the author
of these pastimes, which have long ago been else where practiced: so might I
right well excuse my self, both for want of skill, and also of good
vtteraunce. But for that I have in the name of all the rest, promised obedience
unto your L, I will not be the first that shall disobey. Wherefore worthy
Ladies, and Gentle women, quoth he, if I doubted of your friendlye judgment,
and benevolence, I would crave it at the beginning, but because your good
hearts and noble natures, Master Pedro begins this Flower of Friendship.
have been by proof sufficientlye tried of me, letting that pass, I will go
briefly to my charge the Flower of Friendship, wherein I will first declare
unto you, the virtues of the matrimonial estate, which, (setting virgmitie
aside, The commend^tion of marriage.
as the purest estate, is both holy and most necessary. It is not unknown unto
us Christians, how God the Creator of all things, made of the rib of Adam his
well-beloved Eua, as an helper, who^ Adam called bone of my bones, and flesh of
my flesh, Gene^^s. 2.
so that the almighty instituted this holy ordinance of matrimony in the
bliss^full place of Paradise, when man was in his chiefest perfection: and
therefore, if antiquity may give any worthynesse, what is more ancient than
this honorable estate, which God himself the founder of all ordained and
consecrated? What is more honorable, and praise worthy, than this, that Christ
with his mother in Canaan did not only with his presence make honorable, but
also with miracles did sanctify the same? What is more just, than to render
that to our posterity, which we of our predecessors have before rec^yued? What
thing is more inhumaine, than for man to contemn that as profane, which the
eternal has hallowed, and nature her self bewtified? christ our Lord
commands that man shall forsake Father and Mother, and cleave to his
well-beloved spouse, and what is more holy, than love toward parents, which GOD
in the commandments has rewarded with the longnesse of life, yet matrimony
is preserred before y^ same, what is then more necessary than Matrimony which
contains the felicity of man's life, the Flower of Friendship, y^ preservation
of Realnies, the glory of Princes, and that which is most of all, it causes
immortality. I might here allege a number of authorities in the commendation
of marriage as well of ancient Doctors and Fathers, as also worthy
Philosophers, and grave learned men. But because you doubt not therein, and the
state does sufficiently commend it self, I let them pass, and will before I
proceed any further, The rites of diverse nati^ns in marying.
show you y^ rytes of diverse Nations, in celebrating this mystery, whereof as
some will make you to laugh so other some are to be noted. As for the christian
orders they are not unknown unto you. The Romans.
Amongst the ancient Romans, as Cicero records, were two kinds of
marriages, whereby they had also two sorts of wives, the one more ordinarye,
whom they called Matrons, the other were called houswyfes, which were married
by conioyning of hands, almost like unto us. These did they esteem as their
daughters, and had like enheritance of their lands, who bare the rule of their
houses, and therefore called houswyfes. But no excess of y^ husband might be
permitted unto them. For on the Matrons began they their children. The
Babilonians.
The Babilonians married their maids without dowries in this manner. All their
maids, which were to be married, were assembled in a place appointed, and
placed orderlye the fairest first, then the meaner sort, and last the fowlest.
The fairest was given unto him that would give most money to marry with her,
still paying according to their beauty, more or less, till they came to the
fowlest, and to them, that would mary any of those, was given part of the
money, that was taken for the fayrer sort, paying according to the rate, as
they exceeded in foulness. The like manner also, was used amongst the ancient
Venetians, The Venetians.
as says Sabellicus, an unhappy custom was it, quoth the Lady Iulia, and
likely that the Flower of Friendship was but weak lie rooted between them of
so slender acquaintance: But I pray you tell us, how the indifferent sort were
married, that were neither foul, nor fair, but lovely brown. Mary quoth he,
for such amongst the Venetians there was no money either given, or taken, but
were married for naught. And so perchance, quoth a merry gentleman, that stood
by, called master Gualter of Cawne, were some of the fairest, as they be
sometimes now a days. I have also read, quoth Master Pedro, that in
France, The French men.
the Maidens did choose their husbands in this sort. The parents calldd a
number of young men to a banquet who^ they thought fittest, and him, to whom
the Maid gave first water, by that sign she chose for her husband. In
Mauritania, The Mauritanians.
as says Diodorus Siculus, there was such store of women, y^ every man might
have five wyfes, and no less than three, which also after y^ death of their
husbands within one month either willinglye buried themselves with him, or
were perforce executed by the law. In the Isles of Canaria, In the Isles of
Canaria.
there were contrariwise so many men, and so few women, that every wife might
have seven husbands, and could not take less than five. But I trust, quoth
the Lady Aloisa, that those men were not so kind hearted, as to be buried with
their wives, as the woman in that other country were with their husbands. I
think not quoth Master Pedro, and I doubt whether those women of Mauritania,
could not have been contented to have tarried behind their husbands, had
there been no law to have compelled them. Tush quoth the Lady Iulia, this is
far from your matter. What appertains this to the Flower of Friendship?
lady quoth he, I am not yet come to my purpose. But one word more, and I will
to my charge. The Chaldeans, The Chaldeans.
that honored the fire for their God, had an easy custom: for when they
minded to marry, the Priest kindled the fire in the good man's house, and both
the parties touching it, were assured together, and when any of them mislyked,
one of them quenched the fire, and so were they as free, as ever they were
before. In another Country the Priest of their Idols enjoyed the first nights
pleasures of the Bride, The Scots.
as in Scotland the Lord of the Soil, has the first fruits of all the
Uirgins, within his Lordeship. A number of such like customs I could recite,
but I may not spend longer time in those trifles, What equality is in marriage.
and the Lady Iulia desires to hear of our friendly Flower, whereto now I
return, and say, that equality is principally to be considered in this
matrimonial amytie, as well of years, as of the gifts of nature and fortune.
Pitachus Myteleneus.
For equalness herein makes friendlynesse Pytachus Myteleneus one of the
seven sages of Greece, being demanded of a young man, whom he should take to
wife, answered, go and learn of the children, that play together, and they
will inform thee. For they had agame among them, wherein they often repeated,
take to thee thy peer. Marry not a superior, says Plutarch. Plutarch.
For in so doing, in steed of kinsefolkes, thou shall get thee masters, in
whose awe thou must stand, and a rich woman, that marieth a poor man,
seldom, or never, shake off y^ pride from her shoulders. Yea, Menander.
Menander says, that such a man has gotten in steed of a wife a husband, and
she of him a wife, a strange alteration, a wonderfnll metamorphosis. But
Licurgus the law maker well considered that, Licurgus.
when he ordained that women should be married without dowries, so that then
they had nothing to be proud off, save only their virtues, which ought to be
accounted y^ chiefest dowry. For that which is more excellent, is to be
preferred before things of lower valor. Why then for lack of substance, shall
a virtuous wife be repelled, Alexander*
or for want of wealth, wisdom be rejected? Alexander, the great Monarch of
the whole world, showed his noble courage in nothing more, than in that he
rejecting the rich Barbarian Queens, vouchsafed to match with Barcina,
daughter of Arbaces, a poor gentleman, but of noble parentage, wherein not
riches, but nobility adorned with virtues prevailed. Well quoth the Lady
Iulia, I pray you what is he now a days that had not rather marie a woman full
of money, wanting virtue and grace, than that having virtues, lacks money.
For my part, it well lyketh me that equality, as you say, be observed, seeing
equalness causes friendlynesse. But I understand not this kind of
equality, wherein you seem to allow the greatest inequality yt can be. For
Alexander being Lord of the whole world could find no equal match, in
respect of his greatness. Much less Barcina that was so far his inferior,
both in parentage, and substance. Not so far his inferior, quoth Master
Pedro, for the great virtues which abounded in Barcina, and as I said before,
the only richesse to be required in a woman, was in all respects comparable to
the great greatness of Alexander the great, neither did she want sufficient
parentage, and though not a conqueror of the world, yet well known to be
proceeded from the conquerours own lineage, so that a virtuous woman being wise,
and of good lynage, wants no equality on her part to counterpeyse the
greatest riches or treasure, that any man can have. For where virtue abounds,
all good things do flow. And to conclude, I say that great regard ought the
man to have in his choice, that he may leave his child parentage, which being
joined to virtues, makes men perfect. Now for y^ equality in age, I say
co^fisteth likewise in the equality of years, but not so much as the
Philosophers, in times past affirmed. For Aristotle by his reasons, would have
the man to be twenty years elder than his wife, because they might leave off
procreation at one time. Hesiodus the Greek Poet, and Xenophon the philosopher
would have the woman fourtene, and the man thirty years old, so that there
should be sixteen years between them, because in that time, the man should
be best able to rule his household, and the woman taken from evil occasions.
Licurgus law was amongst the Lacedaemonians, Licurgus.
that the man should not marry, before thirty and seven years of age, and
women at eightene. What manner of equality is this, quoth the Lady Isabella, I
would never marry, rather than to take such old crusts, whose wives are more
occupied in playstering, than in enjoying any good conversation. You say truth,
quoth Master Pedro, neither do I allow it, yet may I not condemn the
ancient philosophers. For in those days men lived longer, and their natures
were much stronger. Therefore by likelyhoode it was at that time more
tolerable. But my opinion is, that they differ not above four or five years.
After this match made, and equalities considered, next follows, to love, and
to like well: For perfect love knitteth louinge hearts, What love in marriage
should be.
in an in insoluble knot of amity. Love indifferent serves not, love feigned
prospers not. Wherefore it must be true, and perfect love, that makes the
Flower of Friendship between man and wife freshlye to spring. This love must
grow by little and little, and that it may be durable, must by degrees take
root in the heart. For hasty love is soon gone. And some have loved in post
have, that afterward have repented them at leisure. We all seek the fairest,
the richest, and noblest. But virtues are laid aside, and naught accounted
off, we seek so feed our eyes, and not to content our ears. Why? quoth
Master Gualter, shall a man choose his wife with his ears. To choose with our
ears, quoth Master Pedro, is to inquire of her virtues, and vices by report
whereof you shall understand her conditions, and qualities, good, and badde.
As for that, quoth Gualter, it booteth not. For the best of them all hane their
faults. And if she be virtuous, she will look to be so honored, that her
husband shall have the more a do to please her. And I remember, that a wise
man, I know not his name, being enquired of a friend of his, with whom he
should marry, answered that he had been married four sundry times, first
with a fair woman, who was so proud of her beauty, that he was feign to
please and content her, least she should dishonor him, the second very
rich, whose substance made her so statelye, that he was forced like a slave to
obey her, the third was so virtuous, that he was glad to honor, and reverence
her, to keep her still in her virtuous goodness, the last was of good lynage,
which so exalted her stomach, that she made him her bondsman. Now choose,
quoth he, which of these four thou can best content thy self. You have
made a fair reason quoth the Lady Aloisa, I never knew that you were so
deepelye learned before and all the Ladies would have driven Master Gualter
out of the Arbor* But father Erasmus said that he remembered the like thing of
Anaxagoras, and therefore he was not to be blamed, because he did but repete
the words of a Philosopher. What then, quoth Master Pedro, it is no part of
my charge to disprayse women, but to speak the best of them, and to plant the
Flower of Friendship between them, and their husbands. Wherefore, let love be
rooted deeply in the man's heart toward the woman: Let the person be sought,
not her substance, crave her virtues, not her riches, then shall there be a
joyful beginning, and a blessed continuance in amity, by which all things
shall prosper, and come to happy end. Beware of hatred, be circumspect in
love, which of them first takes place, does abide during life. And love
grounded remains for ever, which being once gone, al other goodness follows
for company. The man must beware in chyding when he is newly married.
Therefore to confirm this love y^ married man must as much as he can, always
abstain from brawling, lowering and grudging, especially, when he is newly
married. For if the wife first conceive hate, she will never receive love
again. The husband then must be merry, and pleasant with his wife, to make her
the more in love with him at the beginning, so that if afterward they chance
to fall at square, it shall rise but of a sudden anger, which will be gone
again as soon, and not of any old conceived malice. There be many men that
boast much, how they be served, and feared, like Bugges, of their wives, but
they marvelously deceive themselves. For much better were it, if they were
better beloved and less feared. For whom the wife hates, in fear she
serves, but whom she loves, she gladly cherishes. It is good reason, that
all women do labor to stand in the good grace of their husbands, but much
more ought we men to foresee, that we fall not into the hatred of our wyfes.
For if she once fasten her eyes on another he shall enjoy her in dispite of her
husbands beard. In this long and troublesome journey of matrimonye, the wise
man may not be contented only with the Spouses virginity, The married man
steal away his wives private will.
but by little and little must gently procure that he may also steal away her
private will, and appetite, so that of two bodies there may be made one only
heart, which she will soon do, if love raygne in her, and without this
agreeable concord, matrimony has but small pleasure, or none at all, and the
man, that is not lyked, and loved of his mate, holds his life in continual
peril, his goods in great ieoperdie, his good name in suspect, and his whole
house in utter perdition. I will recite two, or three examples of those that
loved their wives well, Such as loved well their wives. Adam.
and then I will proceed. The first that loved his wife, was our father Adam,
who being set in Paradise, and forbidden on pain of death, one only tree in
the Garden, to consent and please Eua his wife, did notwithstanding eat of it,
and dyed. Darius the great King, Darius.
being overcome by Alexander, in all things showed himself stout and
invincible, till he understood that his wife was taken prisoner, who then
poured out of his tears abundantly, as lamenting for that which he more
esteemed than his life, Tiberius Gracchus.
or estimation. Valerius Maximus says, that Tiberius Gracchus finding two
Serpents in his bed, sent for the soothsayers to know what y^ strange chance
meant, and signified, which answered, that if he killed the male serpent, be
should dye before his wife, but if the female were first slain, his wife
should die before him. He bearing entire love toward his wife, gave his own
death to prolong her life, and killed presently the Male serpent. There be,
quoth the Lady Iulia, few such ^^sbandes in these our days, or rather none
at all. That is the matter quoth Master Gualter, that your Ladyship is so a
fearde to marry, but yet to tell the truth, and shame the Devil, there be mo
such husbands, than like wyfes if it were well tried. This (...) fool, quoth
Madame Aloisa, would be well beaten, and banished our company. For he is
still prattling against women, and interrupt^th our pastime. No, no, quoth
Master Pedro, he increases our sport, and therefore we cannot well want
him. But I will show you one example more of later years, because the Lady
Iulia says that none now a days do love their wyfes so well. Baptista
Fulgosa recounteth of a certain poor man, Baptista Fulgosa.
and his wife, that were seeking for their sustenance upon the Sea side. The
woman being taken away, by certain Rouers, her husband swam in the Sea after
her, desiring the Pirates to take him also, saying, that he had rather be with
his wife in captiu^tie, than lacking her, to live at liberty, whereat the
Pirates marueiling, received them both into their Ship, and declaring the
whole adventure, presented them to the King of Lunis, who understanding the
case, gave them great commendation, and not only set them at liberty, but
also sent them home with great reward.

This may satisfy to make you understand, that men do sometimes love their
wives, and hereby may you also see of what force the true matrimonial love is,
whereon let the married man fasten, and ground all the rest of his doings, and so
shall t^ys friendly Flower be planted in a fertile soil. And as there be
certain sweet herbs, that are great nourishers of this Flower: Weeds that
will ouergrow the friendly Flower.
so there be certain poisoned weeds, that will ouergrowe it, and in the end
utterly destroy it, if they be not weeded out by the root, whereof the first
and chiefest is adultery. For what godliness can raygne in that house,
Adultery.
where harlots bear the rule, whose fruits Solomon does greatly describe. For
if the husband please the wicked woman, he must of force displease his own
wife being godly, and that injury a good woman cannot with any patience
support. At what time the married man determines to keep a harlot, even the
same hour, does he set fire to his honesty, destruction to his house, and
loss of all, that ever he has. An honest woman will suffer a thousand
discommodities in her husband, so that she be assured, that he is contented
with her, and loves her only. What greater cruelty can a man show unto his
wife, than to keep all his raylings, brawlings, and chidings for her, and
another to enjoy all his (good) conversation, and pleasures. I doubt which of
them has the greater heart, either he in doing it, or she in suffering it. Can
there be any greater disorder, than for the husband to be merry abroad, and
lowre at home, to take from his wife, and give to his harlots, to want for his
children, and to suffice for his bawdes. The faith that the woman owes to her
husband, the like ^^fidelitie ought the man to repaye unto his wife, and
though the civil law gives man the superiority over his wife, that is not
to offend, or dispraise her, but in misdoing lovingly to reform her.
Therefore the abhorring of adultery increases amity between man, and wife,
and the chiefest way to ground the Flower of Friendship in matrimony is, first
to root out the poison of adultery. The second weed that is to be ex^irped
is gamnin^, G^^^ing.
which though the woman can with more patience suffer, than this others: yet
for his own sake, let him forbear it. For what wisdom is it, that a man at
one chance of the Dice, hasardeth as much, as the toil of his whole life has
gottten, and scrapte together, and small commodity the gamester reapeth
thereby, when he has best hap, if all his cards be told. For suppose he
win, yet is there such cursing, such lying, such brawling, chyding, and
swearing, that the Devil laugheth, them all to scorn. If he lose, he
fretteth, and fumeth so, that beside the loss of his thrift, he hazardeth both
body and soul, with cursing, and blaspheming. Then if he either win, or
lose, ye see these his gains and commodities. I condemn not honest playing
for recreatio^ at times convenient for some small matter, as the persons
ability is. But what a monstrous thing is it, to consume whole days, yea,
whole days and nights in gaming, swearing and foreswearing. For it happens
often, a daily gamester, a common blasphemer. Wherefore it were no great
hinderance to the common wealth, if such kind of persons were utterly
banished. Riotousnesse and dronke^nesse.
The third pestiferous weed is banqueting, and riotousnesse. For drunkenness,
which commonly haunteth the ryotous persons, besides that, it wa^teth thy
thrifte, consumes thy friends, and corrupts thy body does also transform
thee from a reasonable creture, Socrates.
to abrute beast. Socrates compares the wit, that is overcome with Wine,
unto a horse that casts his Master. What greater reproach can there be to a
man, than to be called a common dronkarde, which is as much to say, as a man
deprived of all virtues. I could recite many examples, what discommodities have
chanced to woorthye men by this vice, if the time would suffer me. You have
yet day enough, quoth the Lady Iulia. Wherefore we pray you show us some of
those examples for our instruction. I am content, quoth Master Pedro, and
seeing you are so willing to hear, I will declare first somewhat of wine,
which by abuse nourished drunkenness, and by use is the best liquor of all
others. Anacharsis
Anacharsis the Philosopher said, that the Uyne bare three kinds of grapes,
the first of pleasure, the second of drunkenness, and the third of sorrow,
so that passing the first, which is to drink it temperately, and delayed, the
other two are naught. (...)
Noe was the first that invented Wine, though some attribute the same to
Ycanus, and some to Dionysius. The first that delayed wine, was Fylona, (...)
borne in Candia, and being so drunk temperately, it quickens the wit, it
increases the strength, it cheereth the heart, it takes away cares, it
causes color in the face, it strengthens the sin^wes, it helps the sight,
it fortifieth the stomach, it provoke urine, it takes away sorrows, and to
conclude with S. Paul writing to Timothe, (...)
being sick in his stomach, counsayleth him to drink a little wine. But as
many discommodities has it also, (...) it be abused, as breeding the gow^e,
causing the dropsy, decaying women's beauty, and making them barraine, (...)
with many other much worse. Licurgus the Lacedemonian lawmaker, commanded,
that no man before.xviij. years of age, should drink any wine, and from
thence to forty he gave leave to drink a very little, and much delayed, and
from forty vpwardes somewhat more, and less delayed. Noe the first drunkarde.
As Noe was the first inuenter of wine: so was he first dronken, who was
therefore laughed to scorn of his own sons. Lot Lot.
in his drunkenness lay with his own daughters. Alexander Alexander
the great was so spotted with this vice, that always in his drunkenness, he
would kill his dearest friends, and in the end being drunk, was poisoned
himself. Marcus Antonius, Marcus. Antonius.
an invincible Romain captain, being once overcome with Wine, gave himself to
the pleasure of Cleopatra, and was slain by Octauius Caesar. Anac^eon Anac^eon.
the Poet was so great a bibber of wine, that he was choked with ye husk of a
grape. Lo, here you see the unhappy end of those that pass the golden
mean, and cleave to the excess. If the married man do weed out these three
dangerous weeds by the root, no doubt this Flower will prosper passing well,
and yield yearly double increase. And as I said before, the better to nourishe,
and maintain this Flower, (...)
there are certain delicate herbs that must of force be cherished, which be
these. First to be advised in speech, courteous, and gentle in conversation,
trusty and secret in that, wherein he is trusted, wise in giving counsel,
careful in providing for his house, dyligent in looking to that which is his,
suffer able in the importunities of his wife, dangerous, and circumspect in
matters touching his honesty and ieolous in the education of his Children.
These be excellent herbs, quoth the Lady Aloisa, and rarely found all in one
garden. Wherefore we pray you teach us how we may plant, and conserve them.

That appertains not to my charge, quoth Master Pedro, and if it did, yet
want of skill, and shortness of time would not permit me. But I will instruct
you in their qualities, which being well considered, will proueke the wise man
to seek after them. In doing whereof, as I shall sufficiently discharge my
duty toward the Lady Iulia, concerning her commau^deme^t. So I trust to
deserve great thanks of al these Ladies. The first delicate herb Flower,
Advised in speech.
is to be advised in speech. For the man that without discretion speaks more
hast^l^e than wisely, for the most part falls into errors, much bablyng,
declares a foolish head: and a silent person is the exampler of wisdom.
First expende with thy self, what thou will speak, and ponder thy meaning
well. Then note to whom, where, and when thou speak. The tongue that
runs before the wit, commonly breeds his Masters woe. The Philosophers
in their schools, never taught a man to speak, but first learned him to hold
his peace. Solomon says, (...)
that much talk cannot be without offense, and he that (...) refrain his
tongue is wise. Two (...) Socrates allowed, that should (...) one to speak,
when he (...) matter very well, and when necess^^e (...) him. Xenoph^n says,
(...)
that nature gave us two ears, and but one mouth, to the intent we should
hear more than we ought to speak. The second herb is to Courtise in
conversation.
and gentle in conuers^^^on. For ye see, that fierce, and hurtful beasts, as
the Lion, the Serpent, with such like, be abhorred of us for their cruel
curstness, when the tractable beasts, as the spa^u^ll, and the grayhound,
with others, have not only place in our houses, but we have sometime more
care to nourishe them up, than a Christian creature. The married man then must
not be rigorous toward his wife. For there will discord grow by her inward
hate, and never shall they have joy, or peace, if the woman cannot refrain her
tongue, nor the man suffer. If he want discretion, and she patience, it will
rather appear the mansion of fools, than a house of y^ wise. For at the last,
except one of them yield up in time, they will fall to raging, and so
consequently to blows. Women for the most part, are ^roward of complexion, and
tender of condition, whereto y^ wise husband must have great regard, and if he
once repr^hende them sharpelye, he must a hundredth fold exhort them lovingly.
There are many occasions, that causes variance between man and wife, as for
their children, servants, apparel, and other such household matters. In which
the good married man must show his wisdom, either in turning it to sport,
and dissembling the cause, or aunswering not at all. If so be he cannot
suppress his anger, let him then go and digest it abroad. For the end of
indignation, is to be ashamed of our selves. And as in a miste a man appears
greater than in a fair day, says Diogenes: Di^genes*
so appears his vy^^s more in his anger, and rage, than when he is pacient.
The third is to be secret, and trusty in To be s^cre^
One of the virtues most esteemed in times past was secrecy, whereby the
wisdom of a man was perfitely discerned. He is diserate that keeps well his
secrets, says Socrates. (...)
But he is not wise that dis^^uereth them. (...).
The good Cato repented him but of three things that he did during all his
life. First, for disclosing a secret to a woman, the second, for sailing by
sea, when he might have gone by land, and the last, for consuming one whole
day, without doing some profitable deed. A marvelous example of secrecy,
Anaxagoras.
was showed in Anaxagoras, who with other conspired to kill a tyrant, and
being betrayed, and by the tyrant put to most cruel torments, not
sufferable, bit off his own tongue, because he would not discover that, which
he promised to keep secret. The like is reported of a woman in Athens, because
she would not bewraye a conspiracy, wherein her husband was a part. It is
happy, quoth the Lady Aloisa, that some women have been secret in times
past. For you men say now a days, that women can keep no counsel. See I pray
you, quoth Master Gualter, how soon this Lady had gotten hold of that
sentence, which so little serves her purpose. For I trust it was an easy
matter for that woman to keep silence when she wanted her tongue. Whereto the
Ladies would have replied, but Ma^ster Pedro interrupted them, and said, that
he did not condemn, althoug he the most part were not tongue tied, and so
there be, quoth he, some men that be open enough. But I would have this married
man to embrace secrecy as a virtue, and think it is a great shame not to be
so secret as a woman. The fourth, is to be wise (...)
which is not every man's office, but such as be of good years, that have
seen, and heard much. Counsel^lers must bewise, learned, virtuous, of good
judgment, and without affection. (...)
(...) The office of the husband is to bring in necessaries: of the wife, well
to keep them. The office of the husband is, to go abroad in matters of profit:
of the wife, to tarry at home, and see all be well there. The office of the
husband is, to provide money, of the wife, not wastfully to spend it. The
office of the husband is, to deal, and bargain with all men, of the wife, to
meddle or make with no man. The office of the husband is, to give, of the wife,
to keep. The office of the husband is, to apparel him as he can, of the
wife, to go as she ought. The office of the husband is, to be Lord of all,
of the wife, to give accounte of all, and finally I say, that the office of
the husband is, to mainetayne well his liuelyhoode, and the office of the
woman is, to govern well the household. And as the man may not deny his wife
things, that must be granted of necessity: so he ought not to grant her
things of prodigality, and superfluous. For as great disorder is it to
grant the one, as to deny the other. The sixte is, that the married man
accompany no defamed persons, and in any case that he harbor them not. For To
accompa^y no def^^^d p^rs^ns.
when they themselves are the causers thereof, for maintaining such companions,
whereby he himself does hardly escape infam^e, and these good fellows do
seek to creep into greatest friendlshippe with the husband, to the intent
they may have ^^^ter opportunity with his wife. Yet may he use his tried
friend or n^^re kinsman familiarly, as well in his own house, as else where,
^auyng always regard to the old saying, that a man may show (...) wife, and
his sword to his friend, but not to far to trust them. For if thereby gr^w
unto him any infamy, let him not blame his wife, but his own negligence. The
seventh herb of marue^lous virtue is, (...)
sometimes dissemblyng, and in t^ifling matters consentyng unto ^ir. For if all
things that women crave, should be granted, all things that they find
fault withal, should be amended, and all things that they are agrieued with,
should be redressed, Sampsons strength, the patience of Job, and the wisdom
of Solomon were all to little. For some men, whose misshaps are to be lamented,
are matched with such saints, that devise naught else, but how to vex, and
molest their husbands. Socrates.
Socrates pitied three sorts of men. The first was, a good man in the hands
of a cursed shrewe, the second a wise man, under the governance of a fool,
and the last was a liberal man in subjection to a covetous caytife. I thank
you for this, quoth Mai^ter Gualter, this is the truest tale you told to day,
and hitherto, you have but flattered these Ladies. Not so, quoth master Pedro.
For I spoke nothing heretofore but the truth, neither speak I this now
generally against all women. For that were slanderous unto them. I do but
touch some shrewde wives. Tush, quoth master Gualter, they be shrewes all, and
if you give the simplest of them leave to day to tread upon your f^^te, to
mo^row she will tread upon thy head. Be not angrye, I pray you, quoth Master
Pedro. For I give no such leave, but I say that for quietness sake, and for
the increase of amity, the married man must sometime dissemble, and in this
case ought to consider, that if his wife be foolish, it little helps to
answer her, and less profits to reform her, but if she be wise, one word
will suffice. For it is a certain rule, that if a woman will not be still with
one word of her husband, she will not be quiet with as many words as ever
the wysemen did write, nor with so many stripes, as a man is able to give her.
The wise husband therefore I say, and affirm, must, to preserve this
pleasant Flower, deal with his wife, rather by subtilitie, than by cruelty.
The eight is to be circumspect in (...) (...)
and not to be ieolous of his wife. The Stoike Philosophers say, that jealousy
is a certain care of man's mind, least another should possess the thing,
which he alone would enjoy. There is no greater torment, than the vexation of
a jealous mind which even as the moth fretteth the cloth, does consume the
heart, that is vexed therewith. Two kind of persons are commonly ^ore sick in
this disease, either those that are evil themselves, or they that in their
youth have gone astraye, supposing that as other men's wives have done toward
them, so will theirs do toward others, which is vanity to think, more
follye to suspecte, and greatest foolishness to speak of. For as some lewd
women be dissolute: so likewise women there be, honest, and very circumspect.
If the wise be to be suspected, let the man work as secretly and closely as he
can, to reprehend her, yet all peradventure will not aduaile. For, trust me, no
wisdom, no craft, no science, no strength, no subtlety, yea, no patience
suffices to enforce a woman, to be true to her husband, if she otherwise
determine. Therefore to conclude to be ieolous, either needs not, or booteth
not. The ninth, and last herb, is to be careful To be careful in education
of his children.
Diogenes being enquired what were best for a man to do to be in favor of the
Gods, and beloved of the people, answered, that to be in the credit with the
people and favored of the Gods, a man ought to do three things, the first to
reverence, and honor much the Gods, then to bring up his children in due
correction, and last to be thankful to his benefactors. What a^aileth riches,
possessions, to be fortunate, to have thy wife with child safely delivered,
and thy child well nourished, if afterward by ill trayning, and for want of
education he become vicious? The monarch of Macedon Philippes Son, Alexander
being asked why he honored more his master, than his father, said, that his
master gave him life everlasting, and his Father life but for a time. There
came once before the wise Solon a Father with his son, one accusing the
other, the father complained of the disobedience of his Son, and the son
accused the father of his ill bringing up, which was the cause of his
disobedience, Solon*
Solon well considering the case, determined that because the Father had not
brought up his son in due correction, he should therefore after his death,
be depri^ed of his sepulcher, which was very rigorous in those days, and the
son for his disobedience was disherited. I assure you, quoth Master Lodouic,
that same was an excellent judgment of the wise Solon, and if it were put in
ure at these days, there would be many fathers to lie without graves, and as
many sons put from their inheritance. The more pity, quoth master Pedro,
and I thought to have said more therein. But the sun is so much declined,
that it is more than time to unburden these Ladies of this tedious talk, and I
fear me, I have already troubled them to long. Not so, quoth the Lady (...).
For sooner should we want the day light, than good will to hear you; though
the day were so long again. You s^y your pleasure, quoth Master Pedro, ^ut
now to knit up this Flower of matrimonial amity, and friendship, touching
the office of the man, I say, that he must above all things have the fear of
God before his eyes, which with the rest well considered, and put in execution,
no doubt he shall enjoy the fragrant savor thereof. Then rose up the Lady
Iulia, with the whole company, giving my friend m^yster Pedro great thanks,
wishyng that there were many such husbands, and therewith she took the
garlande from her head, and said, turning her toward master Pedro, that she
would surrender unto him again the authority which she of him received with
that charge, that he should the next day bestow it on some other in that
place. For I shall not be in quiet, quoth she, till I have heard the married
woman prescribed in like sort, as you have done the married man, neither can
this Flower well prosper, or be perfect, except the woman also put to her
helping hand. Whereto master Pedro answered, that in the woman was to be
required great help for the preservation of this friendlye Flower. Yet will I
not, quoth he, take the authority from you. But if you list to depart with
it to some other, you shall your self to morrow resign it to whom it
pleases you, and in the mean time he willed her to leave the garlande, and
her authority in the place, where she received it, which she did, and then
went we out of that most pleasant arbor into the Garden, where we took our
leave of the Ladies and gentlemen, who were very loath to have left our company.
But master Pedro had so appointed, that we could not tarry. Therefore promising
to come again the next day, we went home the same day we came in the
morning, where the Nightingale saluted us with such sweet melody, that we
were at the end of our journey before we were ware.

The office, or duty of the married woman, for the preservation, and
continaunce, of this Flower of Friendship*
TThe next morning came there two, or three strangers to Master Pedro, which
let us of our mornings walk, notwithstanding we sent word to the Lady
Iulia, that in the after noone, we determined according to our promise, to
meet her in the garden. So after our dinner was finished and the guestes
departed, we prepared ready our horses, partly for that the weather was
somewhat to hot to traueyle ^n foot, and partly for the more speed.

But for all our haste, the company was assembled before we came, and merrily
sat togithers, gyuing ear to the pleasant harmony, and melody, that was
made by the musitions, to whom after our reverence accordingly done, we drew
nere, and took our places in the Arbor, where as the evening before, the Lady
Iulia had left her authority. And every one orderly se^, she took the garland
of her soueraignt^^, and standing up said. That the authority which she had
received the day before of master Pedro, she purposed to give to some other,
least in usurping a continuance therein, she might do injury to the r^a^t of
the company and so courteously coming to the Lady Aloisa, The Lady Aloia
chosen sovereign.
she set the garlande of principality upon her head, with election
confirmed, by assent of us all, with the promise of due obeisance. The Lady
Iulia sat down soberly in her place again, and the Lady Aloisa standing up,
declared how much against her will she took that authority, and
sovereignty upon her: notwithstanding for as much as the Lady Iulia by the
free consent of the rest, had elected her, she neither would vncurtesly, nor
might she honestly, contemn or reject it, The Ladiee Iulia comm^unded to
d^scribe the married w^man.
by the virtue whereof, quoth she, I will that the Lady Iulia do briefly (for
that the day is far past) describe unto us, the office, and duty of the
married woman, in like sort as master Pedro has done for the man's behalf and
therein to show in what sort she must apply her self, to maintain this
Flower of Friendship, between her husband and her. When the Lady Iulia heard
this, she began a little to change her color, and standing in doubt what she
should do, much disschabling her self, but in the end after her pawse a
while, I rather ch^^se quoth she, to hazard the judgment of ignorance, by my
unskillful tale, than to be condemned of disobedience by ungentle resistance.
For disobedience is a fault in all persons, but the greatest vice in a woman.
And now, The Lady Iulia begins the married woman, and agreeeth with master
Pedro in diverse p^ynts.
in hope of pardon, if my unlearned speech be not aunswerable to your
expectations, of this married wife this is my opinion. In diverse points I
agree with Master Pedro, which are as well necessary in the woman, as
requisite in the man. For if in suppressing of the three foresaid weeds, the
chiefest enemies to the Flower of Friendship, the man must be careful: much
more ought the woman to travail, that they do not spring in her, and also the
great regard in choice with others: wherein because master Pedro has already
satisfied you, I may be unburdened of that traueyle. For if the man ought to
be circumspect in the electing of his wife, what shall the siely women do,
being so often deceived by you men? Therefore must she with great care consider,
and be well assured of the man's honest conversation, of his manners, and
affections, and specially what love he bears. For the venom of love blyndeth
the eyes, and so bewitcheth the senses of us poor women, that as we can
foresee nothing, Love blinds the eyes, and bewitcheth the senses of women.
so are we persuaded, that all the vices of the beloved are rare, and excellent
virtues, and the thing most sower, to be very sweet, and delicate: for the
aduoyding of which, the woman can not be to inquisitiue. I mean not of the
man's wealth and substance, but of his virtues, which be the true riches, and
remains for ever. With which thing moved, Themistocles Themistocles.
being demanded whether he had rather marry his daughter to a rich man
vicious, or to a poor man virtuous, worthily answered, that he would sooner
^hoose a man without money, that money without a man. Also I dissent not from
Master Pedro, in his equality of match. And after such her choice, The
happiness of marriage consists in a chaste wife.
let her endeavor to increase a perfection of love, and above all embrace
chastity. For the happiness of matrimony, does consist in a chaste matrone,
so that if such a woman be conjoined in true and unfeigned love, to her beloved
spouse, no doubt their lives shall be stable, easy, sweet, joyful and happy.
But love taken away, in steed of most sweet pleasantness, is placed a
bitter unsavory, and an intolerable estate. The first thing therefore, which
the married w^man must labor to intend, the first thing which she must with
all her force, apply her whole mind unto, and the first thing which she must
hartilye put in execution, is to like, and love well. The woman must like and
love well her husband.
For reason does bind us, to love them, with whom we must eat, and drink,
whom we must only accompany, of whose joys, and sorrows, wealth, and woe,
we must be partakers, for whom also we forsake parents, friends, and all,
leaving only to them, for no shorter time, than during life. And albeit they
be cancred of nature, ill in conversation, worse in condition, base of lineage,
deformed of personage, and unadvised in word and deed: yet being our chosen
husbands, we may not, nor can we forgo them, or change with our neighbors, as
did sometime the Parthians, but seek gently to redress them, The Parthians
exchaunged wiu^s with their neighbors.
endeavor to please them, and labor to love them. To whom we have wholly given
our bodies, our goods, our lives, and liberty. But it often falls out that
discord grows between man and wife, by the ignorance of one the others
nature, and for this cause we are bound to learn, and observe them, and let
not the woman to hastilye persuade her self, in ymagining that her husband
likes and loves her entirely and shows her a good countenance. For in that
moment, when he shall perceive that she loves him not heartily, even then will
he abhor her utterly. For as to season unsavory meats, pleasant saw^es be
prepared: so to give a good release to the food of marriage, it must be
tempered with true love. For love gives to hard things an easiness, to
tedious things a pleasantness, True love the sauce of ma^iage.
a beginning with facility, and ending in felycitie. Then spoke the Lady
Isabella, and said, that it was not possible for a woman to love that husband,
the which delyteth more in another. It is sure quoth the Lady Iulia, a hard
matter for a virtuous wife to live with a vicious husband. For an honest woman
to love a dissolute man, or a wise spouse to accept a foolish mate. Yet
notwithstanding, how much more the husband be evil, and out of order, so
much more is it the woman's praise, if she love him. And you men, as intractable
as you be, yet is it not possible, if your wives do lovingly embrace you,
though you cannot enforce your evil inclinations to repaye love for love
again, yet can ye not well hate them, Examples of such as loved well their
husbands.
which is no small matter. I could recite diverse worthy examples as well of
Roman, as Grecian Ladies, that have so intirelye affected their lincked
mates, that not only have they endangered themselves in great perilles for
their sakes, but have also willinglye spent their blood to die with them.
Plutrach reports, how that ^he Lacedaemonians, waging battle against the
Mimians, A w^rthy example ^f the Mimian Ladies.
and by conquest getting the upper hand, took a number of them captives, which
they imprisoned, intending shortly after to put them to a cruel death. The
loving Wives of those men, when they understood the woeful hap of their
unfortunate husbands, came to the prisons, where they were, and with sorrowful
tears and playntes, entreated the Iarlors that they might have recourse to
speak with y^ prisoners, which thing after long and tedious suit, obtained,
they entered in, and after most loving imbracings, and lamentable bewaylings,
these wives took on them their husbands apparel, fending them out in their
womanly attire, with their faces covered, as the guise of the country was, who
being taken for women, were let pass, and so escaped, leaving their wives in
prison to dye the death, at the appointed time for their sakes. When the day of
execution was come, and the matter fully known, the Lacedaemonians stood in
admiration and gave these faithful hearts high praise, and pardoning both them,
and their husbands, sent them l^me with great rewards, to the encouragement
o^ others, to tread the like steps of hon^st love. Panthea, Panthea.
when she hard that her husband was slain in battle, ran fortl with with a
mourning heart to the doolefull place where he lay, whom after she had b^^ayled
her fill, and had bathed her s^l^e in ^is blood, took that same unhappy
lance, wherewith he was slain, and gored ^ir self to the heart. The like is
reported of Porcia, Brutus wife. Porcia.
Martial also writes, how that Alcesta, the wife of King Admetes, If Alcest^
be dead, good Lady revive her not again.
understanding by the Oracle of Apollo, that her husbands grievous disease,
wherewith he was sore pained, could not be cured, but by the blood of a
dear friend, killed her self saying, that Admetes had not a dearer friend
than she was, which thing when the king heard, he finished his life, with the
like death, supposing it more better to couple themselves together by one end,
than separated, in tears to bewail the lack of so true hearted, and loving
spouse. In like manner, Paulina Paulina.
the wife of Seneca, when she had intelligence that her husband by the
commandment of Nero had by cutting of his veins bledde himself to death,
did also cut her own veins, to accompanye her good husband in the like end,
had not Nero preventing her purpose, caused her veins to be stopped up again.

What shall I speak worthily of Triara, Triara.
the sweet spouse of Lucius Vitellus, who so entirely loved her husband, that
she accompanied him in the wars being a woman, aduenturing dangers with a
manlye courage, ryding always next her beloved mate, to guard him, and to be
partaker of his chances, good or bad. Did not Iulia, Iulia.
Pompeius wife, erpresse the sign of a most loving heart, who when she saw her
husbands coat brought into the City all imbrued with gory blood, fell into a
sudden sound, scriching most ruthfully, and bitterlye crying: O Pompei,
Pompei, farewell. And being with child, brought forth in extreme pangues her
vntimelye fruit, which immediately with the mother, yielded up y^ gasping
breath, whose deaths were bewailed with many tears. Pliny the younger, in an
Epistle writes of a fishers wife that finding no means to cure an
intolerable disease of her husbands, A notabl^ example* of a fishers wife.
and sore lamenting his pains, that daily increased, persuaded him, that one
of them should slay the other, and in the end concluded, that they both
assended to the top of a high rock, which hung over the sea, and being both
cowpled together, threw themselves down, and were drowned. I could occupy
you, quoth the Lady Iulia till to morrow this time, with like stories, of
worthy women. But these may suffice, to show the love of the wife to her
husband, and to let you understand also, Master Gualter, that there has
been always women as loving as men. No doubt Madam quoth he, ye love
passingly, when ye do love, and ye hate as extreemely, when ye do hate.
Wherefore it were a goodly matter if you could bring your married women unto a
mean. Not so, quoth the Lady Iulia, I will have no mean in love. No mea^^ in
love.
And when the woman has thus grounded the perfect roots of love, and planted
this Friendly Flower, in a faithful heart, she must be as curious as Master
Pedros good husband in preserving it against all tempe^^^^ous storms, and
from all venymous w^e^es. The greatest help whereto is shamefastness, which
is of such power, and virtue, that it suffyceth alone to defend it against all
weathers. Shamefastness.
And if so be that there were but one only virtue in a woman, it might well be
shamefastness. For as in a creature void of shame there is nothing found
worthy of commendation: The shameless creature is void of all virtues.
so in the Woman endued with that virtue, is not any thing worthy of
reprehension, and there is the root of godliness, where springs y^ branch of
shamefastnes, which is the only defense that nature has given to women, to
k^epe their repetatio^, to preserve their chastity, to maintain their honor,
and to advance their praise. How far ther^ore are ye men ouersene, when you
only inquire of their beauty, substance, and parentage, leaving virtue
beside, and that most excellent gift of shamefastness, which is the chiefest
dowrye, the greatest inheritance, and the precious Jewel that a woman can
bring with her. There is another great mainteyner of this Flower, and that is
the goodlye grace of obedience. Obedience.
For reason it is that we obey our Husbands. God commands it, and we are
bound so to do. I know not quoth the Lady Isabella what we are bound to
do, but as meet is it, that the husband, obey the wife, as the wife the
husband, or at the least, that there be no superiority between them, as the
ancient philosophers have defended. For women have souls as well as men, they
have wit as well as men, and more apt for procreation of children, than men.
What reason is it then, that they should be bound, whom nature has made free?
Nay, The Achaians.
among the Achaians, women had such sovereignty, that whatsoever they
commanded, their husbands obeyed. Yea Plutarch says, that the man swept the
house, dressed the meat, and did al other necessaries, where the woman governing
the house, and keeping the money answered all matters, and which worse was,
they corrected them at their discretion What did she, quoth Master Gualter,
and might she beat him too? Mary lo, Here is the matter, that some of our
Dames in this Country take so much upon them. They think belike that they be
in Achaia But sure if I had been amongst those women: you would have done,
quoth the Lady Isabella, as they did. For Dogs bark boldly at their own
masters door. Believe not daughter, quoth the Lady Iulia neither those
ignorant Philosophers, nor these fond customs. For contrary also to this, the
Parthians and Thracians Parthians and thracians.
accounted not of their wives, more than of slaves so that after they had borne
them a dosen children or more, they sold the mothers at the* common markets or
e^chaunged them for younger. Fie upon that law, quoth the Lady Isabella. But
what say you to the custom which Dionysius Alicarnasseus writes of the
Numidians and Lydians, The Numidians and Lydians.
where the women commanded within doors, and the men without. Yea marry quoth
the Lady Aloisa, that was a just law, where the commanding was equal. Not so
quoth the Lady Iulia. For though it ^^re better than the other two: yet not
^ollerable amongst us, neither was the sovereignty so equallye divided, as
you think. For if the woman keep always her house, as duty is, the man
stands ever at her commandment. For as long as she is within, though he
command her without, this law byndeth her not to obey. Wherefore in my opinion
al those Barbarian customs are to be disanulled, and contemned of Christians.
Ye say well, Madam, quoth M. Erasmus. For in deed both ^^^ine, and human
laws, in our religion gives the man absolute authority, The man both by
reason, and law, has the soueraigne^y over his wy^e.
over the woman in all places. And, quoth the Lady Iulia, as I said before,
reason does confirm the same, the man being as he is, most apt for the
sovereignty being in government, not only skill and experience to be
required, but also capacite to comprehend, wisdom to understand, strength to
execute, solicitude to prosecute, patience to suffer, means to sustain, and
above all, a great courage to accomplish, all which are commonly in a man, but
in a woman very rare: Then what blame deserve those men that do permit their
wy^^^ to rul^ all, and suffer themselves to be commanded for company. A hard
adventure quoth Master Gualter, A hard aduerture happens to him that is
matched with a shrewe.
happens to that man, which is matched with a maisterly shrew. For she being
once past shame not only blabbeth out all that she knows, but thundreth out
that also, which her mad head conceyueth, or her fantastical brain dreameth
of, and yet will she maintain, that she is never angry, or speaks without
great cause. There be quoth the Lady Iulia some such women, but I do utterly
condemn them. For this married woman, whom I have taken upon me t^ describe,
The woman must be obedient to her husband
must of duty be unto her husband in all things obedient, and therefore if he
sometimes moved do chance to chide her she must forbear: in doing whereof
he shall neither eat y^ more at his dinner, nor she have the less appetite
to her Supper. The wise woman must consider, that hi^ husband chydeth, either
without reason or has good cause. If reason move him, then of duty she is
bound to obey, if otherwise, it is her part to dissemble the matter. For in
nothing can a wife show a greater wisdom, than in dissembling with an
importunate husband. Her honest ye her good nature, and her praise is showed
in nothing more, than in tollerating of an vndiscreate man, and to conclude, as
the woman ought not to command the man but to be always obedient: so ought he
not to suffer himself to be commanded of his wife. Seneca in his tragedies of
this matter shows a notable example. In the wars of Mithridates and the
Romans, A notable example.
all the soldiers in Rome were commanded to be in readiness, to attend upon
Silla the Consul. This edict being published, the officers came to an old
knights house to will him to prepare himself. But his wife withstood them and
said, that he was not at home, and that he should not go. For quoth she,
though perchance he were able, yet being an old Soldier, and exempted from
the wars, I will not give him leave. Whereat the officers being astonished,
informed the Senate thereof, who forthwith banished the old Knight, for
suffering himself to be commanded by his wife, and her they kept in prison
during his exile for presumption. The married woman, must be also very
careful, and circumspect of her good name. For a good name is the flower of
estimation, The good name of a woman is very delicate.
and the pearl of credit, which is so delicate a thing in a woman, that she
must not only be good, but likewise must appear so. For you men are naturally
so malicious, that you will judge as well of that you suspect, as of that which
you see. The chefest way for a woman to preserve and maintain this good fame,
The good married woman must be resident in her own house.
is to be resident in her own house. For an honest woman in sobernes, keeping
well her house, gayneth thereby great reputation, and if she be evil, it
drives away many evil occasions, and stops the mouths of the people. In
keeping at home, all things shall be better governed, her husbands heart better
cheered, all evil suspicions depelled, angers aduoided, expenses diminished,
and the great excess of apparel not required, wherein we are commonly so
curious, that otherwise being naturally great sauers, only therein are we as
great wasters, which thing is aduoyded by the wives honest keeping at home.
Women are great wasters in apparel.
I cannot but maruayle, how a woman of estimation can delight in gaddyng abroad,
to be a gossiper, having at home her husband to confer with, her children to
instruct, her family to look unto, her kindred to please, and the evil
tongues to appease. Seneca says that his aunt for sixtene years space, whiles
her husband was in Egypt, never went out of her own house. Faunus King of the
Aborigines, had a wife named Fauna, Fauna.
who after she was married, would never look upon any man saving her husband,
in doing whereof, she gate such reputation, y^ after her death she was honored
for a Goddess. Licurgus commanded that no woman at any time should go out
of her house, saving at certain festival days appointed. For the married
woman, says he, has nothing else to do, but either in the temple to pray to
the Gods, or at home to instruct her children. My meaning is not in reciting
the so examples, to have the married wife continually locked up, as a cloystered
Nun, or Ancres, but to consider hereby, what respect she must have in going
abroad, and what a virtue it is to keep well her house. Lucretia Lucretia.
the famous Roman Lady, obtaining not so great praise in excelling others in
beauty and parentage, as she did in being found at home a spinning, and
carding with her Maidens, whereas the other Roman Matrones, were roming
abroad in feasting, and banqueting, when their husbands came from the wars to
vi^^te them. As the wife must be thus wary in going abroad: The woman must
avoid suspicious companies.
so must she be as careful what is done at home, on her part not to sit
ydlely, nor to permit any one suspiciously to come unto her, espeacially her
husband being not at home. Plutarch tells of a custom among the Numidians,
The Numidians.
that their husbands being abroad, the wives kept always their doors shut,
and there was a law inviolable, that who so ever knocked at such a door so
shut, should therefore lose his hand. To be brief, not only in chastity of
body, but in honesty of behavior, and talk, does the woman's honor, and good
name consist, and is also mayntayned. These be on the woman's behalf, the
greatest nourishers, of this matrimonial Flower, wherewyth being adorned, she
shall please God, content her husband, and get honor of all persons, without
which all trym attire, all outward payntings, and garnishings are nothing. For
what avails it a man to have his wife of excellent beauty, great possessions,
good parentage and well friended, if therwithal she be shameless, proud cursed,
and dissolute. Also for the perfiting of this married woman, certain outward
qualities are to be required, as to look well to her huswifery, The married
woman must be skillful in huswifery.
and not only to see that all be done, but that all be well done, to the
contentation of her husband, even in things of least importance, and to
occupy her self accordinglye, The woman must not be idle.
not to sit always idle, but to spend her time in some profitable exercise,
as with her needle, and rock, or such other lyk^, which in times past, have
been in great reputation amongst the greatest Ladies, Solomon.
so that Solomon commending a good woman, says that she sought woole and
flax, and wrought by the counsel of her hands. It is also a great want in a
woman, if she be unskillful in dressing of meat. Cookerie.
For it is the chiefest point of a huswyfe to cherish her husband, who being
sick, will have the best appetite to the meat of his wives dressing, and if
she then cherishe him well, he will love her the better ever after.

Stratomacha y^ wife of king Deiotarus, Stratomacha.
whenever he fell sick, was his cook, his physician, and his surgeon,
which worthy qualities so esteemed of such a noble Queen, why should not the
married woman labor to have them, seeing that thereby she shall enlarge y^ Flower
of Friendship between her and her husband, whose face must be her daily looking
glass, The face of the husband, the looking glass of the wife.
wherein she ought to be alwais prying, to see when he is merry, when sad, when
content, and when discontent, whereto she must alwais frame her own countenance.
Why, quoth the Lady Isabell, what if he be mad, or drunk, must we then show
the like countenance? If you perceive him in such case, quoth the Lady Iulia,
speak him fair, and flatter him, till you get him to bed, and there
reprehende him lovingly, with kissing and embracyng, that he may perceive it to
come of pure love, more than of malice, for better were it to convert him
lovingly in gentleness, than to control him frowardly in shrewdness. It is
most true, quoth M. Pedro. For in this point, we are not much unlike to wild
and savage beasts, as the Lion, or the Unicorne, which by force cannot be
tamed, but by humility, Men must be reformed by gentleness.
and gentle means, so that who will reclayme us, must avoid all contrarying,
and vexation of mind, whereof I could tell you a pretty story that of late
years happened to a gentlewoma^, that by such gentle wyles reclaymed her
husband, being far gone, but I should injury the Lady Iulia, to intermeddle
so far in her charge. Not so, quoth she, but you shall greatly pleasure me
therein, wherefore I pray you let us hear it. Master Pedro tells a pretty
tale, how a woman reclaymed her husband.
There was, quoth he, a Gentleman of good calling, that greatly delighted in
huntyng, who on a day, near to a little village encountered with a poor
Wydowes daughter, a simple wench, but somewhat snowte fair, whose gaye eyes,
had so intrapped this iolye hunter, that under the color thereof, he
oftentimes resorted unto her and lay diverse nights out of his own house.
When his wife, being both fair, wise, and virtuous, understood thereof, as
well by his demeanor, as by other conjectures, like a wise woman she
dyssembled the matter, and kept it secret to her self, not altering either
countenance or conditions toward him, but on a time, when she was assured,
that he was gone another way, hyed her to the house, where she learned of the
young woman the whole circumstaunce, feyning her self to be his sister, and
when she had vewed the chambers, and bedding, wherein he lay, which was very
homelye, she returned home again and trussed up a good bed, well furnished,
and hangings, with other necessaries, which as secretly as she could, conuayde
thither, desiring both the old woman, and her daughter to be good to her
brother, and see that he wanted nothing. The next day, came this gentleman home
and according to his custom went a hunting to his old haunt, where he seeing
this new furniture, marueyled much thereat and inquired what the matter meant.
The old mother answered, that a sister of his had been there, and willing
them to cherysh him well, gave them besides, certain money. The gentleman
understanding then how the world went, and knowing it to be his Wyfes doing,
returned forthwith home, and demanded of her the truth, and what she meant
thereby, who denied it not. The cause why, quoth she, I sent such furniture
thither, was because I understanding how daintilye you were accustomed to lie
at home, doubted you might by such hard entertaynement have gotten some harm.
He should quoth the Lady Aloisa have had a bed of nettles, or thorns, had it
been to me. For sure I would not have been the cherisher of my husband in his
unthriftiness. And so should you have made him worse, quoth master Pedro. But
it happened much better to this gentle woman. For he being overcome by her
virtue, lived content with her ever after. This story, quoth the Lady Iulia,
has well helped me forward for the which I thank Master Pedro, and now to
continue my purpose, I say that very circumspect and wary must the woman be
in reprehendyng of her husband in such great matters. For in things of small
importance, the best will be for her to dissemble, noting diligently the time,
the place, and the manner in doing. The best time is, when anger, and
malincholye reigns not, and in any case, let no person be in place to hear
her. For it is a wise man's grief, to bear the open reproof of his wife. The
best place is, as I said, when they are both in bed, a place appointed for
reconcilements, and renewing of love and friendship, let your words not be
spiteful, but loving, kind, gentle, merry and pleasant. For though the woman
every where, ought to be merry with her mate: yet must she chieflye in bed,
thereby to show what love she bears him, where she may lawfullye pour out
into his bosom all the thoughts, and secrets of her loving heart. But now to
conclude, and knit up the married woman's office in mainteyning and conseruing
this Flower of Friendship, in holy Matrimony, she must being of her self
weak, and unable besides of her own diligence, The married woman must put her
trust in God.
put her whole trust in the first, and principal a^thor thereof, whom if she
serve faythfullye, will no doubt, make this Flower to spryng up in her
abundantly. For daily we may see a foul deformed woman, that truly
seareth, and serves God, so well beloved of her husband, as if she were the
fairest of beawtie in a country, and women void of Gods favor, and grace,
what qualities soever they have besides, seldom, or never enjoy they the
happy estate of Matrimony, nor shall they ever attain to the sweet, and
perfect smell of this most delectable Flower of spousall amity, and
friendship. I think verily, quoth master Pedro, if either Medea, or Circe
could have obtained this Flower, as cunning inchaunters as they were, to have
tempered their charms withal, Circes had not so soon lost her Ulysses, nor
Medea ^orgone her well-beloved Jason. Herewith the whole assembly rising up, gave
the Lady Iulia her deserved praise, and thanks, and the Lady Aloisa laying
aside her soueraignetie, went all out into the Garden, where we roming about
the pleasant allies, discoursed a new of that which had been said, both by
the Lady Iulia and of master Pedro, which was very well borne away. But the
Lady Isabella, who in this second debating fell to my lot, at our departing
required me for her sake, to pen the whole discourse of this flagra^t Flower
For quoth she, your quiet silence both these days assures me, that you have
well considered thereof, and therwyth the rest of the Ladies joined with her,
at whose importunate request, with the help of my friend Master Pedro, and
others I have adventured to publishe this Discourse.

FINIS.

