ALBA. THE MONTHS MIND OF A MELANCHOLY LOVER, divided into three parts:

By R. T. Gentleman.

HEREUNTO IS ADDED A most excellent pathetical and passionate Letter, sent by
Duke D'Epernoun, unto the late French King, Henry the 3. of that name, when he
was commanded from the Court, and from his Royal Company. Translated into
English by the foresaid Author.

Spes, Amor, and Fortuna valete.

AT LONDON. Printed by Felix Kingston, for Matthew Lownes. 1598.

As glorious Pearl, the MARGARITE
At shine of Sun does show:
So does she look, or very like,
To whom I Duty owe.
R.T.

TO THE NO LESS EXCELLENT THEN HONORABLY DESCENDED Gentlewoman, Mistress
Anne Herne.
PVre Lamp of Virtue, burning always bright,
Who, Grace in me (unworthy) do infuse:
Clear Sun that driu'st each doubtful Mist from sight,
The firm'st Maintainer of my crased Muse;
Lo I this mournful Verse in sable weed,
From sorrows Cell, do send thee for to read.
Daine thou with cheerful look, what my sad eye
Distills from Lymbeck of a bleeding Heart;
Fruits of True Love disdainde most wrongfully,
Vouch^afe of me (as of my Duty) part,
A Woeful Wight, indebted paieth thee so,
Bankroutes in pleasure, can but pay with woe.
As often as the Moon does change her course,
And Sun to novel Sign does enter in:
So often I do call still for remorse,
Whilst endless sorrow does new Grief begin.
Once I each Month to CRVEL ALBA make,
A MONTHS MIND, yet no pity she does take.
Thou art the SHADOVV of her SVBSTANCE fair,
Resembling her most perfectly in Shape:
Ah then but smile, and it shall ease my care,
Though stint it cannot, her nere dying hate:
Grant me this Boon, and never shall my Verse
Leave, of thy Crystal BROOK praise to rehearse.
Humbly devoted unto your matchles Virtues. R. T.

TO THE THRICE GENEROUS AND NOBLE Gentleman Sir Calisthines Brook Knight, one
of her Majesty's chief Commanders in IRELAND.
MIrror of Knighthood, WORTHIES Caualiere,
Touchstone of Valor, Chief of Chivalry;
Honor of Field, to Foe a deadly Fear,
Wars bloody Ancient, Plague to Surquedrie:
Soldiers Relief, Mars brauest Coronell,
Bellonas Trumpet, Battles Larum Bell:
Sweet to thy Friends, to Strangers nothing sower,
Whose kind Behavior has bin of such force,
As ore thy deadliest Foes, thou have had great power,
Making them learn true Pity and Remorse.
Witness the sauadge KERNS, and IRISH wild,
Wrought through thy Carriage sweet, both tame and mild.
Virtue and Honor, strive in thee t'exceede;
Valor and Beauty, Intrest in thee claim,
Whilst thou thy Noble House noblest indeed,
Thy House, not thee, through thy Palme-rising Fame.
Worthy art thou to be (Fair matchle^ Wight)
MINION to Kings to Queens, dear FAVORITE.
Then (Courteous KNIGHT) vouchsafe with cheerful smile,
This woeful Verse (though worthles) to accept:
Begot by Grief, brought forth as Sorrows Child,
Since Thee and Thine (as Sacred) I respect.
Ah had mine ALBA seen thy lovely Face,
For thy sweet sake, I (then) had found some Grace.
At your honorable Disposition always to be commanded. R.T.

To the right noble and magnanimous Gentleman Sir John Brook Knight, one of
her Majesty's chief Captains in the LOVV COUNTRIES.
Brave KNIGHT, whose Virtues far exceed thy years,
The Ornament of thy thrice Noble House,
Whose Worth is such as finds abroad few Peers:
So Famous art thou, and Illustrious,
Making the World to wonder at thy Praise,
Whilst to thy self new Glory thou do raise.
Thou like unto another Alexander,
Art to thy Countries Foes, a Tamberlaine,
(A Bloody Scourge) whilst thou do them endanger,
The Proudst of whom, thou makst to yield with shame:
Witness the Siege of AMYENS late in FRANCE,
W^^re Knightly Honor thy Service did advance.
Vouchsafe thou then great MARSI's Parent Heir,
To lay aside thy Martial mind a space,
And view these lines, Th'vntimely Fruits of Care,
Which I desire (though not deserve) to grace:
Gracious thou art with All, then grace to One
This Verse, whose Grace I do entreat alone.
May be, when my coy ALBA shall perceive,
This Favor done so kindly unto me,
She (for a while) from Rigor then will breathe,
Taking T^uce, (though not Peace) from Cruelty.
Grant me this Suit, and I with zeal will pray,
That when thou love, thy Mistress nere say Nay.
At your honorable Disposition always to be commanded. R.T.

Richard Day to the Author.
WHilst lovely ROBIN REDBREST thou do sing,
In chirping note her Beauty most divine,
Whom thou to heaven with peeles of praise do ring,
The gentle Air with thee keeps tune and time:
Aurora, from the skies on ALBA sweet,
Raines Roses, her in kindness more to greet.
To hear thee sing the Winds are whist in the air,
And calmie Zephirus a cool fresh blast does blow:
Flora does smile, and Riuer^ forced are
To stay their course, they like thy music so:
Willing they lend to thee their listening ear,
As who would say, Him only would we hear.
The savage beasts do run; the liueles stones
Tumble apace, and moving Mountains hie,
To hear how sweetly thou thy Love bemones,
Taking delight in this rare melody,
Whilst LOVE himself hearing thee making Love,
The ^eat^ thereof as ravished does prove.
So did the Thracian Orpheus heretofore,
Upon the flowring banks of Heber play
On skillful Harp, (as thou do now implore
Longst TAMESIS) for fair Euredisay.
Be then our English Orpheus, raise thy Verse,
Thy worthy ALBAS praise, bravely rehearse.
R. Day. Gentleman.

An Answer to his kind friend Richard Day. Gent.
NO lovely, nor beloved REDBREST I,
A ROBIN poor refusde, such one I am,
Which I Will ascribe unto my Destiny,
And not impute it unto ALBAS blame:
Yet will I chir^ her praises to my skill,
Where Art does want, my Heart supplies goodwill
Sweet Friend, it is thou that lovely sweet do sing,
No swanne, but raven I; my voice is hoarse:
Thou DAY to the day the cle^rest light do bring,
And of thy DIAMANTA findst remorse.
Heau^^s, Air^, Winds, Earth, Beasts, Stones, Hills, Seas and all,
Thou can command by thy sweet Verses call.
To praise me thus thou do me too much wrong,
This waight's too heavy for my back to bear:
To thee, and to thy Mistress, Praise belong;
For you, not me, this Garland's fit to wear.
Yet since some Flowers thereof you do bestow
On ALBA mine, I thankful still will show.
Be thou our ALBIONS ^epheus most divine,
I cannot play, my ioy^^^ not nimble are:
Thou that art best in Loves sweet t^ne and time,
Sound thou ^irected by a beauteous Star.
My Star is bright, you let me tell the truth,
Where Beauty most abounds, there wants most Ruth.
R. T.

A friend, though a stranger to the Author.
WHen I by chance do read thy dulcet Verse,
I cannot (though a stranger, yet thy friend,
Thy passions be so pleasing, and so pierce)
But give thee Due, and them (of right) commend.
So cunningly thy Verse does join with Art,
Thy griefs makes yerne the hardest Readers heart.
If thou do write, thou others do inflame,
Thy style is pure (well nie Celestial)
Like to the Sun sparkling his beams amain,
Or like the Fire, whose heat does soon appale.
To hear thy self (not others) sing, I long,
Sweet Bird thy Notes are sweet, sweet is thy Song.
Sing then sweet Bird with Ruddie Breast thy fill,
For I do love, affect and honor thee:
Thou Sweet, I Constant, so continuing still,
A Cignet thou, and I Will a Lover be:
So shall no love be like the love of mine,
No style compare with style so rare of thine.
Then be not mute, when thou may gently move;
Keep not (always) thy sorrows to thy self;
Still moan not privately like turtle Dove;
Content of Mind's worth all: seek thine own Health.
Think All things have their course; the time may come,
Though now obscurde, yet bright may shine thy Sun.
Per Ignoto.

An Answer.
BOund by Desert, (thy Merits, but not mine)
A Stranger thou, how shall I make amends?
That of thy friendship, such assured sign
(To me scant known) such loving Verses sends?
Thanks give I, that is a younger Brothers reward,
Naught else I have, my Fortune i^ so hard.
My worthles lines thou have red, (as thou do write)
But (partial thou) too much the same do praise.
To sing still kindly thou do me inuit,
My Glory (but indeed my Shame) to blaze.
Alas I cannot; dead in that sweet Fire,
Which did inflame in me such chaste Desire.
Then boldly sang I, when those lovely Eyes
Were guide^ ^o me: but now that they are gon^,
Now that my Sun shines not in cheerful wise,
Nor my Fire heates me, I will weep and (...).
I, weep, (says Cruel A^na) weep thy fill,
For never more I see or love th^e will.
But thou that constant art in thy vowde Love,
And (as Beloved) thy Ladies love do gain.
With thy sweet S^ile, and my sad Plains to mou^,
Each Readers hearts seek thou in ^^^rous vain;
In s^cre^ still I Will sorrow like the Dove,
And when my Sun shall shine, then will I move.
R. T.

To my dear friend R. T. Gent.
SWeet Cignet that so sweetly do deplore,
Thy sad lamenting Passions and thy love,
^here TAMESIS does flow along the shore,
and from clear Isis does his passage move,
Running along brave Troynouants right side,
Till ceasles she into the Sea does glide.
^hou to the Nymphs do sing so sweet a tune,
^racing thy self with such a sugared note,
^s Waves and VVindes, are still, and cal^nie soon^
^o hear thee; nor desire they blow, or flote,
Whilst they do breathe to us this gentle Gust,
Only let ROBIN sing, All other Birds be hush^.
I. M. Gent.

The Answer of the Author.
It Is thou, not I, that singst so sweet a Song,
Where MERSIE streams, whose waves are Silver found,
Whose ba^kes are Gold, whilst he does g^^de along
unto the swelling Trent his utmost Bound.
You that in Loves Quire sing, hear him alone
Not me: my Song's unpleasant, full of moan.
Hear him, who chaunts with such a pleasant Lay,
As he, Seas storms, can (when he list) assuage;
Make stealing Time against his will to stay,
And calm the Winds, when most they seem to rage:
Hear him; to us (to hear him) it is a Grace,
Your Glory to be hushed, and give him place.
R. T.

The Author to Master R.A.
Dear friend, in whom Euterpe does in still
Each rare Conceit, within thy learned breast,
Guiding so happily thy pleasing quill,
Whilst of thy Mistress Beauty thou art in Quest:
Making our TAMESIS for fame as rare,
As Tiber, when proud Rome Worlds scepter bare.
That LAVVREL green which in my youthful years
I loved so much, so dear, as like could none,
A fatal barren Cypress now appears,
Which scarce in harsh and hateful Verse I m^ne:
Too true presage of Falling of my Sun,
And hasty Post of my sad Griefs to come.
Then to what end, since that it is in vain,
My sickly pen, my bloodles hand to write,
Calast thou on me? that thus live still in pain,
Since blinded I, have lost mine ALBAS sight.
MERCY no Mercy me, no more will show,
Now does it ebb, where it was wont to flow.
But thou whose Blood is hot, and in thy Prime,
And daily ioyest thy Cynthias Company:
Rowse thee, and of right Eagle show the sign,
And with thy Verse (thy flight) cut through the sky,
Whilst I mine ALBAS absence still bewail,
Whose sight being lost, my senses needs must fail.
R. T.

An Answer.
EVterpe, nor the Muses (her sweet Mates)
Pernassus drops infuse into my Brain:
My table is not furnished with rare Cates,
(Dainty Conceits) which come from Poets vain:
No sacred Fury me inspires t'endite,
But what first comes in brain (straight) that I write.
Thy Laurel green that thou have loved so long,
Does flourish still, nor fatal Cypress it is;
To fear too much, thy self them much do wrong,
And overmuch to grieve, thou do amiss.
No Sun but falls as well as it does rise,
And who (in Love) lives without Contraries?
Though ALBA's gone, yet she will again return,
Then write, that she may know thou do her mind:
What Ladies promise, HONOR will perform,
Nor think^ that Beauty always is unkind:
ALBA is mild; MERCY will Mercy show,
No River ebs, but it again must flow.
I am at best and in my youthful prime,
My lovely Cynthias Favor I enjoy:
Yet think not but my Day is darkt sometime,
As I do taste of Bliss, so feel I noy:
Thus chirps one ROBIN REDBREST to another.
Ah do not thy rare Gifts through sorrow smother.
R. A.

TO THE PICTVRE OF HIS MISTRESS.
LIke to the Porpose (Tempests prophesier)
I play before the storm of my sad Tears:
Or as the Swanne whose sweetest Note is higher,
When Death is nearest, which he gently bears:
So sing I, now that ALBA mine is parted,
Who has me left disliude and quite vnharted.
Turn ink from Black to Gore in bloodiwise,
Paper from white change thou to deadly pale,
Whilst I my Readers eyes do rumatise
With brinish drops to hear this woeful Tale.
This woeful tale, where sorrow is the ground,
Whose bottom's such, as (nere) the Depth is found.
But unto whom sha^^ (now) dedicate
This mestfull verse, this mournful Elegy?
Even to my cruel Mistress COVNTERFAITE,
Of Beaut^es shape, the right Eternity.
Then to her PICTVRE I present this verse,
Of my slain Heart (dead for pure love) the Ho^^^
Here may I touch, kiss, talk, do what I please
Without Control, Frown, Anger, or Disdain
To break ones mind in grief yet it is some
And boldly speak without reply again.
Ah that I were Pigmalion in this place,
That Venus, me (as him she did) would gra^
ALBA. Alla Crudelissima.
Lo here the MONTHS MIND of my dear bough^ Lou^
Which (once a Month) I vowed to memorise,
When first I sought the CRVEL FAIR to move,
Who always did my sighs and tears despise.
This must my SABBATH be, and HOLIDAY,
On which I (to my Goddess) use to pray.
This Feast I solemnise for her sweet sake,
(In absence hers) as if she present were,
For my proud CHOICE, who pity none does take
On me, that live twixt Hope, despair and fear.
(Dear ALBA) then accept this Sacrifice,
These dutious Tears, the Tribute of mine eyes.
Think how perplexed fore PICTVRE thine I stand;
Think of the depth of my sad Passion;
How I have always bin at thy command;
How none but thee my thoughts still muse upon.
Think how I ever tendered thy Good na^^,
Conseruing with my dearest Blood the same.
(...) how I still of thee had due respect,
(...) thou (at all times) ^idst me use too hard;
(...) withouten cause thou did reject,
(...) meaning too too mean reward)
(...) ^hese wrongs which I endured have,
(...) ^emember me: Naught else I crave.
Troino^an^.

Since spightfull Fortune (sore against my will)
Has drawn me far from place where thou do live:
And that of force I must obey her still,
(Although to live so does me deadly grieve)
Yet though my Body is far off, MY HEART
Is still with thee, from whence is nere shall part.
Only of thee (sweet Lady) this I crave,
That till our thread of life shall be vnspun,
Thou will vouchsafe me in thy mind to have,
And not forget the Love twixt us begun.
But in thy Heart the same for to repose,
As I (the like) in inward soul do close.
This only can (still) me in life conserve,
Thy gracious Favor and thy Pity sweet:
This is the precious Balm, the pure Preserve,
Which I do hope to find, and still will seek:
This makes me live, although with great unrest,
Since of thy self I have bin dispossessed.
Thou art my Hope, my Haven, my Comfort chief,
On thee alone, on none el^ I rely:
Only to thee I come to beg relief;
In thee it is if I shall live or die.
(DEAREST) remember it is a Gift more rare,
CONSTANT to be, then to be counted FAIR.
Two sparkling stars, fine gold, pure Ebonie,
From whence Love takes his Brands, his Shafts and Bow,
Two dainty Apples, which though hid from eye,
Through veil of Lawne, through lawne more fair do show:
A cherrie lip with Iuo^ie teeth most white,
Where Cupid begs within that Grate so bright.
Vermilion Flowers that grow in Heaven above;
Snow, which no wet can mar, nor Sun can melt,
Right Margarite Pearl which always Orient prove,
A Voice, that Heart of marble makes to swelt,
A Smile that calmes the raging of the Sea,
And Sky more clear makes then was wont to be.
Grave, stayed wisdom in young and tender years,
A stately Gate, and Port maiesticall,
A Carriage (where in virtue (borne) appears,
Looks that disdain, and yet delight withal,
Numbers of Favors, Beauties infinite,
With Modesty, chaste, pure, and mild Deligh^.
An humble Soul within a Body rich,
A lowly Thought within a conquering Heart:
These are the works which I commend so mich,
Which Heavens and LOVE have framde by curious Art:
All these I once enioyde: but they being gone,
My Note is changde, my Mirth is turnde to Moan.
Ah might I once persuaded be at last,
These skalding sighs of mine should have an end,
That I for Sower, some Sweet (at length) might taste,
And that the CRVEL FAIR would not contend
Ever against me; I then would (gently) take,
And suffer all these wrongs for her sweet sake.
Too well I know (and I confess the same)
That too too lofty is my proud Desire:
My soaring Thoughts, deserving mickle blame,
And I, ore bold, presume too high t'aspire:
Yet still (me thinks) mine Aim, being not base,
I should deserve some little tynie Grace.
Say then (sweet LOVE) for thou with ALBA mine,
Do soiorne, wheresoever she does bide)
Say, am I like, that, to obtain in time,
From which I now am so far off, and wide?
Ah say the truth, does she once think on me?
Does she but wish that I with her might be?
Ah had not Reason my Desires refrainde,
I had, my Thoughts dear Sovereign, seen ere this,
Whose Grace I sought (but bootles) to have gainde,
The only joy I in this world would wish.
Rather would I see those chaste beauteous Eyes,
Then choose to be in matchless Paradise.
As Crystal Glass in which the Sun does shine,
I like mine ALBAS Angels heavenly feature:
But when she deadly wounds this Cor^e of mine,
I loathe her more then any murthring Creature:
More then a Thief that robs and steals pelf,
I hate her, when she steals me from my self.
My heart is grieved cause it does disagree:
For whilst my Mind to love her does devise,
And thinks her worthy honored for to be,
A Sdainfull thought through Hatred does arise,
Which skornes yt one so Rich, a Thief should prove,
That one so Fair, a Murtheresse is in love.
I know not what to seek, nor what I should,
Yet have I sought till I have lost my sense:
Although truth to confess, feign love I would,
And yet not die for this too Cruel wench.
Betwixt these two fain would I find a Mean,
Alas, Women have none, they always keep ^h'extreme.
Then how for me ift possible to love,
If my best ALBA once from me be took?
How shall I live when thousand Deaths I prove?
When not this one (the least) I scarce can brook.
Ah woe is me, a double mixed Desire,
To haste my Death the sooner does conspire.
Such is the rare perfection of sweet Beauty
Of my fair ALBA, my sole choice Delight:
That if that any PAINTER does his duty,
To shadow forth her Luster passing bright,
He loses both his labor and his time,
As one ore bold, so high a step to clime.
For whilst he gives his mind attentively,
And studieth to match Nature with his Art,
Marking her Feature with a watchful eye,
To portray forth most lively every part:
Such brightness comes from her, such glistring rays,
As he is struck blind, and darkened goes his ways.
This is the cause, that who in hand does take,
In curious wise her pearlesse Counterfate,
Hoping himself immortal so to make,
Does fall into like dangerous estate:
Thinking to shadow her, he shadowed is,
And so his eyes, and purpose he does miss.
That, she were drawn in midst of Heart it were
Far better, (and (my self) have plaste her so)
For though in dark she hidden does appear,
Yet unto me she fair and bright does show,
My Hart's the Board, where limnde you may her see;
My Tears the Oil, my Blood the Colors be.
Fano.

Bright were the Heavens, and hushed was every wind,
Clear was the day, when as mine ALBA fair,
Brought forth with joy (Lucina being kind)
A dainty Babe, for feature passing rare,
Adorning all the world with this glad wealth,
A gift to enrich the World, Us, and her self.
What time she was in travel of this Child,
No thunder, lightning, nor no storm was heard:
But all was quiet, peaceful, calm, and mild,
As if the skies to offend her were afeard,
Whilst the earth attended on her, and the Sea,
As though they staid at her command to be.
Then did the Winds (not using so before)
A gentle gale blow calmely every where,
And filled the blisfull Air with sweetes great store:
Each bird and foul showing a merry cheer,
Whilst that blessed Day a double Beauty fo^^d,
One from the Sun, the other here on g^ound.
This made the haughty proud Oceanus,
To open all his wealth in outward show:
And finding my fair Mistress honored thus,
He made his swelling waves in richnes flow,
Whilst that a MARGARITE brought forth a Perle,
A precious stone, a dainty lovely Gerle.
As I have lived, I live, and live so will,
With self same bait that LOVE for me did lay,
When he his net (to train me in by skill)
Did open set, to bring me to his bay:
Only that I might sigh for thee alone,
And sue for Grace, although Grace found I none.
Then ALBA let it not displeasen thee,
Nor make thou show of anger for the same:
Though my sweet Bonds so strait and inward be,
Since I (not thou) do bear thereof the pain:
And that my love to thee is grown so near,
As then my life I value it more dear.
Thine was I first, and thine at last I am,
And thine I will be to the world his end:
For thee into this world I willing came,
And leave this world I will, fore thee offend.
Mea^^ time thy matchles virtues I will blase,
And ^pend my life, sighing for thee always.
Ah LOVE it was thou that tookst my liberty,
And of Freeman inforst me be a slave,
Whilst Hers to be, and thine, most willingly
I am content this servile yoke to have.
LOVES prisoner then, begging at Beauties gate,
Some Alms bestow sweet Lady for Gods sake.
My mounting Mind, my never staide Conceit,
Has buil^ a stately Castle in the Air:
Which Jove his lightning Fire, nor his fierce thret,
Nor Fate, nor Fortune, nor ought else does fear.
Founded it is upon two running Wheels,
The Gates of dust and wind (still turning reeles.)
Thousands of Motes are digd about the same,
Which are capritious Humors fond and Toys:
The Skouts and Guards thereof, Hopes dead and vain;
The Food therein preparde, false fleeting Joys;
The fencing Walls are framde of fi^rce Desire,
Which dreads nor Sea, nor earth, nor force, nor fire.
The Armours, framed are in running Head,
Of foolish Boldness, and of pensive Fear,
Which None knows how they should be managed,
Nor how the same against others right to bear:
The Shot, Munition, and Artillery,
Are diverse Thoughts which in the Fancy lie.
The Castellane does fight against himself,
Having naught else his soldiers for to pay,
But with Ambition which is all his wealth:
Judge then my state, and mark my firmest stay.
O LOVE how long learn shall I in thy School?
The more I learn, I (still) do prove more Fool.
Swift roling Spheres, clear burning Lamps divine,
That with your beams disgrace the glorious Sun:
Fair Ladders by which I to Heaven clime,
And by your Influence this rare course do run.
Ah, if not quickly hither you return,
Too late (in vain) my loss you then shall mourn.
My Spirits for you did seek to open each way,
That you might passage make into my Heart,
And joyful were they when you there did stay,
But sorrowful when you from thence did part.
And now my Soul is summond by Despair,
For want of you his only Hope and Care.
All comfortles I live here all alone,
Banished from Mirth, and Bondslaue unto Noy:
Feeding my self (now you from hence are gone)
With sweet Remembrance of forepassed Joy,
And ^^th kind Hope: these twain together strive
To keep me, against despairing Thoughts alive.
The first, does ALBAS self (for my relief)
Present (of which I am now dispossessed)
The other does abate each swelling grief,
Which else my Heart would overmuch molest.
Ah pleasing Hope, ah gracious Memory,
You make me live, which else of force should die.
Without my Sun, I live in darksome shade,
Whil^t I with sighing spend my hateful days,
And in LOVES Sea without my Pilot wade,
Whilst storm my leaking Bark to sink assaies:
I languish malcontent, deep drownde in Care,
Witness mine Eyes, that running fountains are.
Thou Northwest Village far from mine abode,
Which do enjoy my Mistress presence fair:
Ah h^ppie art thou where she makes her rode,
And where she bides whose self has no compare.
Happy art thou, but most unhappy I,
Thou do possess, I want her company.
Feign would I (for long since I vow did take)
As painful Pilgrim in deuoutfull wise,
A voyage in that Holy land to make,
At my sweet Saint her Shrine to sacrifise,
Where (for Oblation) I my Heart would o^fer,
Not doubting but she would accept the proffer.
But to no end I wish, it is in vain,
A lesser Favor should contenten me:
It should suff^ise me if I might but gain
A sight of her, Her once more for to see.
Alack, this is not overmuch I crave,
Only her sight, not her, it is I would have.
Sad Tears, that from my mestfull Heart do run,
Thrust forth through watrie Eyes by Sorrow kind:
If you into LOVES paths by chance shall come,
Where he does walk, and pity think to find:
In vain then do you stir abroad, in vain
You lose your travail, labor, and your pain.
For whilst the way unto an Humor new
You open wide, fierce ALBA shuts close
Her breast from mercy, making me to rue,
And for your Friendship, counts you as her foes:
Wherein, she does a damd Example show,
Forcing her Heart against Conscience hers to go.
Then woeful tears what will you do as now?
LOVE's dead and gone, all pity is exilde:
Skornd is my Constancy and loyal Vow,
And through Disdain I daily am reuilde.
My Hop^s are blasted, and as withered seem,
Whilst still Disgraces show before me green.
Come then, turn back, and with me secretly
Bewail my torment, least my Heart appear
A senseles stone, through p^oud Impiety:
And my blind eyes a fountain ^unning clear.
And since not any will our Griefs bemone,
Lets swallow down our Sorrows all alone.
LOVE has me bound once more to make the way,
From whence my Heart has never yet declinde:
And doubts least He, from rightest paths should stray,
Because so weak and crased I him find:
And marvel none, he wants his wonted sight,
How can he journey then but Sauns delight.
The silly Wretch looks up, yet naught can see;
As who should say, my Help comes from Above:
Yet grieves his service is not took boun gree,
Since it is refinde from Thought of purest Love.
My Mind does burn in frost, but not in fire,
Through uncouth passion barde from his Desire.
My Heart is like a Widower that is disdainde;
My soul a Figure of a MALCONTENT,
To see that LOVE thus vildly should be stainde,
Not to requite, where naught but Love is meant.
But I do see no pity is in spite,
Where Malice reigns, Desert is banished quite.
My Soul upon my Heart for this does plain,
My Heart (again) my Fancy does accuse:
My Fancy says, mine Eyes were too too blame,
Their ouer-boldnes wrought this great Abuse.
Alas poor Eyes, too dearly do you pay,
When for one Fault your Light is took away.
Thy whitenes (ALBA) I may well compare
To Delia, when no cloud does her obscure:
Thy hairs to Phoebus lightning in the Air,
When he does shine with greatest Luster pure.
Thy diamond eyes, like to a frostie Night,
Where sparkling stars do shooting take their flight.
Thy cheeks Aurora like, when with her Dew,
The Rose and Lilly she does sprinkle sweet:
Resembling drops that seeded Pearl do show,
As if that double Beauty did them greet.
Thy Hand, no hand, it is the dainty Glove,
Which Psyches ware, when she was wed to LOVE.
What art thou, but All fair in outward show,
But inwardly thou art Cruel and unkind:
In thy fair Face all Favors sweet do grow,
But Thorns and Briars in thy Heart I find:
With s^ew of sweet thou lur'st and do entise,
But bitterly thou makst them pay the price.
Thou cruel lead'st my life to dismal Death,
My hope from all her Joys thou do confine:
Thou art the cord that stopst my vital breath,
And Arms with Arms against me do conioyne.
Thou only art the SHE that is fenst with hate,
And do thy self of pity naked make.
Tirde with a Burden of Extremities,
Which breaks, not bows, my woeful Heart in twain,
And checked with chiefest Mate of Miseries,
I linger out my lothed life in pain.
Then death, not life, I may this living call,
Where ceasles Noy, not joy, does me befall.
Black gloomy Thoughts (...) me do tyrannise,
And to my Soul appointed faithful Guides,
Do her deceive, with her they subtellise,
Nor in this ill to comfort me None bides.
All my best Hopes are at an Ebbing low,
Whilst stealing years, with griefs increasing grow.
What shall I do? shall I to reason turn?
Oh no, for her I too much have offended.
What, shall I go to LOVE, and to him mourn
For aid, and promise all shall be amended?
Alas, it were in vain, and labor lost,
Where he does promise, he deceives most.
See then ye fond Desires, what you have done,
By headstrong Will, sage Reason to deprave:
But what shall I, as now resolve upon?
Whom shall I trust? of whom help shall I crave?
Even her who first betraide me will I trust,
She can but be (as she has been) unjust.
Come gentle sleep (sweet sleep) my welcome Friend,
Come comfort me with shadow of my Love,
And her, in vision quickly to me send,
For whom these g^iefes and bitter pangs I prove.
Black Night be thou far darker then thou art,
Thy chiefest Beauty is to be most dark.
By thee my peace and pleasure does arise,
Whilst I through thy deceit (yet liking me)
Do seem to joy with her in lovely wise,
Although from hence (God knows) far off she be.
Such is the pleasure that herein I take,
As more I could not joy, were I awake.
Thou shewst to me the trammels of her Hair,
Clept SCALA COELI, locks of pure Delight:
Her snowy Neck, the cause of my sweet Care;
Her eyes like Saphires sparkling in the night:
With other sights, unseemly to be known:
Al these sweet sleep, through thee to me are shown.
Only in this (my thinks) thou art too unkind,
That when thou partst from me, all joy does part:
Nor any such thing left with me I find,
Which then afresh renewes mine inwa^d smart,
Then since her self (I waking) cannot have,
Sleeping let me her shadow of thee crave.
Like as the painful Merchant venterer,
That is to leave his sweetest native soil,
Being bound unto some strangy Country far,
Whom hope of gain does restles make to toil;
Taking his leave of his dear Family,
Through fear and hope, makes them to live and die.
But afterward when he has crossed the Seas,
Fraughting his ship with richest merchandise,
He then begins to frolic, Hearts at ease,
And hoyseth up his sails in cheerful wise,
Searching by skill the shortest cut to take,
Of this his weary journey, end to make.
When being almost tired, at the last
He is in kenning of his wished Home,
And when having of his Native Air a taste,
Twixt joy and grief, his very soul does groan,
For grief, his Country he so long did in
For joy, that Home he now returned is,
So fare I: for when I do call to mind
The time in which my Liberty was lost,
I shed salt tears, to think how I did bind
My self, being free, as slave unto my cost:
But when I hope one day I shall be free,
(Through my sweet Saint) my heart does leap for glee.
As many fiery darts as Jove on high,
Dingde down on Giants in his angry mood,
So many whirle about my Body nigh.
As longing causeles for my guiltles blood,
The frighted Air rain Ashes down apace,
And cheerful sun flies hence to hide his face.
Thus stand I in a Maze of Misery,
My Heart (seeing naught but signs of present death)
Seeks how with clipped wings away to fly,
And feign would escape to save his vital breath.
Ah pouer wretch, but how ^ft possible?
I know not how, nor he himself can tell.
The world's his foe, and LOVE does him betraie,
Despair of help, his senses does confound,
His cursed Guide (for nonce) leads him astraie,
Fortune accuses him on no sure ground.
And which does gaul him most, and most does grieve,
His Mistress rash, against him does judgment give.
He Mercy cries, and calls for his Book,
But proud Disdain does stop the Judges eare^,
So that on ^im she will not so much as look,
And thus from Bar, they quickelie do him bear,
From ALBAS presence is he qui^e debarde,
Exilde from Her, this is his sentence hard.
Great state and pomp this princely palace shows,
And richly every chamber hanged is:
Mine entertainment daily sweeter grows,
What Heart or thought can guess, I do not miss.
Chiefly the Walks, and Gardens wondrous been,
As they a second Paradise do seem.
Yet though I find this kindness passing great,
With hunting, hawking, fowling, and such sport:
For all our feasting and our dainty meat,
Our mirth and Music in most pleasing sort:
For all these pleasures, yet live I in pain,
Since Her I want, for whom I wish in vain.
What others love, I loathe, and quite dislike,
And though I am in worthy company,
Yet still (my think^) I am retired quite,
Into a place of matchles misery,
Into an uncouth wood and wilderness,
Where live such Beasts as pray on Sauagenes.
And if that long from her I be deprived,
My life shall be like flowers that want the Sun:
So shall I yield my Ghost as one disliu'd,
Whilst my threads life shall quickly be vnspun.
Go skalding sighs then, fly unto her strait,
Say that for life or death on her I wait.
You stately Hills, you princelike Ruins old,
Which proudly in your last remainders show,
And who as yet the name of fair Rome hold,
To whom did once the whole world homage owe,
The place where (now) so many Relikes lie,
Of Holy souls honored for Christ to die.
You Theaters, you Conquerors Arches fair,
Colosses huge, and massy Pillars great,
Triumphant Shows of more then Glory rare,
Where Victory with pomp did take their seat:
Lo what a wonder strange in you is wrought,
You now are dust, con^umde (as twere) to naught.
Though conquering War, does make in time to come,
Many things flourish, and with Fame to rise:
Yet in the end when all is past and done,
Time does All this consume in spiteful wise,
All M^^uments, all Monarchs that have been,
Time in the end destroys, and wears out clean.
And since it is so, I will contented live
In discontent: for if that Time can make
An end of All, and end to each thing give,
(May be) some order he for me will take,
(May be) in the end when I shall tried be
To the utmost, I my guerdon just may see.
Roma.

ALBA think thou, thy Month shall still be MAY,
And that thy Color fresh, still fair will be?
That Time and Fortune will not wear away
Beauty, which God and Nature lends to thee?
Yes, yes, that white and red, thy Cheeks now show
Shall quickly change, and black and yellow grow.
The Giniper the longer it does flower,
The older still it waxes, bowing still,
And that sweet face of thine, which now has power
Whole worlds with wondering at the same to fill,
Shall (though it now sauns blemish be) a Stain,
Hereafter with thick wrinkeled Clifts remain.
Great care to keep this Beauty frail must be,
Which we (God knows) a small time do enjoy,
Do what we can, we lose it suddenle;
Why, then, being courted should thou seem so coy,
Fortunes wings made of Times feather^ ^eere stay
But ear thou them can measure flit away.
Then be not over hard, like changeles Fate,
But let my Cries force thee (at last) relent,
Do not oppose thy self too obstinate
Against him, whose time to honor thee is spent:
Ah let me speak the truth (though somewhat bold
Though now thou art young, thou one day must be old
Rivers of gorie blood into the Sea,
In sted of Waters shall most swiftly run;
The hugie Ocean dry as land shall be,
And dark as pitch shall show the glistering Sun:
LOVE shall of Love, and kindenes be depriude,
And vastie world (sauns people) shall abide:
The Night shall lightsome be as Day most plain,
The Heavens with their colored clouds shall fall,
Fore LOVE in me, a new IDEA frame,
Or my firm Heart, from ALBA alter shall,
Ah fore I change, let horror stop my breath,
Unworthy Her, unworthy of this earth.
As heretofore, so still I will her love,
Nere shall my constant Heart lie languishing,
In hope another Beauty for to prove,
Which flitting fancy to mine eyes might bring:
My fa^^h Acanthus like shall flourish green;
Which th'older it is, the fresher still is seen.
I am no glass, but perfect Diamound,
My constant mind holds still where first it took,
Though not my self, my soul's in English ground,
ITALIANS looks, but not there LOVES I brook.
The Globelike World is round, and has no end,
Such is my Faith to her, my Fairest friend.
Fano.

Gold's changde to Lead, and Emmeralds into Glass;
Lillies prove Weeds, and Roses Nettles be:
No harmles Beasts now through the fields do pass,
To feed on Hill or Valleys shade we see:
Wild Tigers fierce, and ravenous Lions fell,
In open Plain, and cooly Groves do dwell.
In stead of mild and pleasing Accents sweet,
From hollow Places fearful Voices sound:
Echo amongst the craggie rocks does weep,
And (heavy) makes her noise with sighs rebound.
Rivers against their wonted course do run,
The Moon looks black, eclipsed is the Sun.
The Sallow shakes his boughs, and inward grieves,
The Cypress shew'th as if he sickly were,
And (melancholy) bares his lothed leaves,
A sign presaging some great cause of fear.
Phoebus no more does comb his tresses f^^re,
But careless lets them feltred hang in th'a^re.
Ghosts through the City ghastfully appear,
And hideous shapes the minds of men afright:
No Day we have, but darkness every where,
And turned the World is topsie turuy quite,
The cause of all this change is my fair Love,
Since to the country (hence) she does remove.
On bended knees low groueling on the ground,
Before the CRVEL FAIR I prostrate lay:
But what I sought of Her could not be found,
My kind request was dashed with ruff Denay.
With me she sharply began expostulate,
Nor would she once pity my hard Estate.
Tears I did shed, but tears I shed in vain;
Vows I did make, my Vows she did reject;
Prayers I offered, Prayers she did disdain;
Presents I sent, but them sh'would not accept.
If tears, vows, prayers, nor presents can do good,
What then remains, but for to offer blood?
Then Cruel take this Blood, Oblations Fee,
Which at thy shrine from Heart I sacrifice:
I know twill do thee good and likes thee,
And I bestow it in most hearty wise.
Never ^o much I of my life did make,
But that I could dispend it for thy sake.
What needst thou then ad water to the Seas,
Beams to the Sun, or light unto the Day,
When I more ready am, if so thou please,
My self to kill, then thou my life to slay?
Ah let me know thy mind, thus vex not still,
A kind of Pity it is, quickly to kill.
In stately Bed twixt sheets more white then snow,
Where late my Pearl mine ALBA fair did lie,
I restless up and down toss to and fro,
Whilst trickling tears distill from blubbred eye.
Ah gentle sleep do thou devise some Mean,
For comfort mine, whilst I of her shall dream.
You downy Pillowes, you which but of late,
Her dainty self did kindly entertain,
(Once) of two loving Bodies charge do take,
By your soft yielding, call her back again:
For she is gone, and Troynouant has left,
And being gone, my heart with he^ has rest.
For both of us here is room enough to see,
We b^th in rest with ease may here remain,
And he^e two souls (united) one, shall be,
Two bodies (joined together) One, not twain.
But it is in vain, for were she here I know,
Though you agreede, agree she would not so.
Yet call her back, and pray to her for me,
For I am hoarse with praying over long^
Ah to no purpose it is to call, I see,
She cannot hear, she too too far is gone.
Yet will I still her praises haroldise,
And among the beauteous Saints her canonise.
Hear me, a Martyr for religious Love,
Thou Fair Tormentor, (Motive of my pain)
All Racks and Tortors against my patience prove,
And when thou have done, begin afresh again.
Weary shall thou be of tormenting me,
Before I grieved at these plagues will be.
Too dear I prise thy beauty to repent,
Or wish I had not such sower storms endured:
Though I thy hard heart find nere to relent,
Custom and time, to woes have me inured.
What ill so great but I would willing take,
And bear the brunt assured of thy sweet sake.
The sweet remembrance of thy sight of yore,
The Only companion is of my dear life,
Thy presence was, which absent I ado^e,
My paradise and place of joy most rife.
So I al^ne am not, though None's with me,
And was in Heaven, when I thy face did see.
But this thou think not of, this is least part
Now of thy mind, nor have thou hereof care:
This never comes God knows into thy heart,
But as heat's joined with fire, and breath with air:
So cruelty in Women's stomachs dwells,
Which with Disdain (as Fury) always swells.
Ye Valleys deep withouten bottom found;
Ye Hills that match with height the azure sky;
Ye Caves by Nature hollow under ground,
Where quiet rest and silence always lie,
Thou gloomy Air which ever to the sight
Bringst darkness still, but never cheerful light.
Ye uncouth Paths, ye solitary walks,
Ye breakneck Rocks, most ghastly for to see,
Ye dreadful Dens where never any stalks,
And where scarce hissing Serpents dare to be:
Ye fatal Vaults where murdered Corses lie,
Haunted with hateful sprites continually.
Ye Wildernesses and ye Deserts wild,
Ye strangie Shores nere yet inhabited,
Ye Places from all pleasures quite exilde,
Where sad Melancholy and Grief is fled,
Hear me, who am a shadow and a Ghost,
Damnd with eternal sorrow to be crossed.
Hear me, since I am come for to bewail,
Among you, my Faith, my Constancy, and Love,
I hope with my loud Cries and drerie Tale,
Though not the Heavens, yet Hell at least to move:
Since more the Griefs are which within me grow,
Then Heaven has Pleasures, or Hell, Plagues below.
^ow can the ship be guided without Helm,
^he storm arising in a troubled Sea?
Needs must the churlish Waves it ouerwhelme,
Needs must it drown, and cast away must be.
How should I live, and not my life enjoy?
Feeding on Grief, what should I taste but Noy?
^h Cupid think upon thy Servant true,
^ crave for my Deserts but some reward:
^eeke mine Own, not more then is my due,
Hate for Goodwill to reap is too too hard.
If I for Well with Ill am paid again,
Had I done ill, what then had bin my pain?
Love with Remembrance lies in my breast,
All other Thoughts he cancels out of mind:
To think what is past I cannot quiet rest,
Yet I in those Conceits strange Joy do find,
Whils^ ^ow for her I think All I forsook,
And wholly to her Grace my self betook.
My wonted Mirth is turned into Moan,
Because my state is changde and altered quite:
In company I am as One alone,
Whilst what does Others please, does me dispite.
Ah when shall I once from these Plagues be free?
Neue^, less ALBA Mercy show to me.
My ioyles Heart a troubled Spring is like,
Which from the top^ of matchles Alps most hie,
Falls with a mighty noise down headlong right,
By uncouth stony ways most dreadfully,
Where all his Hopes he in the Deep does drown,
A fatal sign of fortunes heavy frown.
Dark pitchie clouds of hugie Mountains steep,
The loftiest part do hide from Sunny heat:
Seeld any wind of Pity there does fleet,
Them to dissolve, their thicknes is so great.
For no calm Air of gentle Love does blow,
Where swelling Anger frets in furious show.
Thence does my Tributarie Heart forth send,
Through peable stones, now here, now there along,
A little Brook into the Sea to wend,
As sign that I my duty would not wrong:
For ALBA mine, (Degree above Compar^)
A large Sea is of sundry Beauties rare.
A bitter cause, me bitter tears makes shed,
Whose envious Stepdame is a Froward Will,
Which is by Self conceit too wanton fed,
Th'efficient cause that I these drops distill:
Which though in outward show you white them see,
Yet pure Red blood they in my Body be.
^et baseborne Minds of basest matters treat,
My self (with them) to trouble I not list:
The vulgar sort (they know not what) do speak,
Whilst against the Truth and Virtue they persist.
HONOR's the mark whereat I seek to aim.
Shame light on them that think on beastly shame.
^o many men, so many Minds (they say)
Yet at the last Truth always shall prevail,
Bringing her vowed Foe unto her bay,
Falsehood (I mean) for all her masked Veil.
No Woman blame I, only I do seek,
Swanlike to sing, of my fair Sun I le^ke.
The Beauties which in other Ladies be,
^ never had once thought for to disgrace*
Mine ALBA has enough in store for me,
Thousand of Amors find I in her face:
Her wo^ld I praise, whose looks have pleased me ever,
From whom in heart disioynd I will be never.
Feign would I make mine infant Pen to swell,
Through fervent zeal to blaze her Deity,
That he her praise as Oracle might tell,
Raising the same t'the skies bright Canopie:
That she (since she deserves) might famous be,
Beyond the Bounds of All^^ons utmost Sea.
The Conclusion of the first Part.
WHo so acquainted is not with my mind,
Nor knows the Subject fair of whom I write,
Nor how mine ALBA me, to her does bind,
Of whom I still discourse, talk, and endite.
How I do hope, how I do fear and grieve,
How I do die, and how (again) I live.
Let him but LOVE seek out, and him demand;
And he shall wonders strange to him declare,
Such as at Beauties gaze shall make him stand,
So exquisite, so strange, they be and rare,
Heel tell him of so rich a Precious stone,
As like before has been enioyde of none.
And if he be desirous for to know,
The Heaven where my fair Angel does abide,
Northwest from Troynouant he will him show,
Along which place, fair MERSIE clear does glide.
WAR IN that TOWN, LOVE (Lordlik^ ^^epeth still,
Yet she (ore him) triumphs with chastest will.
Some say she is Lovely Brown; but I dare say
She is Fair, BEAVV? SE, so Fair as Fair may be,
Fairer then is the break of beauteous Day,
When sweet Aurora smileth in her glee.
Put why do I praise her self praising Face?
I praise her not, it is she, (her self) does grace.
R. T.

THE SECOND PART OF THE MONTHS MIND OF A MELANCHOLY LOVER.

By R. T. Gentleman.

AT LONDON. Printed by Felix Kingston, for Matthew Lownes. 1598.

Alla Crudelissima.
THese few (yet zealous) line come^ from my heart,
Dried with my Sighs, and written with my Tears,
I send to her the Author of my smart,
though (subtle Serpent like) she stop her ears:
Who, more to her I sue, her Grace to gain,
The more incenst against me does remain.
^ love not I to pharisie, nor praise
My self, for to her own self I appeal,
^f I devoted have not bin always,
To do her good, as one that sought her weal.
Heavens I forswear, and utterly abjure,
If that my Faith be tainted or vnpure.
Malleuolent, Malicious, Planet, Star,
Was it my Fortune, so for to be borne,
My COTE so true, to have so cross a BAR,
That for my service thus she should me skorne?
Must my dear Sun eclipsed be with Spite?
Must envious Clouds still seek to dark my Light?
What remedy? I Will think it was Fortune mine,
And not her fault) that wro^ght me all this pain:
Her Cruelty it was not, but Destnie mine,
My self, not she, was cause of mine own bane:
Yet shall ye world by this my LOVES MONTHS MIND,
A ^hast Fault, though no Folly in her find.
Since that mine ALBA took her leave of me,
I leave have took of pleasure and of joy:
And did with sorrow at that time agree,
To soiorne with him in his chief Annoy.
My Woes (still green) increase continually,
Which feign I would, but cannot remedy.
And were it not but that my dauntlesse Heart,
Does comfort me with hope of better cheer,
I soon would rid me of this uncouth smart,
And leave this life which I have bought too dear.
Often do I weep to LOVE, and him I pray,
Either to ease my pains, or me to slay.
Yet though I beg, I find but small relief,
As do at Rich men's gates the Needy poor:
Who more they cry to aggrauate their grief,
The less they find their Alms at the door.
So LOVE, the more my cries I to him sen^,
The less my plants, he skornefull does attend.
And yet my suit is small, small is the Grace
That I desire, (for somewhat I deserve)
It Is only for to die before her face,
From whom in Duty (yet) I nere did swerue:
That she might know my life does me annoy,
Unless I might her company enjoy.
Lady, when first upon fair Venus Day,
I came acquainted with thy seemly self,
And vowde thy loyal Votarie to stay,
Proffring to thee my living, life and wealth:
As I was then, so am I still the same,
Never to change, for change exchangeth shame.
Within the Center of mine inward Heart,
(As sign of everlasting Monument,
Which fatal Death shall hardly from me part)
Thy high prizde Love full surely have I pent,
Never to be removed, but there to lie,
World without end for aye, continually.
For thee I longde, for thee I much did dare,
For thee I hopte and feared, bid sweet and sower:
Liking thee, I* for Others did not care,
Ore this my Heart thou had so great a power.
All other Faces, (in respect of thine)
I skornde as Masks, thou only seemst Divine.
Since LOVE, then me with such affection framde,
That he has me adopted Thine, alone,
That I delight not but to hear thee namde,
And only like to hear thy praises shown.
Ah keep thy plighted Faith vnstainde to me,
Though now far off from hence thou Absent be.
Disdain assaulted has mine ALBA fair,
Fixing fast foot deep in her marble breast:
A blacksome Cloud has darkt my beauteous Air,
Where cheerful Sun before with smile did rest.
She most unlike her self a Tyrant shows,
Whilst as a Tiger mad with rage she grows.
All for her pleasure (me for to displease)
Pity she bandies from her tender heart:
Poison, not honey, now must her appease:
Yet my Desire runs headlong to his smart,
Headlong he runs to her spite-tainted mind,
Which over fierce and cruel he does find.
My hopeles Chance, through Veil (as twere) I see,
Her quondam beauteous eyes are bloodshot now:
Exorde, desirde, entreated, they will not be,
They Will not relent, repent, nor yield or bow:
Lightnings of Anger they do show arigh^*
Thunders of Fury darting forth despite.
The dangers great my harmeles Heart does spi^,
Yet for all this, from her he will not retire:
And whilst more humble he fore her does lie,
The more she sullen swells with wrathful Ire.
A Monster then I may her mirorise,
Since she delights in such strange Tragedies.
Dried has th'iniurious Fever those fair Flowers,
Which in the cheeks of my fair ALBA lay:
Scorcht are those paradized colored Bowers,
LOVES LOBBIE where he wantonly did play:
Yet not extinguished is mine amorous flame,
Some sparks are yet remainders of the same.
As she looks now, so looks the Moon in skies,
When among the gloomie clouds portending rain,
She with her watrie horned head forth pries,
Spreading abroad her dewie beams amain:
So we Aurora use for to depaint,
Among palish violets, when she looks faint.
Pity is mixed with grief in her fair face,
And Grief with Pity in the same conioyne,
Where LOVE (though sick) sits with a lovely grace,
In midst of sickly palenes in her eyne.
Sickness it self so lovely nere did look,
But since her Inn in ALBAS breast she took.
That stately Haughtines she had before,
Now changde is into low Humility:
And that same glance that faithles was of yore,
Now faithful shows and full of Loyalty.
So with her Color if she did Cruel take,
Yet Pitiful her Palenes does her make.
Like bloody Lion, or a stinging Snake,
With proud Disdain to aggrauate my smart,
Love into me (vnaskt) his way does take,
Died all with blood, (and Blood it is of my Heart)
Which wounded deep, still languishing does lie,
Expecting every minute when to die.
Thousands of Wounds my life has quite bereft,
And wanting blood, Palenes sits in my face:
My soul this Corse (his mansion House) has left,
Nor dares he back retire to his old place.
This Martyrdom, although there is many see,
None me caresseth, or does comfort me.
My Life runs fondly to his mortal Foe,
Hoping for Help, where he his hurt did find:
My spirits after him amain do go,
Whilst liueles Body does remain behind,
On which grim death does seize, as on h^s pray,
And of his breath to reaue him does assay.
A far off Peace I see, but War at hand,
Love single strikes me, (but with double pain)
Killed is my heart by Cruel she is Command,
And he that slew him cleped is Disdain:
Lo here of my kind Dame the Exercise,
Hate is her Chapman, Blood her Merchandise.
Praxitiles, and Myron (workmen rare)
Apelles skilde, learnde Homer (famous wight)
Were these alive, the Picture of my Fair
To carue, to cut, to paint, and thereof write,
In marble, brass, board, or in books at large,
They sone would faint, ore pressed with so great charge.
And yet may be her beauteous Countenance,
With chisell, tool, with pensell and with pen,
They rightly might have shadowed (though by chance)
Because they, in their Age were rarest Men.
But had they come the nobler part to show,
Their cunning then had soon took th'ouerthrow.
If my bright Sun (renowmd per Excellence,
Through the illustrious splendar of her gleames)
Does dim and darken our Intelligence,
By virtue of her more then radiant beams:
What Hand or Thought in hand could ever take,
A work so endless, with good end to make?
Dear ALBA I by thee am still forbid,
By Statue, Image, Picture, or by Verse,
To show the Virtues rare within thee hid,
As not being able least part to rehearse,
It shall suffice (as sacred) I admire,
Thy spotles life, thy more then chaste Desire.
To thee far off (from me) these sighs I send,
To thee far off from Love, I, near to die,
To know if thou thy self will mind wilt mend,
Desisting from thy hateful Cruelty.
Beauty if it be mild, it is renound;
If it be proud, a foul reproach it is found.
Thou makst a show as if thou would be kind:
But it is a shadow, not a substance right:
For coming unto trial straight I find,
Thy sdainfull chaste looks puts my Hope to flight:
Whilst thou do seem at these my Woes to grieve,
Yet them with succor never do relieve.
Thy Grief (for me) a passion's in a play,
Which men does ravish with Melancholy:
But acted once, and out of sight away,
In mind, no longer there does stay, but die:
Thou art the Actor playing such a part,
My griefs near deeply pearce into thy heart.
O would I could from Reasons Court obtain,
A Supersedeas, LOVE for to remove,
From out my Breast to thee to ease my pain,
That thou the force thereof a while might prove.
But Destnie wills that I thy slave do stay,
And so I will, who bound is, must obey.
Why have the Heavens thus changed mine Estate?
Deserving well to complot my Decay?
Why rather was not so ordainde my fate,
That ALBA nere should wend from me away?
I never changing my first vowed Love,
Why should (unconstant she) from me remove?
(Fond man) is she unconstant to be calde,
Who after course of world does run her race?
Are not all men by fortune pulled and halde,
Never to bide (still) in one certain place?
Nothing is more commended in the Sea,
Then th'often Ebbings, and the Flowings be.
Ah ALBA, if thou should continue still
In one self place, it would be a Paradise:
But thou (t'allay our proud Affections will)
T'eclipse thine own perfections do devise,
Think^^g it is enough, if but with eye
We joy a small glimse of thy Majesty.
Then to increase our Griefs, thou do decrease
Our pleasures, and thy self from us do hide,
When we for nothing looked but peace and ease,
Even at thy Best, and in thy Beauties pride.
But why talk I, where I cannot be hard?
Or heard she me, she would not me regard.
Where are my Vows withouten number now?
My tears withouten measure that I shed?
My skalding sighs to make proud ALBA bow?
They all are gone, forgot, quite banished.
Yet though they not deserve her love they crave,
Me thinks some better fortune they should have.
But if the Gods in judgment partial fit,
Unequal viewers of each injury:
And with condign revenge seek not to quit
So monstrous wrong, such nere heard Cruelty:
Why then I Reason none for Lovers see,
That they should bide such pain for loyalty.
Yet neither Hopes preferment, were it great,
Nor fear of punishment, though to my pain:
Nor counsel of the Wisest that entreat,
Nor company of best where I remain,
Shall ever make me once my Humor change,
Nor from my first devoted Vow to range.
My youths chief Flower (of all my life the prime)
In melancholy passion I will spend:
Careless behavior shall my latter time
(Because (forsook) she cares not for me) end.
Thus will I still continue during breath,
Doting on her, who does devise my death.
Fond that I am like Greekish Wrastler vain,
Striving to lift a weight impossible,
I caught so strange incurable a strain,
As thereby (bruised sore) I brainsick fell:
Fixing my thoughts above my reach, I fall
Into Disease, without recure at all.
The stately Cedar whose tops seem in show,
For height, to reach unto the azur'd sky,
Never his head bows to the shrubs below,
That in the deep and hollow Valleys lie.
Th'yuie that climing up by th'elme does run,
Never can get hold of the beams of Sun.
ALBA I honor in humility,
Whom none ought, or should dare venture to love:
Though I presume with importunity,
Sometimes my suit (in vain to her to move:
For her ^ffections be immortal, rare,
Her virtues such as infinite they are.
Then suffer me to gaze on ALBA mine,
With my minds eyes, though absent now she be:
I knew when I enioyde her sight (ah happy time)
That time (I fear) I never more shall see.
But it is all one, for were the Cruel here,
I of my purpose should be nere the near.
Am I so mad, to think that such a Toy,
As Sorcerie is, should ought prevail for me,
That witchcraft power has for to make me joy;
And cause me here, mine absent Mistres see?
I cannot choose but think all to be tales,
And that Enchantment little here preuailes.
What though the Sun is darkened by this skill,
And Moone's remoude from out her settled course;
Wild beasts made stand, amazed, tame, and still,
And waters turnde from their first wonted sours:
Yet cannot Art, by force make settled Love,
From his first Center (where he rests) move.
The Gods, not men, do rule the inward Heart,
They can appoint Affection as they please;
Stones, Yearbs, and Words, may vsen be by Art;
Yet these the Lovers griefs can smalely ease,
Not Exorsisms, Spells, Metals, Planets, Fire,
Can alter once the settled firm Desire.
Then I Will with Discontent be satisfied,
And hopeles live in hope, though Hope in vain:
Resolving all base coins to abide,
Since I despair her grace for to obtain:
Unhappy I, may case ore desperate,
No Skill nor cunning can my pain abate.
Hard hap had I, to fall into thy hand,
Who give thy self to endless cruelty;
When to thy flintie heart wilt give command,
To change his wont, and somewhat gentler be?
Will thou thy Beauty fair, adulterise,
And seekst thou still on me to tiranise?
Ift possible thy years so few and small,
So many ancient mischiefs should contain,
Thy swelling pride, I long have borne withal,
Because that Beauty thereof is to blame.
Which still the more in fairenes it exceedes,
The more it joys in coy disdained deeds.
I grieve at thy devises against me wrought,
And sorrow, that wits sharper that they show,
The shroder and vnhappier should be thought,
Prone unto ill, but unto Goodness slow.
But for ^o seek to murder (through disdain)
A harmeles heart, is worse then Murderers stain.
What moves thee then, thy self thus to disgrace,
Unfitting for thy Sex, where naught should be
But kindenes mild; far altring from thy face,
Where nothing but rare beauty we can see?
If then so fair a Sun, such foul clouds hide,
Let me still in eternal Darkness bide,
The bitter plaints wherewith my soul I wound,
With skalding sighs which smoke from forth my breast:
My cheeks through grief, pale wan and hollow found,
My troubled Thoughts which reaue me of my re^t:
Salt watrie tears, which rain from blubb^ing eye,
Warm blood from Ha^t distilling inwardly.
The servile yoke which did my freedom break,
My willing mind to do what wild Command,
The state wherein I brought my self most weak,
The frost and fire wherein I still did stand,
The snare in which LOVE wrapped me so about,
As from the same I nere (yet) could get out.
All these, and many another worser grief,
Are no such plagues as is that Marble Heart,
(That Marble Heart) that yields me no relief,
Nor ever sought some comfort to impart.
The revolution of the Heavens, nor any ^ime,
Can make (that Breast) to yield to my Design.
Virtue does hinder it, in my despite,
Chaste Honesty maintains her in her force:
Then LOVE farewell, all Hope I Will banish quite,
I see in Flint is found no kind remorse.
If Tears, Vows, Gifts, Prayers, Oaths no good can do,
Nor Love obtain; in vain it is then to sue.
Dear to my Soul (for Dear I may thee call,)
Since thou far dearer then my self I hold,
When will thou rid me from this loathed thrall,
In which I am through Fancies bands enrold?
When will thou keep thy promise unto me?
Whereof no deeds, but words I yet can see.
Why (doubtful still) do thou my joys prolong?
And driuste me of, in dalliance without cause?
Me and thy self, why do thou double wrong?
To keep thy word, why, so long do thou pause?
Thus for to love thy golden ^ime, it is sin,
Which once being past, again, thou can not win.
Matters of state we use to politize,
Procrastinating for advantage great,
LOVE, lingering hates, and lothes to temporize,
Delaie's too ^olde, for his orewarmed heat:
Ah, do not drive me of thus (still) in vain,
Still for to lose it is much, once let me gain.
Dearer to me then the apple of mine eyes,
Let word and deed, but once for all agree,
Not any can in face thee equalize,
If but a little more thou kind would be.
Then with allusiue Sightes, feed not me still,
But grant (at last) for to perform my will.
Ye luke warm Tears which from my nere dride eyes,
Stream down amain like fountains day and night,
Wend to my Lady in most humble wise,
And show to her, my most unhappy plight:
Wend unto her, who outwardly in show,
Seems pitiful, but (inward) is not so.
Weep you ^o her and say; Is It possible
A Creature that so courteous seems to all,
Should have a heart more cruel and more fell
Then Tiger, harder then a stony wall?
Ah why seems she not inwardly as kind,
As she does outward show, the world to blind?
This my Icarian soaring (boue my reach)
(Though Beauty, serenising falls my Heart)
How I ore bold, my headlong fall does teach,
Whilst LOVE does play against me a subtle part:
Yet Beauties Birth I am, by her I breath,
Though live against her favor and her leave.
Wild fire with milk is quenched, rigor with tears,
Yet naught her stubborn mind can mollify,
Unto my prayers she stops her deafened ears,
And with Despair requites my Courtesy,
Thus am I still star crossed in my Love,
As one bewitched, with whom no good does prove.
How long shall I diue in this vastie Sea,
To find this Perle, this Orient MARGARITE!
How long this bottom founding shall I be?
Yet nere attain this precious Jewel bright?
My labors (like to Hercules) abound,
Who more he did, the more to do, still found.
I am too weak with Ospraies eyes to look,
Against the fiery beams of this fair Sun,
Too great a Burden have I fondly took,
For my weak shoulders long since overcome.
The more I seek, the farther I, to find,
Like to the wretch, that of his sight is blind.
My bruised Bulwark is not strong enough,
For to resist this beauteous Battery,
My yoke too small, to draw so huge a plough,
Mine eyes too dim, such Brightness to descries
This sh^wes, that as unlucky I was borne,
To die unfortunate I must not scorn.
Yet I Will not leave to intercessionate,
To her hard Breast, for my too gentle Heart:
That if her Rigor she will not mitigate,
At least she will somewhat ease me of this Smart:
I only crave, if she will not yield relief,
T'adiourne my pain, and to proroge my Grief.
Thrice trebble blessed BRACELET, rich in prise,
I envy not thy perlie fret, nor gold,
But fortune thine, because in happy wise,
The place of perfect pleasure thou do hold.
About that wrist thou turnst and windst so often,
More white then Snow, then thistle down more soft.
Base minds love Gold, it is not thy Gold I steeme,
For this I only value thee at much,
Because an Ornament thou art to be seen,
Of her white Hand yclept of right, NONESVCH,
NONESVCH indeed, whose Beauty is so rare,
As nere the like, attainde the perfects Fair.
This is the cause so highly I thee rate,
As all the golden Mines of Indian ground,
Nor Seas of Pearl can counteruaile thy state,
Wherein thou art this present to be found.
And, if that truth I shall confess inde^^e,
The wealth of all the world thou do exceed.
But when I mark, how by strange cunning Art,
Fair lovely Hairs, with Pearl and Gold conioyne,
A pleasing joy does seize upon my Heart,
Whilst with strange pleasures, Fancy feeds my mind,
So as (sweet BRACELET) thou do rightly prove,
To be th'enchantment of bewitching LOVE.
Live Lovely Fame, which when thou first did take,
Possession of my Heart, were stony cold,
And bashful; but when entrance thou did make,
Then, as Triumphant thou did keep thy hold:
Changing both Thought and state, that where before
Cold chillie Ye was, hot Desire burnt sore.
If I thee honor, worship, serve, and love,
He knows, who guides the restles Globe on high,
But envious Fates on me their force do prove,
And me, from thee have banished spitefully.
So that more pain I do each hour abide,
Then if that thousands sorts of deaths I did.
But fore that peereles matchles shape of thine,
(The better part wherein my Soul does rest)
Shall out of mind, or memory of mine,
(Whereby I only happy live and blessed,)
All things shall chance, impossible that be,
My self, forget my self will I, fore thee.
The Sun shall lose his power, and dark become,
The Skies shall melt, and into horror fall,
The earth shall sink, the world be quite undone,
And fore this chance, all strange things happen shall.
Though (now) thou bidste in Albions fruitful land,
And I, where Mantuan Duke, his Court does stand.
Mantua.

Such as do liggen in Delight and joy,
And have what Heart can wish, or Thought devise,
Spending their time withouten dire Annoy,
Living amongst their friends in iocondwise,
And who with Love of Ladies theirs are blessed,
May in Eternam Requiem, happy rest.
Me, silly Trauailer (a pilgrim poor)
(Who through hard hap these blessings all do miss)
Care does become, since want I do endure
Of Country, Friends, and Love, my chiefest bliss:
And yet this CARE not Ill, but well, with me,
Observing still Decorum does agree.
A Trauailer, far from his Native coast,
With Care does rise, with Care him down does lay:
And though from pillar tossed he be to post,
When All him leave, yet Care with him does stay.
Not like vain pleasure, who away does p^ake,
When he his Bark through want perceiues to leake.
Thanks then to Care, of Poor the comfort chief,
The best companion that we Strangers find,
In Countries strange forlorn, without relief,
Who quiet, gentle, patient is and kind.
Then constant CARE, not Comfort I do crave,
And (might I choose) I CARE with L. would have.
This Tower, this Castle, this huge Prison strong,
Begirt with high and double fenced Wall,
(Where I to be kept prisoner, thus have wrong)
Can never hurt, nor do me harm at all:
Since I was pent here, I am (nothing changde)
But as before, when I abroad still rangde.
This place restraines my Bodies liberty,
But has no power over my Thoughts or Mind,
Which is the cause I count my self most free,
Though I my self in greatest Bondage find,
I can so feed on Fancy, and subdue
Envy, by sweet Imagination true.
No sweeter Music to the Miserable,
Than is Despair: therefore the more I feel
Of bitterness, of sorrow sower and fell,
The more of Sweetness it does seem to yield.
Vaine' esteem my life, all liberty,
Since I do want mine ALBAS Company.
Use, Misery has made familiar now
With me, that I count sorrow chiefest Joy:
And him the welcomst Guest I do allow,
That saddest tales can tell of bloodiest Noy.
Then (Cruel) think what life I still have led,
Since so in post away from me thou art fled.
Thrice precious purse, by dainty Hand ywrought,
Of Beauties First Borne, Favors rightful Heir,
Not for a world of wealth, purchased or bought,
But freely given (for Love) by ALBA fair:
Given to me, unworthy of the same,
As one not meriting so great a Gain.
It Is not the richnes hereof, though it is much,
Nor rarenes of the work surpassing skill,
That I account of, though that it be such,
As every eye, with masement it does fill:
But cause it was made by that Alconquering Hand,
Whose beck, eue^ Loves own self does counterma^d.
Dan Fortunatus Bag, which Histories
Affirm, endless to be for golden store,
And that it held of Quoyne Infinities,
To this my purse is needy, base and poor,
Gold in the inside (only) of his purse wa^ seen,
But mine, has (always) Gold without and (...)*
Pure gold it is wrought with, yet her Hairs more bright,
Saft is the Silk, more fast her snowie skin,
Orient the Perle, yet are her teeth more white,
The Culler^ rare; her cheeks the prise, tho win:
Ah precious Purse, where what I do behold,
Are Colors rare, fine Perle, saft Silk, pure Gold.
Warm showers rain fast from forth my blubbred eyes,
My heavy Thoughts are Clouds ^eplete with woes:
Hot lively Flames from out my breast arise,
My skalding sighs the wind's that forth them blows:
Fire burning Cancer and Aquarius cold,
Ore me their powers predominant do hold.
The flames, thems^lues up to the heavens lift,
Where they by thousands round about do turn:
The waters run like to a Torrent swift;
Hence comes it that my self I drown and burn,
By reason of two spiteful Qualities,
(Moisture and Heat) my life in danger lies.
My tears a great stream make, they so abound,
A quenchles burning this my secret Fire:
Hope does despair, and there her self has drownde,
And Heart to cinders burns through her Desire:
Fancy (...) frolike, and does still revive,
Reason's so sick, not long she will keep alive.
ALBA my Tears accounts as a Toy,
And for a sport mine ardent Heat she holds:
For in her eyes, Cocitus (me to noy)
And Phlegeton in breast she fierce enfolds.
Thus she my Heart does still anatomise,
With keenest rasor of her Crueltise.
Hairs lovely Brown immured with pearl and gold,
How ill fits you this Ribbon Carnatine,
Since I no more your Mistress now behold,
Of my disaster, most unlucky sign,
Who to me gave this Bracelet for a FAVOR,
A work by Beauty framde through LOVES true labor*
How often would she, bout my Wrist still pry,
And vnderminde me (by devise) as twere,
Making a show of Doubt and Jealousy,
As if I it forgot bout me to bear?
But now I fear me, through her staying ore long,
Both LOVE, Her self, and Me, she much does wrong.
Who ever saw a Beauty such, so fair,
Lodgde in a subject so unconstant found?
Who ever saw more loyal Lover rare,
To ^uch hard Fortune (causeles) to be bound?
Ah why is not (as is her face) her Mind,
Th'one's Fair, the other, I Forgetful find.
Then lovely Hairs, my dearest Hearts best Ease,
You must from Handwrist mine to Hatband black:
There must you bide, though me it does displease,
Since whom I would, I most of all do lack.
This sable place does fit you best to mourn,
Where you unseen, shall lie till she return.
^h happy Handkercher, that keepst the sign,
As only Monument unto my Fame)
How dear my Love was to sweet ALBA mine,
When (so) to show my Love she did me blame.
Relic of LOVE I do not envy thee,
Though whom thy Master cannot, thou do see.
Only let me entreat this Favor small,
When in her chamber all alone by chance,
Open her pretty Casket for some work she shall,
And hap her eye on thee unawares to glance:
Ah, then the color of her face but mark,
And thou by that shall know her inward heart.
If she shall blush, and grieve, thee so to view,
And wistly cast on thee a piteous eye,
It is a sign her love continues true,
And that her faith she does not falsify.
Ah, the^ (a fresh) (her faith more firm to move)
Bleed thou again, for to revive her Love.
But if she (seeing thee) no account does make,
Flinging thee here and there without regard:
Know then expired is my loving Date,
My Hope deceived, my Fortune over hard.
Yet if she does but sighing say to thee,
(Saftly) (Farewell dear SERVANT) happy me.
Those ebbon windows sweet, those cheerful eyes,
Where LOVE (at LAVVGH and sweet look on) does play
Are on the sudden changde in strangie wise,
And do Disdaines Ensign (against me) display:
Dark now they seem, and sower, ore passing bad,
Making my life seem to me black and sad.
Those cheerful eyes, which wont to comfort me,
And to mine hangrie soul yield nourishment,
Deny me food, nor will they pleased be,
But mew me up, as starueling closely pent.
My walks I v^de, which fair and easy were,
Are stopped with blood-drawing bra^bles every where.
My crased heart thus skorned for his Love,
And plagude with proud disdain and sdainfull Pride,
Wa^les so as would a Rock (though flintie) move:
Nor ^etter course has this Disgrace to bide,
Then sighs and Tears, which forth he se^ds apace,
And damned like) still begs, but nere finds grace.
Sweet stay of my weak tottring life nie fallen,
^alme to my wounds, and Cordial to my grief,
^^ght to my darkness, to my storm, mild Calm,
Ease to my pain, and to my want, Relief.
Ah who has now (and that so suddenly)
Of pity thee deprived, to make me die?
Poor wasted Heart that wandrest not astray,
Although the PEARL her orient color change:
Thou, which in thy first Faith unstained do stay,
Although she from her plighted vow does range.
Ah, where are now thy cheerful days of Hope?
Thy Lives line, Love, what wretched hand has broke?
Alas, poor soul, how badly art thou used,
For thy much loving (loving over long?)
Causeles without desert to be refusde,
And for thy right to be repaid with wrong?
(Fond) do betimes from Fancies Fort retire,
Reason retain, and banish rash Desire.
What meanst thou careless thus to seek thy Car^?
Call home thy Wits, give ore although with loss:
Else like one blindfold art thou caught in snare,
And wilt too late return by weeping cross.
See no^ that shut is Loves sweet passage plain,
That opens wide the path of proud Disdain?
If so, why should thou beg (in vain) for grace?
Rather demand thy pasport and away:
Better at first give ore in midst of Race,
Then lose in the end, though longer time thou stay.
Then if she will not admit thee as a friend,
Let her thee manum it (as Free) to wend.
O that I were where bides mine ALBA fair,
Whose person to possess is pleasure such,
As drives away all melancholy Care,
Which does the Heart through Griefs impression touch
Whose lovely Locks All do more curious deem,
When they most careless to be dressed seem.
Her sweet Looks most alluring be, when they
Most chaste do seem in modest glancing show:
Her words, the more they virtuously do way,
The more (in coun^) for amorous they go:
Her dressings such, as when neglected most,
She Is thought as then to have bestowd most cost.
Sweet Fortune, when I meet my lovely Treasure,
Dash my Delights with some small light disgrace,
Lest I (enjoying sweetness boue all measure)
Surfeit without recure on that fair face.
Her wonted coyness let her use a while,
My fierce Desire by Diet to beguile.
Lest with the fulness of my joys, abate
The sweetness, and I perish straight before
I do possess them, at too dear a rate.
But soft (Fond Icarus) how high wilt soar?
Thou dreamst I think, or foulie do mistake,
I dream indeed, Ah might I never wake.
Like as the Hawke cast from the Faulkners fist,
Freed from the Mew does (joyful) take his flight,
Soaring aloft in the air as best him list,
Now here, now there, does find no small delight,
Enjoying that, which Treasures all does pass,
(His liberty) wherefore he prisoner was.
But when th'acquainted Hollow he does hear,
And sees the Lure cast forth him home to train,
As one obedient full of awful fear,
He leaves his flight, and backward turns again,
Choosing in ancient bonds for to be bound,
Fore faithles to his Lord he will be found:
So (ALBA) though I wanton, otherwhile,
Do run abroad, and other Ladies court,
Seeking the time with pleasures to beguile,
And often my self with words of course do sport,
Dissem^^^ng with Dissemblers cunningly,
As is the guise, with tongue, with hand, and Eye.
Yet when I think upon thy face divine,
Thy Beauty calls me home, straight as a Lure,
All other banishing from Heart of mine,
And in LOVES Bands to thee does bind me sure.
And since my Faith, and Fates do so ordain,
I am content thy prisoner to remain.
Where are those Hairs so lovely Brown in show?
Where is that snowy Mount of Iuorie white?
With damask Rose where do the Lillies grow?
Whose Colors and whose sweetness All delight?
Where are those cheerful Lights, Lamps of clear Love,
Wherein, a beauteous Heaven does always move
Where are those Margarite Pearls withouten prise,
And Rubies rich (my matchles Treasures store)
With other Graces, wonders to the Wise,
Worthy that every Laurel them adore?
I know not I, unless in her they be,
In Her who is Fair, Alas too Fair for me.
Why have not then my Stars so courteous bin,
In this to me, as they are in the rest,
That I by lofty style might Beauty win,
And blaze abroad her praise deserving best?
Why have not I the Gift, her Gifts to th^nder,
And make the world thereat admire and wonder!
Could I (but as she does deserve aright)
Sing as a Cignet sweet with pleasing vain,
Her Virtues rare, her staining Beauties sight,
As I am blunt in Wit, and dull in Brain,
I then should see, her Courteous, Gentle, Mild,
Where now I find her, Cruel, Proud and Wild.
Needs must I ALBA leave, yet she will not part,
Though I do love her, yet still my Desire,
Seeks her to keep in Closet of my Heart;
And though she does against me thus conspire,
Yet with my Soul, I must her Error moan,
Since so vnkindelie she her self has shown.
My secret griefs I Will in my self disiest;
The world shall never know her hateful Pride,
Her shame (my Bane) I will conceal in breast,
And as a Monument there shall it bide.
ALBA farewell, all pity now is fled,
And since it is so, Adieu, I am but Dead.
But thou (my Heart) come thou from her thy way;
It Is time (I think) to leave that witching face,
Where too too much unkindness still does stay;
For Loyal Love, there is no resting place.
Simple ^^odwill, to so^ourne finds it vain,
Where Thoughts are falls, and Double do remain,
My nere stainde Faith, my life shall testify,
To future Age, that shall hereafter come,
To show the world my spotles Loyalty:
And yet perhaps again may shine the Sun,
When as my Truth unto her being known,
She may at last receive me for her own.
The Conclusion of the second Part.
IF I should count the spending of my time,
Since Her I lost, with whom I left my life;
How I in Grief without relief do pine.
My seldom Pleasures, and my Corsies rife,
If I should take upon me, these to tell,
It were in vain, for it were impossibell.
Yet still the more I suffer for her sake,
The more my Heart does study to endure,
The world shall know the Penance he does make,
And how his Thoughts are loyal, chaste, and pure.
So small account he makes for to die,
At his own Death he seeks wilfully.
Of Her he still does buzze me in the ear,
And will me make a Journey to that place,
To have a sight of Her, (to him so dear)
Whose beauteous shape all Beauties does disgrace.
Alas I would full feign, Her self does know.
But Danger to offend, does still say No.
Then since poor Heart, thou can not have thy will,
But longst ^or what thou never shall obtain,
Consume t^y self with thy recureles ill,
As Women, that with Longing breed their ban^.
And as thou die, let this thy Comfort be,
Thy LOVE was VERTVE, hers was CHASTITY.
R.T.

THE THIRD PART OF THE MONTHS MIND OF A MELANCHOLY LOVER.
By R. T. Gentleman.

AT LONDON. Printed by Felix Kingston, for Matthew Lownes. 1598.

Alla Crudelissima.
LO here the course spun Web of Discontent,
Extract from out the cause of my true Grief,
The Quintesence of my Complaint close pent,
Wherein my Heart has line without relief:
The Glass wherein my sorrows each may see,
Thou cruel ALBA, thus haste plagued me.
Think on the Mestfull MONTHS MIND I still keep,
Depriude of thee, how I do live forlorn,
All night I sigh, all day I wail and weep,
As one that has all pleasures quite forsworn:
Thus (ca^efull I) do care for careless thee,
Whilst wretchles thou, makst no account of me.
Knewst thou what it were to Love, and what to hate,
I know with Malice thine thou would dispense,
And would enhaunce my Bale to blissful state,
And Love with Love, not Rigor recompense;
Ah against me do not thou thy wrath incite,
Monstrous it is, Love to repay^e with spite.
Be gracious then, though I have graceles bin,
Let Favor thine, above my Merit show,
Against the Tide, why should thou always swim;
And as a froward Tortoys backward go?
Not Night, but Light give me with those fair Eyes,
Fierce Serpents (not mild Doves) enuenomise.
To thee (Dear Fair) that make me fare amiss,
To thee my Goddess I my prayers make,
And prostrate fall before thy Shrine of Bliss,
Craving of thee, that them in worth thou take,
Whilst I to thee my Heart in humble wise,
Upon thy beauteous Altar sacrifise.
Peruse with kindenes this my sad complaint,
Since I with patience do abide the pain,
And but thy willing ear herewith acquaint,
So thy remembrance not forget the same:
Thy heart against me, not still induratize,
But my sad thoughts in me retranquillize.
I will not leave, until I leave to love,
(And leave to love, I will not till I die)
But thy hard flintie Breast, I Will somewhat move,
To moan my Grief, the cause I always cry.
Cry will I to thee till my Voice be ho^rse,
And never leave thee till thou take remorse.
From thy fair eyes, the Suns Pr^cursors bright,
This fire has sprung, which all my parts does burn,
No Art-Enammeld lines that I do write,
No prays nor prayers, to Mercy th^e ^an turn:
Yet come the worst, the Age (to come) shall say,
I bare the prize for Constancy away.
Burnham.

Now earthly Goddess have thou some regard
To me thy servant, craving what is just,
Though long at last, yield to me some reward,
Since I rely on thee, and wholly trust.
Think on the penance sore I do endure,
Which to my Soul, thine Absence does procure.
Support my feeble Thoughts, that scarce can move,
For thou were wont, such, better to commend,
Who would persist more loyal in their Love,
And persevere unto the latest end,
Then those, who when Loves course they began to run,
Would give it ore, before half way were done.
I cannot do so, for my longing Heart,
Is knit in thine, in such perfection strange,
That Death these twain in sunder cannot part,
Nor length of Time, nor Places distance change:
Thy Be^utious Virtue, Virtuous Beauty ti^,
That makes me joy in noy, take Bale for blis.
Ah where art thou kind Friendship that of yore,
Still with thy cheerful smile, did comfort me?
And sweetly would with me my state deplore,
When heavy, sad, and grieved thou did me see?
Ah where are those Alcinoi days as now?
I Metamorphosde am, I know not how.
Clear shines the Son, yet shines it not on me,
Fair is the Morn, yet dark^ned is my Light,
Others the Spring, I Fall of leaf do see,
Whilst I enjoy no Day, but gloomy Night;
Thou art the cause (sweet ALBA for thy Love,
In absence thine) these bitter-Brunts I prove.
Whilst thou like Princess entertained art,
By thy kind Tenants in most dutious wise,
Seeking to show the zeal of their pure Heart,
By all the pleasing means they can devise.
Striving who shall thee better entertain,
(Signs of thy welcome home to them again.)
I here am left alone, all post alone,
As LOVES true Pledge, that lies for Faith to Pawn,
Only to wait thy parture and to moan,
Whilst my Conceits on Sorrows Tent are drawn,
Like to the Bird, on solitary branch,
Wailing his Mates sour loss through hard mischa^ce.
Then lovely thou my Hearts dear Treasurer,
Let me obtain this Favor at thy Grace,
That tho^ delay no longer nor defer,
But daine me once more, see thy heavenly face.
Else here I vow, (if so thou come not soon)
Me, shall thou not see, thou shall see my Foome.
Now that my weary spirits do run their race,
To those transplendent Lamps of ALBA fair:
And gazing there (in vain) do plead for grace,
Leaving their ancient lodging nakte and bare.
She as their Foe stands on her Bravery,
And passage to their Entrance does deny.
They finding shut fast close mild Pities gate,
And seeing in what danger I remain,
With haste return from whence they came of late,
Retiring to their wonted Home again,
Where they repose, of Hope quite dispossessed,
And there with Fear and Care together rest.
Disdain those eyes spoils, that before were bright,
And fierce Desire, that to revenge has mind
Increases still in heart to work me spite,
Devising how to make her more unkind:
The or^, the Bellows unto Fury blows,
The other, Slave to wrathful Anger shows.
But though to me she seems as pitilesse,
Seeking my Death, without cause to conspire:
Yet wi^^ I bear with all wrongs nere the less,
Resolved to bide the utmost of her Ire:
Against her wrath I Will true and Humble be,
For Faith's my Fence, my Shield's, Humility.
Poor Meleager being in disdain,
With furious Altea (cruel mother his)
She flang his fatal Brand in fiery flame,
Long time kept by her, (as her chiefest blis)
So as through fire it did (consumde) decay,
His wretched life did peece-meale waste away.
Altea, mine ALBA is, Meleager, I,
The fatal Brand where bides my life, her Love:
No longer then she keeps this happily
For me, no longer may my spirits move,
Long time Affection kept it, but as now,
She flings it in the flame with angry brow.
Anger's the Fire, Suspect kindles the Flame,
Conceit's the Bel^owes, wherewith she does blow:
Haste was the hand which flung it in the same,
The Coals, Unkindness, that did burn it so.
Ah, but one drop of Water of her Grace,
If so I had, twould quenched be in small space.
Thus do I burn, and burning breathe my last,
And breathing last, to naught consume away:
Like to that Lamp whose Oil when it does waste,
By lesser light, and lesser does decay.
Yet in this Fire I cry still for to move her,
Ah pi^ie me th'vnhappiest loyal Lover.
Thou solitary Mountain, Mount of Moan,
Pleasing to me, mine only solace chief,
How like are we? we two seem but as One,
Since thou shewst sad, and I still, to have Grief,
Thou with wild sauadge Woods art compast round,
And in my Breast sharp austere Thoughts are found.
The huger Hill in bigness thou do show,
The more, (All) thee uncouth and sauadge deem:
The more that I in years in Love do grow,
The more deformed Creature I do seem.
Water from thee, from every side does come,
And tears from out mine eyes as Fountains run.
Thou do abide the blustering furious wind,
The pain of skalding sighs perforce I feel:
Tempests and storms, to thee are often unkind,
But worse to me is ALBAS Heart of steel:
Tho^ ^rooken art by Jove's sire from above,
And I am blasted with Lightning of Love.
Thou want Fruit, and I am without Heart,
Only in this my Griefs do thine exceed,
That where as thou insensible still art,
I (living) feel too well the Brunt indeed.
Yet were thou worse I like in thee to stay,
Since that my Pearl, mine ALBA's gone her way:
O that I might my Griefs set down at large,
And to the world make known mine Injury:
But I not dare, the Cruel gives in charge
Them to keep close, and This bear patiently:
Being so grievous, as but part to know,
Would make the flintiest Heart to split for woe.
Besides, if I my Crosses should reveal,
They would renew my sorrows fresh again:
Therefore I vowed have them to conceal,
The more to feel the depth of lasting Pain:
Reaping not only discontent hereby,
^ut all Despair of future remedy.
How secret have I bin, this seven whole year,
That scarce I have not yet, nor yet scarce dare
To tell her Name, I so much still do fear,
To purchase the anger of this ^dainfull FAIR*
How Faithful, that have offered her to plea^e,
To dye for her? so ought I might her ease.
But what auailes all this? for all my grief,
I cannot hope she ever will be kind:
When she was present I nere found relief,
And (in her absence) think you she will me mind?
O no, as likely ^is, she will pity me,
As I am like (unlikely) her to see.
^o great a grief did never pearce the Heart,
Of any loving Mother over kind,
When she her only son ready to part,
Does see to foreign Country against her mind,
Losing the staff of her old Age and stay,
On whom the Hope of all her Comfort lay;
As woeful I, when I those lovely Eyes
Saw to look back, which I should see no more
Of many days, and when in pitious wise,
They showed by signs Our parting grieved them sore.
Ah when her last look back on me she cast,
Then, then, I thought I should have breathed my last.
Yet for my Hearts sake did my spi^its revive,
And life once more recovered they again,
Whilst staring after her I kept alive,
And thought that I (not seeing her) saw her plain,
Long t^me my Powers were got into my sight,
Deluding me with pleasing false Delight.
But now that her rare Beauty lives else where,
I Will wail with tears her Absence, (my Disgrace)
With weeping I my sight away will wear,
Which skornes to look on any but that Face.
Eyes be Recluses, you can weep no more,
And (Heart) since She is gone, weep bloody gore.
Ye Hoarie Hills and Icie waters cold,
If what fresh April gives; sharp Iani^^ere
To take away from you himself shows bold:
Yet quickly does the Sun with pleasing cheer,
Restore to you your Liuerie^ green again,
And flowring Banks longst which you streme a^^ain.
But now to me, from whom mine ALBA fair,
Still hides her self, all Hope is withered quite:
Nor will she show her self, to ease my Care,
For my young Plant an envious frost does bite,
Since that same heart that gentle was of yore,
Hardening it self against me, still swells more.
Nature (you) gouernes, but Love rules ore me;
Nature is loving as a Mother kind,
Love, worse then cruel S^epd^me is to see,
And to my loss (against conscience) does me bind,
Taking from me mine ancient Privilege
Whereby I live, my days for to ab^idge.
Then happy Hills you shall be green again,
And blessed Springs your Courses you shall hold:
But if that she revive not that has slain,
I soon shall dye, Conceit is grown so cold,
Lest her warm Sun glide hither it to thaw,
My freezing Heart no more his breath shall draw.
How long shall I knock at that Iron Gate,
Of thy hard Heart, for mercy? (but in vain?)
How long my Griefs to thy deaffe ears relate,
And reap naught else but travel for my pain?
Yet still I Will hope, since Acornes, Oaks become,
And tynie drops prove Floods that streaming run.
Thy f^ce is fair, yield Favor then to me;
Thy heart is flesh, not bone, then gently show;
Ah let thy Love with thy sweet Cheer agree;
And to atonement we shall quickly grow:
My Love which is to thee more then extreme,
Requite not with a fortune, over mean.
If thou should be Unfaithful in thy Love,
Where should I fly for succor, or for Truth?
If th'owlt not hear my suit, whom should I move?
If thou be Cruel, who will then show Ruth?
If thou ^eceit shall use, twill likely be,
Others dispense will with deepst subtlety.
More trial then thou have had thou can not have;
(How often) my secret Hearts depth will thou sound?
Will thou my blood spill when thou may it save?
When thou may heal my Grief, still will thou wound?
Ah do not ( Surgion like) Anatomise,
Each mu^^le of my grief in cruel wise,
Sick in my lothed Bed I languish fast,
Nor can my learned Doctor help me ought,
His cunning now is at the latest cast,
Yet he no ease to crased me has brought.
And marvel none though he no help can find,
Sick am I not in Body, but in mind.
My heart each hour does worse and worser prove,
And my Disease increases more and more,
Because he wants her sight whom I do love:
Nor can I have a salve for this my sore,
Less so much labor, LOVE for me does take,
As my Physician, ALBA fair to make.
Sick is my soul, my Body languisheth,
Th'one's far from health, the other's nothing nie:
So as I doubtful l^ue, scarce drawing breath,
Twixt fear and hope in this extremity.
A strange Consumption has me wasted l^ng,
And for a Pearl restoratiue I long.
This for me, then all Physic is most sure,
Or else I doubt I never shall be whole:
For whilst that Nature would my Body cure,
Love pestilenzing) does infect my soul.
Then ALBA show now if thou be'st Divine,
Raise Dead to life, for now, or nere it is time.
Why should I love, when I am loathed still?
And praise her still, who seeks me to dispraise?
Why should grave reason yield to headstrong will,
My Griefs the more to multiply and raise.
I do commit Idolatry extreme
With her, whom I should rather right blaspheme.
Fire if it warm not, for no Fire we deem,
The Sun, no Sun we count, except it shine,
Water, no water, bu^ it were do seem,
Virtue, no Virtue, lest it show some sign;
No Woman is she, that's not pitiful,
Rather Pri^es Spaune, a nice disdainefull Trull.
Have I transgrest the Bounds of Modesty?
Whispering indecent speeches in her Ear,
Or have I (ere) assailde her Chastity,
And sought the spoil thereof away to bear?
If I have ^^^mde my self in such gross wise,
Why then she reason has me to despise.
^h, no, fat be it from my harmeles Thought,
^uch base unseemly tricks to her to move,
^ matter small it was (God knows) I sought,
Only to be Receiver to her Love.
No scandal it is, it is no Disparagement,
Service t'acc^pt, where naught but Honors meant.
Feign would I take of quiet sleep the Say,
My wearied Corse with ease for to delight,
But I no wished rest can find by Day,
Nor slumber swee^ely in my bed by Night.
No rest I wretched man as yet can take,
My woes are such, as force me still to wake.
My Truth is measured by my Fortune hard,
And (I poor soul) Unfaithful judged am,
Because I seem Unhappy; and am bard
From all good Chance: (Against right) I bear the blame,
But willingly; (since she does will) I shall,
Whose Absence turns my Honey into Gaul.
Yet feign I slumber would, though but a while;
But if I cannot with that Fode be fed,
I will embrace (the time for to beguile)
Such golden Thoughts as are within my head.
Golden indeed, Gold Thoughts of s^^h a one,
As I prefer fore Gold, though she a Stone.
But sleep, or die, Then, dye, thou can not sleep,
For thee to sleep it is impossibell,
To think what is past, broad waking will thee keep^^
Which thou must still conceal, not any tell.
My comfort's this, that waking as I die,
I see my Love in Thought, though not with eye.
Pure Iu^rie, white with spot of Crimson red,
Where Beauties First Borne lay the perfect Molde,
Or like Aurora rising from her Bed,
Such was mine ALBA fair for to behold.
Such was She, when She lovely LOVE ore came,
The Conquerors Glory, Conquereds Pleasing Shame.
But now that Cull^r fair has changde his grace,
Through Burning Fever, (deadly in his kind)
And Sallow Palenes stained has that Face,
To whom the Prize for Favor was assinde,
Sick is my Lady, sick is all Delight,
And brightest Day is turnde to darkest Night.
Fortune has stolen from ALBA, took from LOVE,
From him she takes his, Solace, Sport and Play;
From Her her Beauty which she would improve,
And to her self, would (falsely) it convey.
Being Pitiful she Cruel seems to be,
And in her Blindenes shows that she can see:
False Fortune dark as Mo^^^ in any Good,
^ut to do Hurt, as Argus, full of Eyes,
^n outward show, a Tiger fierce and wood:
and yet to me she is Kind in piteous wise.
Since She, by drawing Beauty from that place,
Quenched has my Fire, to ease me for a space.
My Heart upon his Deathbed, sick, did lie,
Calling upon proud ALBA but in vain;
Too Cruel she, (for pity) it did cry,
Yet had Repulse through Rigor of Disdain.
So as to live thus (long) it could not bide,
But soon gave up the Ghost, and so he did.
Then to the Chapel of bad Fortun^ hard,
By smoking sighs it quickelie was conuaide,
A place for these sad Funerals preparde,
Where in a Tomb of Loyalty it was laid.
Anger, Suspect, Grief, Sorrow, Care, and Fear,
With dismal Doubts, the chiefest Mourners were.
About the Hierce, great store of Tears were shed,
The Torches that did burn so clear and bright,
Were ALBAS eyes by Cruelty misled,
VVhilest she triumphed to see so woeful sight.
Pity the Dirge did sing with woeful Pl^^^,
Assisted with a black and dismal Saunt.
Upon the Monument yplac^d was,
Fire, Sword, and Cord, with Arrows sharp and keen^^
The Epitaph (for such as by should pas)
Was thus subscribde, an carved to be seen.
Lo here that gentle Heart entombde does lie,
Whom cruel ALBA causeles, forced to die.
Poor Soul, in covert joy, thy Care fauns rest,
Wear Willow in thy Hat, Baies in thy Heart,
Gold when it bubleth least, then boyles it best,
Water runs smoothest in the deepest part.
By thy great warines let it be seen,
Not what thou now art, but what thou have been.
The greatest comfort (as a Lovers dew)
Is, of his Mistress Secrets, much to know,
Yet no less labor for him (being True)
Then naught to say, nor ought thereof to show,
Of men we learn to speak, things to reveal,
Of Gods, silent to be, and to conceal.
Yet sweete's the Beauty of mine ALBA fair:
What blabst thou it? yea blab it willingly,
Bees that do die with honey, buried are,
With dulcet notes, and heavenly Harmony;
And they that dying, do Beauty still commend,
Shall be with kindenes honored in the end.
Then hope thou well, and have well (as they say)
Long have I hopte, but Hoping is in vain,
Hope with Allusions, dallying does me pay,
Yet but for Hope, the Heart would break in twain.
Ah MELT my Heart, would Melted once thou were,
Thou should not then have cause so much to fear.
The Fall of Leaf, the Spring tide of my Love,
Flowring a fresh with Hope I found to be:
But now (alas) the Spring time for to prove,
Fall of the Leaf of my lost Love I see.
The Carnouale of my sweet LOVE is past,
Now comes the Lent of my long Hate at last.
LOVE is revolted, whilst he (Traitor like)
Against his prince (against me his Sovereign)
Weapons unjust (sauns cause) takes up to fight,
And does his fealty and his Homage stain.
He is revolted and mine ALBA's fled,
I seem alive here, yet in deed am dead.
In vain I wish for what I cannot have,
And seek with grief to aggrauate my Moan:
What is to me denied, that still I crave,
Gaulling my self with fond Concei^s alone:
Yet I forgive her, little knows she,
That she her own Heart wounds, when she ^ils me.
Mean time in uncouth Sorrows secret Cell,
My haples Fortune hard I will disiest,
Hating all joy, I private there will dwell,
Because I of my wish am dispossessed.
Like Petrark chaste of Laura coy I plain,
Of whom I (never yet) could Favor gain.
How long shall I importune thee with Cries,
And press thee for some Grace (bard flintie Dame?)
How long my suit deplore in pitious wise,
And yet be frustrate of that I complain?
Urge me with ought if so thou can of Ill,
Do but object, and answer thee I will.
Cite me at LOVES great Audit to appear,
And if a just account I give not thee
Of all my Life, since Loyal I did swear
Unto thy Cruel self, casheere thou me:
But if I true have bin and dealt upright,
Thou do me wrong to set by me so light.
More then high time it is for thee to relent,
My sorrows flows above their wonted Bound,
And well nie break my Heart where they art pent,
(For so great Force) a too too slender ground.
Then (...) supplant not from my wished rest,
But do abjure harsh Rigor from thy breast.
Affect me (not inflict on me) fresh woe
Thy Love, my service merits, not thy Hate,
My loyal Heart to thee, did thou but know,
Thou would not thus revenge, but rue my state:
Nor am I over bold in what I crave,
Pity (not Favor) I desire to have.
TAVVNY and BLACK, my Courtly Colors be,
Tawny, (because forsook I am) I wear:
Black, (since mine ALBAS Love is dead to me,
Yet lives in another) I do bear.
Then welcome TAVVNY, since I am forsaken,
And come dear BLACK, since my Love's from me taken.
The princelike Eagle's never smit with Thunder,
Nor th'Oliue tree with Lightning blasted shows:
No mar^^^l^ ^hen it is to me, or wonder,
Though my ^oy Dame, in Love to me hard grows:
More deaf to me she is then sensles stock,
Her Hart's obdurate like the hardened rock.
But what mean I thus without Reason prate?
I am no more forsaken then I was:
My Love's no more dead then it was of late;
For yet mine ALBA nere for me did pass:
My Love's not dead, she never me forsoo^^,
For ALBA (nere yet) me in favor took.
As many Favors have I as before:
For since I her (first) loved, she me disdainde,
And still does so, still wounding me the more,
As in despair I have ere since remainde:
Yet I in BLACK and TAVVNY Weeds will go,
Because Forsook, and dead I am with woe.
LOVES LABOR LOST, I once did see a Play,
Ycleped so, so called to my pain,
Which I to hear to my small Joy did stay,
Giving attendance on my froward Dame,
My misgiuing mind presaging to me Ill,
Yet was I drawn to see it against my Will.
This Play no Play, but Plague was unto me,
For there I lost the Love I liked most:
And what to others seemde a left to be,
I, that (in earnest) found unto my cost.
To every one (save me) it was Comicall,
Whilst Tragic like to me it did befall.
Each Actor played in cunning wise his part,
But chiefly Those entrapt in Cupids snare:
Yet All was fained, it was not from the heart,
They seemde to grieve, but yet they felt no care:
It Was I that Grief (indeed) did bear in breast,
The others did but make a show in Jest.
Yet neither faining theirs, nor my mere Truth,
Could make her once so much as for to smile:
Whilst she (despite of pity mild and ruth)
Did sit as skorning of my Woes the while.
Thus did she sit to see LOVE lose his LOVE,
Like hardened Rock that force nor power can move.
My life's Catastrophe is at an end,
The Staff whereon my sickly Love did lean,
And which from falling (still) did him defend,
Is through mischance in sunder broken clean,
Gone is my Mediatrix, my best Advocate,
Who used for me to intercessionate.
Ah that my Love cannot aright be waide
In Balance just, as merits due desert,
But must with Hate (for her Goodwill be paid)
Whereof The Exchequer is mine ALBAS Heart:
The Sapphire cut with his own dust may be,
Mine own pure Faith, in Love confounds me.
O be not still unto me (thus) severe,
But rather Simplest mild in sickness mine:
Honey with Gawle, Oil mix with Vinegar,
With frowns, blithe smiles, some sweet with sower of thine,
Give me (to comfort mine) a Lenatiue,
But not t'encrease my Pain, sharp Corasiue.
Can thou endure that as a Ghost or Sprite,
I still should haunt thee with my irksome cries?
Ah yet at last unto thy self be like,
Some pity show from out those murthring eyes.
If th'owlt not grant my suit, nor loving be,
At least, yet in my Grief, do flatter me.
Dear Parler, (loving lodging unto me)
Mine only Walk and Garden of Delight,
Ah who has took thy Beauty now from thee?
And rest from me what most did please my sight?
Ah if our wonted Sun do not return,
(As absent Her) so, me, (dead) shall thou mourn.
My Heart that scarce his fainting breath draws hard,
Demands still his tribute of mine eyes,
Needs must I say a too too small reward,
Whilst he his Masters sorrows oremuch tries.
(Poor Heart) thy Master wrongs thee I confess,
Yet cannot he amend it near the less.
I bear my part with thee in this sad moan,
In this sad Quire where doleful Notes I sing:
For not to any but to me alone,
This Roo^th as uncouth seems and grief does bring,
Yet sin^^ she here did use her walk to make,
These naked Walls I Will honor for her sake.
Ah Quondam Temple of my Goddess fair,
Great reason have I thee for to adore:
Thy Boords and Windows I do hold as rare,
Since thou have entertainde her heretofore,
Though Saint be gone, and naught be left but Shrine,
Yet for her Love I Will hold thee as Divine.
Shall these same Eyes, but now no Eyes at all,
Rain Tears still thus? and shall this my poor Heart
In vain upon a flintie Corse still call
For mercy, who no Mercy will impart?
Shall this my Tongue now hoarse, with (Pity) crying,
Nere find relief, but still a Voice denying?
Ah partial LOVE! Ah, World unmeet for men!
Ah manners fit for sauadge Beasts to loathe!
Ah wicked Fortune thus do quit me then!
Because thou see my self with Love I cloathe,
Another shall despoyle me and vnbare?
Is this reward for faith vowde to the FAIR?
Sweet meat sour sauce deserves, I must confess,
But pure Love, should nere purchase Hate in right:
By Ones Disdain, which is remediless,
I live to like (vnlou'd) to work my spite.
Wretched's that Wight, but faithful Pat^^ne rare,
That does through Love, Death to himself prepare.
Now by these brinish tears that outwardly
Distill from weeping eyes, like showers of rain:
And by those drops of blood unseen of eye,
Which inwardly from heart stream down amain:
And by what else I have; All which, is Thine,
Begin to love, else end this life of mine.
Ah ALBA fair, ah me unfortunate!
Ah that my Birth's so low, my Thoughts so his,
My due Desires so great, so poor my state,
As not to joy my Right, deseruinglie!
How might I please thee, thee for to possess?
With how gteat will would I my self address?
Will Labors patient of Extremities,
Obtain the favor of thy long sought Love?
I will attempt, if so thou but devise,
Monsters to tame, and Mountains to remove:
Alcides like, all things I will subdue,
So I may find thee gracious when I sue.
Do thou ^he passions of deep Love desire?
The sad despayring mood of perplexed mind,
The nere expressed through hidden torments) Fire
Of racked Thoughts? do covet this to find?
Mark (...) deep sighs, my hollow eyes, salt tears,
My broken sleeps, my heavy countnance bears.
Would thou I to thy Beauty vowde should be^*
And in thy service spend my long life's time?
Remember then my solitary life for thee,
This seven whole years (a Prentiship of mine)
It Is true (thou know) where ere thou (now) remain,
Then be appeasde, and pleased to ease my pain.
Say then fair ALBA, fair, yet full of spite,
What have I done that thou should me undo?
Holding thee Dear, why setst (...) me so light?
Why silent art thou when to thee I sue?
The more Submissiue I, and Humble am,
Why against me do thy self still sdainfull frame?
Whom have I but mine own Thoughts entertainde,
And thy rare Virtues and what company
But Contemplation, has with me remainde?
And whom have I still wondered at but thee?
Whom have I not contemnd for thee, since time
I first beheld that matchles shape of thine?
Have I not crept to some, not trod with feet
On them, cause thou to favor them I saw?
Have not all Injuries to me bin sweet?
If thou did will me bear them, it was a Law,
Have I not spent my golden years with I open?
Seeking naught but thy Love (my Wishes scope.)
Yet in the midst of these distempered Thoughts,
Thou art not only Ielous of my Truth,
But makst account of me, far worse then Noughts,
Nor do by Message yield me any Ruth:
My Love unspotted, cannot be accepted,
My Truth (O strange) vnspeakable's, rejected.
Like to this Sea, LOVE has me fashiond right,
He full of water, I replete with woe:
He boyles and bubleth up in open sight,
I fret and rage where ere I (wandering) go:
He flows, and boue his banks the surges rise,
(From me) salt tears gush forth in streaming wise.
He water wants not, nor my Griefs decrease;
Thousands of quicksands has he all about,
I, thousand cares that on my Heart do sease:
His waves are cut in twain, my Heart, throughout.
The whistling reeds about his banks do sound,
Sorrow in me is of my song the ground.
Both winds and rain upon him (daily) fall,
I still, distill salt showers and sighs amain:
By tempests, often his Channels broke are all,
My Bowels cleft be with continual pain:
His bott^me none can well perceive or see,
My Torments without depth sauns sounding be.
Only we differ thus, he still does bide
Here, swallowing them that pass along this place,
I vade away, and ( Cruel Homicide)
Murder I do my self in pitious case.
Who then can rid me ( Notamie of Woe)
From these hell plagues? None, but my Cruel Foe.
ALBA I have not lived over long,
Yet have I hollow eyes, and hairs half gray:
My years not many, for I am but young,
Though wrinckled be my cheeks and lims decay.
But is this Destnie, or ift pure Deceit?
That has on me (thus) wrought this cunning fea^?
Ift be the first, why then none could prevent
My wretched Stars to escape this misery?
Ift be the latter that such ill me meant,
I needs must think it was mine Enemy:
It was (indeed), thy self it was ( Fair Witch)
That with thy beauty wrought me to be sich.
Thou art too Fair (I see) for to be true,
And too too False for one that is so Fair:
Yet for my wrongs thou seem not to rue,
Nor for my Crosses ought at All do care:
And yet my Love's more fervent still tow^rds thee,
My sparks grown flames, my cinders bonfires be.
Only I grieve my days are at an end,
Fore I can of thee any favor gain:
And which is worse, I likely am to spend
All the Remainder, yet no Grace obtain.
Unhappy Pilgrim I, borne still to evil,
To shrine her for a Saint, who is a Devil.
When Beauty sickneth, then Desire does die,
Favor does vade most flouring in his prime,
Then LOVE does ebb, when flows Adversity,
But Friendship bides out every stormy Time.
Ah ALBA I not doted have on thee,
But loved thee dear, as dear, as dear might be.
Affection, (always) either grounded is
On Virtue; (and Virtue nere peevish showe^)
Or else on Beauty; (counted chiefest bliss)
And Beauty praisde, (through Love) more fairer grows:
I never Perverse was, nor Sullen yet,
But praisde thy Beauty to mine utmost wit.
To thee, I, both a Friend and Lover am,
Yet every Lover is no Constant Friend,
But who a Friend in Nature is and Name,
As Lover true begins, and true does end:
Thy trues^ Friend am I, more then another,
And unto thee the faithfulst loyalst Lover.
Virtue (in me) Affection shall subdue,
Wisdom, all Lust, my Friendship sweetest Beauty,
I Will not be fickle, false, but constant, true,
Serving thee still, with all respect of Duty;
And when I shall be buried, dead and gone,
My Ghost shall (as thy Slave) thee tend upon.
Ah Speak then, shall these Torments I endure,
Of Bloody Thoughts, and nere expressed pain
Never remorse of stubborn thee procure?
And shall they breed (still) my eternal bane?
Yet grant me, things impossible to wish,
To feed Conceit, since that no hurt it is.
Then shall thou see (through this I hold so dear)
I Will long my life prolong, and Spiri^s spend,
And to my self that Creature none may hear,
I Will softly call it Love, till life shall end.
And if what I, thus whisper Any urge,
I Will name it Honor, so my self to purge.
May I but this sweet Contemplation hold,
I then shall live of All men most content,
Taking more pleasure in my Thoughts though old,
Then ere I did in youthly Actions spent.
Grant me this ^race, (to thee it is matt^r small)
And all my Crosses I Will sweet Blessings call.
Ah that tho'wldst daigne, this might be christened Love,
That Favor (as reward^ for it might be,
But I do fear, I shall thee too much move,
This over boldenes (Dearest) pardon me.
And let me hope one day some gentle power,
May turn to Sweet, this my most bitter Sower.
Time was and is, and ever shall be still,
That I to honor thee will n^uer spare,
But for to call it Love or Pure Goodwill,
I never durst, although I seemde to dare,
Then suffer me, to follow this my Vain,
Flatte^ing my self, although I nothing gain.
None pleased has mine eyes, but ALBA bright,
None but sweet ALBA does possess my Ha^t,
Mine ears in ALBA, only take delight,
And ^his my Soul, from ALBA nere shall part.
To follow th^e, all Fortunes I Will forsake,
And unto thee alone, my self betake.
The God^ have set such difference twixt our slate,
That all must be, pure Dewtie, Reverence;
Nothing I must ter^e LOVE (such is my Fate,)
Except thou daine, therewith for to dispense.
And since I know that so thou do command,
I condescend will to it out of hand.
Yet my Unspotted Thoughts my pining Corse,
My D^scontented Life, let them obtain
One blessed Favor throu^h thy kind remorse,
Though they not merit least part of the same.
So I with Joy shall end my weary days,
And dying, sound abroad thy nere dying Praise.
The Conclusion of the last Part.
IF Virtuous Love be Honor and no Shame,
Let no man (causeles) seek my chaste Desire,
To bridle in with base conceited rain,
Since Virtue kindled in my breast this fire:
The Wise (I hope) will no Exceptions take,
Nor Against my Love, nor against these Toys I make,
For by the Dial of Discretion sound,
Mine Actions all and Carriage I direct,
And fearful am I, least I should be found,
To Have done amiss, in any due respect.
(LADY) I hope no live is here set down,
Sauns awful looking back unto your frown.
No Worthless Thought does lodge within my breast,
Since (as my Guides) I follow thy fair Eyes,
Sparks of true Virtue in me now d^e rest,
Infused by those beams in wondrous wise,
Those with an uncouth Flame set me on fire,
The rightest paths of HONOR to aspire.
By these conducted to Eternal Joy,
I hope for to be lifted up to the Sky,
From all Disgrace, from trouble and annoy,
Where, (of my self) I nere d^^^mount so hie.
Be gracious then (Sweet Goddess) of my Thought,
For thy power it is, does make me soar aloft.
Il Disgratiato. R. T. G.

CERTAIN DIVINE POEMS, WRITTEN BY THE foresaid Author R.T. Gentleman.

^mprinted at London by F. K. for Matthew Lownes.

Deo, Optimo, Maximo.
WIth Tears in Eyes, with drops of Blood from Heart,
With skalding sighs from inward grieved Soul,
A CONVERTITE, from Vain LOVE now I part,
Whilst, for my Sins, fore Heaven I do condole.
I know, and knowledge I have lived wrong,
And wilful sought mine own Destruction long.
The Temple of my Heavenly GOD I have,
For earthly Goddess, stainde blasphemously,
Selling my self to Satan for his Slave,
Whilst I transgrest in vile Apostasy.
Banished my self I have from Paradize,
Through thriftles Toys of base-borne Vanities.
O thou that on swift Cherubins do ride,
Creator of all Creatures that do live,
Whose Love was such as thou for Man have did,
Though he thee hated, skorned, and did grieve:
Vouchsafe to view and rue my desprate state,
And me once more from sin regenerate.
Ah look upon me with mild Mercies eye,
Cleanse me with purest Water of thy Grace:
Remember not how I have gone awry,
Since I renounce to run more such a Race.
Ah glorious Spouse, thy Beauty I desire,
For now to He^uen, not Earth, my Thoughts aspire.
Grief, that was once far off removed from me,
Begins (as now) for to approach me nere,
Clad in his Weeds, which Black and fearf^ll be,
And crownde with fatal Cypress does appear,
With wringing Hands he does bewail my ruth,
And mournes, that I have straide so wide from Truth.
Reason the Cochman to my wandering Thought,
As in a Crystal glass, does show most plain
My gazing eyes, how I have fondly wrought,
Spending my Time in Toys, and Fancies vain,
He shew'th me now another Novel LOVE,
Another path, wherein my feet to move.
As One, who in his Travail does epsy,
(By chance) a hideous Serpent or foul Snake,
That long before unseen did closely lie
Behind some stub, where he his Nest did make,
(Shaking his three-forkt hissing tongue apace)
Quickly himself retireth from that place:
So I by loving wrong (unhappy Wight)
Having amiss straide long time, and awrie,
When I (at last) of Death had but a sight,
(Although far off) yet backward, began I hie:
Backward I came, with hasty speedy foot,
Leaving that Course, which I at first had took.
Thou w^ndring Spirit, to whom Jove does commit
(Of this my Body frail) the government:
Why, gadding thus from Truth so far do flit?
Why, are thine eyes with wilful blindness pent?
Why, do not mark what Danger is at hand?
What damned Death does at thine elbow stand?
Ah, be not flattred with this poysenous LOVE,
But call thy former Wits to thee again:
Those wicked Thoughts root out, and hence remove,
Whilst Life in thee to do it does remain,
What Mortal is, by mortal Death suppress,
Thy Gain shall be the more, thy Loss the less.
Heaven once thy Mansion was, and dwelling place,
Now Hell thou seekst by running thus astray,
Unhappy Soul to be in such a case,
So wilfully to seek thine own Decay:
Thou woundst thy self, to God a Rebbell thou art,
And only striu'st to please the World in Heart.
Alas, in whom now do thou put thy trust?
On whom do thou rely, or hope on now?
Ah turn, and (still) live shall thou with the Just,
Ah turn again, and trebble blessed thou:
Thou, then shall be, whereas the Blessed are,
Pure Soul* among Souls* among Stars, a brightsome Star.
What Is God? The Sourse of Goodness and the Sprin^*
What is that Goodness? Such a Goodness sound
As aye increases without perishing.
How is it made? In frame and fashion Round,
Like to a Form that in it does contain,
His End and his Beginning in the same.
This Goodness, (first) from whence did it proceed*
Three proper Veins there be, that forth do run
Out of one sacred Sea, from Heaven decreede,
Which compass does, All, what so ere sees Sun.
Cannot we see it? This ESSENCE most Divine.
No Mortal Man has seen at any time.
How can it then be, if it near be seen,
That i^ our minds (often lifts up on High,
As if (in Vision we in Heaven had been?
It makes us view such Wonders with Faiths eye,
With, Faith^ clear eye which shines to us so bright,
As unto Heaven it is our Guide and Light.
What is that Faith? A Gift, which if Defect
In him, that firm believes, be not found,
It blindfold leads him (yet with steps direct)
Unto that place, where perfect Joys abound,
Where God, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
Do reign in Glory great, of Mightiest most.
Thou LIFE which Life art calde, and yet art Death,
Thou DEATH, which Death art termde, and yet art Life,
Say; which of you maintain my v^tall breath,
Within thi^ wretched Vale of Worldly strife?
Say, which prolongs my Life, most of you Twain?
Or thou LIFE, or thou DEATH: say both the same.
I (more then LIFE) straight DEATH does answer make.
Nay, I (quoth LIFE) far more then DEATH, to me,
And for this Cause this only Name I take
Of LIFE, which by my means alone can be.
Because whilst I within thy Body live,
Death no way can thee hinder, hurt, or grieve.
But I, by cutting off DEATH straight replies)
This slender Thread, whereby Men run their race,
Bring every Faithful soul, in friendly wise,
Where he a better path (for aye) may trace,
Making him lead a Life eternally,
A LIFE, that (still) does live, and never die.
Wherefore, what ere he be, that means to joy
This other LIFE that is Celestial,
He mu^^ not scorn (to escape from worlds annoy)
Nor think it much, to come when DEATH shall call.
For DEATH no^ LIFE, does help us at the end,
LIFE is our Foe, but DEATH, our dearest Friend.
All frail, most happy Day in blessed wise,
A Day of Grief, yet Honorable Day,
In which the Father did (for Sacrifise)
Offer his Son, to save Man from decay:
Clensing our Souls, defilde with sinful mind,
With Innocent, with pure and precious Blood.
Upon that Cross (now sacred) then Profane,
He ^ide for us, who could not dye indeed:
Whilst closing his fair eyes for Mortals gain,
He opened all the Gates of Heaven with speed:
Restoring them that Kingdom we had lost,
Which nothing, Us, but Him, too dearly cost.
Not his, but our Due, was it, for to Die;
Those Torments which he meekly did endure,
His Crown of Thorns, his Wounds done spitefully;
That Cursed Scourge that spilt his Blood so pure*
All these, to Us, and not to him, did long,
Yet for our sakes, our Christ himself did wrong.
Then if for pity, Graves do open wide,
Hills cleave, and Marble pillars rent in twain:
If Heavens themselves, their Lights for grief do hide,
And if the Sun for sorrow clipst remain:
What Mortal heart is there that does not break,
When he but thinks, or of this Day does speak?
That Virtue, through whose power ruled is my soul;
(Only through Virtuous Love, from Love set free)
Takes force afresh as one that would control:
And finding strong himself within to be,
Unbridled Will he seeks to bridle now,
And tries to break what fore he scarce could bow.
New Lords, new Laws; New Customs break the Old,
And where before a dark and mistie cloud,
My mind as in a prison did infolde,
Now is it loosde from out that gloomie shrowde,
My Heart does iump even just with his desire,
And by their Eye know both what to require.
My watchful Soul recovered has well nie,
The former state in which he lived in:
And being free, does call to memory,
What (bound) he did forget through wretched sin,
VVhil^^ for his life repentant he attends,
Immortally to live for his amends.
Not any part there is of Body mine,
But filled is with true, not false Delight:
Yet does it grieve still at her former Crime,
And with Remorse does mortify the Spright,
Whilst wronged Soul, on Others lays the blame,
Yet reprehends her self even for the same.
This earthly Beauty does the Sense delight,
But Heavenly Beauty does ^he mind mo^e please:
The one the World has as an Object right,
And seeks the World to pleasure with sweet ease:
But the other has ^ehouah for her glass,
Nor she for any but for him does pass.
The Sense does burn with ^oues imperfect works.
Which like a blaz^ in the air does flit away:
The Soul thirsts after that which never hurts,
And hunts for that which never will decay:
That, which not subject is to any time,
But of it self most Perfect and Divine.
Thou ( Lord) the Mortal and Immortal both
Created have, mark humbly I require,
How much within my body they be wroth;
Mark how within me, against me they conspire
Within themselves they vary so and grudge,
That which of both shall win us hard to judge.
My bad Conceits from Adam sprung of yore,
Do headlong run to endless death with shame:
And less that Reason do them bridle sore,
Hardly my Soul can ^asse from whence it came.
Then pardon Lord the Course that I have run,
And I from Sin a new Man will become.
A Tirant great, fair Beauty is in Love,
When it does triumph in a lovely face:
And who with cold Disdain, this does not move,
Is caught by subtle sweet alluring Grace:
Who stands at Beauties Gaze, and does not fly,
Is soon entrapt by wilful glan^ing eye.
This which of true Love is but Picture bare,
With shadowing Vale does dim our cleerest sight:
And if to follow it we do not spare,
It soon deceiues us with a false delight,
And to perpetual prison sends our soul,
Unless her sleights by Reason we control.
Fair Pearl, fine gold, base ex^rements of the earth;
What Is Beauty but a little White and Red?
Revived with a little lively Breath,
With Wind, or Sun, or Sickness altered?
All this ^oth Time consume and bring to naught,
And all what ere into this world is brought.
The fairest Colors dry and vanish shall;
The yongst must pack as well as does the Old:
All mortal things to mortal death must fall,
And therefore first were cast in earthly molde.
That which does ^^orish green as grass to day,
Tomorow withers like to dried Hay.
Swift flies our years as does a running stream,
And lothed Age comes stealing on apace:
Our youth does pass away as twere a Dream,
And Death does follow for to take his place:
Death comes, and our Life's patent to his hand
For to resign, he straight does us command.
Strength to his course, and wind unto his flight,
With feathers to his wings, Time joins fast:
And this sweet life which we so much do like,
Though nere so loath, yet must away at last.
The fairest Flower must wither with the weed,
What so does live, to die was first decreede.
Thrice happy man and trebble blessed is he,
That never treads his steps from rightest way,
Nor with the mist of World will blinded be:
But keeps right path, and never goes astray:
Contemning all these mundaine Treasur^ base,
In hope to joy the heavenly Wealth of Grace.
Who dies ill, dies; who dies well, never dies,
But lives a life above Eternally:
Like good ^l^as, who in wondrous wise,
Was from base Earth took up to live in sky:
Where bide The Elect of Christ for ever blessed,
In Abraham's bosom there for aye to rest.
For thee my HEART does burn like fire (Dear Lord)
Which freesde before like Frost and chillie Ice,
For thee to leave my sin I do accord;
Through which thy heavenly grace I did despise.
All Follies now, as Shadows vain I Will leave,
And unto thee (the Substance true) I cleave.
In thee I burn, and in my self I freese,
Frozen through fear, but burning through thy Love.
Reason ore Senses mine, now ouersees:
And her Authority ore them does prove.
Which makes me humbly call to thee for grace,
Though (proud) before I run a self wild race.
Repentance right, sad Grief, salt Tears, sure Faith,
Renew in me a sorry Contrite Heart:
My guilty Conscience often within me says,
I Death deserve, yet Merciful thou art:
Sighs from ^y soul I offer for my Fee,
As precious Blood thou offredst once for me.
My Heart now clensde (and yet not mine as now)
^weet Christ to thee his first Home turns again,
from me he flies, and unto thee does bow:
^ give it thee, Accept I pray the same.
Ah Sovereign Savior, do not now despise
A broken Heart, for pleasing Sacrifise.
Weak is my Bark in which my Life does row,
My wretched life, through grievous faults misspent,
And in the World (his Ocean) sails but slow,
Because it falls into the Occident:
My sickly Mind runs self same doubtful way,
And Soul does grieve that Fancy ^o does stray.
And though a gentle calmie Wind to blow,
She finds about her, as she fresh does sail,
Yet under Waters do I spy below,
The Foe of my poor Soul her to assail:
And in that part wherein he does epsy
The Ship to leake, in that he close does lie.
Ah, now it grieves me, now I do repent
My re^chlesse Race, that I so Iewde have run,
Yet has my God in mercy to me sent
Help to my Vessel weak, else I vndon^:
Hope at the left hand stands, that part ^o guide,
And constant Faith on right hand does abide.
Earth was my flesh before, and earth again
Ere long it shall be, but my Soul on hie,
Shall be lift up in brightest Heavens ^o reign,
If I from false alluring Sin can fly:
When at his feet, who first life to me gave,
A Glorious Seat for ever I shall have.
Full 7. times four of years my life has run,
Whilst to my self a heavy B^rthen sore,
To others I a gainelesse charge become,
Soyled with beastly Thoughts uncleanly gore:
Whilst in true Light being blind I farther go
From Reasons path which Judgment did me show.
Slow to good works, but too too swift to ill,
My Soul abroad with flitting wings does fly,
And in the worlds dark bottom of Self will,
Among 1000. Snares she carelessly does lie.
Where sensual Sense and Ignorance astray
Her doubtful leads, quight out of her right way.
Too obstinate she headlong forward runs,
In greatest Light she tumbleth in most dark,
Nor takes she thought what of her self becomes,
Be it right or wrong her course she does not mark:
So that although Immortal she should live,
Most mortal Death she seeks her self to give.
But now thanks to the Sovereign King of all,
She (no more blind) the dangers gins to spy,
And looking back unto her former fall,
She does repent through faith most heartily:
Where she does see of Heaven the narrow Gate,
Which (once) was shut, now open for her escape.
King of all Kings which from thy sacred Throne,
Do ma^ke and view from forth the Heavens hie,
Thy Graces unto Adams Offspring shown,
Of thy great Love (although unworthily)
Thou that do fill with true Delight the mind,
With true Delight, wherein true Joy we find.
Behold how I, ore laid with grievous sin,
With Soul defiled, with Heart infected sore,
Do fly to thee, thy Mercy for to win,
And with Repentance do my faults deplore:
Lord if thy Laws and thee I have offended,
Let mine old Follies, with new Tears be cleansed.
My Sorrows, to my Sins are sparks but small,
So loathsome they appear unto my sight;
On thee, I at thy Gate of Pity call,
Thou art the Flame that can them purge most brigh^.
The Bellows is Amendements pure desire,
Which does inflame through thy hot loving Fir^
Let thy great Bounty me forget, forgive,
And bad Conceits that idle Fancies wrought,
Let them no more within me (working) live,
But to Confusion and Contempt be brought:
Oh let not Sin my Soul still Satanise,
But with thy Spirit the same imparadise.
A most excellent patheticall, and passionate Letter of Duke D'Epernoun,
MINION, unto Henry the third, King of France and Polonia, when, through the
Duke of Guizes devise and means, he was forbidden the presenc^ of the King.
MY gracious Sovereign, a great combat had I in my mind, and no little or
small ado, to resolve my self what way to take, having received express
commandment not to approach the royal presence of your sacred Majesty any
more; a matter of no small consequence (as that was unto me) and such as was
hard for me to believe, and therefore not unlikely to be but of long
resolution. Willing I was (my good Lord) to obey your letter, and so did I; but
yet, (for to make manifest the cause of so sudden an alteration) I did
greatly desire to remove from my heart, whatsoever might have displeased your
Grace in any of my actions whatsoever: yet could I find none, being thoroughly
determined, and wonderouslie desirous to answer the same with my life, and bid
you farewell with a lively and open voice, before the face of all the world.

I most humbly beseech your Majesty to pardon this my Disobedience, seeing I
have not committed this fault (only) for fear of disobeying you, but rather,
because I am pricked forward by the great affection I owe unto your service,
more than all the men in the world. I see (Sir) I am the only mark whereat
the Envy and Slander of France do draw their most fierce Darts of their
Rigor and Force; I must needs undertake ^o resist, no less those, who are
Enuyers of my good Fortune, then heretofore I have done the Admirers thereof;
not doubting, but that God will give me the Grace, not only to repulse the^,
but also to beat the^ down wi^h the only Sun-shining Beam of your royal
Favor, which (alone) shall suffice without any more need of other Armor; being
as strong unto me, as the foundation of a Rock, which no Accidents whatsoever
shall ever be able to undermine. For I do not place in the rank of transitory
things, the Friendship wherewith your Majesty with so great affection so long
time has honored me: It has continued without ceasing with so great
Goodwill, and sustained so many sharp assaults, that I fear nothing at all
that it should perish in one small moment and on the sudden. Hap-hazard did
not build it, Fortune therefore shall not overthrow it, and the works of your
Majesty's bounty, shall never (I hope) yield unto the malice of the Enemies
of my Good.

Neither will I have any other proof of the Eternity of your rare Favors
toward me, then the answer you made unto one of the Nearest about your
Majesty, who affirming you would make me too GREAT; you answered; And so Great
will I make him, that it shall not be in my power hereafter to undo him,
although willingly I would. These are the words (worthy Prince) wherewith you
have pricked forwards the violence of my malicious ill willers; Words in
truth, most worthy the greatest, noblest and most bountiful Monarch of the
world. In so much as I have engraven in my soul an immortal desire to make
my self worthy the effects thereof.

But I must not now behold, nor at this time look into, what part your
Good Will has showed it self most firm and most affectionate, to make famous
my good Fortune. The principal beginning there^^ was resolved upon with
judgment, the sequel with reason, and the end shall not be variable with ill
destiny. The proceedinges thereof were voluntary; your Majesty will not suffer
(I trust,) that the chance thereof should be forced, you have raised me out of
the dust, unto the greatest honors of your high Estate, and of an unworthy
younger brother that I was, you have created me a great Duke. I am of your own
fashioning; I hope you will not suffer your work to be imperfect: and for to
lift me up unto the heavens of your greatness, you will not give me wings of so
soft a wax that I shall melt in the violent lightninges of the rage of mine
enemies, to make me miserably to sincke into the bottomless floods of their
bloody desires. But rather contrariwise, that it would please you to protect
me, and to take a certain kind of pleasure and pride, to see, and behold
that the power you have given me may be sufficient to overthrow these
Infidels and base Creatures, their (...) estate being full of discommodities,
and t^eir devilish determinations guilty of horrible treasons.

But if your Majesty desire to see the rest and quietness of your poor
People, imagining that I am the cause of their poverty and need, and not the
quarrels and conflicts that these Iewde fellows have attempted; if my
prosperity causes the trouble of your pleasures, and if you think, that
ceasing the pretexte of your unfeigned Good Will toward me, by the same
means they would cease their evil behauiours also; let us then (Sir)
overthrow this good Fortune, let us remove that which serves for a color to
the enterprises that these turbulent Companions go about, to put themselves
into possession of your Estate; let us overthrow the means, which they call
the Motives and occasions of their Factions; yet in the end it shall plainly
be seen, that aspiring Ambition and cankred Envy of these malcontented
minds, is the only cynders which couers the fire, wherewith they would
embrace your Realm, and the break neck overthrow, into which they covet to
thrust your people, to accompany the^ unto their endless miseries. But
Sovereign Liege, I do not hold the liberality your royal Person has
bestowed on me, so dear, as I do the least of your desires, my obedience
shall franckly yield to you, all that, which your princely Liberality has
bountifully given unto me; whether it be to take away the color of the wars
ensuing, or to make it good, (in good-earnest) upon them which bear a show to
desire it: The loss of my Goods, shall be the least of my Crosses: I have
always considered, that Fortune gives nothing, but what she can always take
again, and that all worldly riches are of the variable condition of the world,
and of the uncertainty of mankind. Your Majesty which gave me all
whatsoever I have, cannot take any thing, but what was your own (before) from
me; and willingly if you please will I yield up all I have without enforcing
mine own will at all: I will more easily discharge my self of my Goods, then
they may be taken from me. I will resign not only the Estates, the Honors,
the Offices, and Possessions, whether they be of mine own Person, or belonging
unto my dear Wife, but also my life into your princely Hands, I say, that
happy and contented life, which I owe unto your liberal integrity; do me I
most humbly beseech you, so great a good as to receive it: Leave me only I
desire so little as 10000. franckes of yearly rent, (mine own poor
patrimony) it shall be enough, that I may maintain my self in your royal
Court with the small train I had before you knew me. I shall have
sufficient, being in your presence, and your only sight shall be more unto
me, then all the treasures of the earth. I will leave without any grief at
all, unto your Majesty the Livings you have bestowed on me, without making any
other request in this respect, but only to beseech you most humbly not to
suffer that mine enemies, namely those who have played me no small bad prankes
about you, should be put in possession and invested with my spoils; neither to
suffer them to find their happiness through the loss of mine own good
Fortune, n^r that they may have cause to erect them glorious Trophies of mine
undeserved overthrow: for that (only) and only that alone, would be the
greatest adversity, that loss of wealth or goods might bring unto me.

See then my (gracious Lord) the account I make of riches. But of your gracious
Favors I have in such ample wise promised my self the eternity thereof, and
have taken such a HABIT in the possession of the same, that this Custom is
turned into a natural Order. I cannot draw breath, but with the^, and my life
has no moving but their influence, that day wherein they shall be taken from
me, shall be the last of my life and the separation of them, cannot be
without the parting of my soul out of this body: which notwithstanding I will
hold for very fortunate, to have so honorable a subject, and will not a little
glory to have so long and well lived: that I have been thought worthy the
friendship of so great and mighty a Monarch, who has so much esteemed
thereof, as not to have been able to live without it.

One of the most apparent signs that your Royal self gave me of your rare
Affection toward me is, in that you have always desired to have had me near
about you. Then I most humbly beseech your Majesty, let me not (now) be
banished far from you; Banish rather my Fortune than my Person, they rather gape
at it, than at my self; It is not at the youngest Son of VALETTA, that these
spiteful Oppressors do seek^ to take hold of, but it is on the Duke
D'Epernoun, and to his Princely greatness: they are rather enemies of the
Effects* than of the Cause, and desire rather the possessions* than the absence
of the Possessor Suffer not then (dear Sovereign) this his forced
withdrawing, whom you have so greatly loved, and change not your royal
countenance from him at this time, will ill fortune.

Notwithstanding (most gracious Prince) if of my being far off, dependes the
rest and quietness of your poor people, and the execution of your Majesty's
worthy will and pleasure, I will not gainesay it at all: rather would I be as
low under the earth, as you have raised me on high in dignity. Your
commandments herein, as in all other things, shall be my Counseller^: you
will shall be a law unto me, and your desires my affections. It is more reason
that I should perish, then your Will and Heasts be unaccomplished, seeing I was
not raised up, but by those meane^.

I praise God, for that he h^th left me one comfort in this my luckles
desaster: that is, to know my ill hap* and not my fault, my hard fortune, and
not my King, my Envious and not my just Enemies do seek this my fall. My just
behavior has not any way caused it, and therefore it will not leave me any
place of repentance, for my soul is free from all scruple and doubt, and my
upright intentions of all offenses toward your Majesty. Besides this, I have
placed the friendship wherewith it has pleased you to honor me, in a perfect
heart, not tainted at all. I call thereof to witness, the Divinity of your
excellent Spirit, which never deceives it self in the knowledge of his own.
Amongst which in despite of the rage of his enemies (who are almost in
despair) I will appear in loyal sincerenesse of zeal, and in dutiful
obedience as the Sun amidst the Stars, and I will make it to be seen, that
the jealousy of my pestilent Slaunderers, is a mere injury of time, and my
life a spl^ndant light of your Kingdom. Neither call I to mind these matters,
for that I fear you suspect me of horrible ingratitude or beastly
forgetfulness The ^are manner wherewith you have bound me unto you, was such as
could not come from a rude Scythian, but from a most magnanimious King, who
has restored a woeful heart cruelly wounded, to happy life, being therefore
obliged unto his princely Throne for ever. So that my Actions hereafter, and
not my words at this present time shall answer for my continual loyalty. I
will evermore have in memory the liberality of my Prince, as a passing
pleasing witness of the honorable affection he has borne me, and will repute
that day accursed, wherein I shall not think of the happiness he has done
unto me; being not able as now to do him any other duty.

Then (my sweet Sovereign) honor me I beseech you always with your
Commandments; it shall be a kind of comfort unto me, to be ever employed
in your Princely Service. Adieu, my good Lord, adieu: the greatest good I
possess in this life, is, the happy thought of your gracious Favor. I
beseech you, still to preserve me therein, and to believe that never soul
separated it self from a goodly body, with greater grief then E' Pernoun now
has, in being divided from your Majesty: and not ^ little do I complain, for
that Fortune has no other means to beat me down, then in depriving me of
your noble presence, in such sort as it has done.

But since it has pleased God and your Majesty, I should withdraw my self
from you, I beseech his goodness, that there may remain with you as great
joy, as in parting from you, I carry away both heaviness and anger; that it
may please his holy spirit to conduct and favor you in such sort in your
enterprises, that your Good may be as fairhfully sustained, as I would desire
to see manifested the Favorers of the troubles of your Realm, and the just
punishment due unto them, for their rash Wilfulness, and over presumptuous
Boldness, to the glory of God, the increase of your Majesty's Royalty, the
^ealth of your People, and the contentment of your magnanimous and Princely
Desires.

Your no less duetifull, then sorrowful Subject, for that he must loose the
sweet sight of your Princely Majesty. Iean Louis de Nogaret Duke D'Epernoun,

FINIS.

