A TRIPLE ANTIDOTE, against certain very common Scandals of this time, which,
like infections and epidemicall diseases, have generally annoyed most sorts of
people amongst us, poisoned also not a few, and diverse ways plagued and
afflicted the whole State.

By John Tichborne, Doctor of Divinity, and sometimes fellow of Trinity
College in Cambridge.

ISAIAH. CAP. 62. VER. 1. For Zions sake I will not hold my peace, and for
Hierusalems sake, I will not be at rest, until the righteousness thereof
break forth as a light, and the healthful salvation thereof as a burning
Lamp.

Bernardus in Sermon deseptem confessionibus. Floruit olim Ecclesia in strage
Martyrum, tum demum malitia haereticorum; nunc autem in contentione and
corruptione falsorum fratrum litibus and quaestiunculis inutilibus crescere non
desinit.

LONDON Printed by Nicholas Oaks, for Clement Knight, and are to be sold at his
shop in Paul's Chuch-yard, at the sign of the Holy Lamb. 1609.

AMPLISSIMO VIRO, REVERENDISSIMO IN CHRISTO Patri, Domino long honoratissimo,
Archiepiscopo Cantuariensi, Johannes Tichbornus cum nouo and ineunte anno
fausta, noua, and indies auctiora exoptat omnia, and ex animo comprecatur.
STRENAM idcirco dixerunt veteres, cum quia strenuis dari solitam (vt Varro)
tum etiam, idque potius, quasi trenam (vt Festus) a numero videlicet, quo
significatur, alterum tertiumque venturum similis commodi. Siquidem imparibus
gaudet Deus, and Mecaenates omnes (vt Poeta,) nec non and ternarius hic numerus
Philosophis simul and magnis demum Theologis sacer semper habitus, nescio quid
magni and mysterii in se continere vulgo credebatur. Apud quos celeberrimum
fuit illud a Pithagoreis and Aristotele profectum, primo omnium tandem in vsu
and ore receptum and vsurpatum: Tria sunt omnia. Quod vt in Xenijs hisce, and
Brumalibus (vt Tertulliaenus vocat) passim obseruari solitum, Etymologus ille
satis antiquus and idoneus notauit Festus: sic and in re medicinali non minus
sanctum and solenne fuisse, Arabes primo, and post eos vniuersa Asclepidarum
nobilis familia, cum suis dosibus impari numero and co^positione plerumque
gaudentibus, contestantur. Quod etiam magnu^ (credo) impulit Aesculapium, de
tribus hisce suis (quae nos ex Tertulliano didicimus, In Apologetico. cap. 23.
and nostra vtcunque ferimus) tanto^ere gloriari. Quae ipsa ego (quod foelix
faustumque sit) tua imprimis (Dignissime Archipraesul) venia fretus and fauore,
morbis quibusdam inter nos passun grassantibus, and in omne (vt fit) hominum
fere genus, hac tempestate saeuientibus admodum and debacchantibus, admouere
studui. In quo negotio illud molestum and maxim deplorandum sentio, quo^d non
solum (vt Augustinus olim de quibusdam obseruauit suis) plures vndique de
medicina aegrotantes conspiciam, sed ipsa (quod mirandum magis) medicame^ta
frequentibus iam tande^ indigere remediis, and medicoru^ manus and opem
implorare deprehenda^; adeoque quod medicis pride^ (iuxta vetus verbu^) nunc
ipsis remediis obiectari iustius: Vt seipsa curent. Neque enim quicquam ad
aeternam miserorum salutem vtilius, aut Ecclesiasticis vbicunque constitutis
rationibus conuenientius, a praepotente Deo mortalibus indultum fuit vnquam,
Excommunicatio.
concessum and constitutum, quam quod Excommunicationis nomine and notione
(quicquid sit tandem) indigitari solet and perhiberi. Nec humanum inuentum
aliquod (si fas sit ita nuncupare) salubrius excogitari (credo) potuit
aliquando, and stabiliri, quod tam diuinis quam humanis administrandis omnibus
prodesset magis and subueniret quam Subscriptio: Subscriptio.
Nec antiquius demum, and ad religionis Christianae sacra and salutaria
foelicius adumbranda, and recolenda, ab omnibus fere post Christum Ecclesiis
communi quodam consensu receptum prius quic quam, and magis vsitatum, quam
celeberrima illa, and omnibus oris notissima iam per signum Crucis Caeremonia.
Crucis consignatio.
Que tamen omnia, and fere sola omniu^ n^nc manibus vapulare, and tam
schismaticorum, quam aliorum (qui iam vndque oberrant) Criticorum obeliscis
notari indies, and transfigi nemo non intelligit. Et quae, rebus inter nos
caeteroquin fere omnibus summo Dei beneficio and prudentissimi Principis cura
(sicubi alias optime constitutis, sola in vitio habenda censeri and fundi
nostri (quod aiunt) calamitas, nescio quo fato aut malo merito suo, nuncupari
possint and perhiberi Quorum sanitatem and dignitatem vtcunque plurimi,
veritatis and futurae (quam faxit Deus) ad posteros vsque omnes transmittendae
pacis and foelicitatis studiosi recuperare denuo summa cura and diligentia
contenderint: nisi tu tamen (Amplissime) cum aliis quibus id muneris and
officii tanquam propriis Anglicanae Ecclesiae Aesculapijs incumbit, Episcopis
omni honor dignis, pro summa qua valetis art and authoritate (tanquam Jupiter
(...), and vere iuuantes patres omnes mature occurraris; quae iam morbida
flaccessere, and languida intabescere, heu nimium multi conspicamur;
intermortua postmodum, si non extincta prorsus, and (Quod Deus omen auertat)
cum eisdem omnia quae pacem, veritatem and vnitatem in Ecclesia nostra tueri
possunt and conseruare, breui contuebimur. Quod ad me attinet (Reuere^dissime
Archipraesul) omniu^ minimu^ and infimu^ lubens agnosco, qui sub auspitiis
doctissimi, integerrimi, and prudentssimi, defunctique iam Iehoiadae and vere
Iehoshuae nostri aliquid in hoc genere tentarunt aliquando: Qui ad haec omnia
restauranda and restituenda, haud aliter multa tulit, sudauit and alsit, atque
ille olim ad collapsa^ Hiero solimam; Zech 3. v. 10.
et long indignissi mum qui tibi iam parts easdem agenti, and tenenti seeds,
hec talia ingerere and obtrudere non reformidem. Cum tamen ita maleuolorum
obtrectationibus and impulsu factum sit, and fatali quadam necessitate
comparatum, vt in publicu^ hoc modo prodire inuitus licet maxim and reluctatus
diu cogar, dabo operam fidelem, iuratus dixerim (quamcunque tandem) quo ipsa
(si fieri possit) mala haec tot malorum procatarctica depelli possint and
remoueri. In quo conanime quid praestitum sit, te solum (virorum optime) (si
optio daretur mihi) optarem iudicem: Cui si incaepta haec accepta fore
dignouerim, operepraetium me reportasse satis amplum existimabo; quod and ad
alia (quae hactenus delituisse non magnopere piget) ocyus eulganda dabit
animum: sin vero manca, hiulca, and mill modis imperfecta offenderis, prima
esse recognoscas, obnixe rogo: and quod priora duo attinet (modeste satis and
vere dicam) quibus vix priora vel saltem perpauca alicubi extent. In quibus
etiam tam magnis (and quod facile largientur credo omnes) subarduis, voluisle
and tentasse aliquid satis erit, praesertim mihi haec primo adnite^ti, and
aliis been multis iam diu occupato and nimium praepedito, and dum haec ab
initio mediarer, tantu^ non obsesso penitus and oppresso. Quae si quod voluimus
effectum minus dederint (quod medicantibus in hoc potissimum genere perraro
obtingit (qui vt Galenus curare multos, sed sanare paucos solent) illud tamen
hinc commodi euenturum autumo and been spero, quod vt tertium illud Crucis, and
vere iam Contradictionis Signum nuperos (quod audio and multum gratulor) nactum
esse patronos been multos, and vere Aesculapios: sic and alios nostra haec
forsitan excitabunt, qui depositis illis and pene desperatis de
Excommunicatione and Subscriptione curis and medelis extremam (quod aiunt)
manum quamprimum addant and imponant. Quae denique quoniam tibi in Excelsissimo
Episcopalis dignitatis culmine, magno tuo merito, virtute and prudentia
constituto, quae exhibeantur minora esse, and long indignissima satis
intelliga^: meipsum (si placet) cum aliis pro strenaru^ more and indole
postmodum insequuturis vna offero and adiungo, adeoque se totum ditioni tuae
dicat consecrat, and hisce demum pauculis consignat in perpetuum,

Honoratissimae Amplitudinis tuae obseruantissimus JOHANNES TICHBORNVS.

The Epistle to the Reader.
IT was well said of that Italian Merchant, Machiauel. de repub.
for all refined policies of this last age: That the world must be sick and
purged also before it die. Wherein what the great Physician has from time to
time practiced upon that vaste body sometime by fire, sometime by water, and
generally by many great, and common destructions, every generation and story
are perpetual witnesses: and Saint Hierome most passionately does express and
bewail, writing thus against Iouinian: Libro primo contra Iouin.
Succrescit silua vt succidatur. Howbeit a better Prophet prognosticated of
some more special diseases which should befall, and possess the wayward,
crasie, and most diste^pered old age of the world, auouching by the spirit, 2.
Tim. 3. v. 1.
that in the last days men should be full of self love, covetousness,
pride, wantonness, and such like (which the learned have observed, and found
to be the root and causes of all heresies;) as also disobedient and breakers of
oath and promises, from whence have proceeded the manifold Sects, Schisms, and
personal separations disturbing always the outward peace, and quiet
government of the Church of God. For the mitigating and repressing whereof
(because they can never wholly be cured, or taken away: 1. Cor. 11. Math. 13.
for there must be heresies, and Coccle, tares, and darnell will be sowed, and
must grow amongst the best corn, and croppe until the end) it has pleased
Christ, the souls sole Physician and great protector of his Church, to
substitute the Ministry and Magistracy; whereby as Chirurgians and his own
hands in those his ordinances, to apply sundry kinds of remedies, to so many
and diverse maladies; both which working diversely, yet to one and the same end,
partly by the word and spirit, and partly by the civil sword, do hold up, as
well the general frame, and compage of the whole body, as the estates of all
particular Churches and Common wealths, until the day of perfect recuring and
restoring all things come. Now the physic and Cure committed to the hand of
the Church (which is the subject matter of my treatise ensuing) may for our
better discerning and handling the same for this present, not unfitly be
matched with the terms and parts made, and given by the learned to that happy
art, whereby the life and health of the lesser world, man's body is procured,
and maintained. Which being by the usual account three in number, namely
(...), may for breuity and order sake, be reduced to the three special heads,
to which I have referred this my so termed threefold Antidote, and desired to
apply the same to our present state in England, being now by God his blessing
(if all had eyes or grace to see it) as was sometimes said of Rome and Athens
(...): even a little world, or a brief and Epitome of all God his mercies
elsewhere bestowed upon all the Churches, and Commonwealths in the world.
Understanding by the first thereof Excommunication (which comprizeth under it,
as a part for the whole, exhortations, admonitions, reprehensions, threatenings,
confession, absolution, and such like) all these means which the ministry and
power of the keys may by the word and spirit prescribe at any time, for the
purging and healing so many souls sicknesses, which the whole Church for this
life, and every member thereof, is continually subject unto. And by the second,
termed Subscription, answering to that second general part of physic, called
Hygeine, in respect of the nature, end and manifold use thereof; we mean all
wholesome decrees, Councils private or public, and constitutions of the
Church, by which the truth of doctrine, amidst the manifold differences, and
contrarily minded people in the world may be preserved and maintained, the
inward peace of each conscience more fully and safely secured, and the outward
order of every particular Church better established and defended against al
manner of oppositions, by turbulent spirits in that behalf, and the just
temper of the whole body of Christ, by all good means, and wise foresight cont
nued throughout the world. And lastly, by the Cross, which I have made the
noble Hierog^yphicon of all other decent ceremonies to be used at any time in
the Church of God; I understand all comely ornaments, whereby as well Christ
his Ministers, according to their differences, degrees and dignittes; as all
other things belonging to the least performance and holy administration in God
his service may and ought to be beautified, decked and adorned: all scarres and
defects naturally or by evil event incident to any Church, healed, and
supplied, and the most natural sweet color, vigor, and beauty of Christ his
Spouse, be made resplendent, and apparent to the whole world, with all other
properties and effects, which that decoratiue art, and last part of Physic is
known, and celebrated to bring to pass in man's body* all which as in those
last dangerous days they have been much incombred by the hands and means of
Schismatikes, Atheists, Churchrobbers, and such like, of the profane and
cursed crew of so many heathenish people, that have rushed into Gods
inheritance as Psalm. 80. v. 1. and no less tortured and afflicted now a long
time with all kind of spiritual diseases and enormities, and even brought (as
they say) to the last cas^; so stand they now in need, if ever, to be relieved
with all the best antidotes and electuaries, which from both hands of Ministry
and Magistracy the Lord is willing (as Esaias. 42. ver 21.) if men also would do
their parts at all wants. And assaies most readily to afford; and indeed, now
is the time spoken of by the Prophet: Psalm. 119. ver. 126. for the Lord to put
to his hand; for men have destroyed, and even with plague and pestilence (as
the Septuagints render it) wasted and adnulled his Law, and all the means for
the magnifying and exalting the same, as the Prophet Esaias complains in the
place above named. Howbeit because purging medicines, especially of the highest
kind and degree, such as Excommunication, has proportion unto, are very
seldom, and with greatest care to be used; it has been the judgment, and
resolve of our late grave Divines, and very worthy and wise governors,
especially of that thrice reverend Whitgift, that considering these late
turbulent times, very little or nothing at all should be spoken or written
touching the true nature, power, use, and necessity of that great and high
censure. But now that it has pleased God by the eye and care of our most noble
Sovereign, to appoint a courageous prudent Alexander, in the place and room
of that renowned Philip for his wisdom, meekness, and sweet moderation of
all things belonging to Ecclesiastical affairs (whilst he sat at that
stearne, and has withal enlarged somewhat his vergee power, by putting the
garments of Aaron, as Exodus 28. verse. 2. upon his shoulders, and committing the
golden rod as well as the pot of Manna and tables of the Law to his special
custody: I hold it high time for all sorts of persons, and especially of our
own tribe, to use all good means for the repayring the manifold breaches,
irruptions, and depopulations before mentioned, and the giving and bringing
upon Jerusalem beauty in stead of ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, and the
garment of gladness for the spirit of heaviness, as was prophesied and
promised by the prophet Esaias 61. verse. 3. to come to pass in these days of
the Gospel and greatest grace, and would no doubt, but for the great abuse,
contempt, and neglect of both, be fully effected and accomplished. In which
respect if all means were summed up together, I presume none would be found so
excellently useful, and absolutely necessay as Excommunication and
Subscription, which therefore I have placed in the forefront; the one
containing in it and requiring by it, a just power to be invested in the sacred
ministry, for the establishing all due means for the souls health, and
recovering the same once lost or decayed: the other providing a constant,
uniform, and certain course and order for the executing and observing most
precisely every the least thing once enacted and so appointed, as without which
indeed it is impossible any where to uphold a comfortable ministry, or that
the Magistrate should be able to retain any means in any for me or due tenor
for Gods service, or the common peace, justice, and equity amongst men; for
want also whereof, any may perceive how little profit has been made of so long
and much preaching in this kingdom, arising chiefly from so many differences,
new inventions, and extrauagant courses as well in preaching as in infinite
strange opinions, and unheard of new and vain doctrines broached and scattered
in every country, Church and corner: insomuch as I may too too truly say, the
cause of so little religion in the world is, for that there has been of late
and now also is so much religion, I mean so much padling and meddling in it,
and so many kinds and means vnrepressed, and not so severely proceeded or
seriously provided against of every ma^s device to express it. And which is
treason to attempt in state affairs once appointed by men, is now admired and
magnified, and not only admitted, or at the least wise permitted and winked at
in Gods matters; which a good writer seeing, and foreseeing, complained of long
sithe^ce in this manner: Ratinnculis and sermonibus de religione sillogisticis
inhiant iam omnes etiam ex ima plebe, tanquam he^bis and pascuis armenta, with
many other such like words and matter to that purpose, the sum and sense
whereof is according to our former inference, that whilst every one is bold,
and takes liberty to himself to dispute and dispose of Religion in general,
and the highest and chiefest points thereof; it is come to pass that they have
in them no true or sound religion at all, 2. Tim. 3. verse. 5. with 1. Tim. 4.
verse. 1.
but to end as we began with Saint Paul his prophecy, most make a show of
godliness, but deny the power thereof, and to become flat Apostates at the
lest to deny the faith, that is all true Religion, the Church, God and all. For
my part, In Epist. res. pons. ad Augu.
albeit I could wish according to the old word; Da mihi medicum canum canillis,
that as Hierome told Augustine, all men's endeavors in this kind were like the
steps of the weried Ox, that fastneth sure footing wheresoever he goes; yet
observing as Camerarius does the like in the practice of Herodotus and
Theucidides, In his notes upon Theucidides.
how young vpstarts and Emperick mountebankes are too bold and aduenturous to
offer their drugs in this behalf, I mean much loose, old, and disguised
stuff without new matter or better form and order (both which, or at the
least the latter ought to be discerned in every new work) and that even at the
games of Olympus: and how withal our ancients for days, as Elihu terms
them (who indeed should speak by word and writing to this cause) do sit
still in that their politic resolve upon (...), or like Ruben Judge. 5. verse.
16. are content to abide all their lives private, by their sheepfolds,
notwithstanding the much bleating of their own and other flocks: the
indignation of the matter on both sides has drawn and enforced me to this
second adventure, and to say with Elihu, Who can in such a cause refrain from
speaking and writing also, especially in the behalf of Excommunication and
Subscription, whose reproach redounding so to God and his Church, I have so
often heard? and for which happily (some may say) and I must needs acknowledge)
my self have paid so decre, and can yet be c nten, and will be most willing
to be more vile (as he said) yea if it could be so purchased with name, living
and life it self to redeem the great good and consequence of them both to the
present state of our Church, to wh ch I have adressed and after my manner
prepared this poor Antidote, desiring GOD that it may sort to none other event
and end then I aimed at and propounded to my self in the former; which is and
ever shall be partly to stir up others of greater ability to some better
service in this kind, as also to cause much other of th kind and quality spent
already and truly meant that way, to be revived again, and by this means if
it may be to work the better: the issue whereof I commit and commend to the
hand and blessing of that great physician that came to heal the sores and
repair the decays of our nature, Mat. 8. verse. 17.
and took upon him our infirmities, and cured all our diseases, as it is in
the Gospel, even Jesus Christ, the Prince and author of all health and
salvation, who is God blessed for ever. Amen.

Thine ever in the Lord, although with loss of himself, I. Tichborne.

A Table containing the Chapters in this book.
THE first directed as a remedy for Excommunication, being through ignorance of
the true nature, use, and power thereof, and great neglect and contempt
thereupon of that holy censure, not only sick but eue^ dead, or at the least
dying at the heart; and therefore it is called Socordium.

The second is provided in like manner for Subscription, and is termed
Denatium, in respect of the most decayed state thereof, which also has now
need if eeur, by such preparatiues to other (I hope) more strong and restoring
medicines, to be revived and set a foot again in these factious and turbulent
times.

The third is especially wished and addressed to those weak stomachs of many,
even of our own Tribe, and others amongst us, who distaste so many things in
the Ceremonies of our Church, and cannot as yet be brought by any means to
brook and digest the least use or mention almost of the Cross; whose good is
feelingly tendered and very sincerely respected herein, as Aesculapius did in
one of his Receipts, the health and recovery of his best friends, Tertul. in
his Apology, and against the Jews.
which therefore is accordingly named Asclepiodoton. All which terms and
remedies were so used and interchangeably directed and applied by Aesculapius
himself, according to the nature of the disease, the state of the affected
therewith, and the qualities of the remedies appliable thereunto.

The ingredients of all which are conveyed in the Chapters following, fitted as
particular due receipts of the same. Whereof the first has three more large
ones according to the consistance of the matter handled therein.

Socordium.
The first whereof contains the names, natures, and manifold kinds and
differences of Excommunication.

The second comprizeth and imports the true end and scope of all those kinds
and differences of Excommunication above named, with some little infusion of
gnomicall Divinity, touching one specall point for proceeding thereby against
some kind of persons, after their confessions, and often absolutions thereupon.

The third given as an Electuary by way of answer to certain questions, and
sundry objections and exceptions made by diverse of these times, against some
particulars in the managing and executing this great censure of Excommunication
by the governors and Officials of our Church, and others which for many years
together until this day have used and observed the same.

The second concerning Subscription has five receipts comprehended in so many
chapters. Denatium.


The first whereof showing that Subscription is not such a heavy and heinous
matter as many would make the world believe, thereby to draw envy and obloquy
upon the thing it self, and the vrgers of the same.

The second declares the true nature and end of the inuenting and urging of
any kind of Subscription, by the prudent governors of any Church or state.

The third relates the ancient, constant, and general use of this kind of
proceeding in the Church of God, and all other kinds of societies and
incorporations whatsoever.

The fourth conuinceth the absolute necessity thereof in any well ordered
government and securely established state, by all wise foresight and just
prevention.

The fifth affoordeth reasons both to the weak and obstinate, why they may and
ought to yield hereunto, with some answers also to their ignorant and frivolous
objections to the contrary.

The third priscribed about the due use of the Cross, Asclepiodotou.
has seven special receipts according to the distempers of sundry persons
diversely conceipted and affected against it, and many ways scandalized and
offended thereby, as they say.

The first whereof entreats of the lawfulness and necessity of Ceremonies in
general, and in all solemn, public, and more especially all holy
administrations whatsoever, and how far the Magistrates authority may stretch
for the determining of any to be used in particular: thereby the better to
establish the consciences, and setting (as it were, the waumish stomachs of
the aforenamed) for entertaining the particulars that follow.

The second enquireth of the Cross, and finds it to be in the number of
indifferent and lawful Ceremonies: yea and necessary also, being once commanded
by the Magistrate.

The third aduoucheth the general allowance of this Cross by the practice of
ancient times, and judgment of learned fathers, with their reasons for the
inuenting and retaining thereof, and other judicious late Writers accordingly.

The fourth examineth and answers those many reasons alleged, and some of
them but lately coined, to prove the best use of this Cross, or any other such
Ceremonies to be simply wicked, and to be not only in their use, but even in
themselves, and in their own nature utterly unlawful.

The fifth encountereth with that one most stubborn conceit, and irremoueable
humor of some that would needs have it accidentally unlawful at the least,
and that especially because it has been so much! abused, and very commonly
sometimes made and set up for a great Idol in the world.

The sixth endeavors to purge all of that peevish and most silly conceipte of
all other, pretending and presuming upon their Christian liberty to neglect
the use of this ceremony, and to violate any other good order and humane
constitution whatsoever.

The seventh and last remoueth that melancholic, and braynsick opinion and
conceit of so many Scandals, or at the least so many occasions of scandals,
which are supposed and imagined to arise from the use of this Cross, which
fancy having framed, and no sound judgment from any true rule of practical
divinity (sorting some answers thereunto according to the nature of the
objections) we wish them all heavenly Physic, and leave them to the prayers
and other good helps from many wise, godly, and learned amongst us.

The Errata.
Epist. Dedicat. p. 6. l. 19. for esse read est. p. 11. l. 23. for occurrents,
r. accurrants. p. 15. l. 20. for permission, r. commission. ibi. ve dilescat,
r. ne vilescat, p. 26 l. 32. put out the first and. p. 32. l. 25 for or, r.
but. p. 35. l. 9. for particular, r. particulars. p. 47. lin. 23. for an
universal, r, any. p. 57. l. 6. for one, read due p. 65. l. 6. for like, r.
lawful. p. 67. l. 5. insert this sentence. Hieron. in Epistola ad Lucinium,
page 72. Nec hoc dico quod dominicis diebus ieiunaendum putem, and contextas
sexaginta dicbus ferias auferam: sed vnaquaeque prouincia abundet suo sensu,
and praecepta maiorum leges Apostolicas arbitretur. p. 76. in the marg. put
out, as Bellarmine. p. 78. l. 2. for facts, r. fasts. p. 81. l. 35. for
Antichrist, r. Antichrists. p 84. l. 35. for conscience of some, r. conscience
of sin, p. 85. l. 18. put out not in the title of the Chap. p. 96. l. 34. for
tollerent, read tolerent.

A TRIPLE ANTIDOTE AGAINST Certain very common Scandalles of this time, which
like infectious and epidemicall diseases have generally annoyed most sorts of
people amongst us, poisoned also not a few, and diverse ways plagued and
afflicted the whole State.
CHAP. I. Containing the names, natures and manifold kinds and differences of
Excommunication.
EXcommunication being the highest censure of all Ecclesiastical power, from
which the other two of Subscription and the Cross with all such decent and
profitable ceremonies do naturally arise; and the lawfulnes and necessity of
these latter depending for the most part upon the former: I have placed the
same in the forefront (as it were) of those many battles and encounters, which
by all kind of people almost in this complaining and murmuring age have been
made against them all, but especially against the truth, power and use of
excommunication. Which according to the name and nature thereof, I have first
of all endeavored to define after this manner: Namely (as the word expounds
it self) Excommunication in the most general sense and acception thereof is
nothing else but a separation from some common benefit, of which any formerly
have been, Excommunicatio a communi bono separatio.
or otherwise might have been partakers: which is the common received
definition by the Schools and Canons. Which being somewhat too general for
our purpose, after certain divisions of these larger terms, we hope at the
length to comprise the full sum and substance thereof in as short a compass
as so great a matter may be. These common benefits and privileges therefore
enjoyed in this life, being either Ecclesiastical or Civil; this term of
Excommunication has been always by all sufficient writers restrained to
those special graces and favors, which belong properly to the Church: and so
this censure is to be defined accordingly, to be a debarring and separation
from the Church: which also being either visible, or invisible, the truth and
nature of this excommunication must be in like manner examined and
distinguished to be a separation from the visible or invisible Church. Of which
distinction sundry reasons may be given, which briefly may be comprised in
these two positions, from which many more particulars may easily be collected:
first, that the knowledge, order, and proceeding in either of these kinds are
very much differing; both in respect of the persons censuring, accusing, or
offending, as also of the defaults and punishments thereunto belonging: the one
being always certain after one manner, because God (as Augustine well
observes) who is the high Judge in that privy Court, does see all things
evermore as they are, and judges accordingly by his present mercy and present
justice: taking all actions and persons as he finds them, and so his word and
ministry thereof, with all other means belonging to this Excommunication,
proceed by the same order and degree: the other very variable (from the visible
Church) and uncertain, Primo secundum praescientiam: 2. Causam. 3.
Operationem. 4. retributionem sol. 2047.
taking knowledge, and giving order for personal causes according to
particular allegations and proofs (as they say): which Hugo de sanct: in his
book de Sacramentis legis naturalis and scriptae, does more largely express
making four kinds of judgments. Secondly, because one and the self same
person may be admitted and allowed for a communicant in the one, which happily
has no interest nor fellowship in the other: and so contrarily the same
persons may by course and order of laws and proceeding in some cases be
removed from some part of the visible Church, which keep their place firm and
sure in the invisible, as 1. Timothy Chap. 5. verse. 24. and 2. Samuel Chap.
16. verse. 7. is plainly avouched that God sees not as man sees, and that
some men's sins go before unto judgment, and some follow after. Now this
Excommunication from the invisible Church is only infallibly known and
exercised by God, who alone knows who are his. 2. Tim. chap. 2. verse. 19. And
how at all times every one stands or falls to himself the great master of
all. Romans 14. verse. 4. yet has he appointed certain persons to whom a
special commission is directed to proceed in this inward and high Court of
conscience, and by which special means (as by certain signs and best
conjectures) the knowledge of every one his estate and freeholde (as it were)
in the invisible Church and true fellowship with God and his Saints may be
discerned: which means the learned have called voluntatem signi (being indeed
signa voluntatis) subordinate to that infallible prescience and predestination
of God, by which together with these signs and means, which for that end are
prepared and appointed by God, all are delivered from their miserable estate
and fellowship with the devil and Church malignant, and received into this
invisible Church and company, whosoever they are that are at any time so
received (as Saint Augustine in many places learnedly shows): which signs
and means specified in the word of God, and commonly called and understood by
those general graces of faith and repentance, being found in any, or testified
by any outward signs to those Commissaries of God (as I may so term them
above named) so far as they can, or ought to judge, according to their rites
of commission and proceeding, to be in any or otherwise to be wanting; so are
they judged and allowed for meet partakers and communicantes with that
heavenly society, being qualified thereunto by the former graces, or else to be
wholly unworthy and out of the same, and so being admitted or excluded by these
stewards, Gods ministers (whom God has appointed and none other, as shall be
showed hereafter to deal in that high Court of his) or pronounced privately or
more openly so to be: whatsoever they shall do in that behalf according to
the tenor of their commission and order of their court roules (which is the
truth and scope of holy scriptures) shall be ratified and confirmed in heaven,
both for the pardon of sin which is the kingdom of grace in this life, Ioh.
20. verse. 23. and the full state of glory for ever in heaven, Mat. 16. verse.
19. In regard whereof this excommunication from the invisible Church, so far
forth as it may be awarded, or any way iudicially proceeded in by man,
Definitio excommunicationis ab inuisibili ecclesia.
may thus be described: to be that part of the power of the keys, whereby
upon the signs and evidences of infidelity, heresy, irrepentance or such
like, every true minister does pronounce any to be in the state of Gods wrath,
and out of the fellowship and communion of Saints. Which power albeit Saint
Augustine gives sometimes to private men's admonishments and exhortations
(saying thereupon cohortatorie, as Luther observes him, and the other learned
fathers to speak many times) Ligasti aut soluisti fratrem: yet is this no whit
of this nature and kind whereof we entreat, this being an exhortation or
counsel, and a common work of charity belonging to all Christians: the other
a judgment or a solemn and peculiar judicial proceeding, performed always
by Gods ministers only and lieutenants in this behalf: wherein God deals by
them as a King does by his Judges and other immediate officers for any state
occasion; wherein although many have skill and can give counsel and aducie,
yet are no charters ( quoadius as we say) pardons or judgments whatsoever of
validity and force to carry or confirm any thing for or against any, except
they be pronounced or otherwise sealed and warranted by those who are called
and designed to represent and supply the Kings place and person in any of the
same. And thus much briefly of this first kind of excommunication, which
respects indifferently all kinds of people that have souls to be saved: and
may, yea ought to be exercised in all places where any true minister is found,
albeit there be no order or power established according to the nature of a
visible Church, or other ordered government whatsoever: For so is the nature of
the other excommunication which we made to be from the visible Church; wherein
always is required some company living under form of outward government, by
which laws may be made and enacted for this, or at the least some other kind
of separation from the same; for so Saint Paul speaks of a company to be
gathered together, as from which that incestuous person was to be removed by
his own censure: which also may appear by all other such separations which
ever have been read of, or are as yet practiced in the world: wherein by some
kind of power established amongst some company living under government (be it
of one kind or other) certain persons have been excluded oftentimes
(according to the discretion of the governors thereof) from the face and
fellowship of some visible Church: Which also according to the causes and
diverse kinds of operation, and proceeding by or against any, this kind of
excommunication must again be divided into that which by violence without
cause, and against all order and reason is oftentimes denounced: and that which
upon just cause, or by some kind of order at the least is commenced and
executed for the separation of any from the visible Church; the first whereof
may be called excommunicatio violentiae; such as were exercised by Tyrants
against many a true member both of the visible and invisible Church: the other
not vnfitl termed excommunicatio ordinis, in which by some orderly proceeding
and under some course of Law and constitutions just or unjust any are removed
from any such company and privileges belonging thereunto: which also being as
all judgments are as the Schools distinguish them, usurped or defiled and
tainted with some in justice and wrong, or else direct and regulated according
to truth and equity: so likewise is this excommunicatio ordinis whereby good
Jeremy and our Savior Christ himself John 7. were by such orders (as those
times did afford Abstentes (as the word in Jeremy imports) and debarred, at
the least from many privileges of that Church and time (as the word (...) may
by Erastus his own acception or any others signify) as well as that incestuous
person most justly by Paul from the company and privileges of the Church of
Corinth. But to tie our selves to that excommunication which by good order and
upon just and necessary cause is always awarded, resting in the hands and
power of every true Church and company gathered together in the name of Christ,
to profess his name and service, that also has it differences and
distinctions: for so by the Schools and Kanons many such have been invented,
whereof that of excommunicatio mayor and minor, the greater and the less, may
very well fit our purpose. According to the use of this great censure by all
Christian Churches in the world. Which upon the assistance at the last of
Christian magistracy, and by their own special decrees and constitutions
thereabout, have extended the power of this censure to the debarring of those
that are separated thereby from many common privileges, whereof the civil
estate makes them otherwise partakers: as appears by many civil
constitutions and statute Laws in force at this present amongst us, de
excommunicato capiendo, and such like to that purpose. For which cause this
excommunication by order as we have termed it for the better setting down the
true nature of it, must once again be divided into that which is merely
ecclesiastical, as proceeding only and wholly from that power of the keys
which are given to the Church, for the ruling and saving of souls; or else into
that which is civil (abusiuely so called and (...) as we say) or lastly,
partly ecclesiastical and partly civil; according to which are most
proceedings therein for the outward government of any Church at this day. That
which is called ecclesiastical is so wholly estated in the persons of Church
governors, as that if there were no civil Magistrate in the world, yet would
and ought they to claim and show their authority and power: if according to
the true ends and uses thereof (hereafter more particularly to be set down)
the Church shall judge it fit or necessary so to be awarded. Author of late
assertions for Church Discipline.
And no civil power has any more to do with it, then (as the latest exceptor
and pleader himself against many things therein confesses and proves by the
authority of Bishop Horn and Doctor Bilson, both reverend fathers of one Sea
in our Church) it has to do with making ministers, consecrating Churches,
immediate making of Church Canons for doctrine, and cases of conscience
administration of the word and Sacraments, and such like, In the prefaces to
certain Injunctions made in Henry 8. and Elizabeth their reigns.
which some princes of this kingdom and all other wisely possessed with the
truth of these matters, have evermore disclaimed. Howbeit for the other which
concern first the bodies, and outward estates and condition whatsoever of any,
and secondarily and consequently the soul and inward man, and so also respect
for the most part the outward peace of the common state both ecclesiastical
and civil, they all must have their consideration, determination, and proper
place accordingly, as proceeding first from civil power, may be intended or
remitted, continued, suspended, or changed, and sometimes exercised or
inhibited by civil magistrates, sovereign or subordinate. Of which sort I
make all temporal punishments, commutation of penance, outward shame, and all
other bodily afflictions (whereof notwithstanding that of being given over to
Satan, some have made one, Erastus out of some of the fathers.
albeit belonging to the Church power always in such cases, and that in the
highest degree) wherein through the affliction of the flesh in any kind,
means may better be procured and applied for the saving of the soul in the
day of the Lord Jesus: 1. ad Corin. Cap. 5. v. 5. The difference and true
distinction whereof may appear by these special notes: first that
Ecclesiastical excommunication and all things concurring thereunto, so far
forth as they are merely ecclesiastical, concern the soul and the means to
recover any secure or desperate sinner, and withal to preserve any other, or
the whole Church from any further annoyance, spiritual infection, or any kind
of prejudice thereby: but the other respect first the body and outward man, and
afterward happily are made profitable and appliable to the souls of any.
Secondly, that which we call, for better order and instruction sake, civil
have their ground and original (whatsoever they are) from the other power
which is called civil magistracy, as the other touching the soul, the inward
and spiritual service of God, the peace of conscience and such like, belonging
unto this censure, proceed from the rites and investitures of that other order
called priesthood, power of keys, ecclesiastical magistracy, or what else
besides it be called, swaruing not from the truth of the matter it self:
which for it part must always do that which belongs thereunto, in this and
all other offices, although there were no Christian Magistrate in the world;
and does also exercise the same (according as they see it most fit and
correspondent to the ends above named) in all places, where the foot of
violence from any part of the secular power incombreth not, but rather (as they
ought to kiss the Sun in that one sense and behalf) protest and maintain
the rights, power and privileges of the same. Thirdly, those proceedings
herein which are merely civil, or mixed sometimes of both, according to their
several ends, authors, and originals, do principally, and for the most part,
respect the common policy of the whole State, and that which is Civil as well
and more particulary many times, as that which is Ecclesiastical, albeit they
ought to agree in all things together, as Hippocrates his Twins. All which
might be showed in the manifold particulars, which in the use of this censure,
have been added, partly by the civil Magistrate; and further invented by the
immediate Governors, under the allowance of the chief magistrate of several
Churches, for the better strengthening, and more orderly and profitable
executing this or any other censure, which any judicious reader may refer
every one (as they are not unknown, by reason of their common practice in the
world) to their proper place, and one of those three heads of this our last
division. To which I desire this one thing to be adjoined, before I come to the
more particular definition of this Excommunication: namely, that albeit this
censure does properly and evermore of right, belong to the power of the Church
and immediate government of souls: yet can no such power exercise any part of
outward government, or more public administration whatsoever, within the
territories and dominions of any civil magistracy, without the special good
allowance or indulgence, at the least, of the chief magistrate there, which in
all places of settled and well ordered government, appertains to the civil
power: which God in the example and type of Judah, among the tribes has made
the only lawe-giuer. Insomuch as no due execution of any other their own most
proper proceedings, can be well performed without their help and assistance:
which caused the due use of this censure to be so rarely, and indeed weakly
exercised in the primitive Church, and many other Churches of later times,
before civil magistrates were christened, or this civil power did undertake the
protection of the Church, or at least gave way and liberty for the full
execution of all Ecclesiastical power; which has been very much curbed and
scanted by most Christian Princes in the world. Much less do we arrogate any
secular power and command, to be originally and properly in the persons or
states merely ecclesiastical, albeit one and the self same man or state, may
very lawfully, and ought sometimes necessarily to be armed and furnished with
them both (as Luther himself learnedly shows, In Epistola responsiua ad
Melancthonem: Et in postilla ad Epiphaniam de Magis.
and elsewhere we have examined, that as the civil magistrate sometimes has
been a priest, so contrarily may Gods minister be a king, or of any other
elective dignity: the same man, but not the same person, which are
distinguished evermore, but may concur both in one subject) but that the
enacting of laws, Bodin. de repub. and in Method^ historiarum.
creating of magistrates, citations, Judicial proceedings, and punishments
accordingly, have their first beginning and warrant also from the civil sword:
yea the very outward form of government, by which that part of the Church,
which is committed to any civil Magistrate (who is truly termed of our later
Deuines, the keeper and maintainer of both tables) commonly called Church
discipline is to be administered, and under which (be it one or other) any of
these Church affairs are to be established, procured and executed, depends
wholly upon the will and authority of the chief magistrate in any estate, as
himself may judge fittest for the due ordering of the same, most agreeable to
the civil body, and convenient and profitable for the whole state. Always
provided that the essential and main points expressed in the word, or the
necessary consequents belonging to any person cause, or calling in these
Ecclesiastical administrations, be in no part abolished, interrupted or
diminished; which is all that we challenge in this Excommunication, or any
other such power, privilege, or censure from any civil magistrate in the
world. The sum and definition whereof, according to the premises (I mean
this Excommunication from the visible Church, by order of wholesome Laws
ecclesiastical or civil, according to the true nature thereof commanded and
expressed in the word of God) may for our better proceeding to the points that
follow, Definitio Excommunicationis a visibili ecclesia.
be thus set down. Namely, to be that censure of the Church, which proceeding
from the power of the keys, is awarded against notorious offenders under any
form or means, by those persons only whom any Church shall think best to
depute and assign to take knowledge of all causes deserving the same, and to
give sentence according to the nature thereof against any persons offending
therein. Which although in regard of the extent thereof, and quality of the
crimes and persons offending and incurring this censure, it has been divided
or rather distinguished by some such circumstantiall differences of time,
longer or lesser while, places, of and in the Church or Churchyards, or such
like; yet for sum and substance (I hold them all one,) as by the true ends
and scope of all those kinds before named, or at any time used by the Jews
themselves, or any other in their Church governments, shall more specially be
showed in the next Chapter.

CHAP. II. Comprising the true end and scope of all the kinds and differences
of Excommunication above named, with some little infusion of guomicall
Divinity, touching one special point for proceeding thereby, against some kind
of persons, after their confessions and often absolutions thereupon.
THE ends therefore of all those kinds of Excommunication, which have been
recited in the former Chapter (as appertayning any way to the Church power and
authority) concern either the common good, or avoiding any evil and imminent
danger in any particular Church: which by suffering any notorious offender
uncensured, or scandalously to rest among them, might by evil example or
further infection be much annoyed, and suddenly subverted: or else the private
duty and care the Church, sa a loving mother, and the ministers thereof their
spiritual Fathers; ought to have, for the regaining and recovering any from
their irrepentance, and more special soul sins, as also by true confession
of some occasions and occurrents thereunto, upon their receiving again into
the Church, to preserve them from further dangers: and to prescribe them
remedies and directions for afterward. And indeed more good is like to be done
toward the most part of sinners upon their confessions and absolutions after
these censures, then we see come to pass, or likely to be effected, by our
ordinary and general preaching. The common ground of all which may be
observed, especially in the latter inventions for bodily and more sensible
punishments, to have proceeded from the strange corruption and fleshly minds
of all mankind for the most part, with whom all other means of exhortations,
admonitions, reprehensions, promises, or threatenings for the time to come, and
such like will little prevail, except some present, sensible, temporal
afflictions, inward or outward, be adjoined thereunto: and therefore not only
means of grief, fear, and shame, but other also more near and outward
punishments upon their goods, bodies, and good names for ever, have been
devised and appointed, to drive them to confess and leave their sins, and by
the affliction of the flesh (as saint Paul teaches) in what kind soever, to
recover and save the soul, in the day of Christ Jesus his judgment: wherein
the Church deals as God himself is wont with hard hearted and irrepentant
sinners, whom when all other means fail, he afflicts for no other end but
their own salvation, with many inward and outward plagues and judgments. In
all which temporal and outward afflictions, this one thing ought evermore to
be regarded by those that have the awarding of them, that such particular
means in this kind may ever be applied, as whereby the offenders might more
sensibly be touched: and not to punish the richer ones by the purse, which they
little regard; and the poorer with shame and bodily chastisements, which they
are well hardened to endure: but rather contrariwise; that so at the least, they
may be brought into order of outward government, if not to the inward reforming
of themselves, and so by true and unfeigned confession to God and man, to be
restored again to the invisible Church: which all the parts and kinds of these
latter excommunications aim at, and serve unto. For so indeed this confession,
and absolution thereupon, is one of the chief and true ends of this the
greatest censure of excommunication, and all the means and parts thereof; as
might appear by those hard places in the 6. and 10. to the Hebrews, and the
18. of Matthew (if they be thoroughly looked into, and well compared together)
as also by the practices of the Jews themselves, to the which some of those
places at the least are referred, and by the same (as the practices of those
times) for the most part to be expounded: who were not only armed for their
Ecclesiastical estate with great authority, but had further power to inflict
corporal punishments, which the Romans themselves would not altogether
abrogate, nor much alter. According to whose practice, and proportion of
truth, touching, this argument contained in the former places, one special
point touching confession, and absolution thereupon (but especially the
exercising of this highest censure in some cases, Quod gnomicum esse volo.
and against some persons) I think fit and necessary to be unfolded: for the
Jews themselves had not only their Consistory, wherein this Church power was
exercised (which Math. 18. 2. Thessal. 3. cap. verse. 14.
is termed by the name of the Church) and Saint Paul would have disordered
noted persons carried thither (by which nothing else can be meant but this
Church power (we now speak of) resting in the hands and execution of them to
whom any particular Church shall commit the same for the time: In his Dictionary
called Thisbites. De politia Iudana.
) but also (as Elias Leuita reports and might easily be gathered out of the
old Testament (but that others have eased me of that labor of late) and out of
Berteram also and Sigonias, they proceeded diversely by outward and temporal
punishments, according to the nature and quality of their saults. Which against
some persons, and in some cases, was so far extended, as that they were never
received into the outward fellowship of the Church again, or at the least had
not the sentence of absolution publicly and ( quoad forum externum, as we say)
affoorded unto them: as by the three words used by the Jews, to express three
kinds of Excommunication may plainly be gathered. Nidni. (...)
By the first whereof they removed more grievous and obstinate sinners from the
rest of that Church; Cherom. (...)
by the second they inflicted and awarded some more grievous punishment, which
might stick by them, as we say, and even pierce them to the heart and bones (as
themselves expound the word: Shamatha. (...)
) but the third did Anathemize them to a perpetual separation, wherein they
should remain unto their death. Which last I take it, was only meant of these
outward means in Church government, and no way respecting forum internum, or
any ones interest, at the least, for ever in the invisible Church: but that
therein any private minister, or member of that Church besides, might (yea
ought) to deal by all good means for their confirmation again, and recovery:
and so that place in Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 16. verse. 22. concerning Anathema
Maranatha (until the Lord come) is to be understood of all those that should,
as Hebr. 10. verse. 26. (...).
by their wilful and more then voluntary rebellion (as I may so speak) and
returning unto their old sins make but a sport and scorn of this
Excommunication and absolution, and even tread under their feet the blood of
the Lord Jesus, then the which nothing could be more despightfull to the spirit
of grace, which by this special means and ministry of the Church, offers
such reconciliation, for whom the Apostle there witnesses, that there
remains no more such sacrifice for that their sin, as unto whom Hebrews
6. verse. 4 it were not convenient (as some expound the Greek word (...)) that
this kind of repentance or penance a part for the whole, Caietanus in tertiam
partem Summae. Nazianzen ex (...) Hieroon in Epist. Aug. lib. 20. contra
Iulianum Pelagianum. Confession our daily Baptism.
or the conseque^t for all (which the Schools and some of the fathers call
second Baptism or absolution) should be any more offered, by which they might
be renewed, that is, received any more into the visible Church: which places to
be understood and expounded of that inward gift and grace of true repentance,
which joins always certainly and inseparably to God, and the invisible
Church, were against the whole course, tenor and purport of holy Scriptures,
which promise reconciliation at all times and admittance again to every truly
repentant sinner into the invisible Church, whereof God only and no mortal
man can judge or discern. Howsoever in the cases before named, they whom such
matters do concern (the Governors in any part of the visible Church) are
taught and enjoined by the places before cited, to keep this order and
decorum; because otherwise there would be no order or distinction at all, but
the blood of Christ together with this censure, and all other holy
administrations would infinitely be profaned of all desperate sinners; who
would make no more of this matter, but to sin and be absolved again: which
were not only troublesome to the ministers, but much more prejudicial to the
peace and safety of any Church; and therefore God himself is said, Heb. 12.
verse. 17. in the matter of Esau his refusal, and putting off from his
birthright, that he found at Gods hands nor his fathers (then Gods immediate
minister in this behalf) any place for repentance: that i, for the recovery of
that outward favor (which yet was a further pledge and Sacrament, as it were
of better things) for ^f his special salvation (as no man can judge) so this
place has no meaning. And more especially for Cain his mark, about which the
learned write and differ so much, and driving from Gods face, as never to be
admitted again into the visible Church, howsoever for procreations sake God
(the only Judge then Ecclesiastical and Civil) spared his life. And indeed so
far is this place, or any of the other before alleged, or any where to be
found in the old or new Testament, from giving any signs or directions to any
particular persons, or Church in general to take knowledge, or give judgment
of any to have committed the sin against the holy Ghost, as that (I think)
no humane censure has ever had any warrant or permission from any part of Gods
word so much as to inquire, or to take any knowledge thereof; being only known
to God himself as abouesaid, who alone knows who they be that will continue
in final impenitency unto the end. Howbeit for that other exposition, besides
these former examples of the Jews, and God himself in the cases of Cain and
Esau, it may be observed to be the practice of all politic proceedings, such
as this practice and particular in Excommunication is: in which it is most
solemn and general, not to suffer their favors, pardons, and indulgences too
often to be abused; for so we see that notorious offenders formerly branded for
their often outrages, are not permitted by our Laws to claim the benefit of
common pardons. So in the second book of the Institutions for the Canon law,
Cap. de remission. and poenitentijs: Solemnis poenitentia, ve dilescat
Ecclesiae authoritas, iterari non debet: and Saint Paul himself commanded
Titus, cap. 3. verse. 10. to give over (as the Greek word imports) reasoning
or dealing in this kind, (...).
with any foul heretic, after certain admonitions and censures used for his
recovery: (...).
being (...), as in the same place above named. And so much for the true and
proper ends of Excommunication, with the special kinds and degrees thereof:
Now follow certain questions in the next Chapter to be considered of, which
happily may better explane some things in these former chapters, which yet have
been purposely set down for the more easy discerning and full discussing of
the same.

CHAP. III. Containing answers to certain questions and objections, made by
diverse of these times, against some particulars in the managing and executing
this great censure of Excommunication.
THE questions usually made and objected diversely, by the manifold exceptors
against the truth and power of this Excommunication, may be reduced to these
special heads, as they follow in order to be handled. First, how far this
censure (as it is Ecclesiastical) may extend it self; being, as some merry
gentlemen and quaint Lawyers of latter time have in reproach thereof cast
forth, a bottomless gulf, which they nor any other could ever sound, nay yet
the original and ground from whence both it and all Episcopal power do
proceed, especially as they are exercised now adays in most places of the
world. To which I answer, first, that if they could be as well contented to give
unto Christ that which is his by the power of the spiritual sword (which
should cause this acknowledgement) as they are enforced by temporal Laws and
power to give unto Caesar that which is due unto him, they would never occupy
their heads, and tongues with such questions savoring strongly of disdain and
envy, if not palpable ignorance, in this clear light of the the Gospel: for
in a word this power of theirs is as well from above as any other subordinate
power under Christ, who being the great Bishop of souls, has appointed his
holy ministry, and anointed them with special grace and power for the
government of souls by all those outward means of dispensing the word in any
kind or manner, giving the sacraments, admitting into the Church upon
confession and acknowledgement of the true faith, and shutting out for the
renouncing the same, absoluing and receiving them again upon repentance
professed, and such like in any of the parts of this Excommunication besides,
which God has made proper to this function (as has been above declared.) And
so not only that special power and commission to deal with the conscience and
inward man in all matters appertayning to the visible Church, is appropriated
to this ministry: and every particular anointed with the least part of that
holy oil, but also a kind of external power and jurisdiction, properly also
Ecclesiastical, respecting all the means abouesayde, and all other things
which directly and immediately concern the soul, and the means for the peace,
safety, and well ordering the same in the kingdom of grace, and preparing and
fitting them for the kingdom of glory. Instance and evident proof whereof, is
affoorded in this one practice, for many others, of the primitive Church: in
which these Church governors only took knowledge and care of all those that
gave their names unto Christ, and were thereupon after confession of the faith,
admitted into the rank and order of their Catecumeni, and so afterward were
reckoned in the number of the visible Church (as Saint Augustine confesses of
himself:) who also afterward falling from that faith, or not living worthy of
the same, after all good means used (as is specified more particularly by our
Savior Christ, Mat. 18. v. 17. and was always in force in the primitive
Church, as by Heb. 10. and other places may be gathered) and yet persisting in
that their unworthiness of such a fellowship, were returned back again by
the same power of the Church unto their former estate: and were no otherwise
accounted of then as if they were Publicans or Heathen: Mat. 18. v. 17. that
is, such as had nothing to do with that special Church of the Jews which was
the only Church visible at that time. The like may be said of all decrees and
constitutions, made by the immediate governors of any particular Church, for
the determining of all controversies, and expounding of Scriptures according to
the rules of faith and manners, and their special prescribing means and
directions to penitents, and such like (as Physicians are wont to their
patients) and giving orders for the safe keeping of the doctrine of faith and
manners, and the preventing of all things contrary to the same, commonly
procured by heretics and schismatics. Wherein also that their power for the
urging of Subscription, proceeding from this of Excommunication to all things
set down by them not contrary to the general rules of faith and manners
consists and appears (as is further declared in the next treatise.) In
which respect Saint Paul gave such charge in so many places unto Timothy for
the careful keeping of that depositum and form of wholesome words: 1. Tim. 6.
v. 20. And Revel. 2. ver. 14. and 15. God requires it of the Angel, and none
other (who by all men's confession represents the Church power in that place)
that the doctrine of Balaam, and of the Nicholaitans, and the heretics
themselves, were not repressed by him and that Ecclesiastical power, whereof
that Angel was head and superintendent, by such means of admonition,
confutation, conviction, and so consequently (if need required)
Excommunication: which are evermore proper to the Church care and power. Albeit
in that infancy of the Church in all places there was a great mixing of both
powers (as appears by the Apostles themselves) who called Councels in their
own name, for the better strengthening that their weak state and beginnings,
struck some with temporal punishments, and with death also in some cases:
which also until Christian Magistrates did protect and maintain this power,
rights and authority of the Church, was practiced in many places after the
Apostles time, wheresoever the violence of persecuting tyrants did not
restrain the Church liberty in this behalf: which is wont, and so justly may,
yea ought indeed (as well as any other incoporation left unto it self) to
make Laws, ordain Magistrates, punish offenders, and such like, whereby that
their state may be better ordered and preserved. Howbeit, which in the second
place I answer and is evermore to be remembered (according as we have also
observed before) no power whatsoever properly belonging to the Church, or else
annexed by any means thereunto, can be exercised in any part of the world,
under civil Magistracy, without the authority or good leave at the least of
the commanders therein: nor any Laws made or ratified without assent and
leave of the civil power: as under which, and from which all other External
power has all his outward motion, as the most principal members of any
natural body under their proper head: as all Christian Churches do
acknowledge the civil magistrate in all causes supreme head and governor
(howsoever that word Head without any such just cause (I think) has been of
late misliked of some) even as many good Popes also, Beda. lib. 1 cap. 23. de
Gregory Mag: ad Mauricium, and lib. 2. cap. 18. Honorius ad Horaolium.
before that chair of pestilence was fully seated amongst them, did call the
Emperors of their times, their gracious Lords. And yet notwithstanding as the
other principal parts of the body (the Liver for example) has immediate
motion and operation from it self, as well as that other from the head; and as
the inferior orbs of the Stars and circles of heaven are moved as well by
their own natural courses as by that general motion which is observed to
carry all other with it, and under it: so is it in this intercourse of
politic administrations, Ecclesiastical and civil, both interchaungeably
compared and considered together: neither may the proper orders and proceedings
of the one be truly said to be any more prejudicial or contrary to the
other, then the Liver in his proper operations to the heart or head, from which
it has his continual life and motion: whereas the God of nature has in his
wisdom and providence diversely disposed of them in that general communion
(their properties and functions evermore reserved to themselves) as that stout
and wise high Priest told Vzziah how it appertained not unto him to meddle in
any part of the Priest his office: 2. Chro. 26. verse. 18,
howsoever in other things they were subject unto them, even unto their placing
and displacing: and indeed here is no more in effect, then as householders rule
in the house, and martial men for their orders of war, 1. Reg. 2. v. 35.
which yet I hope no way withstand that other which we call the chief power.
To which purpose also is that other strain, and further extent of this cauil,
that any such power should be warranted by God, and so allowed to be in force
under any well ordered government: wherein the civil and chief Magistrate has
nothing to do for the discerning and awarding thereof; much less to have
power and authority to repeal or reuerse the same, and so to restore any
person censured thereby of this kingdom, to foreign Ecclesiastical power of
law (as it is thought.) Insomuch as one of the daintiest practisers of these
days, in a sad and sober conference had with some of our grauest, did cast it
out (I cannot tell how) that he could never found the depth and mysteries of
Episcopal Jurisdiction in general, and of these proceedings for
Excommunication in special. page 77* 78. Late assertions for Church discipline.
And more plainly and grossly our late pleaders, as well for their innocents (as
they term them) and as I may truly call the other very sinful assertions for
their new discipline, have made both the power it self, and much more the due
practice and exercise thereof very dangerous for any estate, and most
prejudicial to the royal prerogatives, yea the very Crown and dignity (as
they most ignorantly, slanderously (if not indeed blasphemously have objected)
of Christian Princes, making it the greatest means for Antichrist his clyming
so high, and the very stirrup to the Pope his mounting into his saddle. To all
which, albeit I have answered somewhat in a larger treatise (which I purposed
should have been the elder brother, but that this like rough Esau has for
just and good cause (I hope) hastened foremost, and prevented the other, which
was even ready to come forth first, and like unto Jacob, may hold this elder
by the heel:) yet must I briefly adioyne somewhat to that which has been a
little before answered in this behalf, that may more directly quench, if not
kill the heat and venom of these poysonfull proiectes and problematicall
devilish objections. First therefore they might as well except against the
ministry of the word and Sacraments, the Ordination, or degrading of
ministers, consecrating of Churches, and such like many more; which as yet none
of these exceptors, nor any other durst divorce from that holy order and power
of Priesthood (as without any true offense it may be called) or to make them
any way common to any Prince and civil power whatsoever. Secondly the heart may
as well be arraigned of treason against the head and whole body, as this power
of the keys, and any particular administration thereof may be judged
prejudicial to the supremacy of Princes, and safety of the whole body,
standing quietly of Ecclesiastical and Civil power, and executions sweetly
joined and combyned together, under any kind of sovereignty, or Civil
Magistracy, which is evermore the head of them both. And lastly, their Law and
Logic together very much deceive them, not only in making that the cause,
which is not the cause, and things accidentally and by circumstance sometimes
evil, to be so evermore, and in their own nature (which are the usual
sallations practiced by these Sophisters deceiving themselves and others
thereby:) but also (which argues their greatest ignorance, or forgetfulness
at the least in this point) pleading from that (which is clean contrary) to
argue this encumbring and encountering of Princes just titles and royal
dignities, as the proper effect of the same. For indeed this Excommunication
(especially as it was used by those masters of the Romish Church) was one of
the greatest engines and means to batter down the walls and strong holds of
Antichristian prelacy, and power, when Princes and all the world once perceived
that those many Bulls roared for nothing else but to get preies for the filling
of their own bellies, and feeding the ambitious humors of those usurping and
presumptuous Prelates. And for the thing it self in it own nature, there is
no one thing belonging to Ecclesiastical power, or which might possibly be
invented in the world, which might sooner distaste Princes, or any part of the
civil body, and more likely to withdraw them from protecting all or any of
the Church rightes, then the due execution of this censure. In regard whereof,
together with these confused and troubled times (wherewith the Church has
been and is, for the most part, still annoyed and encumbered) the due and
constant use of this Excommunication, either has been observed to have been
seldom practiced in any Church: or else have the wisest governors of the same
not thought it fit or convenient, many times, to draw out this spiritual
sword, and censure so often as otherwise the necessity and safety of their
several Churches might require. And for the abuses which proceeded from the
persons to whom this censure has been at any time committed, and not from
the thing it self: whereas for want of skill happily and good wisdom, how
and when this special physic was to be applied (as Erastus himself
observes, who had more learning and judgment, even in this physic also and
true divinity, then hundreds of these late pleaders, and from whom this last
dram of mischief was drawn into the Pens and pleas of these pettifoggers
and promooters) they do no more argue the unlawfulness of this power, or
disable the true, wise, and round use thereof, then if a senseless although a
golden sword appointed evermore for the highest Justice, should be misliked,
and most senselesly indicted and condemned for that murder, which a fool and
mad man had committed by it. To all which kinds of reasoning and such like
objections and framers of them, I could wish better skill to construe their
Law, or choppe our Logic (as we say) then for want of this latter (which
with due reverence always to that grave profession, any may observe to be
much wanting in those Scribes, especially when they are out of that their
Element, and put a little from their own pace) to miss very much in their
right use and application of the former, and other their rich naturalls and
further accomplishments, wherewith for the most part they are well qualified
and endowed: for many Lawyers (as I may say truly with reverence and respect
as abouesayd) of most of them, would dispute as well as any if they knew how:
and for the last pleader of all, Author of the Assertions for Church Discipline.
who has been a great and long practiser in that bad and black Court (by
cunning libelling against all our Ecclesiastical power and proceedings, and
not long since has drawn all his Law and Logic (which I think may be put
in a little bag, or at the least weighed in a small balance) together with
the slime and froth of his hot and malicious wit to the fortifying of a rotten
mud wall reared by another pleader almost as bad as himself) I cannot but in
holy zeal (I hope) to this good cause and most holy censure of Christ's Church,
Nichols Countermure.
and just indignation against all such unskillful reformers of Ecclesiastical
abuses, and wilful deformers indeed of all good order, cry out with Peter to
Simon Magus, and all such envious spirits and despitefull lookers upon any that
have greater gifts and authority then themselves: Thou, thy Law and thy
Logic perish together, for they have no part (I am sure) nor portion in these
businesses, and less authority or calling to speak or write against any thing
possible amiss therein: and I fear (I may too too truly add the other) that
their hearts are not upright in them, but that under color of calling upon
the urging and mayntaining of many good Laws, and constitutions amongst us,
and under pretense of tendering Princes supremacy (which if any should presume
to breathe or blow against, I wish them from my heart breathless) to
establish an iron and Macedonian throne for themselves, under which they would
soon bondage and bring both Medes and Persians, and the golden head it self
of any kind of government; as al know their intendme^ts, who are any way
acquainted with their positions, resolutions and practices about their new
discipline, which they forsooth call Christ his lore and yoke, unto which all
Christ his true members must submit themselves. Which indeed is no other
(especially as they mean it for this point and argument, which we have in
hand) but the new fangled devices of their own discontented and ambitious
spirits: as in the examination of the second part of this first objection,
which now follows, shall better and more fully I hope appear. For under that
more large question touching the original and due bounds of Excommunication,
comes another more special and subordinate, very much urged and delighted
in, by many: how far Princes themselves are subject to this censure, or any
other person or persons, or whole states sometimes of like condition, quality
and consideration: the which being diversely propounded and intended by these
two late pleaders (the one exempting Princes altogether from all and every part
(as it seems) of this Excommunication, (as may be gathered by his own
words:) the other urging, especially herein, the abuse of it in his conceit by
some, Nichols in his plea for innocents. page 51. and 52.
to whom (which he so much misliketh) that is impropriated which in his
judgment should be common to all Ministers of the Gospel: and that so far
forth (as was observed by a grave counselor of our state, by that which was
put up in petition sometimes by those innocents his clyents) that by their
rules the pastor of Greenewitch might excommunicate Queen Elizabeth so
worthily famous throughout the world in those days. And indeed being never
agreed upon by those new Doctors themselves, nor scarce any other of later
times it may be allowed very worthy our pains to enquire further into it,
Author of the Assertion for true and Christian Chruch-policy, page 327
albeit we come short of any full conclusion, or final determination of the
same: the rather, for that our Lawyer like exceptor over carried with malice
and desire, to charge our Bishops with some foul and great imputation
thereupon, seems to have forgotten the first principles of their common
profession herein, or at the least forsaken the grave judgment of their
renowned masters, and founders of their new Discipline, crying out very lowdly,
and challenging all confidently in this manner: Who and where they are of their
opinion and faction, which hold that princes may be excommunicated? Whereas
besides the general opinion of them all displayed in the petition abouesayde,
and discerned by that honorable counselor, and elsewhere expressed in their
disciplinarian assertions, apologeticall writings and conclusions, Sir Walter
Mieldman.
that their Oracle may speak as the mouth of them all, what their judgment
and desire is for this question: Master Cartwright, part 2. reply page 65.
Bishop Whitguift.
who little regarding the troublesomnesse of those times (wherein that worthy
prelate sat at the stern of our Ecclesiastical government) and less
discerning (as it may seem) the mysteries of any such politic
administration, and particulars belonging to so weighty a censure and
proceeding, especially against such persons as Princes are, etc: was not
ashamed to term the Lord Archbishop of Caunterbury then being, Page 92. vbi
supra.
as the bawd to Princes and other great Magistrates sins, in case they were
not excommunicated, as his wisdom with the Senate of his associates did judge
oftentimes meet and necessary. Demonstration of Discipline, page 75.
And another ads further in this point, that Princes must not be flattered in
their sins: and therefore this censure must be inflicted upon them as well as
upon any other. But (leaving them to themselves) I thus answer to the
particulars of this objection as they glance and glide on both sides of this
Excommunication, and are directed by the former exceptors and many other,
against the truth and nature of the same: First, that as for that
Excommunication from the invisible Church, whereby any Minister pronounces
according to the rules of Gods word, of any, to be in the state of grace or
otherwise: it and all the parts and degrees of it agree as well to the Prince,
and any other such like person or state, as to any other that has a soul to
save, and so stands in need of faith, repentance, confession, and
absolution, necessary, requisite, and tending thereunto: because in Christ
Jesus, and matters of souls government, Christian liberty and such like, there
is neither bond nor free, as Coll. 3. v. 11. Secondly for that which we call,
from the visible Church, so far footth as it is merely Ecclesiastical, every
Prince and Potentate is as well lyeable unto it as any other; because the care
and charge of their souls is no less upon the governors of the Church, but
rather much more then for any other: and also their sins and examples are
commonly more infectious and dangerous then other men's. And lastly, it were not
only a great profanation of all those holy things daily offered to such
polluted and unclean souls, but a great cruelty also and carelessness at the
least, in those that should be soule-sauers and physicians, to suffer any under
their diet, ordering, and cure to surfeit themselves, and surcharge their souls
with new sins of taking by this means Gods name in vain, polluting his
sanctuary eating and drinking their own damnation, and such like: before by
confession and true repentance outwardly testified, at the least (which is as
much as any man can require and discern) they have discharged themselves of
their old sins as noxious humors in a foul stomach; which eftsoons
otherwise would break out into many aguish hot and cold fits (as Augustine
calls them) of other sins, and daily symptoms of Gods judgments. Howbeit
in this second kind of Excommunication there are certain cases reserved, Casus
reseruati.
and special rules evermore to be observed for the execution of it, which may
fit us in some better and further answer to this point. As first, that because
the safety of many, and the common peace of the whole Church is always to be
respected and preferred before any means for the salvation of a few, or of the
Prince himself, in such times as by the Excommunicating of some Prince, or
others of great power, or else some whole faction which might breed commotion in
the Church or whole state (commonly noted and called by turbidis temporibus)
this censure may very well, yea ought to be forborne, as in all other of that
nature, which may prejudice, rather then help and further the peaceable
government of the Church, and saving of souls in general. For which ends
this censure was first invented by God, or man, and all things appertaining
thereunto, and wholly are, and ought to be referred. Secondly, where the
forbearing of this censure, or at the least some higher degree thereof, may be
perceived by the wisdom of the Church to make most for the regaining of any,
who might otherwise happily be hardened and discouraged, if not in some tender
minded people swallowed up with sorrow thereby: as Saint Jude seems to employ
verse. 22. and 23: commanding to put this wise difference, taking pity of
some, and pulling othersome out of the fire, according also to that general
rule (which may be the ground of both these answers) 2. Cor. 13. v. 10: God
has given this power to save, and not to destroy: and so upon Mat. 13. v. 29.
the learned have observed three bad kinds of Excommunication comparatively to
those eradications there spoken of: Festinata, Suspitiosa, Damnosa: which they
thus expound (namely) damnosa Excommunicatio quando multitudo est in causa, vel
princeps, nisi fuerit causa manifesta redundans in iniuriam ecclesiae: as Saint
Augustine observes the same, quod aliquando sunt tolerandi mali pro pace
ecclesiae, quando timetur de schisenate, adding, aliud est quod docemus, aliud
quod sustinemus. For so may this Excommunication be well and fitly likened unto
a sword or physic, which are never to be used but upon great occasion: and
when those that have skill how to use them see it fit and needful, especially
for this strongest kind of potion (as I may so term it) which only is to be
used in desperate diseases. And therefore the governors of the Church and
immediate ministers and awarders of this censure, respecting with a wise eye
and foresight, when this physic and last remedy may be profitable and
behouefull, observe many times that milder means of more grave and temperate
admonitions and increpations to serve turn toward some persons, to whom
being wise (as the proverb is) a word may be sufficient, and many times better
then this great blow of Excommunication. Which further no immediate minister
thereof under Christ privately or more publicly in any state-administration is
bound continually and without respect or difference to denounce and put in use
and execution, but as they shall find and judge it most profitable for that
whole Church wherein they are Judges and Commissioners, or that special person
or persons who may incur and deserve the same: which being once discerned and
upon sufficient and mature deliberation resolved upon, it ought to pass
against all that live in the Church, princes or potentates, as well as others
without respect of persons; except only (which is the last reservation in this
case) with strong hand they be openly withstood, or justly feared so to be:
which in another kind was David his case sometimes, when in his wise foresight
and most just grief and godly indignation withal he cries out: 2. Sam. 3.
cap. verse. 39.
The sons of Zeruiah are too strong for me. Lastly (I answer to the second
part of this grand objection) that in respect of the last kind of
Excommunication, which we called for distinction sake, Civil (so far soorth as
this censure has been at any time strengthened immediately by civil Laws and
authority, or the governors of any Church themselves have had any delegate
power committed unto them for that purpose) no chief Magistrate (howsoever he
be termed in monarchical or any other state) is any further subject to it,
then as himself who is the fountain of all external power, and such kind of
proceedings, shall think good for any just cause and respect, either of his
own good or peace, or well ordering of his state, to submit himself
thereunto: as the manner of our Kings of England is (and ever has been) in
matters of common justice to yield themselves to the order of Laws, as well as
other their subjects, and so are many times impleaded in their own courts;
which if they should refuse, no humane power by Gods word has any authority to
bring them into order, either of any of those Civil courts, or those other
which for the constitutions and process therein, we have called
Ecclesiastical. well as the administration of the word and Sacraments, which
are outward means in like manner to testify unto any their communion or
separation from the true Catholic Church, which is only seen of God: but for
the other two later kinds of Excommunication (which are properly politic, and
exercised evermore by some company living under form and order of Laws, as
all other of that nature, they may no more properly or conveniently belong unto
every minister, then that every Citizen should be Ruler and Magistrates at the
least in free Cities, or that every Counselor or Lawyer should be Justice of
peace, or that every one should be the master, father, or first borne: and so
bear all kind of rule in every family. Whence it is that Christ himself,
Math. 18. refers matters criminal and of politic consideration (such as
no private means could reform) first of all to the Church Discipline, by
which (as we have above noted) nothing else can be meant then that power (in
whose hand soever for orders sake and better execution, by the designment and
appointment of any particular Church it may rest) by which any person or
persons shall in the name of the same Churches proceed in this censure or any
other of the like nature: as we read of Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 5. v. 4. and 2 Thessalonians. 3. v. 14. writing to a certain company to be gathered together amongst
the rest of the Corinthians, for this end and purpose, to take knowledge of
such criminal and other kinds of causes, which might require any such
Ecclesiastical censure; and more special to the Thessalonians, willing
disordered persons to be noted by some letter or Epistle, as worthy to be
deferred to some further knowledge and judgment (as without which, such noting
and all other Ecclesiastical observing were to small or no purpose. Wherefore
the same Apostle, 1. Cor. cap. 12. v. 28. speaking of all Church affairs and
public administrations, makes some to be Governors as well as others to be
pastors and teachers of Gods people: Sic 1. Tim. 5. v. 17. vere. ruling Elders,
and sensu vero and genuine. And herein never as yet did any judicious Divine
stand much upon it, whether these Church Magistrates be termed Bishops, Elders,
Chauncellors, or by any other such like name or degree (which the Church and
chief Magistrate shall put in trust and commission for these administrations,
so long as the things themselves, and the substantial points for all
Ecclesiastical proceedings be allowed and maintained by every chief
Magistrate, as they are proper and even essential to any well ordered Church,
and necessarily required by Gods word. And had not God himself made this order
and difference in all public and politic proceedings (as by the places
above named, and many other of the old and new Testament (which we have
elsewhere used for the differences and dignities of Ministers in general, may
appear) yet common experience, reason and necessity would have enforced the
same, as we may see in all pollitique bodies Ecclesiastical and Civil, which
have ever been in the world: which otherwise through a general confusion,
none ruling, nor any obeying, would fall down of themselves; as Saint Paul
says, if every member were a head, where were the hand, the feet, the
smelling? etc: even all without order and difference, a monstrous confusion.
And therefore these men themselves in their exercising and awarding this high
censure or any part of their new devised policy and discipline, reduce all
such proceedings to Consistorial throne and jurisdiction, and that in far
greater sovereignty and peremptory vnreuerseable power, then wheresoever under
Christian Magistracy any lawful Ecclesiastical body does execute their
jurisdictions and power. And herein it differs not, whether the immediate
mannagers and Actuaries in this Excommunication be good or bad (as the
Donatists and Anabaptists sometimes excepted against Baptism it self; and
some of our homebred Schismatickes, have often revived those quarrels) or else
Laickes sometimes, and in some cases, as the next question will better inquire:
so long as they have this external order and power by lawful authority under
Christian Magistrates put upon them; because therein they do not their own
work or actions (as Augustine has abundantly answered against the Donatists)
but the special functions of the Church: by which they are moved, and in every
particular directed, and no way carried (so far forth as they perform any
Ecclesiastical services) by their own private motions and spirit; as
appears also in baptism, ordination of ministers, and many other things
appertaining to Ecclesiastical power and censures. And indeed the sum of
this objection is none other then the demand of Corah and his confederates
challenging equal power, and holiness in this kind to all the Levites and
ministers in common, Number. 16. v. 34.
which God had made then, for the order and government of that Church, proper
to the Priests: which is all one with the matter and question we have in hand
For the conclusion whereof I desire all to read that with judgment, and to
translate the Latin of it into good true English divinity, or Christian and
godly policy (if they will) which that grave, learned, and true Christian
politician wrote sometimes by way of council and Theological determination to
certain like minded with these Questionists and Obiectors: Melancthon in
Consiliis theologicis.
Et Consistoria ideo co^stituta sunt ne indocti pastores aut malida^nent
homines sine legittima cognitione, sicut manifestum est iracundos pastores
saepe hoc modo unjust turbasse ecclesias, and notum est plurimos pastores
nescire ordinem cognitionum: satis est pastors (quod ad ministerium and
iurisdictionem suam attinet) quando crimen est notorium, admonere reum, and si
non obtemperet, arcere cum a communione, etc. Which special power also is by
the wisdom and appointment of our Church, thorough some delegate power left
many times in the hands of every the meanest minister who also for the most
part always has his ministry and use in the inflicting this censure, and
absoluing any persons from it. To which the same author adds the practice and
judgment of other learned men and Churches at that time more directly to this
question: An^^ Annum in ditione Naumbergensi magna contentio fuit inter
quosdam, an singuli pastores armandi essent hac potestate, Nominatim, sine
cognitione Consistorii excommunicandi aliquos? responderunt autem Dr. Sneppius
and Casper Aquila idem quod nos nunc scribimus.

Now for the third and last question and objection, usually made against the
means and manner of executing this censure, Quaest 3.
namely that oftentimes mere Laics or such (at the least) as were never fully
admitted into holy orders, do not only intermeddle therewith, but have for
the most part the greatest stroke therein: Plea of the Innocent. page 49. and
50.
To which (I first answer) that which some of these exceptors and pleaders make
contrary use of, alleging as the truth is, and the order thereof by our Canons
and common practice of our Church, that the main sentence of Excommunication
is evermore reserved to be denounced by the Bishop, or some other minister: as
from whose care and power this whole proceeding does originally descend, by
whom, and by what means soever it be managed. Which secondly (if it were not
so) I answer) that whatsoever is performed herein by any such persons, either
for the better and more safe preparation to the final sentence it self, or
else practiced in the very denouncing of the same, are to be accounted for no
other then the actions of the sacred ministry it self; or, if you will rather
speak with Cyprian and Jerome, of the Church, and whole power any where
established: for so they speak plainly (albeit very impertinently, Nichols in
his plea page 59.
and as ignorantly cited by one of these grand exceptors against many things in
our Church government, and this one we have in hand amongst the rest) Clauium
potestas non vnised vnitati conceditur. And so indeed the intermedlers herein
are not merely Laikes, or wholly Ecclesiastical, in that behalf and their
assistance herein; or pronouncing this sentence at any time, is no otherwise
then as the Clerk of the peace at any common Sessions does read, denounce, or
any way assist the Judges thereof, to whom properly and principally the whole
commission is directed. Thirdly, many things incident and especially belonging
to this great censure of Excommunication (as it is now for the most part
exercised by any Church) being external and primarily respecting the bodies
and outward estates of the offenders, as also the common peace and external
policy of both Church and common wealth together (as we above showed) they are
by all reasonable consideration to be managed and discussed by their proper
professors (and best experienced therein. Neither lastly were it meet (as the
whole council of the Apostles conclude) in the like case, that the ministers
of the word and Sacraments should attend upon tables; or taking knowledge of
all criminal causes in this kind and nature. In respect whereof our new
masters of their Church policy have found it very necessary to appoint diverse
sorts of lay persons, as Elders, Deacons, Widows and such like, making them
essential parts of all welordered Church policy, Acts. 6. v. 2.
according to Christ his word, rules and kingdom, as they say: who yet
notwithstanding in the truth of those terms, being according to the use
thereof in the first Churches, and Paul his mentioning of such kind of helpers:
1. Cor. 12. v. 26. under the names of Commissaries, Officials, and
Churchwardens retained still amongst us, will by no means allow of such kind
of assistance in these special causes, which no other can so conveniently
consider or determine of. And to end this point (because I have partly handled
it in another treatise also) I desire all indifferent readers to peruse that of
Vrsinus (generally allowed for a very sound and judicious Divine, In Catechism
de potestate Clauium.
as most of later time) where he writes thus: In Ecclesiastico Iudicio gratiae
and irae Dei, non sit denunciatio ab vno aliquo priuato (qui hoc munus
plerunque obire solet) sed a tota ecclesia, vel nomine totius ecclesiae, idque
ab ijs qui ad hoc electi sunt communi omnium consensu, and ad certas personas:
In functione sacerdotis.
Which Tollet sets down more particularly allowing and appointing amongst
the persons executing this censure, the Churchwardens sometimes, or other such
like Lay persons: but especially I refer all Judicious readers for their
further informatio^ in this point to Panormitanus that great Clerk, for his
Councels and exact skill for all Judicial proceedings, upon the decretalls
under the title de Iudicijs Fol. 9. and in cap. Decernimus, and many times in
his larger treatises Ad literam Laicus, and title of Excommunication, where he
shows both the equity and necessity of that we now maintain.

CHAP. I. Showing, that Subscription is not such a heavy and heinous matter as
many would make the world believe; thereby to draw envy and obloquie upon the
thing it self, and upon the vrgers of the same.
AFter Excommunication discoursed of in the former treatise, and some questions
and difficulties thereabout discussed: In the next place comes Subscription,
not unfitly to be considered of: which indeed could never have bin called into
such question, and such standing out against it would never have been showed,
if the true power nature, and use of Excommunication and Church power from
which it proceeds, had been thoroughly known and maintained, or at the least,
accordingly exercised and enforced amongst us. And therefore as we have
entreated more largely of the one, so must we also by our order prescribed, not
unfitting I hope the same speak now of this other, the rather because it is
one of the maine whites and marks which those bad Archers (with whom my
greatest encounter has been in a more large field) chiefly aim and shot at,
but with no better success I hope then as good Jacob complains of those
against Joseph, Genesis 49. for the order of which treatise it shall be this:
First to set down the true nature and chief ends of subscription; secondly,
the long, ancient, and constant use of it in the Church of God: thirdly and
lastly, the great necessity and equity for the urging thereof at all times,
with some special reasons thereupon, why it is or ought to be so strictly
urged and required from certain, living under this present estate of our
Church by the wise and careful governors of the same, and why also those
standers out may safely submit and yield themselves thereunto. For the first
we must show in the first place what it is not, because upon the
misunderstanding and misprision of that which indeed it is not most have been
driven from their due reverence and obedience to those things which by the same
are required; wherefore all offended from the urging thereof at any time must
know that the meaning of this subscription is not that every one so urged,
should peremptorily, and de scientia, as we say, auerre and auow by word
writing, seal or mark, every particular thing contained in the book of
common prayer, and the other particular excepted against, much less in all our
Homilies, Canons, and constitutions made, or to be enacted hereafter (as some
have objected of late) to be absolutely perfect, according to the exact rule
and rigor of the Law, and word of God in general (as some would have those
heinous words so offensiuely and tenderly taken (nothing contrary to Gods word)
to mean and import: For so we are nothing of humane use or invention in the
world: much less is the nature of it such as upon the premises would fall
out, whereby men's consciences should be set daily upon the rack, and sundry
persons urged thereby to approve untruths, and diverse things which cannot
possibly be known and justified, or else to be driven thereby to speak at the
same time yea and nay; yea to maintain many ungodly practices with all,
Nicholls in his Plea page 102. and 103.
as is most ignorantly (if not maliciously) suggested by one graund late
exceptor: for proof whereof who sees not if that should be the meaning, how
contrary to the old rule (against which no state proceeding of all other ought
to offend) nemo tenetur ad impossible) many impossibilities would appear at
once: for not only the best inventions of men have their manifold imperfections
and so are against the word in that sense: but even the best prayers conceived,
or forms thereof prescribed by man, are full of much weakness: yea although
they be taken out of the holy Scriptures themselves, being but once used by us
require a prayer for pardon therein: wherefore it is that at the end of our
Letany (our most solemn prayers to God) we pray for the forgiveness of our
ignorances and negligences: which especially escape us in Gods service: yea in
the Lords prayer it self we are taught by our best Master one petition (which
Saint Augustine calls our daily Baptism) as touching our daily trespasses,
Contra Iulianum Pelagia. number lib. 2.
amongst all other to call for the forgiveness of those (wherewith even in
repeating, much more no doubt in our best translating that holy prayer we
defile our selves, as indeed for the translating hereof (to speak nothing of
infinite other) never any Papist or Protestant, or any other whatsoever, durst
challenge any such absoluteness of perfection, no not in the very Canon of the
Scripture it self (as we or any other Church now have them) being only perfect
and absolute, as Bellarmine himself confesses, Bellarmine and Whitakers de
Scriptura.
and our best masters for these matters cannot deny, in their originalls of
Hebrew and Greek (wheresoever also they be) much less for the number of their
Canons, and every particular story and sentence therein (as Jerome shows
manifestly in his preface upon Job and Daniel:) whereat notwithstanding so many
scruples are made to hinder this subscription by the chief captains of those
that impugn the same; In their late schedules and objections against
subscription.
and lastly for the translation thereof (as I have also elsewhere showed) no
company will ever be able perfectly to understand many hard textes, which in
this life (especially in any one age) can never be attained) which is but the
first point herein (as Ierom shows upon Daniel) and no pains nor tongue,
much less our English (which is the straightest and most penurious I think of
all) has ever as yet, or at any time hereafter will be able faithfully and
fully to express many things (which yet happily are none of the hardest.) All
which might give as great a distaste to these men, and cause of scruples, and
refusing to subscribe according to their conceiving and meaning for the urging
thereof, as those particulars instanced in by many; and unjust quarrels against
it at these times, which I hear of late certain learned and judicious grave
writers have more particularly scanned and satisfied. For indeed their own
niceness cause things to seem harder then they are; and who sees not how
easy a thing it were to find many holes and faults (if any sort of people had
warrant curiously to prye into, and uncharitably to construe in this kind and
manner; in the most perfect constitutions or proceedings in this life, neither
can I compare these men better to any kind of people then to that bad and
basest sort of Lawyers, who lighting upon any kind of evidences (although never
so well made) and most sufficient to carry and confirm the true meaning and
purposes of the willers, deuisers, and makers thereof; yet will be sure by
wresting and misconstruing, to find some quirke of Law in them, whereby to
avoid their conueyance, or at the least to give great trouble to all those
that have any thing to do about them: for even so it is with these busy
examiners and curious pryers into many our state constitutions and proceedings:
which being never so well devised and comprised as sufficient means for God
his service and our duties, as any where else in the world: yet for something
or other (which their private fancies and humors cannot relish and digest)
they will never, nor can please them; and therefore presently must be against
God and many parts of his word: Nicephorus. Gregory's hist. lib. 11.
whereas the Heathen in their generation were more modest in the one and more
provident in the other, by not letting every young gamester that was not able to
judge aright of such mysteries (as being not well Grammered and initiated in
them) so much as once to peer into these state affairs, much less to touch
and taunt them for insufficiency, imperfections and errors. And amongst whom
that was very solemn and general, never to dispute with them that should deny
principles: which also was for good purpose taken up in one of the late
Councels, wherein it was thus enacted: Contrahaereticos non est disputandum.
And if it be well observed, this is one of the chief causes of so little true
religion in the world, or at the least due and constant expressing the same,
whilst every one is bold enough (being not curbed with some authority to the
contrary) greedily and curiously to spy and censure such infirmities, as are
incident to the best humane orders, and every one will take liberty to carpe
against public proceedings, where there is no cause or error at all many
times. Whereas the best state and politic body whatsoever is, or can be no
better then the temperature and disposition of man's body, which albeit (as the
learned in Physic know) when it is at the best, might be reduced happily with
much ado to some better temper and diet, also for the same purpose; yet does
the knowledge and wisdom of Physic, observing that through the old temper
and customable diet that body to be kept within some good proportion and
latitude of health (as they say) forbear so much as to inquire into some
smaller defects, nay hold it not safe being settled once in one temper and
courses of diet answering the same to make or attempt the least alteration
therein, notwithstanding they judge and could wish happily also, that special
body to be of another, and somewhat better temperature or disposition: like
unto the wisest builder also, which having reared a house with great trouble
and charge, upon the discrying of some imperfections afterward (which the best
plot and frame is ever blemished withal) does not by and by altogether mislike
it to pull it down, for such eye-sores and imperfections; but himself and all
his content themselves with it, knowing the cost of building. An other, which
would possibly admit as many or more defects, when the former were amended: and
yet cannot our new builders see, and physicians of small value (as Job calls
them) the meaning of these matters in our politic body, Job. 13. v. 4.
and building to acknowledge and allow the good state and temper thereof; but
would feign be pulling down to amend that where happily is no fault, and to be
tempering with that body which is in as good proportion of health, and does for
the general frame and temper thereof, as well perform and accomplish all the
functions and due offices thereof, I am persuaded as any other in the world;
yea a great deal better then if it should be otherwise reformed: before which
time also it might happily be lost it self, temper, and all.

CHAP. 3. Declaring the true nature and end of the inuenting and urging of any
kind of Subscription, by the prudent government of any Church or state.
NOw to show the nature and proper end of this Subscription. It is only a bond
or witness of all inferiors living under government for their good opinions
and allowance of that state and proceedings therein, under which they live,
wherein I could wish double bond taken with all possible security from those
that should seek any public place or promotion whatsoever, in our Church or
any part of the common wealth: Neither do our governors make any other end
thereof, but by establishing thereby a general uniformity of doctrine (as the
confession of the Church wherein they live, comprised in our Articles of faith
and conformity to public orders and proceedings) to preserve the common peace
of the Church as also to prevent thereby (so far as humane foresight and
means can attain unto) the manifold sects and diversities of doctrines, and
opinions, and attempts, and practices of special persons at the least which
are most like, or may most justly be feared to be any way preiuditiall to the
same: and to breed and bring in, by false and erroneous doctrine and
irregularity from the aforesaid several orders determined any danger to the
whole state, as also those which are urged to Subscribe, to protest and
witness no further thereon, but that all things contained in the book of
common prayer, and the rest are so far forth according to the word of God as
humane ability is wont to attain unto, being no way contrary to the rules of
faith, but such as has most wisely and religiously been invented and
appointed: and with no less care preserved and maintained, as the best means
which our wise and worthy governors, have in their grave and most careful,
curious, and conscionable considerations resolved of, as well for the true
service of God, and orthodoxall and wholesome doctrine, as the peaceable
government of the Church. And lastly to be such, as whereby God may duly be
served, and our Church orderly and sufficiently taught and governed as well as
other reformed Churches in the world. Which to be so and no further, both the
nature and end of this course prescribed, and most necessary to be kept of all,
shows. And appears further by that learned Archdeacons answer, Of his
Plea. and 135.
which may be of all the rest both mouth and eye, remembered by Master Nichols
himself, Page 134. which he gave to some (amongst whom, he was one that
refused to subscribe) pressing them, and very truly gathering thereupon, as if
he held opinion that we had no sound religion amongst us, and that our late
Queen of most famous and worthy memory, and the whole state, had not appointed
sufficient laws and orders for the true and right exercising of the same: but
rather some thing directly to the contrary (and then indeed they might and
ought to refuse to subscribe, or to continue any longer in our Church) by
refusing to set to their hands to so much, as that those their orders and laws
contain nothing against the holy Scriptures, and rules of faith and manners,
of piety and faith which is the end and sum of all that is urged and those
dangerous and fearful words so offensiuely and tenderly taken by some; where
it is said, that those articles and means above named for uniformity of
doctrine and conformity in rites and ceremonies, contain nothing contrary to
Gods word. Implying thereby and truly setting down (as himself knew well, if
any other the whole matter and end of subscription) being even then a prudent
governor, of and much employed about that business, Archdeacon of Canterbury
Bishop of Norwich.
under that learned, wise, and most mild and worthy Archbishop, and afterward
worthily in greater place of the Church, that by subscribing in this manner now
as men are urged, they are required only, and by this means tied to give
their witness and certificate under their hands, of their good opinions and
allowance of our laws and orders, for doctrine and government, and all
necessary means sufficient, according to the scripture, for the true service
of God; so that our Church was and is according to Gods word, not Heretical
nor Schismatic, nor maintaining any thing against the first or second table?
but a true member of the right Catholic Church, professing and serving the
true GOD in a right manner as well as other Churches: which also I have lately
learned (by one that was an eye and ear witness) was the answer of that most
learned and reverent Archbishop Parker to Doctor Humfrey, who then also was
somewhat tender and curious hereabouts, and Master Cartwright also at the same
time; and which I presume is, and will be the answer of all our reverent
fathers, to all refusers and standers out, upon the urging thereof, if with the
like mind and modesty, they will come in and submit themselves unto them, as
that famous learned man (whom they need not be ashamed to have their pattern
and precedent) Doctor Humfrey did. And thus much for the first point,
concerning the nature and end of Subscription.

CHAP. III. Declaring the ancient, constant, and general use of this kind of
proceeding in the Church of God, and all other kinds of societies, and
incorporations whatsoever.
THe second follows, which respects the long use of subscription in the
Church of God, according to the true nature and end thereof, above described:
whereof we read in the Law, and before the Law also, and indeed in every
kind of any state proceeding, ecclesiastical or civil, good or bad, one or
other, as without the which none of them could possibly stand, or long endure:
as first in circumcision* Genesis 17. and passover. Exodus 12. verse. 49. whereby
testimony and subscription was given to that religion, and ceremonies then in
use, and none other, whereby they bound themselves to like, allow, and practice
the same for ever, as well as of their separation from all false religions and
idolatry, and to be a means of so great benefits to the receivers of the same,
Gala. 5.3.
as Saint Paul (albeit to some other purpose) tells the Galathians that
being circumcised, they were bound to allow the whole legal services, and
also to keep the whole Law; as that also of our savior Christ, who lived
from that time of his circumcision until his death, under that legal form of
religion (whereof also he was a minister. Romans 15.) neither did he alter the
same, til after his ascension. And hence it was, that both to Abraham and all
the governors of the Church after, GOD gave so straight a charge for the
urging and observing of it, as being the first means of subscription to the
true religion, which was then professed in the world: in so much that whosoever
he were, stranger or bred amongst them, should be cut off, if he were not
circumcised. So likewise at the rearing of the tabernacle, and building of the
temple, we may observe to this purpose, that every family and special house,
yea private persons offered somewhat thereunto, in token of their approbation
to that work, Exodus 35. ve. 5 and 22. and cap. 38. ver. 26.
as the public means of Gods service, and at the making of any covenant
between God and the people, or enterprising any more public business. For
that end in Nehemiah and other places we see an universal practice of this
subscription, Nehe. 10.28.29
and for more particular urging thereof, as an oath ex officio, in some causes
of greater weight, the true meaning and equity of that hard place, Leuit. 5.10,
and s^^e ^^her. Nehe. 10.29. (as Hugo de sancto victore, and other learned
expound it) does not only give allowance, but commandment also for the same:
and the new testament, such as would not receive and obey the doctrine and
ordinances agreed upon, and customs also for those times, as in the first to
the Corin. Cap. 11. verse. 16. were not only suspected and noted for some
dangerous and irregular persons, and the contrary highly commended. 1. Cor.
11.2. as in the second Epistle to the Thessalonians. 3. cap. ver. 14, 2. These.
3.14.
but to be debarred also from the common privileges of the Church, as in that
place, Company not with such, and with such eat not, says the Apostle. 1.
Cor. 5. which I take to be specially meant of the Lords table: yea they were
not to be entertained into house, John. Epist. 2. verse. 10. much less to any
chief place in Gods house, which those men (to whom this subscription for the
like in doctrine and ceremonies, customs, ordinances and orders of the Church,
as Acts. 15. verse. 22. is urged) are in petition and expectation of. But more
particularly for the duties above named, we read in the primitive Church,
which may seem to have less need of this means and preservative, how all
Priests and Deacons were urged to subscribe to the special canons and decrees
agreed upon by sundry Councels, especially to those of Toledo and Ephesus
(which Melanchton more plainly declares, Sic liber Concordiae, in quo 800
Episcopi and Presbyteri subscripserunt. Bal^arminus in censura libri. Et
Harmonia inter omnes Belgii and Gallliae mistros. Eusebius de vita Constantini.
and the manner of their subscription, page 518, of his theological counsels,
where he learnedly handles many things to his purpose, and question of
subscription:) his words are these: Extat hodie Synodi Ephesinae liber in quo
sunt subscriptiones presbyterorum, diaconorum, et subdiaconoru^, extat et
Co^cilium Toletanum quod iubet ordine subscribere Episcopos, praesbyteros,
Diaconos. The particulars whereof we may read also in Eusebius, of Constantine
that most religious and renowned Emperor (who saw right well the true nature
and end of it, and found by the differences of those times the absolute
necessity thereof, which follows to be spoken of in the next point)
commanding for the end above named, this uniformity in subscription, and
condemned Arius with his own voice. The like we see to have been in the
practice of all late reformed Churches, in the harmony of their confessions,
and more specially to our purpose the practice of those of Frankford to our
own countrymen, Theses Geneuenses Gallice scriptae.
who came but to soiourne amongst them: and at Geneua not only subscription is
urged, and that to many persons. 7. 8. or 9. times, but an oath also is taken
for further security, that they shall obey their Doctrine and orders, and do
nothing contrary to the same. And indeed no incorporation or government
whatsoever have ever used to receive and be partakers of any privileges
amongst them (and their folly were great if they did) except they should first
submit them selves, and subscribe to like that estate under which they live,
for any time; much more profess them selves members thereof, and are willing
to enjoy good thereby, and that they will do nothing praeiudiciall to the
safety thereof: as in Venice it self, wherein the greatest liberty is granted
of any place in the world, besides none are suffered to continue amongst them,
which shall any way dislike their state by word or practice: but rather by both
yield and subscribe thereunto, and yet it is strange how it should be thought so
severe, hard. And even tyrannical amongst us, that subscription should be
required to one Synod or Counsel of ours, and some few things which are
cheifest and greatest of consideration, for the state and good of our Church
and common wealth: although it be from those men's hands also who manage some
special businesses thereunto belonging: whereas, as in short to conclude this
second point, al Captains, governors of Cities or any incorporation, yea of
some meaner family (as for example, many of those ministers, gentlemen and
meaner persons which mislike so much our urging of subscription by the Bishops)
will admit of none to their services, or any privilege or freedom in those
places of their commands (neither is there indeed any reason why they should)
except they give testimony and subscription by oath, many times, and other
solemnities, (as some kind of profession and subscription) for their well
liking and allowing all their orders, and continual care to do nothing
praeiudiciall to the same by means whereof, and that especially we see most
incorporations, towns, free Cities, Innes of the Court, and such like, so much
to flourish. Thus much also for the second point, showing the long use of
subscription in the Church of God.

CHAP. IIII. Showing the absolute necessity of subscription in any well ordered
government, and securely established estate, by all wise foresight, and just
prevention.
THE third and last point follows, which contains reasons for the equity
and absolute necessity thereof in any well ordered state Ecclesiastical or
Civil, and more especially why our Church retayneth such a form and restraynt
thereof to special articles, with some reasons annexed why our Bishops are
forced to enjoin the same, and that such as live under any part of their
government, have no just cause to refuse, nor yet to think so hardly and
strangely of the matter. First therefore subscription being of the nature of a
Sacrament (as we have partly showed before, and the use and end of military
Sacraments declaring the same) Saint Augustine has this general well known
speech to this purpose: Contra Faustu^, Manichaeu^. lib. 19. cap. 29. Et
signaculorum.
Nullum nomen religionis ant professionis est, in quod homines coadunari
possunt absque sacramentorum vsu: for as the maine sacraments ordained by God,
do bind all to one and the self same religion, so ought these other kinds
of sacraments (so generally taken by all state government in the world) and do
bind all under the same to a common uniformity for the profession of the same
religion, or any other duty and service whatsoever. Even as we see the
Romans had their tesseras hospitales amongst their several bands, as without
which (all one with the matter of our subscription) none should discern their
friends and foes a sunder: besides that hereby the security is taken for the
strengthening and combining the better together, any politic body, which
otherwise being divided both in judgment and practice, many times must needs
be dissolved and come to present ruin of it self, as Zanchius that worthy
learned writer, and obseruer has concluded: the principal reasons of which
necessity may more specially be drawn to these two heads. Zanchius in
Co^fessi. page. 639.
First because by it one general and uniform order of proceeding in all
matters (which may concern the state) is and ought to be established, which
going on in one constant tenor, and according to one form, may by all story
and experience be observed to be the maine (if not the only) cause that makes
any society safe and happy, and the meanest beginnings to increase in all
things; as the continuance of the Roman government, and that which is now used
in Venice, does by the censure of the best masters in that kind, abundantly
testify to all the world. Bodine in Methodo. et de republ.
The second, because by it and none other means the affections and
dispositions of people unto that state, under which they live, may the better
be discerned and also, kept upright, firm, and faithful to the same. The
truth of the first reason may sufficiently appear by that general confusion,
which eftsoons appeared at the rearing of Babels Tower, Genes. 11.
when God sent down that great curse of dividing their tongues amongst them;
which sampleth and shadoweth out very fitly and fully the confused states of
our times, for want of that subscription, the only means to take away both
the effects and cause together: wherein by a great curse no doubt to our state
in general, for want of this uniformity in speaking one kind of language
(which was the first and true holy tongue of Canaan) we scarce understand one
another in the most common and usual things for the building of Gods house
(except happily in some few general terms of repentance, faith, and the Lords
prayer, and such like, which also are agreed upon, and in general only
understood for names sake, rather then for any uniform consent in the
understanding and teaching the same) but that every one, both Priest and
people, will have a trick of teaching and understanding Scriptures, and
religion of their own, according to their private fancies and judgments,
whereby they run themselves, and others many times upon the rocks of sundry
heresies, and schismatical practices, too too common amongst us, in so much
that we scarce understand one another, but when the minister speaks of one
thing, for doctrine or life, the people take it, and will understand it of some
other, as in the building of Babell; at which Scalliger observes one only
word remained to all tongues, (namely Sack) because (as he guesseth) being of
so common use to all, every one carried that with the name and use thereof with
them; eue^ as it is also with us who only pronounce happily Gods name aright, as
being the voice of nature, and so in name and use with all the world. In which
respect it were further to be wished of all that love and seek the peace and
good of this our Church, or any other, that the wisdom and most godly care of
our state in general, and the governors of our Church (seeing as we say they
cannot curare de minimis, or possibly cauere de omnibus) would provide a more
general form and manner of urging and requiring subscription: wherein besides
those three points in force and use already, it might further be enacted upon
pain of heresy, or some other great forfeiture (as should seem best unto
their godly wisdoms) that all be bound with as great security to keep one
constant course agreed upon by the Church (according to the Articles of faith
agreed upon) in which we live, in expounding the scriptures, translating or
expounding their texts, discussing an universal controversy, and such like;
as also for conformity in ceremonies, wherein every one now young and old,
please themselves as they list, and reign in their pulpits, and private
parishes according to the motions of their own wandering brains: and that
evermore according to the common Translations, Articles of faith, and forms
prescribed and generally agreed upon by the governors of the Church, in which
we live for the time being; who (as by God and man it is appointed, and
always judged most fit) should praescribe and bind in such cases all under
them, and that considering the manifold inconveniences which daily arise and
break forth for the want of this, to the offense of every man of all sorts,
and no less advantage to the adversaries of true religion. But especially that
none presume, or by any means be permitted to deal in this public sort, or
private also (if it might be prevented) in any thing, controuersed amongst our
selves, our neighbor Churches tending any way to opposittion about any matter
of our doctrine or government, or co^rouersies buried or indiscussed as yet by
the Church it self, without the priuity and allowance at the least, or rather
commandment of such as are in authority for the maintaining of this uniformity
and public peace of the Church, settled amongst us. Remembering that grave
council and determination herein, by Melanchton in his Theological councels.
Page 223. Part 2. Nec vult Deus dissipationes fieri infinitas, and proinde
conuenire vult Ecclesiae doctores and vt vna doctrinae vox audiatur in quaque
Ecclesia. Nehem. 13. cap. verse. 25.
And that worthy precedent for religion, and wise government, Nehemias (with
whom I will conclude this first reason) who cursed and punished those that
spoke half of Ashdod, and half of their own language, and chased all
strangers from the house of the Lord. The second reason of this necessity of
Subscription, is for the discerning and examining how certain persons (of whom
more special care is to be taken) are disposed and affected to the present
state established, and the general proceedings thereof, wherein (because no
state is able to provide for all particulars they have been usually reduced in
our Church to those three (which of all others were adjudged to be most
needful, and behoouefull for the state present.

The first in regard of that dangerous doctrine, and very common defection and
separation thereupon of many a liege subject otherwise against the Princes most
lawful supremacy, that by means of this Subscription, at the least such as
might draw others into the like errors, should show their detestation of such
a dangerous doctrine and opinion. The second in regard of that Anabaptisticall
fury, which possessed whole multitudes amongst us not long since, and raged
very fearfully for the time in the minds and practices of many, holding and
teaching that our orders for Gods service and set forms of prayers, in general
(and eue^ not without blasphemy of the Lords prayer it self) were not to be
allowed, as being unfit for these times of grace, and much derogatory from
those spiritual sacrifices, required since that fullness of grace, and
prerogative of the Spirit, and abundance thereof upon the Church. For meeting
with which inconvenience the second article concerning the book of common
prayer, was thought necessary to be urged against Brownisme, and all the points
and branches thereof: unto both which the third also was found as requisite and
needful to be adjoined, for the lawfulnes and sufficiency of the ordinatio^
of ministers amongst us, which as yet very many da^gerously stumble at (and
indeed is thought to be the only true and most common rock of offense in this
their separation) and that as well in regard of Papists which generally hold,
that we have no true ministry or Minister in England: as also of many amongst
the other Anabaptisticall sort and faction, that maintain openly, the making
of Ministers to be proper to God and the spirit, and so was subject to no human
power, much less to that which our State inuesteth in the Bishops and
Ecclesiastical power established amongst us as the immediate means under God
for that purpose. Insomuch as even unto this day, the greatest masters of
opposition to the Bishops, calling them plants that God never planted, and such
like, condemn them, and much more others, for nothing so much as taking upon
them this power (and which in my opinion and best observation in many, is the
maine and greatest rock of offense, hindering the subscription of many at this
time) and have for their parts, made no more of any such orders and power given
them by the Bishops then (as they have not spared in my hearing, although long
since, blasphemously to say) of a pasport from a master thief, to pass
through Sta^gat hole, or some such theeuish place, or by a bribe to purchase
favor from an unjust and wicked Judge, there being no other man or means
allowed by authority for that end and purpose: and yet poor men for this point
also, as well as for all other of doctrine or practice, general or particular,
in some cases of conscience, they allow of a sorry company in their Presbiters
to order ministers, and determine all other matters as the sentence
vnreuersable in in all things. In regard whereof, and many such like generals and
particulars (which might easily be added) a man would think it high time and
thrice necessary to have this Subscriptio^ with the greatest strictnes and
religion to be urged. Now these being the two maine reasons of this
subscription, respecting the state in general, we will consider of some others
which concern the reverent fathers of the Church, and their special requiring
the same at the hands of any, and then to answer to some few things objected
to the contrary. First therefore, the common reasons for subscription being
such as we have above showed, it may easily appear to any equally minded, that
the Bishops being put in trust by God and man with the government of the
Church, and all state occasions depending thereupon, they do no more herein
(whatsoever any do less) then that which the common laws of the kingdom,
and the chief governors of our whole state do enjoin them, and require at
their hands, and none other. So that in case it should at any time fall out
(which God forbid) that by reason of negligence, or want of due care in looking
to these things so committed unto them, any such as David's men were, or worse,
should come so near the Lords anointed, or any part of that cave or compass
whereby they might have opportunity to cut off the lap of his coat, 1. Sam.
cap. 26. v. 15.16.
or take the pot of water from his head (I mean, to violate any the least part
of that general order of things established by him, much more to prejudice or
endammage any of his royal prerogatives) all David's and others might justly
cry alowde to these our Abners, that they were very worthy of the greatest
blame. Secondly, did not these grand Captains and commanders abouesayd for all
state proceedings, look for this care and service at the Bishops hands; yet
being the Immediate governors of the Church, both their power and authority,
and godly wisdom and foresight could do no less (except they should become
desperately careless in their special charges, Iud. 18. verse 7.
like unto those governors in Judges, which had neither gates nor bars to
their towns and Cities.) And so not only that turbulent Tribe, but the very
runnagates of Ephraim, and tails of Israel (as in Hosea they are called)
might not only traitorously pierce our best and strongest Church forces (as
they daily now do) but also enter upon and surprise (which also they have
been very ready and busy to do) even their best Holds within yea the Masters
and governors themselves: who more especially sitting at the stern should not
only without that former care and means of prevention, be infinitely molested
in their own persons, and all their proceedings; but to their great hearts
grief often see the whole ship of their government tossed up and down with
contrary winds and waves of diverse and contrary doctrines, and as many
differences in ceremonial and all outward obseruances, if not to be wracked
upon the manifold dangerous Syrtes and rocks of this later Church-hating,
envying, and robbing age. Thirdly not only the care of the present state in
general, and more especial that of the Church committed unto them, but
charity it self and due compassion of so many poor people committed unto
them, easily seduced and most inclinable to this variety in doctrine and
profession, do bind these reverend Fathers of the Church to a more strict
urging of this subscription, or any other means for the maintaining of
uniformity in the one, and conformity in the other. To which purpose that
speech of Cyprian (albeit extended and detorted against all reason, by our
adversaries for the establishing that their universality) serves very well,
being understood and applied aright. Vnde aliter natae haereses, etc: nisi quia
non obtemperent omnes vni voci in Ecclesia? Noting thereby the chief causes of
all heresies and disorders in the Church, because where this subscription is
not to one voice (as it were) in the Church, every one imbraceth for his
judgment and profession, whatsoever seems good in his own eyes, as if there
were no King in Israel, as Judges 18.12. Judge. 18.
To which accords that grand resolve of that wise obseruer Melancton, who
managed many state occasions for his time, both for Church and Common wealth.
page 123. Vt sit igitur discordiarum finis, conuenire debent ecclesiae
doctores, and curare vt extet vna Doctrinae vox in quaque ecclesia. For as for
that which the Papists dream of herein, to have this one voice to proceed
from one man's mouth throughout the whole world, is no whit like to that which
we require to be performed in every special province and Corporation of Church
or commonweal, as most necessary for the common peace and well ordering thereof
(as in another kind of Treatise I have labored to demonstrate) and peoples
safeties living under the same; the other not to be affected or expected in
this world, but must be performed at that day, when there shall be but one
shepherd and one sheepfolde, and none but Christ his sheep shall be there,
which evermore hear his voice. But for the reason it self we now insist in,
it is evident to the eyes of all our English, who without partiality and
prejudice do behold the state of our times, where a man may see, for want of
exacting this means of security, and prevention against the same not only
diversities of opinions broached and scattered in every place, but infinite
distractions thereupon of all sorts of people; and look almost how many men,
so many minds, so many factions and oppositions betwixt sometimes Bishop and
Minister, Minister and people, and (if it may be) more unkindly and unsavory
contentions amongst us. Insomuch as some amongst us have been noted as men of
another Church, although they were in the compass of one Deanery, yea two of
the next parishes, yea the same parish and household many times: the one
allowing and using the Cross, kneeling at the Communion, and such like; the
other clean contrary, even condemning all other that are not of their own
opinion. Yea too too commonly (and by no means to be reformed, but only by
this we now speak of) in many essential points of wholesome doctrine and the
holy faith professed amongst us: as of predestination, saving grace, renewing
again by repentance, praying for Apostates, and such like (were they
particularly recited) exceeding many: wherein the poor people are infinitely
offended, and many so stumble that they fall down right, upon occasion of this
our diversity, even to no religion at all: but grow Libertines, Atheists, and
the fall of the best is to the Papists, because it is likely (as they say
themselves) they see no such variety amongst them. And I would to God in this
matter of our government we were but half as wise in our generation as they
are. Lastly to end this reason drawn from the offense of the poor people
(which is very eagerly and earnestly urged by these refusers to subscribe, in
another case, against many indifferent ceremonies of our Church) I do not see,
in respect of this matter of offense and public peace for politic
proceeding, but that we may as well admit diversities of religions, as they are
now diversely distinguished in the world (I mean evermore Christian religion)
as such diversities in opinions about many particulars in any kind of religion,
and proceeding for the profession and expressing the same to God and the world:
especially toward the simple multitude (in the ordering whereof stands the
greatest skill, Exodus 32. v. 2. Make us God to go before us.
and the best Art, and all means are little enough for the madness of the
people as Psalm. 48) whereof the most part are carried by sense, as Exodus 32:
and Luther in his treatise of ceremonies plainly shows: and stand or fall
more upon the uniformity or irregularity in such proceedings then upon a
hundredth doctrines, yea kinds of religion, also being not able to examine them
to be true or false. Fourthly, without this all the gifts and employments of
our chief captains and inferior soldiers, would do little good (as God wot
little comes of all our preaching, etc.) yea the meanest that keeps his
rank and order appointed by any leader in this or any other array, would do
more good then a whole band of vnmarshalled and disordered, albeit the most
expert and valiant soldiers in the world. And in the second place, what enemy
to our state, Papist, Brownist, factious schismatic, or most seditious and
poysonfull heretic, might not plant himself in some great place of advantage
for the disturbing the common peace, and infecting the whole Church, with
sundry kinds of false doctrine? were not this bar of subscription laid in the
way (as a common Law and countermure (as Philo says) whereby to hedge in and
preserve the vineyard of Christ, (...) Philo (...).
and keep these Bores and Foxes out, which notwithstanding all the care and
circumspection (which the most vigilant can use) we see too too commonly come
to pass, and every where to swarm in all Churches.

CHAP. V. Yielding reasons why they may and ought to yield to subscription,
with some answers also to their ignorant objections to the contrary.
THe objections which are usually made against this urging of subscription,
albeit most of them arise from that common fallation of not understanding the
true nature of any thing, and so consequently of this subscription, and
therefore were answered in laying open the first point which we handled
hereabout, showing what it was not, and what it was indeed: Yet because I find
many other things objected against it, or at the least, this practice and
severe urging and vrgers of it, which are taken from certain accidental
things, as the persons urging, and unto whom this Subscription is urged, the
present time, Laws enforce, and such like; I must needs apply my answers
accordingly. First therefore it is objected, that no Law of the kingdom does
require such a subscription, but only to the supremacy provided for by the 13.
of Elizabeth, which seems to be an Ajax his shield to these men for their
standing out, being fitted long since to their hands by that old abstracter,
and furbushed over again by our late public and private pleaders. To which I
answer, that both by the Law of God and man, and the whole body and soul, as
I may so speak, of all temporal Laws in this kingdom, they are bound to
yield themselves to any imposition and demand whereby any private good which by
no other means could be procured, much more the public peace and good of a
whole state may be continued and confirmed, as in the 1. Peter cap. 2. v. 13.
and 13. Heb. v. 17. Obey all set over you: etc. such as we have showed from the
nature, 1. Peter. cap. 2. v. 17. Every ordinance of man, or by man, is not
against God. Can. primo. Fear God etc. Heb. 13. v. 17. where Bishops and
Church governors are directly meant and named.
use, and necessity thereof, subscription to be. And who sees not that the
whole state by Parliament, and common agreement, give power, strength and
authority to Ecclesiastical Laws, as whereby they would have all under their
government bound to obey the same, neither does that special Antidote in the
statute above named provided for the heart (I mean the Prince in his
supremacy) any way hinder or prejudice the application of any other sovereign
remedy for the safeguard and preservation of other principal parts, and the
wholly body in general, such as subscription is to the other Articles, if any
other invented and appointed in our Church. Secondly it is objected, why now
more then in former time, and by these Bishops more then their predecessors,
and to some men more then other, and why there may not be a toleration or
forbearing of it, as well now as in the Bishop Grindals time, and some special
relentings by that wise and worthy governor Bishop Whitegift? For answer
whereunto, as all authority is likned by Plato to a sword, so ought the use of
any part thereof to be like the wearing and handling of a sword, which is not
usual, fit, nor necessary at all times, but only when there is just occasion
thereof; as namely when they espy or fear any dangerous persons upon the way,
or in the verge of their jurisdiction and authority: as now of late and many
times heretofore, many dangerous and suspicious persons have been descried,
that living amongst us are of one or more of those three wicked bands of people
before named, which have given this just occasion (if not to draw out any
sword) yet at the least to use this means of fortification against them, And
why others have not dealt in like manner (there being doubtless need enough
at all times) I rest persuaded of their most just causes, secret and known to
them selves, to deal so in those times, and forbear to inquire into their
particular motives and inducements thereunto: and will only remember one piece
of a story out of Guicciardine (which may descipher in some manner the nature
and state of these things) where for the mistaking only, Lib. 3. Page 104. of
his history.
and not so much for not understanding the same, one word Darier, and in a
small government of a few outcasts being the Odds, the whole array was
broken, and their whole enterprise which was in a manner achieved frustrated
upon the sudden; much more and sooner (might any think) had they been
disarayed, and the whole band dissolved, if there had been any (much more a
greater company, as in matters of our consideration) amongst them, that had not
known their special watch words, neither would have suffered themselves (as
they had subscribed) to be ruled by that discipline and orders prescribed for
that special service, then to be managed amongst them, and executed by the^.
And more specialy for those renowned governors and, Primates for their time
(albeit for the latter of them, they were both his private acts and
indulgences, as whereof also before his death, he found just cause of misliking,
with a most serious vow never to yield the same again to any) I hope I may
speak with due reverence to them both, and just respect also to all other,
which as yet forbear this praecise and general requiring the same, as a great
learned man spoke of as learned a one, Master Bucer in those interimicall
times wherein he lived: Haec ^ius lenitas parum illi profuit: and I pray God
that this of theirs do no greater harm to themselves and others; as what it
has done already, I leave to the judgment of all wise state obseruers to
determine. And indeed as some of these exceptors have made that worthy late
Archbishop the chief Author and vrger of this subscription (howsoever now they
will take advantage from some little relenting of his) so do all wise obseruers
of time and state acknowledge it for a most worthy care, and enterprise of his,
or whose else soever, which being so well foreseen and plotted by him our
worthy Philip, in those difficult and turbulent times; we all hope now by his
successor likely by Gods blessing to prove an Alexander, and his Alexander
after him, and to us all the rather by his means, shall be fully and perfectly
accomplished. As without which indeed the true and sound peace of Church or
state can never be established, (of whom it may be said with all one
reueuerence in this behalf, as it was sometimes of Luther and Lira compared
together for their most worthy and honorable enterprises, which I pray God
these may sort like unto, and much more happy (which God effected by their
means) Si Lira non lirasset, Lutherus non triumpasset. Lastly it is objected
that being brethren, and many of them of good desert and best conversation,
should be spared in some few particulars, especially since greater favor is
showed to worse members amongst us: to which we answer, that Boni viri must
be Boni ciues so, or else are they more fit to be in heaven, or to live as
private men upon the earth, then to bear any part in public administration.
In which the basest soldier keeping his station (as we have said before) and
doing his indeauor, does more good then many other more skillful and valiant
which refuse or forget their military sacrament: and for favor required (which
is always due to men of good desert) howsoever forgetting themselves sometimes
in greater matters, I could wish from my heart, that all lawful favor should
be showed the^, in regard of any of their private estates, for upholding a
comfortable life for them and theirs; because they have been anointed with
oil: and as the Prophet Elishah gave counsel to the King of Israel. 2.
Kings. 6.22. 2. Reg. cap. 6. verse. 22.
so could I wish concerning these enemies of our state (who are now in the
hands and under the censure of the governors of this time) that since through a
fatal kind of error, and not without some special judgment to us all by
cutting off a Tribe (although a stubborn one, as Benjamin was, Judges. 21)
from our Israel, Judge. 21. cap. v. 3.
and depriving the Church of their profitable and necessary labors in some
kind and respect (otherwise I speak of very many of them) a great and strange
blindness is befallen the^, as verse 18. of the same chapter: they should not
be dealt withal, as taken with the sword and bow, but that bread and water
(that is, all things necessary for men of their sort) be set before them. But
yet to yield them such favor, as to retain their public places, and
exercise their offices and functions belonging thereunto, being contrarily
minded, and so affected also to very many state proceedings, both in opinion
and practice; it were a cruel mercy (as Augustine calls it) and favor, by
sparing a few to endanger all: it being a very constant position amongst the
politic masters (as that Popish Dolman auoweth, and our own defendants do
not disallowe it) that all mislikers of any estate established cannot but wish
the overthrow, or at the least some alteration of the same, which I suppose
most of these will not deny or refuse greatly to profess. And therefore
according to that famous and generally received saying of Saint Cyprian, Melius
est vt pereat vnus quam vnitas, better Absolon himself, and all his host
scattered, then that David or any of his honorable servants of state should be
so much disquieted and endangered: who may more justly a great deal answer
these men, suing for favor at their hands, then Titus did the Jews and
Priests entreating for their lives, that since they have set fire upon our
temple with their own hands (as these men have done, not likely to be
quenched in haste) surely themselves whose gifts and lives serve only
thereunto, could desire, or at the least deserve no favor. Neither lastly
ought that to offend any (as it does not greatly commend themselves) that these
refusers to subscribe, are men of tender conscience, painful in their
callings, of blamlesse conversation for the most part, and such like; because
the greater is their sin in depriving the Church of so many their good parts,
and the purer and finer the matter is, the sooner does it receive stains:
neither does the pureness diminish, but increase rather (at the least to the
outward view) the deformity joined with it. And indeed these men being
otherwise well armed and appointed for the Devils weapons (as it seems) no
marvel if they be found imperfect, and ly more open to his assaults and
invasions upon their weak and scrupulous consciences, for want of true
understanding and spiritual wisdom in that behalf. And albeit most commonly
it falls out that men suffer first shipwreck (as Bellarmine observes in his
preface to the third part of his controversies) in their manners and
consciences, before they fall into grander errors, yet it is not always so,
especially in differences and errors of this nature; wherein the Devil (as
Chrysostom well notes) is wont very cunningly to sow his poison by, De
sacerdot. (...).
and in the means of good actions of life, and Paul him self drank thrice
poison out of the Devils cup. 2. Cor. 12. in some such like case and occasion.
But howsoever, God respects no man's person (as the same Paul speaks. Gala.
1.) neither does the word of God come out from them only, 1. Cor. 14.36. but
being as all other men, subject to their falls (howsoever neither themselves
nor any other their favorers delight to tell Quid faciunt) in other things,
and doceant also (which is many times worst of all) as well as Quid patiuntur,
must likewise endure the censure of the time, and their special punishments
awarded, as well as other men. Now that these men may have some reasons given
and affoorded why they may safely subscribe as well as the governors of the
Church may and ought to urge the same upon them, I have reserved somewhat to
the last place (as I promised) for this end. Wherein first we will remove some
difficulties usually pretended in this action of obedience, and then declare
how in effect they daily do as much or (have already by their daily practices)
more then in this subscription is required at their hands. For the first, they
must all know that the thing required in subscription is their obedience rather
and good affection to the state and allowance of the maine things established
amongst us, then any their particular knowledge, and examination of so many
particulars, which do not so much indeed concern them to know, much less to
inquire so far into them; whose best wisdom and safety for their
consciences were in matters of this nature so long as no manifest sin may
appear therein (for then a separation were necessary) to rest themselves upon
that which is commanded, and the wisdom and decrees of those under whose
government and authority they live. For besides that this were many ways more
safe for their consciences, and would cut off many lets and hindrances (which
on the other side are cast into the way of the manifold duties of their
special callings) it would very well become men of their sort to have so
reverent an opinion of so many weighty and grave constitutions, devised and
appointed by so many learned heads, after such long experience and precedents
from all Churches in the world, to yield themselves with heart and hand, and
to give their good allowance to the same, that at the least they are lawful
and wholesome, and such as do no way cross and contrary the word of God. And
to say with him that read over a book and understood but few things therein
(Quae intellexi bona, Laertius in Socratis vita* (...).
credo etiam quae non intellexi): for being things at the most doubtful and
controuersed betwixt them and the reverend Fathers, any reasonable man would
think it more fit, that these inferiors should come in, and yield themselves,
rather then these superiors, (whose reasons and consciences are persuaded to be
as good and better, because better informed and furnished with judgment and
knowledge then theirs.) Neither may the pillars of the earth (as Job speaks)
that is ancient constitutions and determinations of men in place, be forsaken
and pulled down for their sakes, who are but of yesterday; and so I conclude
this with that worthy speech of Arnobius in a higher matter against the
Gentiles: Superciliosa nimis res est quando ipse sit non tuus, Lib. 1. contra
Gentes.
in aliena etiamnum possessione verseris, potentioribus dare conditionem velle,
vt id fiat quod tu velis, non quod inueneris antiquis constitutionibus fixum:
Secondly if any thing be hard in the judgment of these refusers, it may either
be convinced to be simply wicked, and then no doubt it should be forborne, or
altered, or they might and ought to depart; or else doubtful and disputable,
and then by better discussing the points, and information thereupon, the most
tenderest of them might be satisfied, if they would seek and hearken to the
means; as the Bishops of every Diocese, according to the appointment of our
worthy Sovereign, have yielded time and means enough for their satisfaction
in any thing they may have just cause to take exception against. For the other
reason, that they do daily subscribe by word and practice, how else do they
say Amen to our Leitourgies, and to our orders of common prayer, whereat they
refuse not to be present, much more how can they be content by their practices
to have lived as ministers hitherto under that government and particulars
therein, to which now they dare not subscribe and set their hands? whereas by
their former practices they had done so many a year together, and so would
doubtless by their word and profession now, but that some other sinister
causes (I fear) draws and haleth them another way. And so to conclude this
point, I desire all to remember that wise speech of that grave Senator in
Valerius Maximus, prophesying of Rome, that then should be the end of that
Empire when the superiors should forget to rule as beseemed them, and inferiors
to obey in all things; which does evermore best become them, and without the
which there would be no better then Nomadum vita, Euripides in Phaenissis.
where (as Euripides says) (...) and the very Image of hell it self, death
and the grave, where (as Job says, Chap. 10. verse. 22) there is no order, but
light is there as darkness. To answer yet a little more fully the objections
made against subscription, and to give the best satisfaction we can to the
weak or wilful standers out upon the urging thereof, and so many unjustly
offended thereupon, I desire al with indifferency to read that which I have
thought necessary to adioyne here following as a supplement to our former
considerations thereof; as well showing what small cause the one side has for
their standing out, and being offended thereat, as also the great equity and
even absolute necessity for the most precise requiring the same in any well
ordered estate. First therefore to show that it binds none to bear false
witness, to say yea and nay of the same thing, and so to entangle and inwrap
weak consciences with manifold scruples and difficulties, In his plea page 203.
which is the sum of Master Nichols and all his accomplices opposing themselves
against it: we say first, that nothing contained in those Articles to which
Subscription is required, is any way against the rule and Canon of faith and
manners (which are the very pith and substance of all the word of God:) for as
for all our doctrine, there is nothing generally maintained in all the
Articles of our Church, which directly crosses any portion of scripture
examined by those two former rules, nor yet contains or allows any
blasphemy, heresy, Idolatry or superstition, or any injustice in them against
the second table (but wholesome Laws are made against them all, both
Ecclesiastical and Civil) and are every way suitable for the general contents
thereof, with that Harmony of confessions which was not many years since
agreed upon by all reformed Churches: as I presume these refusers neither can
nor will deny, and all that ever I have dealt with, or heard of, confess as
much of our doctrine; which yet indeed (be things well examined) is as much as
is required at their hands by this Subscription. And as for particular
differences of learned men about the exposition of sundry Scriptures and
diversities of judgments, about any special point of positive Divinity, as
for example in some part of that Article touching Christ's descending into Hell,
and such like very many, about the reading or translating, In Epistola quadam.
yea allowing at all certain books generally retained amongst the rest of holy
Scripture they need not hinder any man's hand from Subscription: for as long as
the world stands, there will be infinite such differences and that which
Hierome observes in his time, concerning many such varieties, must go still
for current; that in such causes Quilibet abundet suo sensu, and yet submit
himself to the general truth and equity of things ordained in the Church:
which is the best rule for every age, and every special Church. For so neither
is it any way contrary, but very agreeable to the word of God, and every
particular therein, that the best humane constitutions for matters of doctrine
or manners, should be imperfect, and not want their doubts and ambiguities; nor
yet that those that live under government, for these imperfections no way
implying any manifest error or impiety (be they never so many) shall refuse to
subscribe thereunto, being lawfully required; for so should they yield unto
nothing: and yet when they have done all they can, they must and do subscribe
to some men, and some rules for doctrine and matters traditionary amongst
themselves: and why not as well to the present state, whereby, they live? but
that singularity, syding and affection now rules all the world, and God his
ordinance is easily neglected and rejected. Secondly in matters doubtful and
difficult either for doctrine and practice (so long as they contain no
manifest impiety or notorious offense in them) the Superiors authority
grounded upon the fifth commandment, is sufficient warrant and bond also to any
conscience for obedience therein; for otherwise there would be no end of
controversies (as Melanct. page 123. Part. 2. Consil. Theolog. Vt sit igitur
discordiarum finit, recte facit potestas obligans homines vt obtemperent, cum
alioqui parere sit necesse, according also to that old argument, Cognitio in
synodis est summum iudicium in Ecclesia, parere igitur est necesse:) nor yet
any order for any proceedings in the world. Which moved Saint Augustine at the
last to conclude this point, for the compelling of heretics and all contrarily
minded to wholesome doctrine and religion established by the Civil Magistrate
(as in his Retractations) he shows: Retractatio. lib. 2. cap. 18.
whose judgment being so universally approved amongst us that refractary
spirits may and ought to be constrained to such obedience, even against their
judgments, and that without any conscience of sin unto them; I marvel how
these standards out can in their consciences absolve themselves of a great sin
against the fifth commandment, for disobeying in so mean and small impositions
by so lawful authority; whereas in obeying, they have the fifth commandment
for their warrant, and the commanding magistrate his soul and conscience
engaged in this behalf, as whose sin furthermore it is if it be any, and of
whom it is to be required, and not of the obeyer, who in cases doubtful and
difficult makes just conscience of obedience to superiors, and stays
himself herein upon the fifth commandment. And if they say, that in
subscription things simply wicked are urged by our Church, as in our doctrines,
forms of prayer, and discipline defended and allowed; it is strange that they
have never as yet in all their pryings, exceptions, and conclusions amongst
them, exhibited any such foul matter to the eyes of the judicious, which God
be thanked are in great number amongst us, and abroad in the world: and it were
very strange and wicked also that our neighbor Churches with whom we
entertain and profess agreement and confession alike, should want so much
charity, and that so long (especially those Aristarchi of Geneua, and Beza
himself writing so often to our late Queen, and some Bishops also of this
kingdom) as never to have put us in mind thereof: and in a word they might as
well say we have no Church at all, (which GOD be thanked for matter of
constitution, for doctrine and manners is one of the most flourishing Churches
in the world) as to say we should retain such gross points, contrary to faith
and manners: Cassander de Baptismo Infantum. p. 113.
as Cassander learnedly disputes from this general to his particular defense
of infants baptism against those Anabaptisticall exceptors in Germany of late,
very like in too too many things unto those Sectaries of our times; to whom our
wise and learned most noble Sovereign lately answered, that if they supposed
and judged such grossness (as idolatry and such like) to be in any part of
the substance of our religion, or any means of expressing the same, that then
they did very ill to stay so long amongst us, and should rather depart the
kingdom: which is also our answer in some cases (vel subscribendum vel
secedendum) rather (in case they cannot be persuaded) then they should do any
thing against their conscience, In his Epistle to Queen Elizabeth, and the
Bishops of that time.
to depart from us.

Thirdly M. Digges his reasons for association in religion (which presume are
well accounted of by these refusers and dislikers of Subscription (the Author
being for the most part wholly of their side) make as much for uniformity in
professing and expressing the same religion by one kind of ceremonies and
circumstances accordingly. And be it well considered and examined in matter and
weight of state deliberation and execution, it will be found thereupon, by all
that are truly able to discern such matters and mysteries that it is as like
to have toleration and multitudes of religion (which all kinds of opinion so
much condemn) as such variety, diversities, and contrariety in the outward
manner, external rites, circumstances and ceremonies to express the same (as
we have above intimated) and in the outward performing thereof. And albeit
there be great ods in respect of the matter of conscience with GOD (which is
but one, and so will have but one religion, one faith, one baptism, etc) and
so for the souls and safeties of Christian people which can have but one good
and true religion; yet for good policy, matter and means of common peace, and
well ordering the outward government of the Church, more inconveniences may
well and wisely be observed to proceed from the latter then the former: as in
comparing ceremonies with doctrine by certain reasons drawn from master
Luther and others, we have elsewhere showed in a more large treatise, which if
God please shall not be long behind this, about this and many other matters:
the people being led chiefly by the outward senses, and orders customably
observed. Lastly, whereas some object that our doctrine and ceremonies are
contrary the one to the other, and that willingly (which all confess and yield
unto) they would subscribe to our doctrine and all the Articles of our faith,
but not unto the ceremonies; it seems to me very strange, and much repugnant
to the rules of true Divinity; which teach that evermore to be good for
practice, which is true and sound for conscience and judgment. Now our
doctrine being allowed for good and current (which doubtless is as well about
ceremonies, as any other head and point of doctrine) I cannot see any just
cause for the standing out against the one more then the other: and indeed
howsoever the doctrine of faith (which is according to those grand rules of
faith and manners, as Hierome defines them: 1. Tim. cap. 4) is truly and
soundly taught and maintained, all other things about circumstances and
ceremonies, and special practices of any, not contrary to the general rules
above named, cannot go amiss, according to that grave and true judgment of
Augustine: Lib. de Ciuit. Dei cap. 4. Vbi been creditur non male viuitur: And
for things doubtful and controuersed (which evermore will remain in the best
reformed Church whatsoever) either for doctrine or practice, the Decrees of
every special Church for their times ought to prevail with every well minded
and affected person to God and his Church. For the further resolving and
concluding whereof, and this whole treatise, I desire all to read that which
Melancton has set down, page 501. and 502: of the first part of his
theological Councels, part whereof I have thought fit and necessary to set
down and add as a Colophonem to all the rest: Haec cum constituta sunt in
Ecclesia, potestatem esse interpretandi ambigua, eamque pertinere ad plures,
hoc est ad Sinodos, sequitur Sinodorum sententias amplectendas esse, tanquam
certas and non labefactandas: Frustra enim esset potestas datae iudicandi, si
liceret perpetuo aduersari: Nulla est politia in qua non sit aliqua vox legum
interpres inuiolahilis. Si ea maiestas tribuitur imperis quia diuinitus
constituta sunt and Deus voluit Magistratum hac potestate Iudicandi munitum
esse, cur non Ecclesia magis haberet potestatem and authoritatem inuiolabilem
quae long superat imperia maiestate. Denique concussa Sinodorum autoritare and
refractis his repagulis, quo modo petulantia ingeniorum coerceri poterit?
Nullus in ecclesia seditionum finis erit, si ea quae vetustas summa grauitate
decreuit cauillari licebit. Multae sunt causae quae deletis veterum testimonijs
magnos possint tumultus excitare, vt quaestio de infantu^ Baptismo, de verbo
Ioannis primo, an significat personam and pleraque alia: Valeat igitur in
ecclesia rerum iudicatarum autoritas. Agnoscamus promissiones quae testantur
piorum congressus, and iudicia gubernari diuinitus. Discat populus reuerentiam
ecclesiae, and illis piorum Doctorum congressibus deberi, qui ingentibus
certaminibus defenderunt caelestem doctrinam: Haec sunt vtilia tranquilitati
communi. Nam (...) parit aeternas dilacerationes and vastitatem Ecclesiarum.
And this which I wish imprinted in every breast, being put last, that it might
be less lost, Epist. ad Luci.
and first and for ever remembered, proceeding from old Hierome that bos lassus
solet figere pedem firmius.

CHAP. I. Entreating of the lawfulness and necessity of Ceremonies in
general, in all solemn, public, and (more especially) all holy
administrations whatsoever, and how far the magistrates authority may
stretch, for the determining of any to be used in particular.
AMongst so many idle, uncharitable, and unnecessary exceptions by many,
against sundry particulars established for Church government, and the ordering
and performing the public service of God amongst us, there is one, more
generally carped at, and misliked then any other, namely the sign of the
Cross: which has been so much observed in our administration of Baptism,
and noted to contain Idolatry, heresy, and manifest impiety, or at the least
great superstition and manifould occasions of the greatest, and yet most
necessary and unavoidable offense to all, both good and bad. Which as some have
publicly and too too scandalously termed Crux infaelix; so has it by Gods
just judgments, thorough some weakness or wilfulness upon the urging thereof
too too truly fallen out, to the just hearts grief of many, and much garboyle
and dissipation in our Church. For the clearing of which exceptions, and
satisfying the offended therewith, I could commend many things out of ancient
writers, and learned discussers of this point, and more especially that answer
of learned Cassander (albeit in some things justly to be refused) to several
objections made against the ceremonies in baptism, used by most Churches, and
the solemn administration thereof; but because no authority of any new or old,
nor yet any Council in gnomicall cases more particularly appropriated, (and
evermore applyable to the present time) nor yet any weight of reason and
argument can draw some from their prepossessed opinions, and resolves to the
contrary; and some scripture holds of theirs ill understood, and worse applied
against the true and lawful use of this ceremony: I will indeauor to set down
by way of position, objection, and answers, whatsoever I think may either
declare the lawfulness of this Cross, or else answer any objection to the
contrary. For the which this position is in the first place to be set down,
(as to which all sorts of Christian professors in the world have evermore
agreed and subscribed) until of late some bold spirits (which dare set upon
any thing) have encountered this grand position and Maxim in all state
proceedings; namely, that there is no nation of Christian name so barbarous,
but that in the administration of their baptism public or private, some
decent rites and ceremonies serving for orderly and comely performing of the
same, have been invented, used, and retained by them, over and besides such
things as are directly prescribed for the administration thereof by holy
scriptures. As Bellarmine obiecteth (and we never denied) to the Lutherans,
Lib. 1. de Sacramentis cap. 24. de ceremoniis Baptismi.
Zuinglians, and such like, that urge abrenuntiation, and use other such like
ceremonies: which both for reverence to the ancient Churches the mothers of us
all that use the same, and obedience to that Church wherein we live, besides
charity which we ow to our neighbor Churches, at least for our opinions, if not
for our practice, are most reverently to be esteemed of us: and which may
further serve (as Cassander shows) to declare the virtue, In Respons. ad
obiectiones contra ceremonias in baptismo vsitatas.
and commend the dignity and state thereof in this holy administration (besides
many other reasons there rendered by him) to the simpler sort. Insomuch as the
great obseruer of state-proceedings, as well Civil, as especially
Ecclesiastical, Melancton wrote these words with great advice no doubt, to one
Loneras a very scrupulous exceptor, and severe and hasty censurer of his
neighbor Churches: Nunquam poterit esse tranquillitas nisi in ritibus
dissimilibus, add etiam dissimulanda aliqua infirmitate aequitatem and
moderationem adhibebimus; mihi creed nobis etiam and illi multa condonat. And
indeed besides the former reasons, even nature and common reason do urge and
call for the same, it being all one in a manner to see a naked body without
clothes, as any such solemnity for sacred or Civil administration without
ceremony. And therefore as the Schools say well, that circumstances do cloth
the humane actions for the morality thereof (be they good or bad,) so outward
rites and seemly ceremonies give the beauty and true decency to the same. Which
being most requisite in all publiques for their better grace, according to
their gravity, and avoiding all contempt (which otherwise does easily follow
such proceedings) so most of all in Gods service: whose house and every the
least means of his presence with us, and our dealing with him, holiness
becomes for ever, and all decency is too little. In which respect the Apostle
himself does not only leave it arbitrarie to the Church of Corinth, and so to
other Churches, to do and see all things done in comeliness and order; much
less directs and prescribes thereby, how things already precisely and
particularly commanded in the word for every circumstance and every ceremony,
ought to be managed and performed (as some of late are bold to interpret and
define the meaning of the words to be so, and no otherwise:) but indeed, as the
text shows, and common reason conuinceth, commands and enioyneth the
governors of that Church, and so of every particular Church, to appoint and
ordain all such things, as by the judgment of such governors (and not of
every private humor or fancy) might best make for the comely ordering all
things in public, performable to God: as also for the greatest edifying of
the whole Church first, and then of every particular member thereof. Implying
that without ceremonies and outward accomplements, there were no comeliness in
any of our actions: which without, the same were like bare walls without any
seeling, varnish, or painting. Secondly that without order, this color and
beauty of ceremonies, is no better then a fair face or sweet complexion with
a most misshapen and monstrous body. Lastly all such means, be they never so
seemly and so orderly, are little worth, unless they be referred to
edification the end of all: no more then a sweet savor, and most comely
proportion do profit one that has an Atrophia, or hectic fever and
consumption in his bones, that no one part can do his office or right use for
the good of the whole body. For indeed to speak with the Apostle, does not
very nature, common reason and experience teach that (as Aristotle long since
observed) no special rules can ever be given (I may say with truth and
reverence) by God or man in writing, In the sixth book of Ethics.
or any other means of direction? whereby this comeliness and good order for
edification may generally be given for all particulars which are infinite and
accordingly continually practiced, for all times, Countries, Churches, and
congregations alike) but that which is thought and is comely in one, and so may
serve for order, and edifying to the same, is not so, nor can be so to another:
besides that as the Apostle says, we have no such custom, 1. Cor. 11.16.
which many times in any politic body becomes another nature (as we say) as
well as in the state of any natural body. I intimating that most of these
things for outward ceremony tending to comeliness and order, are very much
determined and ouerswayed by custom, Augustinus Epistol. 118. and 119.
as in those two famous Epistles for this purpose, of Ambrose to Augustine, and
Augustine again to Ianuarius, does very plainly and plentifully appear. And
lastly to end this point of ceremonies in general, Magistrates Ecclesiastical
are not only bound to make wholesome Laws, determining many particulars, and
the right use thereof for the ends above named; but also all such Laws and
constitutions made by them, not repugnant to any part of Gods word, whether
originally invented and derived from the primitive Church, or more lately and
particularly devised since for any more special form of government by the
immediate magistrates thereof, both for quality, and in some good proportion of
equality also as well bind all living under those governments Ecclesiastical or
Civil to a due respect and obedience thereunto, as the ceremonial and
Judicial Laws did bind the Jews for those times, or any Ecclesiastical Laws
and traditions made by the Apostles themselves, as 1. Cor. 11.2. and that by
virtue of the fifth commandment, which tyeth all to obey in such indifferent
points, which afterward becomes necessary to every subject: neither must the
Church now look for immediate oracles, or Apostolical directions, and
extraordinary assistance and revelations for the ordering every particular (as
at the first founding of Christian societies under Moses and the Apostles)
until all things were fully settled for the legal service, and state of
Churches under the Gospel; at what time God was pleased himself to be
superintendent, King and Priest for both governments, before there was any
settled form in the world under the Law or Gospel, and so many things were
extraordinarily carried by the Apostles, as in Simon Magus, Ananias and the
excommunicated person given over to Satan, and even Moses himself in sundry
punishments for the breach of the Saboth, and such like, by special counsel
and directions from Gods voice, and spirit special for those times. But the
governors of the Church them selves, having now the spirit and word of God
together, Esaias. 59. v. 21.
and so many precedents of Christian Churches for all state deliberations, and
proceedings, may and ought to the end of the world determine of all such means
within the compass of Gods word, as they shall judge to serve best for their
several times and states to comeliness, order, and edification of the whole
Church or any part thereof, as in the treatise of Subscription we have more
specially showed.

CHAP. II. Showing of the Cross, and finds it to be, of it self, in the
number of indifferent and lawful ceremonies: yea and in the right use thereof
necessary also, being once commanded by the Magistrate.
NOw in the second place, this position I hope shall be found and allowed to be
as true, that not only amongst the tolerable and convenient, but most seemly,
orderly, and edifying ceremonies of the Church, the sign of the Cross in
special may very lawfully and safely be reckoned and esteemed. The truth
whereof may thus appear, first because the use of it in baptism (as it is
amongst us) is not against any special commandment of God, by which all our
actions and particulars in use are to be examined, justified, or condemned.
Secondly, because it is very agreeable to comely order, both generally, and
more special for the matter of baptism, and so consequently very fit and
profitable, and in some cases also necessary for the edification of the Church.
Lastly because the use of it has been very ancient and constant, even in the
matter of religion, in that sense we understand it and expound it, throughout
the Church of God, and thereupon also adjudged and commanded the rather to be
retained of our Church and many best reformed Churches in the world. For the
first (because for the answering of the objections which is the second part of
this treatise, it will better appear) I will be the briefer in it: and only
show that it is neither against the first, second, or third commandments; but
especially the second, which this Cross so much crosses (if these men's
judgments might go for authentical expositions of that commandment. And
indeed that which wise Socrates (who diued as far as natures light and strength
could give him, into the manifold depths of those two general differences,
bonum and malum) perceived to be the hardest task for all those Doctors to
distinguish of good and evil, may more truly be auerred of our Divinity
Masters, who for want of looking right into this perfect Law of liberty, which
with the Evangelical harmony are the hardest taskes of our profession, put
very often evil for good, and good for evil; and so are so far to seek in
the right assoyling so many weak ones in cases of conscience, as that they not
only wound themselves, and many others, Prou. cap. 17. verse. 15.
through their peremptory assertions and determinations, in cases very
doubtful and difficult; but contrary to Salomons rule, justify the wicked and
condemn the innocent, which both together are abominable. Insomuch as some
worthy Divines hold yet opinion, that all errors, schisms and heresies in the
world have still proceeded from the ignorance and misconceiuing and construing
of the nature and properties of God and sin discovered in this law. Now of
those three commandments, the first concerns the having and worshipping of
the true God, and none other; the second, all means to conceive of him and
serve him by: and the third, the manner how to use these means, and to have
and serve this God aright thereby. If therefore the use of the Cross do
neither encounter nor incumber any of these three, the adversaries will surely
grant, that it is simply and in it self neither against these, nor any other
commandment of God. For the first, our doctrine never teaches nor allows
any of the least part of worship any way to belong to the best creature, much
less to any image of this Cross, which is but a bare sign, and of no good
thing in it self, but of a form and sign made for such a tormenting engine
(which yet by accident became through Gods permission a means of the best
things and all good unto us) howsoever it be taken in wood, stone or metal,
much less conceited in the mind, or imagined by any fancy, by means of any
transient and aerious sign as ours is. Neither must the use of a thing, much
less any part of the Church of God thereupon in their doctrine or practice, be
condemned for any particular or accidental abuse of this Ctosse, or any other
ceremony, so long as the nature of the thing remains indifferent, and the
received and maintained doctrine of that Church is against them. For so do we
teach, and so ought all both ministers and people to believe detesting all
doctrine and abuses to the contrary, that this our Cross either mental,
aierous, or expressed in any visible form, is so far from having any Divine
power in it naturally, (which is the highest idolatry) or transfused from
Christ and the Cross which he hanged upon, and so into all other Crosses
accordingly (which is a peevish conceit of the Papists amongst the rest) or else
infused by any especial promise or grace of God, either into the thing it
self, or upon the best use of it, according to the solemn orders of any
Church to that end, whereby it has any power to procure good, or turn away
evil (which many heretics and idolaters have given unto it, Irenaeus lib. 10.
cap 24. de Gnosticis and Carpocratianis
and do yet at this day) but only hold it to be a bare ceremony invented by
man for other good uses in the Church. And for the second commandment we
teach and hold in like manner, that this Cross which we use in any kind or
difference, is no means either to express or comprehend God, or any person of
the Trinity in or under it (as thereby the better to serve them, which is the
first thing provided against in this commandment) nay yet to be any means at
all of Gods worship, which ought only to be appointed by himself, and
therefore gives commandment thereunto, and to the obseruers thereof; who
thereby do homage unto God, and procure blessings and good things to
themselves, which is the second thing enjoined by the same, and the very sum
of cautions given touching Gods worship in this second commandment: only our
Church retayneth it as an indifferent ceremony, as Master Fulke also in the
like case answers to Marshalls reply against Master Calfield about this
matter for the use of this Cross in the primitive Church. In his answer to the
first Article page 173.
For the third none of the reformed Churches where this Cross is used, make it
any part of the form outward or inward, or else any means of the least part of
Gods worship, as if without it holy baptism were not rightly administered, or
with it were in any respect of God, or any power or use of the Sacrament the
better thereby administered (all which might incur some breach of the third
commandment) but as our Canons explain themselves, the whole matter of the
Sacrament for the whole substance, matter, Second reason.
form and manner thereof is perfected and ended before any use thereof be
once admitted or named: For the second reason, proving the lawfulness of this
ceremony, it appears from hence, because it is very fit and agreeable to the
three general rules prescribed by Saint Paul for all ceremonies to be used in
the Church, namely edification, comeliness and order. As for the latter two, to
be comely and orderly, the judgment, commandment and common use thereof by
any Church, do sufficiently argue the same, in respect that this sign of the
Cross (as above showed) is as comely, and indeed more fit for the ceremonies
of Baptism then any other. And is not only generally commanded, and that above
other ceremonies, as being of most ancient use in most of the Churches in the
world, and so judged more befitting this comeliness: but for order sake, and
avoiding confusion, and many other scandals by name of ceremonies (which
disordered persons of all sorts would daily bring into the Church) is
particularly retained, and the constant and continual use thereof so precisely
urged and required amongst us by the governors of our Church. So that in
respect of these two, comeliness and order, we do not deny but that any other
such like ceremonies were every way as lawful, in case they were as
particularly commanded, and as generally used in the Church of God: in the
which, use and constitution give as it were both matter and form to all such
ceremonies. But for the first of these three wherein we auouche that this
Cross may serve for edification, it happily contains more difficulty, and I am
sure most of those enemies to this Cross of Christ, do with both hands and
heels fight and spurn against it. Which yet I presume may as easily be
proved as the other: as first of all because it represents and calls to
our minds that special means of Christ his abasement and sufferings, as by
which more specially above all other it pleased God and our Lord and Savior
Christ, to have our peace procured, and all curses to be taken away from us
through that one cursed kind of death. Insomuch as the holy Ghost by the
Prophets in the old Testament, and by the Apostles in the new, especially Saint
Paul that Evangelical trumpet (as Chrysostom often calls him) seems very
greatly to delight in the word, both by using it sinecdochically for the whole
matter and means of our redemption, as also giving it a prerogative and power
(respectively to the thing signified by it, and not to the Cross it self,
much less this the least kind of sign of it) to work and import all graces
by it, and comfortable rejoicing in us: Galath. 6. Fulke and Perkins observe,
as Bellarmine.
in respect whereof also it seems that the Church from time to time has made
such choice of it, and use also in most of their holy administrations. Secondly
because it helps our manifold weaknesses and infirmities, as well for means
of knowledge, as also helps of memory: and therefore Master Perkins, and
Zanchius also before him allow the very image and picture of Christ himself,
for the better learning and remembering the history of his person and passions
especially: and yet both of them (I know not how) especially master Zanchius
in his posthume writings, in which some Ghost oftentimes may be discerned to
speak* rather then himself, are much opposite to the use of this Cross in
Baptism: Howbeit it is clear from that one commandment of Saint Paul (if
there were none other) besides the general equity of all Gods commandments
especially the second, 1. Cor. 14.
together with the precedents and practices of all Churches even under the
Law, and before, but specially since the time of greater liberty under the
Gospel; that the governors of every Church not only may, but ought also to
invent and appoint sundry decent and convenient ceremonies, as may best serve
for the edification of their several Churches committed vntn them; and that as
well for the outward as inward senses, for the stirring and moving of affection
by music, or such like, helping the fantasy, knowledge, judgment,
conscience, or memory of man in any thing wherein they have to deal with God;
and so any Church, Master of Family, or private Christian, may very lawfully
ordain any kind of means natural, or artificial, wherein their own
manifold infirmities (which are evermore greatest and so appear in dealing
with God) may the better be helped and supplied: and that so far and no farther
(which always I desire to be remembered by way of exposition to the second
commandment) as such inventions of men are referred to themselves only, and
have no respect primarily or directly to God and his service, as wherewith God
may any way the rather be pleased, or his service in respect of it self or any
special and proper means thereof, be thereby any one jot the better
performed. Neither can I (nor any other I think) see any reason at all, why by
art and humane invention those many defects of ours may not as well be supplied
and relieved, as by the means of natural things created by God, or falling
out diversely by his providence. Which none of these Crossers of our Church
ceremonies do mislike: but rather teach and command from the observation of
the new year, new Moon, washing of the hands and such like, to be put in mind
of the washing of our hearts and newnes of life, which is the sum of all
Christian life and doctrine. Yea and that which is more, in the very use of
baptism (which elsewhere also is remembered, and cannot sufficiently be urged
against these exceptors) man may invent and appoint a significant name, by
their doctrine importing all the duties of Christian profession, (as Fear God,
Repent, and such like) which are now in use, and proper names of some living:
and yet the whole Church should not have power to ordain ceremonies to put us
in mind of these holy things and duties. Neither secondly why the Church under
the Law (wherein she had least liberty for any such inventions, being under
the Pedagogy and severe discipline of that ceremonial Law) might and did very
lawfully invent ceremonies, the better to help them in the practice of
repentance, by putting dust and ashes upon their heads, in token of their great
humiliation, and that they deserved to be under the earth; in their special
facts also and feasts of Purim, Dedication, or rather Restoration of the
Temple, etc. And that now when not only the greatest liberty is purchased to
the Church since Christ his death (and that for these proceedings especially in
all matters of ceremony: but also the self same power in good proportion of
quality* albeit not wholly equal, is now in the Church, which before the
ceremonial Law it self did bear and carry with it) this liberty of the
Church should be so much encumbered and restrained by these new and hard
masters: as namely for that which Scalliger reports of a famous ceremony
invented and used by the Jews in the celebrating their Passover, In
emendatione temporis.
in which the Master of the family took a piece of bread, wrapped it in a
napkin, and after dipped it in vinegar, or some other liquor, to the end that
all might ask and further understand the mystery of those matters, with this
long speech and exhortation together: This is the bread of affliction which our
Fathers did eat in the wilderness, all that are willing let them come and eat
of the Passover: all which were famous ceremonies of their own invention, and
most significant means of those great mysteries; and yet I hope (as none yet
ever durst) these condemners of all humane inventions in any part of Gods
service, will not mislike any of them. Neither yet lastly do I see it to be
any otherwise then that which is daily used by themselves and all other in
their sermons, and shadowing most high and heavenly things by similitudes,
Emblems, Hyeroglyphicks, or any kind of hypotiposis (which yet in all forms of
preaching are most common and familiar) as to express the mystery and
doctrine of the Trinity by a triangle (as Aristotle did the soul) and such
like very many which were superfluous to repeat, In secundo lib. de Anima.
the matter being no otherwise then as he said of a picture and poetry compared
together, that Pictura was tacens poesis, and poesis loquens pictura. To which
for a third reason, the comparing of this Cross with some other things of more
particular likeness and proportion may be added, as that ceremony of washing
the feet. John. 13. by Christ himself, women to be covered in the Church of
Corinth, in token of subjection, and the wearing of white garments by those
that were lately absolved, or lately received into the Church in token of their
innocence, and pardon of their sins: whereupon came that Dominica in albis
yet retained in our Church, and happily the name of Whitsontide, until which
time many did wear such garments. And also the using of white sheets after
repentance professed, and absolution given by the Church; the picturing or
painting of Death his head, or Death it self, to put us in mind of mortality,
or any other means for moral virtues to be learned or expressed, as Zanchius
himself allows. De operibus Inutilibus cap. de Imaginibus.
And indeed before writing or Printing were in use, there was no other means
for the helping of memory, or any other kind of instruction for knowledge, or
manners, but by signs and Pictures, as in all the Egyptian Hieroglyphics,
and other means in Herodotus, and yet writing began but from Moses, whom God
first taught (as it is very probably gathered) this skill by his own practice
in writing first the ten Tables; and the other of Printing but since our
Fathers days. So likewise the same Zanchius misliketh not the painting of
Christ his passion, transfiguration and such like, yea the very Image of Christ
in some cases, both which Melancthon concludes by way of answer and council
(how a dumb person might receive the Lords Supper) to be necessaty and not
indifferent only for the instructing of such persons, thereby to help their
judgments, affections, and knowledge also toward the receiving of that
Sacrament. Which being in some cases lawful and expedient at the least (if not
absolutely necessary, In Consiliis theologicis. page 268.
because as shall be more fully answered hereafter, no circumstance can make or
mar the morality of any thing to be good or bad) it cannot simply be wicked or
unlawful, but if in private and at sundry times, and in certain persons they
be lawful, they cannot be essentially and in their own nature evil; and if
these be any way to be allowed, there is no reason that the Cross should be by
so many means refused and condemned. To which those two in Joshua may be added
out of the Scripture it self, the one concerning that Altar built by the two
tribes and the half, Joshua the 22. chap. verse. 27.
least they should be made in time to come to forget the name of the Lord their
God: The other as touching a stone reared and set up by Joshua himself, and
that to this end and none other, as verse. 27. of Chap. 24. appears, that it
might be a witness against them, and so first of all a memorial unto them,
least they should deny the Lord, or depart from his service, according to their
vow and promise made, verse. 24. of the same chapter. Both which if they were
not made and set up for some kind of religious use at the least (especially
that latter appointed by the chief Magistrate himself, Joshua, and that in no
private place, but under an Oak that was in the Sanctuary of the Lord; verse.
26. (howsoever the sense be carried and the words expounded) I cannot see what
they will, or do understand by a religious use, if such famous and most
public means for the helping of us to continue and persevere in Gods service,
and against all Apostasy, deserve not so to be called; the particular
enforcing of which points may better be reserved to those answers which we have
framed and applied to the manifold objections made against this Cross.

CHAP. III. Auouching the general allowance of this Cross by the practice of
ancient times, and judgment of learned Fathers, with their reasons, for the
inuenting and retaining thereof, and other judicious late writers accordingly.
THE last reason for the lawfulness of this ceremony is taken from the
antiquity of it, and the judgments of learned men thereabout. For the first,
howsoever it be disputed by the learned, and doubted in what form and manner
it was first taken and expressed, and many have guessed that for a long time it
was only an aerious sign, and used no otherwise then as in our Baptism at
this day (for which they cite Tertullian in many places: Lib. 1. cap. 24. Lib.
8 contra Gentes. Lib 7. cap. 36.
) yet does it plainly appear by the stories of Irenaeus, Philaster, Arnobius,
and Nicephorus, and generally agreed upon by all the learned, that both the
thing it self, and some good use of it has been very ancient in the Church of
God. And albeit that which Irenaeus reports, may seem upon the first view to
argue some greater abuse of this Cross, yet is it clear as well by that, and
other stories, and the very rules of reason it self, that it was first, and so
of necessity must be well used, before it was, or possibly could be abused,
according to that rule set down by Aristotle in the fourth of his Ethics,
Aristot. Ethick 4. lib. cap. 4.
whatsoever is used may be abused, and so contratiwise; and indeed the better
the thing and ordained to the best use, is soonest and most fowly abused, as
the finest cloth is soonest stained, as commonly not only those of the
Gnostics and Valentinians (which first abused this Cross, and the Image of
the virgin Marie) but all other heretical practices have proceeded from some
good ground and beginning, and from things well used to the manifold and
highest abuse of the same. Primo ratio. Iustine martyr in dialogo cum Iudaeo
Triph. and alibi. Nazi^nzene in his (...), vbi multade Cruce hac.
For so doubtless many after the death of Christ took both his own picture,
and the picture of the virgin his mother, and so consequently of the Cross it
self (as in Irenaeus it appears, and Iustine Martyr) in token of their love
and due remembrance they bare, and ought to have to him that lived in the true
shape of man so many years; was borne of a virgin, and died also for our sakes
upon the Cross. And therefore Saint Cirill answers Julian that Apostata,
that if the Romans made so much of Jupiter his Eagle, Lib. 6. contra Iulianum
p. 135.
and the chair of Numa, the Christians might much more (which Julian so much
derided) retain the Cross of Christ, and the sign thereof in remembrance of
him that dyed upon the Cross, which are his own words. And therefore the
Christians at this day set up the sign of this Cross in their banners and
Bounders against the Turks, who like vile Antichrist, bid daily battle, and
show their continual defiance against Christ and his Cross. Secunda.
Whereupon comes another reason that moved the Christians so aunciently to
use this Cross in some kind or other; for when the Christians were vpbrayded
by those many Gretians and the Gentiles which (as Paul complained in his time)
made but a mock and scorn of the Cross and all Christian religion, 1. Cor.
2. cap.
saying, they believed in a crucified God: the Christians of purpose invented
this ceremony and sign of the Cross, to testify (as we remember also in our
form of Baptism) that they were not ashamed of the Cross of Christ, nor
afraid to confess him that died upon the Cross, as Saint Cirill shows in
the place above cited, and Saint Augustine more especially in his eight sermon,
de verbis Apostoli and else where in these words: Cor quidem habemus, non tamen
quale vos habetis, nec pudet nos crucifixi, sed in part vbi signum pudoris
est, Nazianzenus his (...).
signum Crucis eius habemus. And that these scoffing Grecians did so despise
Jesus as Herod did, and scorned them that professed him, besides Julian that
great Apostata (against whom Saint Nazianzene and Saint Cirill wrote so many
things in defense of Christ, and specially this Cross in the sixth book) I
desire all to consider of that one testimony (and not to trouble them with any
more from the blasphemies of Porphirie, Celsus and the rest of that wicked
crew) which Lucian has left behind him in that treatise of his (which he
calls the Rabble of Liars) (...).
where amongst the rest he reckons our Lord Jesus (who is blessed for ever)
calling him that Syrian Sophister nailed unto the Cross or Tranfiixum Palo.
(...). Philaster de haeresibus.
In regard whereof some of the Christians used the sign of the Cross in their
Rings, some at the entrance of their doors as Cirill reports, some in their
foreheads, and some in a praeposterous zeal branded their own flesh withal.
The like also was practiced by the Jews, calling our Savior Christ in the
greatest disgrace Suspensum, the hanged man. To whom that of Hierome may very
fitly be opposed, as arguing both the antiquity and lawfulness of the
ceremony, In his preface upon Job, toward the end.
and more specially directed by the author himself to Aquila the Jew, and the
rest, whose words are these, Ego qui de Christianis parentibus natus sum, and
vexillum Crucis in frontem port^, etc: wherein that godly father shows his
just grief and indignation, that his translation was not so well regarded as
that of Aquila, Simmachus and the rest, iudaizantes haretici (as he calls
them) who little respected the honor of Jesus, as he shows there; De operibus
creationis in praefatione. 3 Ratio.
who yet was to be the end and rule of all translations, as Zanchius observes,
and the spirit of all prophecy is the testimony of Jesus, Revel. 17. The last
reason for the ancient use thereof was (as Lactantius and Saint Augustine do
guess) the imitation and expressing of that ceremony which was used before the
eating of the Paschall Lamb, by crossing the posts of each house with the
blood; but indeed the true reason both last and best of all, was that good use
and end the Christians made of it, all one with that which we have above
specified, namely to put them in mind of Christ and his passions, and to teach
them what they had to endure as marked thereunto by this sign, of which Saint
Cirill speaks most plainly: Haec omnia recordari nos facit salutare illud
lignum, and presently after: Lib. 6. and page 135. 136. against Julian the
Apostate.
Praeciosi Ligni Crucem facimus in memoriam omnis boni and omnis, virtutis, and
Christi qui haec pro nobis in cruce perpessus est: and Saint Augustine in his
20. chap. De Catechisandis rudibus, and 8. Epistle, speaking to one that was to
be baptized, has these words: Crucis signo in front hodie tanquam in post
signandus etc. To which may be added that of Dionisius and Saint Basil and
much more arguing the ancient use of the Cross from those many things falling
out, Eccles. hierar. cap. de Baptis. Basil. de spir. sancto.
and so commonly and generally known and practiced in Constantine his time
about the same. But seeing that which has been above remembered shows both
the ancient use of this ceremony, and all the reasons for their inuenting and
using the same agreeing very fitly and every way to our times (in which so many
Lucianists and Atheists, besides Jews also in many places of Christendom,
abound and are present also many times at our baptismes) I hope I shall not
need to spend any more time about this matter which (as I hear) has exercised
many other of late, who I presume have made these stories and records very
common and familiar. Only I will add a word or two in remembering the
judgments of some learned men concerning the lawfulness of this Cross,
wherein because the judgments of the Ancient fathers (which indeed some of
them gave to much unto it) as Saint Chrysostom etc) may justly be suspected,
and are so censured by Fulke; I will allege some few against whom the very
adversaries themselves have never as yet (for some of them I am sure) taken any
exception As first for Luther and Melanchton, Against D. Sanders and Martial.
who with master Bucer are worthily reputed, as above noted, for the learnedest
Divines in their times. Bucer also in his Catechis. and de recto vsu sacri
ministerii.
The first in his Catechism, and the other in their Epistles and theological
counsels allowing not only the use of the Cross, but also of honey, salt, holy
water and such like which in these days are taken simply and in every respect
by those that have little skill to examine the truth thereof, for damnable
Idolatry. Cassander de Baptismo infanrum page 95. etc. and in Thesibus
oppositis thesibus cuiusdam improbantis baptismi ceremonias.
Which yet Cassander in a more special treatise thereupon, does not only
maintain, but shows also many good reasons for the inuenting and continuing
the same in the Church of God: But for the other two, Docter Fulke and Docter
Whitakers, two most worthy ornaments of our English nation, I presume none will
refuse them in this or any other argument, the one making the Cross an
indifferent ceremony, and in regard of some of the reasons above rehearsed, of
good and necessary use; whose particular words for one place amongst the rest I
think good to set down out of his answer and Reioynder to Martial his reply,
Article 5. page 173: The Christians among the Pagans marked themselves with the
sign of the Cross, in token that they professed him that was crucified:
afterward to put themselves in mind of the death of Christ, In controuersia de
baptismo.
these were tolerable uses of an indifferent ceremony. The other of Docter
Whitakers in his last readings almost that ever he had in the university of
Cambridge (which many heard as well as my self) auouching that not only the
sign of the Cross, but also salt, honey and oil might very safely be used in
the administration of baptism, without conscience of some, if there were the
like reason to us for the use thereof, as was to those special primitive
Churches: or else the governors of any Church should judge the same fit or
requisite to be used. And thus much for the reasons showing the lawfulness,
fitness, and good use of the Cross; to which I will add the excellent
conclusion of Cassander in the place above named. Hoc tantum hoc loco efficere
voluimus, antiquissimas has and lo^go vsu confirmatas caeremonias (quae citra
impietatem seruari possunt) non esse temere insectandas, nec pertinaciter
violandas, nec earum causa Ecclesias in quibus adhuc earum vsus retinetur
perturbandas: sed ex Christiana charitate pacis and vnitatis studio
obseruandas; adhibitis his cautionibus, vt superstitionis periculosae siquid
immineat, occurratur, and nihilominus huius Sacramenti institutio, vsus and
mysterium fidelibus studiose explicetur, and amplissime commendetur, vt and
Christo suus ex fide honos, and Ecclesiae sua ex charitate reuerentia tribuatur.

CHAP. IIII. Examining and answering those many reasons which are usually
alleged against the Cross, or any other such ceremonies to be simply wicked:
and to be, not in themselves and in their own nature, utterly unlawful.
NOw it follows to consider of such reasons as have been usually and of late
more especially objected against it and the use of it in our Church: the which
for order sake may thus be divided. Namely to be such as would argue it to be
utterly unlawful in it own nature every way, or else respectively, and by
accidental abuse and scandal thereupon, since first it has been devised and
used in the Church and Sacrament of Baptism. Of the first kind, the first and
worst of all I think is that strange assertion broched by some of late sort,
but originally derived from the Manichees, and sometimes but in a more
scholer-like sort and cause taken up by that learned Lutheran Illiricus; that
nothing in the world for choice or use, and whole nature of it is indifferent
to any: but either simply and particularly forbidden or commanded: and so not
only the cross, but all other ceremonies invented by man, and orders in civil
things for any good use in the Church especially, or common wealth, to be
utterly unlawful. To which a double answer may be rendered: First that the very
ground of this kind of building is very sandy and unsound, taking away, and
even abolishing the very nature of things and order of Gods creation: whereas
the truth is, both many actions of men, much more the quality and condition of
some things in themselves, are neither good nor bad; but indifferent, and so
are left to man's choice or refusal: so that if he do them, or do them not, use
them or use them not, more or less, no conscience of sin (as Luther speaks
out of Augustine) can arise from them: Mat. 15.
such are, to use or not to use this or that meat drink or apparel, which
defile not the man, to exercise this or that kind of recreation, and to do the
one and not the other, or none of them both oftener, or more seldom, longer or
less while, and such like. Yea in moral and will actions themselves, to give
thus much or thus little to that man, rather then another, as acts of courtesy
and gratuity, and such like a thousand and Ecclesiastical also, as singing and
ceremonies more or less. In Opusculis.
Insomuch as some (and even master Beza himself) not without good show of
truth and reason for it, have spoken and written the clean contrary: and made
all actions whatsoever in themselves to be neither good nor bad, but
indifferent: as the acts of the foulest sins, murder and adultery, in the
matter of war and extreme punishment: and matrimonial duties are then good,
and therefore not simply wicked, being once clothed with their due
circumstances (as the Schools speak) which make every action good or bad. The
morality whereof Aristotle that great Master makes to consist in the manner of
doing, Lib. 2. of his Ethics.
and end for which it is done: including therein the intent of the doer, and
due circumstances thereunto belonging. Which point being somewhat nyce and
easily drawn into abuse, I wish should very warily be handled, and wisely
harkned unto, for fear of that which experience has showed in some to cast
all hand over head as in Job. 22. and Mala. 3. verse. 14. and such like: howbeit
if their meaning be of any action already done, or any thing already used as
being determined of before in our choice to any end, accompanied with
circumstances necessarily following the same, then we ioyn with them against
all indifferency, and the disputation were very frivolous, and de non ente, as
we say. Secondly we answer that in case such express commandment were
necessary for every particular thing and action, especially in all matters of
Gods service, there is sufficient express warrant (as we have above showed)
for this and other ceremonies to make them good and necessary also being once
commanded ( ex necessitate mandati at the least vt scholae) to be used; as
namely that place in the Corinthians which charge the Church governors to
ordain all things tending to decency, 1. Cor. 14. v. 26. and 40. compared
together.
order and edifying in the church, and not only (as these new Masters would
have it) to see all things particularly expressed in the word to be done with
such decency and due circumstances, according to the special commandments of
GOD herein, which were infinite, and so impossible; and answerably all under
authority to obey and use the same, for otherwise a man might preach in his
doublet and hose, or any other more disguised apparel, for any thing is any
where particularly commanded or forbidden to the contrary. And as it is most
credibly reported of one of these (rather wilful then weak refusers of our
ceremonies) in Northhamptonshire, that lighting from horseback in travelers
array, both preached the word and administered the Sacrament in those riding
habites, booted and spurd, all ugly and spattred, saying that all other fit
behauiours were but ceremonies. And I marvel what warrant these men have for
their Turkish gowns, pretty kinds of ruffes and such like many (which we no way
condemn) more then we have for the Surplise and Cross and other ceremonies,
there being as much for this first argument and many other that follow to be
said against them, as against these; except only they are therefore less
warrantable, because they are commanded by the Magistrate, and Christian
magistrate also, either whereof make them from being indifferent altogether
necessary. The second reason to prove them simply wicked is in brief thus
much, that because they are outward forms devised by man to use of religion,
they are flatly against the second commandment being indeed such as in their
kind are worshipped, or at the least made means of worship, as they say, and
included in that co^demning word in the second commandment: Thou shall not
worship them, etc: as whereby all use of religion is signified, and things used
therein invented by man whatsoever. For answer whereunto we have already above
showed what is forbidden according to the true meaning and scope of the word
worship, or the second commandment and word of God in general. Where first it
is to be noted, that no other outward forms howsoever devised by man to any
use whatsoever, are any farther forbidden therein then as they are invented or
any way used to represent the incomprehensible God or any person of the
Trinity, for their better conceiving of them or worshipping of them thereby: or
else secondly to be any means of the same nature with the word, Sacrament, and
such like, whereby to worship and please God, etc. for which God will certainly
according to his word and promise bless the users thereof. Now God forbid that
our Cross or any other ceremonies should have any such use, intent or meaning
in them, but only (as we said before) at the most to stir, guide and direct us,
and our weakness (beyond which, I mean our selves, they have no use or
consideration at all toward religion) to the more zealous, fervent, decent and
orderly performing any of our obsequies and services to God. And so to grant
that by the word to worship, all religious service is meant (which
notwithstanding is wholly contained in the first commandment) yet does it no
way touch this Cross, which has no such religious use in it, or any way
allowed to be exercised and performed in any kind or least degree by it: but
only to be a memoratiue sign unto us to help our weakness, and a manifest
and worthy argument to others especially Christ his enemies, how we are not
ashamed of this his badge and cognizance, In the Canons
so termed and accounted not unfitly of us that use it: and has not any
reference at al to God either to express him by, or any of the persons in
Trinity, or to worship him therein, as any means thereof, which are the things
that are only forbidden and condemned in the second commandment, and not
against the helps of nature and art to supply man's wants and weakness in
dealing with God, and in respect of any duty to be performed by him, which in
all ages had been and must needs be inverted and appointed for the dece^t,
orderly, and more powerful and lively performing any duty to God or man.

The third reason to show it most wicked, is because the thing it self is
worshipped and so is Idolatrous (as some except) or at the least, the use of it
and other ceremonies, as the best studied of them have objected, is divine
worship. Which if it be true, both are flatly against the first commandment
in the highest degree, which forbids any thing to be worshipped but the
only true God, and all kinds, parts and manners of worship inward or outward
to be given to any but to him only; and so also against the second commandment
inhibiting and condemning all kinds and means of worship, but such as himself
shall appoint and allow, whereof the Cross and all such ceremonies we al
confess are none. But to answer this argument, if the first were true (I durst
confidently say) we had no true Church at all, or at the least any sound but a
most sick one (vt Morneus de Romana) that should maintain by doctrine and
practice such damnable Idolatry: In his counsels and godly Letters.
which was ever the cause of divorce betwixt God and his old people, I mean
for GOD his giving them over to strange judgments, as Master Greenham that
godly and wise man well observed. And it is a wonder (as our wise Sovereign of
late answered some of them) that having such an opinion of our Church and
ceremonies, they should endure to stay so long in it. And for the second, we
flatly deny the use of the Cross or any other to be in any sense divine
worship, or any part of it, yea or so much as any way properly belonging to the
essence and nature of it, or necessarily required to it, or in it: as if either
the doing of it were a thing or action proceeding from us, pleasing or honoring
God withal, or so much as any sign used by us to testify any part of our
worship to God, or to declare the same thereby unto men. For then indeed it
were mere will worship, and such as for which God would rather many ways
curse us then bless us at all, as Esaias 1. and 2. Colossi: Nay we make it not
so much as the least means of God his worship, which were certainly evil and
forbidden by the second commandment. And whereas it is further objected to
this argument, that these ceremonies are therefore divine worship, because the
legal ceremonies were divine worship, being every way of the same nature; I
answer first, that no Divinity can make it good that any ceremony legal or
Evangelical (never so much commanded, is in any sense to be called worship, or
allowed for any part of it (both which belong to the first commandment) all
worship being some kind of action inward or outward, from the inferior to the
superior: whereas the ceremonies of the Law it self, are clean of another
nature, being at the most none other then means, or rather helps appointed by
God for those times, for the more easy serving of him, and keeping that
stubborn people under the yoke of that pedagogy, when the Church was yet in
her infancy; and so the true consideration of them, their nature, and use is
under the second commandment.

Secondly we answer that the legal ceremonies and those we speak of, differ
as far as the two Sacraments of the Gospel from all other holy signs and
representations of holy things; for as the word of commandment and promise
makes them Sacraments, as Augustine says well, and so means of Gods worship
and certain good things to our selves: so all other deuoide of that word
promising as well as commanding, remain matters of another nature, and do
indeed differ essentially, which is as we say in Schools, genere and
definitione: So that if we would define those ceremonies and Sacraments, we
must give them a Genus aequiuocal from this commandment of GOD, as whose
nature is in this kind of our conceiving them now altered to be indeed
ordinances of God, 1. Cor. 11.
as Exo. 12. and Cor. 11. whereas the other are only actions of men, or things
invented and made choice of by them, and so remain for their proper notion and
term to my mind; howsoever ordained to holy uses by them that have authority
to separate and determine things to such uses, who have no kind of power to
make such ordinances being only to be appointed by GOD, as the second
commandment provides. Neither are ill actions in Gods worship, or whereby God
is better worshipped by us (much less signs, helps and means therein)
presently the worship of God it self; neither yet are all ceremonies actions:
but whether they be actions, gestures, or any outward habites ordained and
appointed only by man, they are no other but helps only; howbeit commanded
once by God as the legal ceremonies were, the best and greatest of them are
but means and helps whereby the better and more easily to worship GOD by; and
in those such means as he has appointed privately or publicly with any
power, faculty or action of body or soul, which are the sole and all the parts
of Gods worship from man. And lastly I conclude this answer, that these
ceremonies we speak of, are neither in themselves worship of God, or any
means thereof, nor yet any strange manner of serving God, so often condemned
in holy Scripture, with that determination herein of Georgius Cassander in his
answer to one that carped at and condemned all ceremonies used in baptism. In
responsione ad obiectiones contra ceremonias in baptismo vsitatas.
Alienus modus est colendi Deum qui vel pugnat cum vero culius, vel abducit a
vero cultu Dei (which is a short sum of things forbidden in the second
commandment) non qui eo institutus est vt homines ad verum Dei cultum ducat,
and ad eius obseruationem informet. Nor any other means as helps to our
weakness are forbidden by Christ in the fifteenth of Matthew under these words
(In vain do they worship me, Mat. 15. v. 9.
teaching for doctrines men's precepts or traditions) but only such as whereby
the superstitious heart of man supposes to please GOD, or any way demereri
Deum (as we say) to procure GODS mercy and goodness to us, or whereby (as
Christ himself objected to the Jews) the commandment of GOD, or any part
thereof is prejudiced, made void, or encumbered, not adorned and helped
forward, as by these we speak of. That other reason of being an Image and so
forbidden by name (and in their sense also by the second commandment) albeit
Peter Martyr and Bishop Jewel also (as Doctor Fulke remembers against
Sanders) about this argument of Images, will not grant the Cross used by us, or
else as it was used in the primitive Church, to be any Image at al: yet because
in the largest extent and true signification of the Hebrew word used to
signify the same, (...) and (...)
or at the least some such thing forbidden in that commandment, we will not
(as indeed we need not) oppose their authority in this point; seeing as we have
above showed, no such kind of Images are any way forbidden by the true scope
and meaning of that commandment in general, or any particular word or clause
contained therein, or any part of God his word; being no ways made, nor by any
means allowed or defended to represent the Godhead or any person of the
Trinity, or else to be any means at all for our better conceiving or serving
any of them: much less as to which the least part of divine worship inward or
outward is or ought to be performed or applied, which the first commandment
directly provides against, and which I take it, is the sum of all our
defenses or replies used by any of our learned writers for the use or abuse of
the Cross, or against any kind of Images. About which (I suppose) there would
never have bin such hot and unnecessary contention betwixt the East and West
Churches of GOD in general, if these things had been thoroughly considered
of, and the controversy it self (so far as it may be so truly and in it
own nature termed) fully discussed and determined. But because I have in the
second Chapter sampled these things, together with many particulars of like
nature, as namely one above the rest to paint Deaths head, to put us in mind of
Death, and to prepare us thereunto, would equally be found unlawful by their
expositions and exceptions, or to write any thing in greater letters for better
remembrance of any part of Gods mercies and judgments. And because also the
greatness of the argument in general does deserve of it self, and through
some more special and importunate traducements of my self by some more severe
censurers of my poor pains hereabout in another kind (wherein I desired to
give satisfaction to this argument) may happily urge me to a more particular
consideration and discourse about the same hereafter) I will leave it for this
time, and come to that other and last reason of this first rank, arguing the
unlawfulness of this Cross simply and in it own nature: which is, because
being with many other ceremonies most of them artificial and of man's devising,
and withal Ecclesiastical, as we all grant, are yet notwithstanding
significant to the Church of GOD, and of mystical use, representation and
signification (there being no warrant or Scripture in particular or general
expressly or by consequence for any such ceremonies.) To which because I have
answered in a larger discourse (which God willing shall not be long from the
worlds censure) somewhat in examining that cauil and exception against our
Church, how far forth Matrimony signifies the mystical union betwixt Christ
and his Church (as is read in our solemnization thereof) I may be a little the
briefer herein. The argument it self standing upon a very small and weak
foundation of all other. For these ceremonies first being enjoined and
appointed by lawful authority to a good end, without heresy or error
thereabout in our doctrine, or superstition, or any kind of manifest impiety
and pollution in our practicing of them, we have many ways sufficient warrant
for any of them in the word of GOD: neither are any of them done without, or
besides Gods warrant and allowance by his word, as in the declaration of this
point in our treatise before we have showed, being done to that general end of
all our actions in respect of God, Romans 14: Whether we eat or drink, or
whatsoever else we do (being matters as free for particulars in choice and
variety, and indifferent (as these ceremonies) do them all to the glory of
GOD, 1. Cor. 14.27. and 40. verse.
and that other no less general in respects of men and the whole Church of
God: 1. Cor. 14. Let all things be done to edifying, comeliness and order:
Insomuch as we are so far from doubting, whether these things done in this
manner and to these ends especially, enjoined and commanded by lawful
authority, be pleasing unto God, according to Romans 14.23: (so far forth as
things indifferent and of that nature are said to please God) as that being
omitted either by the magistrate in not appointing them, or by the subject of
any place by not observing them, they are to be censured for manifest breaches
of Gods commandment. Secondly to allow a ceremony, and not to be significant,
were to imagine a shadow without a substance; all of them being outward signs,
and so necessarily significant of some inward disposition of the will
affecting, showing or expecting any thing: as Fulke against Sanders on the
missals, and books that way written very many especially by Durandus in his
Rationali diuinorum (albeit some have called it, and that not without reason
for some things therein contained, an unreasonable book) may evidently
appear. And that the Church of God has in all ages lawfully and without any
contradiction of God or man invented and appointed such ceremonies, the better
to testify their repentance, and humiliation, for cause of joy and
thanksgiving (which contain in a manner the whole sum of man's duties to God)
all the ceremonies used at fasts or feasts do demonstrate to all the world,
whereof that one is very memorable, not only in the feast of Purim it self,
which was an invention and appointment of the Church at that time, as well as
many other which we have above remembered, but one special ceremony which the
Jews retain unto this day: which is, that whenever the name of Haman is
repeated in the Scripture to be read on that Festival, all stand up and beat
the forms and seats with their hands and feet, for their general better
remembrance of that great benefit of their deliverance from that cruel Haman,
and signifying their detestation of that intendment of his for ever. Antonius
Margarita Iudaeus baptizatus de caeremoniis Iudaeorum. Tertullian de Corona
militis.
And Tertullian more near to our purpose, upon occasion of that soldiers
refusal, speaks thus in general of the habites of Christians suitable to the
blood and passions of Christ, has these words: Rubricati incedimus, and
amentes perhibemur: Whereunto also that of significant names given at Baptism
and so upon conscience of sin enjoined by their Masters (who are by many
accounted most judicious amongst themselves) may fitly be adjoined: which do
not only put those children and the special congregation present at their
baptizing to thankfulness and obedience (which are the sum of all Christian
duties) but also are of all other ceremonies invented by man most significant,
and that of the greatest matters of our faith and profession in this life, and
future hope and expectation for the life to come: as namely Repent (as some
have been called) which is the sum of all those significant ceremonies of
dipping and rising again out of the water, importing the death and
resurrection of Christ, and so consequently our regeneration, as Romans 8: and
one other (dust) used also by them, signifying our mortality: and lastly that
common and very significa^t ceremony (which many Divines do teach it in their
prayers and preaching also, to be for our continual use and practice:) when as
by lying down in our beds, and rising up again, is signified unto us our
lying down in our grave and the resurrection of our flesh again: which is a
matter of our highest faith and expectation from Christ Jesus his flesh and
spirit, from which all our spiritual hope and comforts are derived. All which
so long as they conteyne no error or superstition in them, nay yet through
singularity violate any wholesome constitution made to the contrary, nor lastly
through nouelty and weakness of judgment, give occasion not only of
unnecessary scandal, and too too truly given, but also at sometimes of
scoffing and scorning to some profane spirits at such holy mysteries (in which
the least action and gesture ought to carry a due reverence, port and Majesty)
I think no man of understanding can justly mislike them: Thirdly these men
forget what a broad difference there is between sundry kinds of ceremonies,
which all notwithstanding are significant, and can no otherwise be. For which
end I could wish them to peruse that which Chemnisius that most learned
Lutheran and grave Divine has, in his answer and examination of the Council
of Trent, In his examination of the Council of Trent* Aquinas tertia part
Summae quaest. 60. Art. 3.
about this very matter of the Cross and Images so grossly abused by the
Papists: where making out of the Schools some Signs prognosticall, some
Collatitiall, some memoratiue, some Demonstratiue, etc. neither he nor any
judicious Divine in the world does, or ever did condemn all memoratiue Signs,
of which kind and nature we have ever holden and maintained the Cross, but no
way of power or the least hability to confer and convey any grace or good unto
the Church, or any creature, as the old heretics by Irenaeus his story gave
unto it ((...) and (...) which I expound) power to remove and dispell evil,
Irenaeus lib. 10. cap. 24.
and to confirm and establish any good: which for many particulars, and the
worst use of all, many foolish, superstitious, and idolatrous Papists have
taken up and taught in the world. Howbeit for being memoratiue signs, and
instructions for things present, or to come, which may be helps unto any our
manifold weaknesses (as abouesaide) we cannot yet see any sufficient reason
against them: and I would be beholding to any that should make any full, sound,
and good demonstration to the contrary. And so I conclude this Chapter and mine
answer to the first kind of Objections with two excellent sentences of Georgius
Cassander in the place before cited: Quamuis verbum Dei sacris literis
consignatum, and sacramenta nobis ab ipso relicta plenam institutionem
contineant, tamen non inanis est opera illorum qui verbi intelligentiam and
sacramentorum significantiam pluribus verbis and signis, modo diuino verbo non
aduersentur explicandam and in hominum animis defigendam putarunt. And anon
after: Qui non iuuantur ombris caeremoniarum eo quod norint veritatem,
tollerent eas (vbi opus est) propter Charitatem. And one other grand decree and
kind of Anathema used by the Jews, and every way as fitly to be applied to our
ceremonies, Hospinian de festis Iudaeorum and caeremoniis paschatis cap. 5. pa.
19.
and to be denounced against manifest despisers and deprauers of them: Qui
contemnit festa solennia and coetus Ecclesiasticos, quia irritum facit faedus
Abrahami Patris nostri, non habebit partem futuri saeculi: which Hospinian
applies to our ceremonies.

CHAP. V. Answering the objections of the Cross, being used for an Idol
sometimes, and so retained yet in some places of the world.
THE other reasons usually made against any use of the Cross in holy baptism
or any other administration appertaining to religion, or any part of Gods
service, are taken from certain accidental occasions which have fallen out in
the world, and the Church of God it self about this Cross: being either not
understood, or misconstrued, or too too hardly censured by some, which upon
their own conceit have grown into great mislike of the same; or lastly
because it has been abused at any time to superstition and idolatry. The
first whereof may be that of their last coining, for any thing I have read or
heard, except only that by way of project and collateral kind of answer,
Doctor Fulke against Sanders might suggest something to this exception, very
quickly apprehended by such busy spirits, Fulke against Sanders of Images.
and the cauelling wits of so many Sophisters and impostors in these days: for
so that truly famous learned man tells Sanders and his accomplices, that they
might as well worship those torturing engines wherewith Martyrs were cruelly
handled and ended their lives withal, as this of the Cross upon which our
Savior Christ endured such cruelty and shame: which rather is worthy of all
detestation, as this replyer against it infers thereupon, then of any such
honorable mention as is made thereof in the administration of Baptism. To
which (albeit unworthy of any answer) being a gross and foul fallation ab
ignoratione Elenchi (as we say) the argument being not ad idem: for this
honorable mention of the Cross is not made by us, because it was a means of
tormenting so innocent a person (howsoever also not the instrument, but the
deuisers and actors of so wicked a practice, deserve all the blame herein) but
because it pleased God to permit, and so it was effected in time, that his own
Son should by so shameful a death (the better to declare the greatness of
our miseries and his own mercies) procure our peace. Which in respect of the
worthiness of the person, and omnipotency of Gods power and mercy might no doubt
otherwise have been accomplished: but that now being done, and (as the Schools
speak) omnia dum sunt necesse est vt sint: we therefore justly do, and
indeed necessarily ought to retain all possible means for the due
remembrance of it: neither may those accidents thereabout any more cause us to
detest the thing it self, or forbear the mentioning of it, then if an honest
man's sword should in it self be hated for any cruelty wrought by it: or which
is more fit, if any man should evermore loath and detest those burning,
cutting, and cauterising yrons by which our health (when there is no other
remedy) has sometimes been procured. In Asceticis.
Which Saint Basil says in his moralls we do well abide, love and like:
although we cannot endure the physicians of our souls to cut, burn, or touch
our souls with those spiritual instruments and edge of Gods law. Nay
further, Cyprian.
an other great and good father not unfitly (albeit somewhat insolently and
strangely for the manner of speech) is not afraid to cry out of Adam his sin
it self (which was the first mouer in this violent resolution of the heaven it
self, for all causes concurring herein to our peace, and the whole argument
occasioning all that great tragedy) O foelix culpa qua talem meruit
redemptorem: Much more may we call it a blessed Cross and wounds, by and upon
which the Apostle witnesses all our peace was procured, ratified and confirmed
for ever. Another argument of this latter kind, and to the same purpose is thus
framed: No invention of man or ceremony whatsoever, whereof there is not for
the present, nor yet ever has been any necessary use in the Church of God,
being once abused, and that so generally, may any longer be used and retained
in any part or means of Gods service: but the Cross is for every point such a
thing, therefore it ought no longer to be used in any reformed Church. To which
I first answer, Johannes Bunderlinus Sebastian Franck, and one Entfelder. Anno
1543.
that by this argument all ceremonies whatsoever (besides those which the word
of God specifieth and particularly requires) should in time be all condemned,
and cast out of the Church: which was the opinion of some in Germany, as namely
Johannes Bunderlinus and Sebastiane Franck (who set forth books Anno. 1530:
condemning all ceremonies) yea even the holy Sacraments themselves: because
they had been profaned, violated and oppressed (as they write) by the tyranny
and Idolatry of Antichrist. For so indeed it is clear, that no humane
invention whatsoever, but has either formerly, or may futurely be abused: and
so by consequence none to be retained in sequel of time and abuse. So that any
may perceive the very foundation of this argument to be most unsound, and
contrary to the very rules of common reason, for that (as Aristotle truly
teaches) whatsoever is, Aristot. Ethics lib. 4. cap. 4.
or may be well used, may also be abused: and secondly, no abuse of any thing
can take away the right and true use thereof; for then as the Apostle says in
another such like case we should go out of the world. And lastly nothing ca^
be abused which has not first of all been in some good use or at the least
appointed thereunto, 1. Cor. 5.
the abuse being a privative or a negative at the least of the other; and so no
doubt was this Cross before (as we have above remembered out of Irenaeus) the
Gnostics and other heretics had so anciently abused the same: and more
particularly the sanctified Bells so called and used in Popery, and in most of
our Churches yet retained, our Fonts also which have been as foully abused, to
speak nothing of our feasts (wherein much Idolatry and foolish worship has
been given to Saints diverse ways) should all be removed, if this argument were
good, there being no such absolute necessity for any of them, besides the
commandment of lawful authority which for decency, order, and better
edification appoints the same rather then any thing else. For so we see that
(as some happily upon conscience of this matter and argument we have in hand,
have made a common practice of it) children might otherwise be baptized at some
basin, or some river and fountain of water, as John Baptist did. And for the
brazen Serpent (about which there has been so much ado betwixt Martial and
Calfill, Fulke and Sanders, even in this very argument of the Cross) there is
no question but that it was very much abused before Hezechias his time: and yet
did not any of the Kings before him pull it down, nor any of the Prophets of
those times did call upon them so to do; much less (as some of these new
masters enjoin Christian princes) were any of those Princes bound upon fear
of that Serpent so to be abused, or giving occasion to Idolatry (which could
not be but very great, 2. of Kings. cap. 28. v. 4. and 2. Chroni. cap. 29.
verse. 16.
it being placed in the Temple it self, as by the story repeated in the Kings
and Chronicles compared together may appear:) and that it was no necessary
thing, but indifferent, Hezechias his pulling it down without any reproof of
the Prophets, or breach of any Gods laws, as it seems, sufficiently
declares: who also if he had let it continue still, and caused the people by
instruction and true discipline to leave that their abusing of it, no Scripture
or Prophet (I dare say) could have reprehended him for it; as we do not read
that any one or other commended him greatly for taking it away, nor reprehended
any other of the Kings for not pulling it down before. And lastly, the setting
up of the Image or portraiture of any ones father or friend (which is a thing
in my poor opinion too too common in some other respect, even in the places
where all the parts of our holy services are performed, as also the arms and
pictures of Princes, which is as common in many Churches, might with greater
show of reason be called into question (if there were any force in this
argument) then our Cross, which is but aerious, and a transient sign (as we
have above showed) and neither Image nor Simulachrum as the learned distinguish
them; and as those we last named are. Which also have not only been abused to
the greatest superstition and Idolatry (as appears by all story) but also
the very first occasions and originalls of all Idolatry, as out of the 14. of
the book of Wisdom partly appears, and many learned men have gathered from
thence, and how the pictures of princes have bin by the flattery of Sycophants,
their own pride and cruelty abused this way, many histories report. And yet I
hope for these abuses, causes, or occasions thereof (then the which there can
be no greater) none will be so bold, not only for fear of law in that case
provided, but even upon conscience of due reverence to the same, as to pull
them down, or conclude that they ought to be pulled down: or any way deface
them, or disgrace them by word or practice. Peter sometimes was advertised)
which GOD by his lawful Magistrate has made holy and necessary to be
performed by us. Act. 10.
Neither yet can any accidental abuse, albeit in the highest degree of any
thing whatsoever necessary or indifferent, discharge the subject from his due
obedience to things of this nature once commanded by the Magistrate. Which if
it should be granted and yielded unto, many temporal Laws of this kingdom
(which are forced to tolerate many a mischief oftentime) ought eftsoons to be
repealed. Thirdly, besides that there have been, and yet are very many good and
so necessary uses of this Cross (as we have formerly proved) so is there no
better way to show and reform the abuses of the same, Cap. 4.
then that both by preaching (which I could wish were more carefully performed
in this behalf) and due use and practicing the same in the public
congregation, all sorts of people might be informed in the truth and
lawfulness of this ceremony by Gods word. Lastly for those places which are
alleged out of Exodus, Esai, and Hosea, to strengthen this argument; I answer,
that most of them are particular cases grounded upon special circumstances of
those peoples sins, and so are not to be drawn to conclude any general
proposition for, or against these kind of ceremonies: as for example there is
great odds between the land of Canaan where all such means and monuments of
Idolatry are in particular commanded utterly to be defaced, and any part of the
Church of GOD, in which any such abuse has sometimes happened or more constantly
been continued, for which God never gave any peremptory and general
commandment or special charge against them. Secondly those places in Esai and
Hosea are threatenings and promises of God to his Church, Esaias. 30. Hosea. 2.
for the better informing, ordering, and comforting the same, and in no
reasonable construction or exposition, any peremptory commandments against the
things there spoken of: as where it is said, I will pollute their Images, and
cause the name of Baall to cease, the one being a just judgment denounced
against the Idolatry of that time (which God be thanked is far from us and
our state, which makes severe laws for the punishment of the same) the other
a gracious promise, as the scope of that place and the meaning of the words
declare. And what a deal of Sophistry is committed by allegation of Scripture,
any Judicious text-man or obseruer of the many strange conclusions of these
times may easily perceive, and elsewhere my self have given some touch unto
them, and taste unto other: because indeed (which is diligently to be marked for
the true understanding of many Scriptures) many things are spoken therein
especially in their Sermons cohortatorie (as Luther observes in the Fathers)
that is, 2. 2. quaest. de vsura.
by way of exhortation and maiorem cantelam (as Caietanus also observes in the
Schools themselves) wherein things are applied to the times present, and not
any way determined of for the lawfulness or unlawfulness thereof, and so such
promises and threatenings implying always a condition, do put nothing in
being, as the Schools speak, which is always to be examined, and only to be
judged by the rule and Canon of the moral Law: of which nature also are
certain homilies of ours from which these exceptors think they have so great
advantage, as well for not subscribing thereunto, as for the overthrowing this
matter of the Cross which we have in hand. Besides also that many things are
by comparison and symbolically drawn by these disputers from the old
Testament to the new: and so as the schools say, argumenta symbolica and
comparatiua, are parum argumentatiua, little or norhing at all able to conclude
any thing: whereas those godly exhortations are made (as the title of them
shows) against the peril of Idolatry, and by way of greater detestation, and
not according to their particular judgment what is lawful or forbidden
therein by the precise rule of Gods word. Lastly these men greatly wrong
themselves, as well as our whole Church and the governors thereof, in comparing
that abominable Idol of Baall and the rest above mentioned in those
Scriptures, with our Cross, and other such like ceremonies, howsoever defiled
with much superstition and Idolatry at any time: for as for that one of Baal,
and most also of the other, there never was, nor possibly could be any good use
of them, as we have showed and proved of the Cross. Neither was the naming of
those abominable Idols simply wicked (as Saint Jerome also disputes in one of
his Epistles, and which might well fit our tenderest in this kind, who cannot
abide the least mention of the Mass, and that upon conscience of these places,
which yet was generally used, as Doctor Fulke shows, Fulke against Sanders.
to signify the Lords supper by it a long time in the Church) but such a
mentioning of them only as those Idolaters did use toward them, as may appear
by the contrary protestation of David, Psalm. 16: saying, I will not mention
them in my lips, which is (as the scope of that special place argues) to
praise them or pray unto them, as it is well known the Idolaters did. Whereas
the worst that ever was imputed or performed to this Cross, or any other of
that nature, was no way given to the things themselves, or by their means to
any horrible Idol, as that of Baall was, and so to the very devil himself
(as Saint Paul shows) but respectively always, and in relation to him that
did hang upon the Cross (as the worst of them all challenge for themselves) as
from whom by their idle fancies, and superstitious imaginations some divine
power was communicated and transfused into that, and all other Crosses; and
that no otherwise (as the best of them plead for it) and themselves) then as a
King does make a grant, and sends usually some token of his will and
authority in many particulars by his ring or seal: and so much for this
argument also.

CHAP. VI. Answering that objection for Christian liberty, which the Cross is
supposed in some so much to cross.
THE other reasons that follow, are of less moment, and yet for the
satisfying of all (as near as I can) I will return somewhat to them also, the
one being taken from that grand prerogative of Christian liberty challenged and
magnifyed many ways by these men: the other from those necessary, apparent,
and unavoidable offenses, which do daily and must needs still arise from the
use of this Cross: which as all Christians, so especially the chief
Magistrate, and all other under him that have charge of their peoples souls as
well as of their bodies, are bound to foresee, prevent, and take away, or else
should be found to transgress that royal Law spoken of in James, James. 3.
Romans 14. v. 15.
and that special branch thereof mentioned in the 14. to the Romans by not
walking in love, nor having charitable compassion at the least of these men's
infirmities, and great souls dangers and damage. The first whereof (which
touches Christian liberty) sauoreth not a little of Anabaptisme, from which
some writing masters of this kind have bought or borrowed too many drugges to
make up their poysonfull confections in some of their books, as that other
above, used by them against the indifferency of any thing, was drawn from the
Manichees. Insomuch as a man may boldly and truly say of many of these
irregular persons, for the sum of their new doctrines and strange practices,
that they are for the most part (and so will be found) to be compounded of
Manichisme and Anabaptisme, I mean the worst sort of them: For against the
other (which I have elsewhere distinguished) I never intended in this or any
other to deal against them, but as near as I can, the errors of them all. As
in this one particular of withdrawing their obedience to lawful authority in
things in their own nature indifferent, under color of Christian liberty,
does very plainly appear. In which (for more special answer) they show not
only their great security in not examining their consciences for so manifest a
breach of Gods Law, and their further pride and hypocrisy in passing over
the grauiora legis (as Christ told the Pharisees of his time) under color and
pretense of making scruples and conscience of these smaller things (as
comparatively they may be called) but also very gross and sottish ignorance in
not discerning, Institutionum lib.
nor any way determining aright of this Christian liberty. Which is a thing
indeed (as Calvin well observes, and discourses upon this argument) no less
spiritual then the pardon of sin, and peace of conscience; and specially
consists in that spiritual freedom from the law of sin (and curse
awarded by Gods law thereupon) which naturally reigns in our mortal bodies,
that is, every power and part of body and soul; and power from Christ his
grace, spirit and life, to work righteousness and fulfill the law: as Saint
Paul from the last words of the 4. Chap. to the Romans, to the end of the
seventh, most fully seteth down. Neither did Christ come (as himself
proclaims) to destroy the Law, but to establish and perform it in himself
and all his members: who is a Savior, but not to sin again, a physician,
but not to surfeiting, and therefore has delivered us from all our enemies,
Lucae. 1.
that we should serve him, and keep every one of his commandments. The maine
sum whereof stands in due obedience to himself, and his lawful
ordinances, Zanch. in Confess.
as Saint Peter expounds the same. Neither does our freedom from that
severity of the ceremonial Law abridge any whit the authority of the
Magistrate in decent ceremonies agreeable to the Gospel; but clean contrary
(as we have above remembered) inuesteth rather that whole perfection, meaning,
and authority of the ceremonial Law in those Christian Magistrates, to whom
God commits any part of his Church under the Gospel. The ceremonial Law
indeed being nothing else but an order appointed by God himself for the outward
policy and discipline of the Church being then under the pedagogy of the Law,
which now is left to the liberty of Christian Princes as they shall see their
times and occasions to require. Only, vt Austen, ne excedant and so become a
snare and burden; where yet I see not but obedience is necessary, albeit (vt
Peter) a yoke too heavy to bear, and it is a sin to the commanders
encroching upon this liberty: but yet you inferior must obey, and so (as Beza)
been parere, may and must stand when magistrates do male imperare. So if the
Apostles had urged more ceremonies, parendum orat: Secundo Cauendum ne (vt de
Imaginis vsu) multitudo caeremoniarum hinder charity, or oppress any in these
poor times, and days of Gods wrath upon the Church, as also of the misery
for the most part of the ministry and abundance of poor in all places.
Thirdly dispute not thou what is fit for discipline of Clergy or people, in
ceremonies more or less, these or other, but leave it to the magistrate that
is charged with that care, and must answer for his magistracy, and sins
thereof one day. Neither may any without great occasion of sin, and manifest
breach of the fifth commandment, pulle their necks out of the yoke of their
lawful commands. For Christianity takes not away any part of ciuility or
humanity (as some have well said) much less due obedience to lawful
authority, as too many have taught of late and practiced. And to conclude this
first part of my answer to this objection, I desire all to read and compare
with judgment that reply of our Savior Christ to that Pharisaicall exception
against Christ his Disciples for eating with unwashed hands, with the doctrine
and practices of these men, who making scruple and much ado about Cross and
Surplice, and a few ceremonies distasting their private judgments, run
headlong into open neglect and contempt of the fifth commandment. And so as the
Pharisees did upon error of devotion and conscience to their Corban, cause many
a silly disciple of theirs to neglect their manifold duties to father and
mother, whereby (as Christ tells them) they made the commandment of God of
none effect by their traditions. Even so do these new masters every way the
selfsame in effect. Secondly I answer, that albeit no humane Laws do of
themselves bind the conscience, but only as they have their ground and warrant
from the fifth commandment, and further, that no magistrate or creature in the
world can take away the least part of Christian liberty in things inwardly
spiritual, or outwardly indifferent in themselves for choice or use (because
Christian liberty is the selfsame still, and is seen as well in doing, as not
doing, using or not using any thing subject unto it:) yet do all wise esteemers
of these things hold, that every Christian Magistrate may, and ought also many
times by virtue of the fifth commandment, restrain this Christian liberty in
many particular things, according as any good cause and reason general or
particular, may occasion any Prince or state to make wholesome Laws for any
such purpose. And that so far, and so large, as no one commandment of God by
commission or omission any thing hereby be prejudiced by any of these
restraints or impositions whatsoever. As in the matter of fasting and
abstinence, the learned Schools have fully determined; which may serve for
answer and direction touching all wholesome Laws penal or otherwise enacted
and in force, in our state or any other.

CHAP. VII. Answering the objection of so many scandals arising by the use of
the Cross.
THat other of this last and least kind of arguments against the Cross (which
shall also be the last of this our consideration) is drawn from the offenses
which happily have, or may at any time arise from the use of this Cross. For
answer whereunto I hope I shall not need to stand upon the definition of a
Scandal in general, Hieron. in 15. Math. v. 12. Scandalum est dictum vel
factum quod dat alteri occasionem ruinae.
or the usual divisions of the same into Active and Passive by the Schools,
and commonly termed offenses given or taken: but referring all to Saint Jerome
his definition of a Scandal, set down in his commentaries upon the 15. of
Math. verse. 12. I wish these great exceptors, and all other too too justly
scandalized by them, and their offensive behauiours in this behalf, to turn
their eyes upon the manifold scandalls and inconveniences also, which many
ways break out privately and publicly, both in Church and common wealth, by
reason of their omitting, misliking, and so peremptory condemning the use of
the same, albeit established by public authority amongst us. Which indeed are
so many, as that no wisely affected or honestly disposed heart can but
thoroughly and most feelingly be touched and justly grieved withal; especially
since those which rise from the omitting of it, are far greater and of
another nature from those which proceed from the using of it, even in Baptism
it self, or any other holy administration, there being indeed betwixt them no
just or fit proportion or comparison: the one being only passive, and
unnecessarily taken by those that abuse them, and themselves and others by
them: and do neither know the truth, use, or right practice of them: the other
being too too justly given, and actiuely, and in themselves evil (as the
Schools speak, and we have above showed) containing in them manifold breaches
of the fifth, and almost every other commandment of God. As namely general
disobedience, and both inward and too too often outward kicking, spurning and
rebelling against the most grave decrees and constitutions of the Church, and
sovereign authority of the chief Magistrate (to which every honest heart
ought willingly to subscribe and simply without contradiction or disputation
to yield their obedience.) Besides the great neglecting of special callings,
and manifold duties therein to GOD and man, bereauing the Church also by this
means of their gifts, and themselves and others of their necessary
maintenance, besides many other, which I have more grief then will to repeat.
Secondly, were these offenses both alike, I mean accidentally evil only, as
those taken herein are, and so being mere occasions, nec dant speciem, nec
veniunt in definitione, as the Schools speak, 22. Quaest. 43. art. 1. and
therefore are no proper causes of evil: yet in such a consideration, the
greater number does and ought with every good conscience to ouersway the fewer
and the lesser, which if they should be reckoned together, there would appear
great odds, and a broad difference to any equal or judicious eye. And whereas
some have found a more nice difference in this behalf, in respect of the
Magistrates commanding these things, which in their judgments might well be
forborne, charging them further with great want at the least of Christian
charity, and wise loving care and foresight toward the good of their poor
subjects, and inferiors souls and bodies, by not preventing and taking away so
many causes, or to speak more properly, occasions of so much offense, hurt and
damage to their weak consciences and Church of God in general: I answer
first, that it is a horrible sin both against the fifth, but especially
against the ninth commandment, for any private spirit or person whatsoever, to
entertain any such thoughts and suspicions (which are no other then
diabolical suggestions) against their Prince or any lawful authority placed
over them. Whereas the rule of that royal law is particularly expressed in the
ninth commandment, never to censure or conster the words or doings of any the
meanest offensiuely and to the worst, when any more favorable conceit and
interpretation thereof may be admitted and affoorded. Much more to presume so
far as to prescribe any thing in this kind to those, whose very thoughts they
ought to honor even in their own secret thoughts, and privy chambers: much
more to reverence and embrace with all duty and respect, all their solemn
ordinances and designments for any such administration, for the which they are
accountants to God only and none other. And therefore I cease now to marvel,
and rather begin to fear and tremble, at the most insolent practices and
behavior of some in these days, who not only dare to censure and misdeeme by
most uncharitable judgment, the words, writings, and best composed Sermons of
the most considerate and zealous amongst us: but also fear not to enter into
the very thoughts of Kings themselves: whereas besides religion, common
charity, and special allegiance, even good manners might teach and persuade
them other thoughts, words, and demeanor. As namely, that having by Gods mercy
so worthy a Soueraign borne, bred, and nurtured up from his cradle in holy and
pure religion, so well through his study and experience (being now also for his
age almost in the vigor and perfection of both) so well and thoroughly qualified
and accomplished with all royal graces and virtues, besides his long
observation of all state occasions Ecclesiastical and civil, which himself
has so long managed, and sat at the stern of both; insomuch as without
flattery, that may justly be said of him, which the Prophet spoke of Hezechias,
The fear of the Lord has made him prudent; Isai. 33.
and that Techoatish woman of David, that he is wise as an Angel of God,
specially sent for the good of his kingdom: who also from his first coming
amongst us (to speak the best, but to a sick and distempered body, howsoever
(I may boldly say) as well shapen and proportioned for all lineaments of state
proceedings, as any other Church or common wealth in the world) has spent no
doubt many an hour in prayer and heavenly meditation with GOD, and much
conference with all his worthies, how to prescribe and minister a course for
the reducing of the whole body to a true temper of uniformity and peaceable
proceeding in all things: as also having so many assistants and under governors
of rare quality, understanding and judgment (whose souls and consciences, yea
lives and liberties, and peaceable prosperity for them and theirs for ever, are
most deeply engaged in this business with his majesty) should first of all
humbly honor GOD for these inestimable and never before known means, and
both to think and resolve with themselves that these worthies have more reason
both in conscience and matter of state proceeding, and have found and judged it
more profitable and available for the common peace of the Church, and good of
the whole state, as well to retain these ancient ceremonies of the Church,
rather then to invent new; as also upon such penalties to urge the uniform use
thereof, then otherwise to take away any formerly established, or to forbear
the restoring of any decayed or intermitted, or else to give toleration to any
contrary minded, for the doctrine, use and practice of the same. And then in
things of this nature being indifferent, or somewhat more doubtful to weak
and unsettled judgments, to submit themselves, their judgments and consciences
in all duty, reverence and humility to these sage, grand, and no doubt most
conscionable determinations of such and so many as are both as holy (as the
best of the standers out) and more old and wise then their fathers (as he told
Job) who have oftentimes considered, and do yet (when these men happily sleep)
maturely deliberate of these, and all such occasions, for the common peace and
their special good, if they had eyes and grace to see it.

And lastly to consider a little (which any that has his eyes in his head may
easily discern) what these contrary and overthwart practices of theirs might,
and are most likely to work in the minds and disposition of most Princes, who
as the Poet says, have for the most part high and strong affections, and whom,
as Aristotle shows, nothing sooner moves to wrath and just displeasure then
neglect and contempt, Aristot. Ethico. tertio.
especially of their most holy and honorable endeavors: and had not we a meek
Moses as well as a most wise and worthy Solomon, might justly be feared to
hazard not only all Church privileges, but even (which sometimes befell that
patient ruler and leader of Gods people) the breaking at once of both tables,
that is horrible vastation and fearful dissipation of all things in Church or
common wealth. Thirdly, I answer touching these offenses, with our Savior
Christ, Math. 18. Woe be to them by whom the offense comes: which in this
case can no way be imputed to the magistrate commanding, according to his
conscience and special duty to God and his people in this behalf, any such
ceremony for uniformity, godly edifying, and peace of that government and body
ecclesiastical or Civil whereof he is the head; much less may it be fastened
upon the immediate minister and vser of any such ceremony, who is necessarily
bound to do the thing which his prince or any other lawful authority require
at his hands, and has the same for his warrant; insomuch as if happily any just
offense be given herein (to which any such woe properly belongs) it does by
all right and reason return upon the first commanders (who will not deny I am
sure to take the same upon them) and by no equity upon the heads of any
inferior soldiers, which are enjoined upon just penalties to do that which
their Captains direct and appoint. But indeed the true cause of those offenses
which happily sometimes come to pass, rests in them only who partly through
weakness and gross ignorance (which never excused any) and sometimes
wilfulness, pride, and malice, make offense in these things to themselves and
others (and therefore a more grievous woe is due unto them) when indeed there
is no just cause thereof any where to be found; who also might both persuade
themselves and others, but that (as I may without breach of charity boldly
affirm) they are so far gone and departed from their due obedience in this
kind (even by a perpetual rebellion as Jeremy speaks) as that they have
resolved together with those of whom the Poet Sophocles speaks, never to be
persuaded: although indeed they be persuaded, and find in their consciences
that without any just offense to GOD or man, they might safely do any of these
things. Lastly, I answer that there is no better means to avoid and utterly to
take away these offenses imagined, or truly given and so commonly taken by
Papists, or any other in the use of the Cross or other ceremonies that are now
adays so generally distasted, then when Christian Princes command the true
and right use of them, and the godly learned ministry do by their preaching
and using the same instruct all sorts of people, both how to use them aright,
and also to shun the manifold abuses and offenses which have fallen out
thereupon in the world. Wherein if the learned ministry of this kingdom had
been as careful and constant both in their doctrine and practice to observe
this uniformity, not only in this ceremony of the Cross, but all other things
for doctrine and manners, so wisely and carefully agreed upon and provided in
our Church: as the other are over diligent in the one by their daily teaching
and dropping as it were into the minds of their followers so many drops of all
those mischiefs: and most resolute in tying themselves and all their sectaries
by the strictest subscription (that ever I think was urged) to the observation
of their orders and none other: we had long since seen an end of so many
schisms and unnecessary differences and contentions amongst us about these
Leuiora legis (as I may term them) of Cross, Surplice, and other ceremonies,
and many times about mere trifles and moonshine in the water: which yet have
much hindered many things appertaining to the weightier things of Gods Law, as
mercy, peace, judgment and righteousness, wherein the kingdom of God and the
safety of his people consists: and many a poor soul, and otherwise loyal
subjects, which now though ignorance, perplexity, tenderness of conscience, or
any worse cause feel the penalty of that law, whereof they might have had the
good and benefit (which is the proper end thereof) would never have incurred so
many scruples, snares, domages and dangers: wherewith their minds, goods,
names, bodies, souls, and all are now entangled and much incombred, afflicted
and oppressed. Whose eyes I pray God for Christ his sake to open, and by the
means and helps of so many worthy Abners under our Sovereign amongst us, to
reduce all the true subjects and liege people of this kingdom even from Dan to
Beersheba, unto the most wise, blessed, and peaceable government of our David,
by reason of our divisions yet remaining as it were in them: whom we hope God
has anointed and established with his posterity to sit upon this throne, and
reign eftsoons over us as in Jerusalem for ever; when all the enemies of our
peace and state shall by his industry and godly wisdom be brought to one
uniformity and agreement in all points and articles of faith and doctrine, and
a general, true, constant, and continual conformity in Ceremonies, which
only is able to make our England David's Jerusalem, Psalm. 122. and all of us
with our posterity to see the peace of it all the days of our life, so to
continue for ever.

FINIS.

