A Marvelous tidings both Wonders Old and New The Devil is endited if many
men's words be true.
IN all Christendom, Christ's Godspell now is rad
Of man, woman, and child, it makes their hearts glad
Which with shameful syns, before were full sad
O wounders good tidings, if all sayings be true.
It is rad so often, and with soch diligence
That no text is wrested, through raische negligence
Plain declaracions, help much to the true sense
We all have cause to rejoice, if these tydyngs be true.
Now after Christ's rule, all folk do lead their life
They abhor all chydyng, braulyng, fyghtyng, and strife
Great fervent charytie is betwyne man and wife
No worse words then honey comb, sweet heart of gold, most true.
One neybur resorteth fryndly to an other
As though all were kynsfolk, like brother and brother.
Greter love was never betwyne child and mother
This world is no world, if all tidings be true.
It is rather like Heuyn, or pleasant Paradyse
The folk be like Angels, discrete, sober, and wise
If one fall through fraylty, he repentyng more then twyse
Ryseth still a new man, a good Christian and true.
Folk fast, pray, and serve God, not Hipocritically
(Only to be seen of men, for folysh vayn glory)
But from the very heart, the Lord God to gloryfy
Despysyng fond fantasyes, as false things, and not true.
Every body now, in somtrade of living
Does labor for his food, with travel or swetyng
Some dyggyng, some spynuyng, some writing, some redyng
Some geuyng good counsel, like honest folk and true.
They know that they must make, a rekenyng to God
Of their dispensacion, they feere gretely Gods rod
The rich do help the poor, with roast meat or with sod
None lie staruyng in Streets, if all men's tongues be tr^
Great rich men be afraid, least they dye suddenly
Least their goods (after them) be spent in foolery
Least God will call them fools, therefore liberally
They spend much in their life, upon poor folk and true.
They be ready also, somewhat to prysons to send
If any through frayltie, chaunse folyshly to offend
But now Prisons be empty, the world does so amend
There be but.iiii. score and ten in kings benche, it was true*
Of them that be in prison, some be tied with clogges
Some gnaw broun crustes of bred, so^ burnish boones like dogs
Some wysh to fill their gut^s, with catts, ratts, myse, or froggs
Specially this dear year: Now (they say) they will be true.
How many be in Ludgate, and Neugate I can not tell
But they that be abroad, be afraid, I trust well
And fall to wourk lustely, through their exampell
They abhor Clinkerum: They say they will be true.
A man may goo now, over fyns bery fy^de
Without sweard and buckler, without spear or shylde
With an houndred pounds: as safe as with a nylde
In a mysty morning, and by night, if tales be true.
All England and Spayn, all Scotland, and Germany
All France and Ireland, all Denmark and Hungary
Be purged so (I trust) from vice and Idolatry
That the Turk does beghyn to thynk the Godspele true.
The Saracens and Jews (I trust) do now convert
Moved with Godlynes that is in Christians heart
They fere least Chrysts scourge will make their bones to smart
I trust they receive baptyme, and belyue the Godspell is true.
They hire it so discussed by calculacyon
That Doomes day is at hand, if men's speculacion
In Astronomye be true, the worlds transformacyon
Wylbe within.x. years, strange news if it be true.
I (one of.xl. years) thought to provide for age
House for one and twenty year, or some fat personage
Some prebend, deanery, or some vicarage
But now I pas not much, if Astronomers be true.
Yea whither Astronomers, be true either no
Or that general judgment be coming to or fro
This one thing I kno sure, that I shall hence go.
I kno nor day, nor ooure: Nothing is more true.
And douteles, if all men, would be of my mind
We would some better way, for to live here out find
Men should be set awurk, unless they were stark blind
Yea blind should do somewhat, to keep themself true.
Helthy folk lackyng wourk, should resort to a place
With their tools and instruments (as some use to show their face)
Then set awourk, or fed, (of men's favor and grace).
With some common purse, to keep themselfs true
So that it should be a strange thing for to see
Any theft or murder, ever committed to be
As (thanks be to God) folk burn so in charytie
That no knavery reigns, if all men's words be true.
The Devil has been a knave, and has kylde many men
Yea both soul and body, more perchaunse then ten
Now he is endyted, as witnesses my pen
His Quest is empayneld, he is found false, not true.
Here follow the names of the.xii. men that goo upon the Devil.
Genesis iii. i. Paralip. xxi. Job. i. ii. Sapien. ii.
Christ in Math. xiii. and in Luke. viii. Math. iiii.
Mar. i. Luke. xxii. Joan. xiii. and. i. Joan. iii.
Paull to the Ephesians. vi. i. Pet. v. Jacob. iiii.
It wylbe hard to kill, such an immortal knave
He recoueryth so often, though a strong hooste we have
Call in Turks and Saracens, that they also may be saue^
Through Gods help, we may break Satan's head, It is true*
To break Satan's head, of all ways this is one
With the buckler of faith, to resyst suggestion
And strongly to belyue, that Christ's passion
Christ's words and myrakels, all be most surely true*
All Christian Kings, do now their wits bend
Their letters in print to the Turks for to send
With many new testamentes, their blind life to am^n^
For fere of hell fire, I trust it wylbe true.
When Satan the Devil, sees such a great host
Such a sort of christians, to dimtnish his boost
He must needs be compelld, to grant his great strenght ^o^
When his pate is broken, God grant this may be true.
Then the golden world, I trust will com again
That folk may live easyly, without any great pain
Many eggs for a penny, at London I would se fayn
Flesche and fische better chepe, I trust it wylbe true.
All other things good chepe, I trust to se er I dye
Coins, measures, and weyghtes, in good vniformiti^
Through all the world, I trust to se schortely
Onles that diversity does more good, it be true:
Ientyll reder, farewell: Thou knoest part of my mind
There lie in my heart, many such things behind
Which toward the brekyng, of Satan's head I find
That all may be merry, and wise in Christ: It is true.
Io. x. (...) habeo / que non sunt ex hoc on^^ / ^las quoq oportet (...) vocem
(...) audient, et fiet (...) o^ile / et vnus pastoe, Io, xii. ^unc (...) est
mundi huios. Nunc princeps mundi huius ^^icietu^ for^^. Et ego (...) ^etra /
(...) trah^^^ ad (...). Hoc autem dicebat significans, que (...). Printed by
Cornel^s Woltrop dwelling at saint Antonies


