(...).

Or A Kenning-Glasse for a Christian King.

TAKEN OVT OF THE 19. Chapter of the Gospel of Saint John, the 5. verse, in
these words; BEHOLD THE MAN.

And Treated on by William Thorn, Deane of Chichester, and his Majesty's
Hebrew Reader in the University of Oxford.

VEHASENNEH BOGNER BAESH VEHASENNEH. VEELLE-SHEMOTH 3:2. AT LONDON Imprinted by
R.R. for John Harrison, dwelling in Pater-noster-rowe, at the sign of the
Anchor. 1603.

IN DEFENSE


TO THE MOST mighty Monarch, and puissant Prince, JAMES, of England, Scotland,
France, and Ireland, King, defender of the Faith, etc. Grace, Mercy, and Peace
from him, which was, and which is, and which is to come.
I Praesume not (Dread Sovereign) in this praefixed Title, to praescribe
praecepts politic to any Christian Prince, much less unto your Sacred
Majesty. Should I attempt any such argument, it would appear in me Annibalem
Phormio, as the Adage is, and I were much out of mine Element. This is a
project more fitting, so high, and Mighty a Prince, as you are, (...).
Plutarch in his Apopthegms.
and already in that your Kingly Gift to a King most absolutely performed. As
Plutarch said of that very same word: so may we of that your work, (...). What
is it then, which in this Inscription of mine I would so feign insinuate to my
Lord, and King? What but that he always be like himself? that he read
himself as it were, and rule out of his own book? Admit then (most Christian
King) thou surpassedst in perfection (as I pray God thou may) all Christian
Princes upon earth; admit no man remained, whom thou might imitate; August:
on these words; The Just shall see, etc. Psalm. 52.
Ipse Christus tibi remanet; there remains yet for thee The Imitation of
Christ. Behold the man. Lo here is A Kenning-Glasse for a Christian King.
Hom: Iliad 1. Val: Mar: 3.
A Kenning-Glasse for a Christian King. As out of those three verses of Homer
the Author thereof expressed (he said) the very living Image of Jove

(...), and so forth: So this Inscription I extract out of these three words of
John 19.5. The first Book. Deutr. 17.18.19. etc. Luke. 16.2.
John; (...), Behold the man. As thou art a Christian, so is this a Common
Glass to thee (O King) with all other Christians, as in the first Division of
the third general Circumstance of this text, and third distinction I have
de-declared: As thou art a King, so does it (out of thine own mouth) more
properly concern thee; As Well for that a King is to compute unto God for each
Christian soul in his whole Commonweal: as that the Isai. 24.2. Ecclus.
10.2.3. Hiero^: ad Heliodor. Plat. in polit. Regis ad exempu^, etc. Cl. Claud:
de 4. consulat. Henorij.
whole Common-vveale is naturally conformed unto the customs of her King.
And therefore of choice I consecrate it unto thy Christian, and Kingly
calling. Accept then in good part (most Gracious King) this thy poor Scholars
praesent. Christus tibi liber exemplaris est. Ioh. 13.15. (...) Constant. ad
Sanctorum coetum Orat. c. 12. in Eusebius.
I have given thee (says Christ) an example. He is an everlasting example for
thee: Imitate him, and thy subjects will imitate thee. He is a most (...),
Phalereus to Ptolome in Plutarch.
Exemplar states-booke for thee: Read him, and thy Subjects will read thee. He
is a Mirror of Magistrates for thee, A Kenning-Glasse for Kings: assimilate
thy self unto him, and thy subjects will assimilate themselves unto thee.
Chrysostom:
And this is, the Office and use of this Glass.

JAMES the Minor (says one) was very, Ludolph: de vita Jesus Christi, part. 2.
c. 59 Galat. 1.19 frater Jesus Joseph: (...). 20. Eusebius: Ecclesiast: hist: 2.1.
very like Christ in face: and for that cause especially (the said writer
surmizeth) he was called the Lords brother. I dispute not of the one, or the
other, of, or on. It seems he was well seen in this Spiritual Glass: Else
whence in his face are those rays of virtues? his Humility? for he was
called Iacobus Minor Ludolph: as before. So (...) in Damascen.
JAMES the less. His Justice? for he was called (...). Ex Hegesipp: comment.
5. Eusebius. 2.23
JAMES the just. His all manner of virtues? for so I suppose, when Christ said
unto him; Matt. 11.29. James 1.23 James 2.1.4.9. John 2.14.15.
Learn of me, for I am humble and meek: he learned him with humility all
manner of virtues.

Good King, will it please thee to consider not slightly, as did that man in
Saint James his natural face, but seriously thy Spiritual face in this
Glass, as Saint James did? will thou compare, and compose the carriage of thy
whole life accordingly? Thy Greatness must vouchsafe to do then, as this
James the Minor, as this James the Just did: thou must out of thy Justice
distributive go on in Gods name, as thou have begun: thou must, as A just
STEWARD, divide aequallie; to thy self thine own, to the Common weal her
own, to the Church her own, impartiallie, without acceptance of persons:
thou must scourge out all Monopolye-mongers, and such like monsters out of thy
commonweal: as Christ did those Money Changers out of his Church: thou must
suppress all Church-robbing-Christ-robbing Satan's, The English Chronicles in
VV: Rufus. James 1.27 Isaiah. 49.23. August. de Ciuit: Dei. 5 24.25. etc. James
2.8. James. 4.10 Of James of Jerusalem, (...) Eusebius: Hist: Ecclesiast. 2.23.
De Imitat: Christi W: Th: a campis. 3.55. 1. Sa. 15.17 Psa. 82.6.7 Amos 6.12 13.
suggesting thee; So svveete is the bread of Christ: and a dainty food for
Kings. To be a Father unto the fatherless, an husband to the widows, a
Foster-father unto the Church of Christ, Hae tibi erunt arts; -- Here is thy
glory (O King) Si Iustus imperas, if thou fulfill the Royal law.

Out of thy Humility likewise, thou must continually cast down thy self,
and kneel, and Camel thy knees before the Lord thy maker, for thy sins, and
for the sins of thy people: thou must aesteeme thy self so much, and no
more, as God aesteemeth thee; thou must be little in thine own eyes. In short
thou must reject thy many flatterers, that will say; Thou art a God; and
respect thy few friends, that will tell thee; Thou art a man. (...). -- I have
said; Ye are Gods, but ye shall dye like men. This is indeed to be James the
less, this is the way to be James the Great, this is indeed to be James the
Just. Do this, and thou do rightly, Behold the man: do this, and thou do
rightly contemplate Christ. This is that then, which I was so feign to
insinuate unto thee, my Liege Lord, and King, induced hereto, in general, as
your subject, in special, as your Priest, and Scholar: As a Priest in way of
conscience I chose to do this, as knowing Amaziah of old, what he said unto
Amos; O, thou the Seer, go, flee thou away into the land of Judah, and there
eat thy bread, and Prophecy there. But Prophecy no more at Beth -- el. For
it is the Kings Chapel, and the Kings Court. As your Scholar in all
consequence, 1. Kings 1.39.40.
I could not choose but do this; Amidst our great Oxford Hosanna to add my
Aramites cry to, Malco legnolemin chief; Dan. 2.4. 1. Kin. 1.31 Prou: 8.15.
Prou. 21.1.
God save my Lord King James for ever.

Now the very God of heaven, and earth ( in whose hands are Kingdoms, and the
hearts of Kings) confirm your Majesty's Throne, Psalm: 89.36.37.
as the Sun in heaven, and the Throne of your Son, as the Moon for
evermore. Direct your hearts and hands, Psalm. 78.71.72.
that you may seed your people in Jacob, according to the Simplicity of your
hearts, and guide your inheritance in Israel according to the discretion of
your hands: 1. Tim. 6.15. Apoc. 17.14 and 19.16.
and grant you both Grace, and your seed after you, always to have this
Kenning-Glasse before your eyes; Even The King of Kings, and Lord of Lords.

Your Highness most humble Scholar, William Thorn.

(...).
Search the Scriptures. In the 19. Chapter of the Gospel according to S. John,
the 5. verse, it is thus written; And he said unto them, Behold the man.

The 19. ch: of the Gospel according to S. John, the 5. verse, the latter part
of the 5. verse; And he said unto them, Behold the man.

IN these words of holy writ, which now I read unto you (Reverend, Regarded in
Christ Jesus) It will please you to observe, and note with me first, The Method.
and generally these three principal circumstances. First the person by whom
they were uttered: Secondly to whom; together with the manner thereof: thirdly
of whom, together with the matter. The particulars that occur (as many there
are) they shall be touched rather then handled in their place.

The first general circumstance.
First as touching the person by whom they were uttered; Some argue by God the
Father Almighty himself, and that it was he that said unto them; Behold the
man: As if he would have said; This man, which you see now standing here in
this pitiful plight, from the beginning indeed was God, of the same divine
essence, and substance, as I am; mine only son, the express image of my
self, being his natural father; And yet behold for you men, and for your
salvation from your sins, I sent him down from heaven to earth; content (as
you see) to clad himself with the mantle of your mortality, instead of the
garment of his own glory. For I have decreed this cup shall not pass away
from him, and my decree shall stand: Lo how I have loved your salvation; lo
how I have loathed your sin.

Or it may be probable rather our blessed Savior said it of himself; As if he
would have said; Behold in what place, and what case I am; a miserable man, a
scorn of me^, indeed a worm, and no man: Consider it is not for my self I
suffer this, but for your sakes; for which to do you good, I will lay down mine
own soul to: only I desire this favor at your hands; crucify not the son
of man again; let it suffize that I be only once offered on the cross for
you, Semelimmolatus est, and so forth. De consecrat. Distinct. 2. Can. semel
Immolatus est.
But the whole current of Interpreters, as also the circumstance of the place
expound it especially as spoken by Pilat, of whom also like mention is made in
the verse next immediately going before; Then Pilat went forth again, and said
unto them; Behold I bring him forth unto you, and so forth: whereunto may be
added the authorities of all translations: In the Syriacke Metaphrase of the
new Testament, and according to that in the correctedst copies of the French,
and Italian, and Spanish Bibles, as also in some English editions the name of
Pilate is praecisely put down Vemar Lehun Pilatus, Metaphr. Syriac. (...).
(...), And Pilate said unto them.

Unto The Second general circumstance.
them? unto whom? For so it follows in the second circumstance I speak a
word, or two, and it shall be but a word, of the persons, or parties, to whom
it was uttered; It was uttered unto the Jews. But is God a God of the Jews
only, and not of the Gentiles also? Romans 3.29.
Yes of the Gentiles also: Tros Rutulusue fuat; all is one. And therefore at
that time alike unto the Jews, and to the Gentiles both, it was aequally said;
Behold the man. But was Christ then Christ, and is he not now? Yes Jesus Christ
yesterday, and to day, Hebr. 13.8.
and the same for ever. And therefore eue^ then this was written also for our
instruction, and we were the men to whom it was said, Behold the man. Yea this
shall be written for the generations to come, Psalm. 102.19.
and the children yet unborn shall behold the man.

Now for the intention of the speaker, and manner of the speech. Origin on
Math. 27.
Origin upon that interrogatorie of Pilate, Math: 27. Art thou the King of the
Jews? Perchance (says he) he asked him deridingly, perchance doubtingly,
perchance axiomatically, or affirmatively. Rupert: on Ioh. 19.
Rupertus the Abbat upon these very words; Behold the man: and again behold
your King, John. 19. Let Pilate say (says he) what he will, let him bear the
simpler sort in hand, that all that he does against Christ, he does against his
will; But ita locuto non credet Romana seueritas: His inner parts are full of
hypocrisy, dissimulation, and mockery. The English Marginals.
Our English Marginals upon the same, and the like places, harp much upon the
same string.

First, if that were true, and were reputed for such a treachery in Pilate;
what shall we reckon of some Christians now a days?
How many are there amongst us (a shame to speak it) even in this noone day of
the Gospel, that make a trade of it to play Pilate, hooding themselves with
hypocrisy like unto that Roman, that never said, that which he thought, nor
never thought that which he said.

Secondly, I defend him not in this action: I praesume the very name of Pilate
is ungracious, and odious in Christian men's ears. Nay I say farther, the whole
process of this his judgment was against al justice. Math. 27.4 Luc. 23.47.
For he condemned him that was innocent and just: against his own science and
conscience to. For he knew of himself, or he had warning else of his wife,
Math. 27.19. and 24.
that he should have nothing to do with that just man. Against the love of God,
for the fear of man. For he was afraid least otherwise he should not be
Caesar's friend, Ioh. 19.12.
or at least wise lest Caesar would not be his friend: and rather then so he
left to love Christ.

Panorm: in pract: istis praemissis.
Yet be-lye we not the devil Si diabolus esset in iudicio vt reus (as it
pleases that great Canonist to instance) if the devil himself were summoned
to the court for this, or that crime, Quantu^ ad hoc, a defense might not be
denied to the devil; how much more may Pilat answer for himself? For if Pilat
of his own inclination had bin so hasty to had done him to death, what needed
he to have used any such vain gloss or praetence? what to please the Jews?
but he knew well enough he could not please them better, then by dispatching
him out of the way; what to collude with the almighty? but he was not ignorant
that God neither uses to deceive, nor to be deceived: Lapides, and ligna
loquuntur. For it was written on the cross with a man's pen: and it was written
in Hebrew, Chrysostom: August. on John the 19.
that the Jews the^ glozing on the law: in Greek, that the Gentiles then
glorying in their wisdom in Latin that the Romans the^ governing the world:
that all the world might know that Pilat acknowledged Christ to be Jesus of Naz:
King of the Jews. For so also when the high Priests would have co^trouled him
Write not King of the Jews, Ioh. 19.21.22
but that he said, I am King of the Jews, Pilate answered; what I have
written, I have written. Chrysostom: on this place.
Ideo enim Pilatus scripsit quod scripsit, quia dominus dixit, quod dixit. I
conclude therefore both by these, and other Scriptures, as also by other
conferences of my text, that in this place it was Pilates intent to have moved
commiseration, and to have set Christ free: And therefore when after the custom
of the Jews he had scourged him, when he had suffered the barbarous
soldiers to make a fool of him, to clap a purple robe on his back, to plat a
crown of thorns on his head, to put a reed in his right hand, to spitte on
him, to smite him with rods; then even then he praesented him a very
spectacle of calamity to to the cruel hearted Jews; if perhaps by any
miseries, by any means they might relent, and he said unto them; Behold the
man; As if he would have said, if you be good men have mercy of this innocent
man: August: on this place.
or if you be men take some pity of a man: Etsi Rege^ inuidetis (says
Augustine) parcite, quia subiectum videtis: and if heretofore you enuyed him,
whilst you said he was a king, yet spare him now at length, since you see him a
subject, nay an abject man: Feruescit ignominia, frigescat inuidia.

O the ineffable operation of the Almighty, even in the hearts of infidels,
Chrysostom: all along.
that the wife of a Ge^tile should see in her sleep, which the whole nation of
the Jews could not see being awake: that the Gentiles should be more
compassionate to Christ-ward, then the Jews: that Pilate a Pagan should be the
first proclaimer of that, which was prophesied so long ago; Ne corru^pas tituli
inscriptionem: that it could not sink out of his head, but that this man (a
man unlike enough as they had made him) must needs be that same Jesus of
Nazareth king of the Jews.

Doubtless as Pilate wrote this inscription, or title in the Cross with his
own hand writing: so was it written before also in the heart of Pilate, though
he wist not when, even by the finger of that truth her self, Ioh. 18.38.
of who^ he asked her, what she was? And I am persuaded it shall be easier for
Pilate in the day of doom, then for those peremptory Jews; for they Maius
pecatum habent. Ioh. 19.11.
Nay I pray God Pilate do not rise in judgment with many of us Christians,
and condemn us then justly, as then he did Christ unjustly: for he
certainly would willingly not have condemned him: but we day by day, like
those reprobate Jews, do wilfully cry, as they did unto Pilate, Ioh: 19.15.
so we to our sins, crucify him, crucify him.

The third general circumstance.
Thirdly to leave the persons by who^, and to whom it was spoken, together with
the manner of speaking; the person of whom it was spoken, was Christ; the
matter was this, Behold the man. And first, Behold. The first division of the
third general circumstance the first distinction.
Which word in holy Scripture has diverse and sundry significations: but I
encomber not your ears with unnecessary notes. Only I content you with this
alone observation of S. Bernard; Bernard on Math. 19. Behold we have forsaken
all etc. 27.
Whenever you read this word Behold, mark then (says he) there always
ensues some important matter: it is one way or other a watchworde to a wonder.
Behold a virgin shall conceive, and being forth a son, Pele. Esa. 7. and 9.
and you shall call his name Admirable, or Wonderful, Esaias. 7. and the.9. The
first division of the third general circumstance: the second distinction.
Irenaeus contr: Haer: Epiphan in panario. August: adquod vult: all along.
Eusebius Cyrill every where.


Secondly behold a man, not a God only as Simon, and Cerdon, and Marcion
maintain; but a man; Not an aethereall man, passing through with a trice,
through the womb of the woman, as Valentine, and Bardisan, and their pew
fellows have plaide; but a man indeed. Not without assumption of human
flesh subsisting as Eutyches excepts; Not without a reasonable soul assisting,
as Apollinaris avouches: Cic de not: deor. 1.
Not as the Epicure would have it, Non corpus, sed quasi corpus, Not as having
a body, but as it were a body: Non sanguis, sed quasi sa^guis, not a soul, but
as it were a soul: Not a fantastical body, nor a kind of spiritall blood,
but a true, natural, and substantial body, Creedes Nicen: Athanas.
and blood: flesh of her flesh, and bone of her bone: Very God of very God, and
very man, of very man, consubstantiall to God his father, as touching his
divinity, and consubstantiall to Mary his mother as touching his inhumanation,
or humanity.

Theodoret Cyrens: (...): out of the rest of the fathers at large.
Or is it possible, (think we) that it was his passible humanity, that raised
Lazarus from the dead? or that it was his impassible divinity that lamented
Lazarus when he was dead? or that it was his humane poverty, that with five
Barley loaves, and a few fishes fed so many thousand? or that it was his rich
omnipotency that fed on a Fig Tree? or that it was the aeternall and
incorporeall word, which in that strange agony swet water, and blood? whose
very soul was heavy unto death? that in the hour of his death, and horror of
his heart, cried Eli, Eli, my God, my God? No, no, that was the son of Mary,
and as he was the son of Mary, as say Gelasius, and Gregory; or that it was
his mortal, and massy body that wrought miracles? cast out devils? cured all
men of their maladies? came in at the door, when the door was shut? walked
upon waters as upon dry land? cui venti, tempestatesque obsecundarunt,
commanding the winds peace, and the Seas be still? In a word, that sustained
the world with his word? No verylie, this could not be but the very son of
the living God. Not God only: for then he could not have suffered that; Not
man only: for then he could not have done this. Not God by himself, and
man by himself, as the Quaternionists cavil; C. de summa Trinit: Nos
tradetes. Damascen of the Orthodox faith.
professing indeed the blessed Virgin to be Chrisostocos the mother of Christ
the man, but not Theotocos the mother of Christ a God: Not Christ (I say) Alius
and alius two persons in an vnquoth nature: Vincent: contr: Haer. c. 19. (...).
Athansius in his Creed Greg: Naz: every where.
but Aliud and aliud (as Vincent speaks) two natures in one person: (...) God
and man, homo-deus, and Deus-homo, as the schooleme^ teach.

Of which his holy hypostasis, and extraordinary union very praegnant are those
notable paradoxes of Abulensis, Alphons: Thostat: Abulensis in his Paradoxes.
as he terms them; as that Christ is a Lion which was seen, and which was not
seen; which was heard, and which was not heard; which was known, and which
was not known: as that he was a lamb vberatus, and non vberatus, that was
shorn, and yet came not before the shearer: that bleated and yet did not open
his mouth, that dyed, and yet did not dye: As that he was a Serpent and an
Eagle, that saw and did not see, that heard, and did not hear; that moved,
and did not move; that came again to the place, from which they never went;
that rested, and yet did not rest, that were renewed, and yet were not renewed,
that rejoiced, and yet did not rejoice: for look what he did as man, the same
he did not as God.

But I have strayed somewhat from my text, The second division of the third
general circumstance the first distinction.
and have soared with the Eagle into heaven to seek Christ there, whom S. John
shows me upon earth here: Behold the man.

Behold, I say, and behold him under two forms. First in his own shape: then
in thine own. In his own behold his Majesty: In thine own his misery. In
his Majesty behold the man: Instit: de iur. Not. Gent. and civil. Sed ius.
Not a man but the man. When I say the laws of Solon or Draco (said the most
sacred Justinian) think then I say the civil law of the Athenians: but if I
say the civil law and ad no name of any nation, think then I say, the civil
law of the Romans; as when we say the Poet, and add no name Subanditur apud
Graecos egregius Homerus, apud nos Virgilius. I alter him on little, and apply
it to my text; When I say the laws of Justinian, it is a clear case I say the
civil law of the Romans: but if I say the law, Thorah. Hieron: in prologo
galealo. Deutr. 4.8.
and add no name, know then I say the law of God. For what Nation is so great
(says your Lord) that has ordinances and laws so righteous, as all this law
which I set before you this day? So likewise when I say Esaias the Prophet, or
Elias the man of God, it is plain, I say Esai, or Eli: But if I say (...).
Deutr. 18.15. Ioh. 6.14.
the prophet, or he that Shiloh. Genesis 49.10.
is to come, or Ioh. 19.5.
the man, and add no name, know then I say Christ. For such an emphasis often
times and strength of signification does the Greek article import, (...), as
Epiphan. in panar: libr. 1. Tom. 1. contr: Samarit: Haer. 9.
Epiphanius observes; and that it so does in this place the Syriacke
interpretation does well accord. Ho gabhro. Behold the man; Metaphr: Syriac.
Diog: Laert: in Diogenes the Cynicke.
not a man, but the man. Not such a man, as the Philosopher would not see, when
he said I would see men, and not Pigmees; nor such a man as he saw again, and
would not speak with, saying, O vere phrygiae neque enim phryges. Hom: virg.
I would speak with Men, and not with Beasts; nor such a man, as a Captain
said he saw many, (...), Women, and no men, but such a man, as there are not
many such: Homo perpaucorum hominum: nay such a one as besides himself, there
was never any such; Vere vir, Cic. Tusc. 3
as from whom all virtue deriueth her name: a worthy man, an excellent man,
not such a man amongst a thousand: Quem sese ore ferens? Virg: AEneid. 4.
quam forti pectore et armis?
Creed equidem (nec vana fides) genus esse deorum.
Degeneres animos timor arguit. --


But thou art beautiful my love as Tirzah, A Salomonicall description of the
Majesty of Christ, as united, and communicating with his Church Cant.
throughout: Dan: 7. and 10. Apoc: 1. and 19. Chapter Vultum habens venerabile^,
etc. Ludolph: in prologo de vita Christi.
comely as Jerusalem, terrible as an army of banners: Thine head is an head
of many crowns of gold, thy bush purple, thy locks curled: Thy hair of thine
head like a flock of goats looking down from Gilead: Thy temples within thy
locks as a piece of a Pomegranate: Thy face as the lightning, shining as the
Sun shines in his strength: Thy nose as Lebanon, thy countenance excellent
as the Cedars; Thine eyes as the Doves; O turn away thine eyes from me, for
they overcome me; Thou have washed them with milk in the Rivers of Heshbon:
Thy cheeks as the Rose, as a bed of Spices, and sweet flowers: Thy lips
as the Lillies, as a thread of Scarlet, dropping Honey: Thy mouth as sweet
things; O kiss me with the kisses of thy mouth, thy love is sweeter then
Wine; Honey, and Milk are under thy tongue: Thy teeth like a flock of sheep
going up from washing: Thy neck as the Tower of David, a thousand Shieldes,
and Targets hang thereon: Thy body like a Chrysolite, and thy stature as a
Palm tree: Thy breasts as two young roes on the Mountains of Bether: Thy
belly like White Iuory covered with Saphites: Thy navel as a round Cup full
of Grace, and running over: Thy loins are girt about with a girdle of Gold,
of the Gold of Vphaz: I have compared thee o my love to the troop of Horses
in the charets of Pharaoh: Thine arms like polished brass thrice purified in
the Furnace; thine hands as the ringes of Gold set about with Tharshish: On
thy thigh a name enwritten, the King of Kings and Lord of Lords, and the
Joints of thy thighs as Jewels: Thy legs as Pillars of Marble set upon
sockets of pure Gold: Isaiah. 52. Nahum. 1. Romans 10. Ps. 45. Hebr: 1.
thy feet, O how beautiful are the goings of the feet of thee, that bring
glad tidings of peace? Thy whole Christ anointed with oil of gladness above
thy fellows: All thy garments of flesh, redolent with Myrrh, Aloes, and
Cassia out of the Iuory Palaces: whiles the King is at his repast, my spiknard
gives the smell thereof: my whole well-beloved is as a bundle of Myrrh unto me,
as a cluster of Camphire in the vines of Engedi.

-- Quem non, vt caetera desint,
Forma mouere potest? certe mea pectora mouit.
O that thou were as my brother, sucking the breasts of my mother, Cant:
8.1.1.12.
that I might find thee within, and kiss thee with the lips of devotion,
and embrace thee with the arms of love: thou should lie between my breasts.

I might seem here much to mistrust your wisdoms, if I misdoubted at all,
lest in this description of Christ you might mistake my meaning, and take him
in such material sort, as the words do sound: But I speak unto you that
have a more spiritual understanding, and that can judge of more then I can
say. Only this I say, and it stands with good reason to, and the Scriptures
of God do not gainesay; but that the The complexion of Christ white, and
ruddie. Cant 5.10. Front habens cum facie sine ruga^^ sine macula; quamrubor
moderatus venustauit ex Annal: Roman: Ludolph: in prologo de vita Christi.
complexion of this man might be all white and well-colored, as being of a
more tender and delicate flesh then we are: but that the symmetrie and
lineaments of his body might be of a more better and aequall proportion; as it
is written; he increased in wisdom, and stature and grace, and favor with
God, and man: Luc. 2.52.
Gratior et gratiosior as Zanchie notes. Zanch: upon that place.
But it is another beauty that I now speak of, and above all the beauty of the
Kings son is all glorious within: within, I say, there within are those most
peerless, and matchless virtues and beauties, which never yet, nor David,
nor Daniel, nor Solomon, nor John Baptist, nor any tongues of men, nor Angels
could sufficiently adumbrate, or express. Return then, Cant: 6.12.3.11.
return O Shulamite return: return I say return, and behoulde my
wellbeloued, behoulde my Lover (O Daughters of Jerusalem.) This is that King
Solomon with his Crown, wherewith his mother Crowned him in the day of his
marriage, even in the day of his Majesty.

The second division of the third general circumstance the second distinction.
Hitherto have you beheld (dear Christian brethren) and more hereafter you may
behold this most worthy man, of what Majesty and Excellency he was in
himself: Mean while behold a little of what Misery and Vility he is in thy
self. Diog. Laert: in Diogenes the Cynick.
Diogenes Laertius reports of Diogenes the Cynicke, that he taxed sometimes,
(and in his conceit very prettylie to) certain vain glorious Sophisters,
supposing that wisdom consisted in words; and he taxed them under this
style, that they were thrice men, (...), Thrisemen for thrise-miserable: if
ever any one man were thrice a man, that is thrice miserable, poor Jesus was
that man.

Ezechias as it is storyed in the second of Chronicles, 2. Chron: 29 5.16.
when the Temple of the Lord was profaned by certain wicked persons, he
commanded that first the Temple should be purified, and that then the filth
thereof should be conveyed into the River Cedron. We were (beloved) that
spiritual, and liuelye Temple profaned by Devils, possessed by evil spirits,
even our own infinite evils, and devilish sins: Christ was that clear river
Cedron, sustaining the beauty of heaven with his streams: Into this heavenly
Cedron then were all the pollutions of our earthly man cast. Christ was the
Priest that purged us: the font and basin that dipped us: the water and Hysop
that washed us: the pure fine linen towell receiving the filth of our feet
into it own self, and wiping us clean; In so much that now we are strong,
and he is weak: we are clean, and he is foul: we are white and
rud-colloured, and he has neither form nor beauty: we acquitted from sin,
and he arraigned for sin: we blessed, and he cursed: we repriued, and
himself hanged on the tree: we were all this for him, Isaiah. 53.4 Matt: 8.17
1. Pet. 2.24, etc.
and he was all that for us. Vere languores nostros ipse tulit. But of his
passion anon: Insomuch that the Church her-selfe stands amazed at this so
sudden and strange alteration; and therefore as if he had been grown out of
knowledge, she demands this quaestion; Who is this, Isaiah. 63.1 Apoc. 19.13
who is this that comes from Edom, with read garments from Bezrah? wherefore
do thou (O Lord) wear garments all be spotted, and died with blood, like
unto them that stamp Grapes in the Wine press? this is very strange (me
thinks) to see the son of God in the shape of a sinner, the God of glory
apparelled with ignominy, life her self put to death. Isaiah. 28.21.
-- Heu quantum mutatus ab illo Hectore? His works (as Esaias had good reason to
say) are very strange, and far unlike himself.

And this much I thought good to declare unto you, The third division of the
third general circumstance the first distinction.
as touching the man, first in his own person, then in our own; Each of them
by way of exposition; vt hominem scias, that we might know him to be a man. Now
again by way of exhortation, Behold the man. And that the eye of our faith may
have some certain object, whereon to fix and setle it self; Behold him first
in his life and actions; Secondly in his death and passion; Thirdly in his
session at the right hand of God his father, and intercession. In the actions
of his life behold him with a zealous, yet sober eye of imitation; In his death
and passion, behold him with the eye of Sympathy and compassion; In his
session, and intercession, behold him with the eye of affiance and
consolation. First in his life and actions: Omnis Christi Actio, etc.
The actions of Christ (say the Fathers in general) are a Christians
imitations: August:
The sum of Christian Religion (says Augustine) is to imitate Christ: Christ
himself I inscribe A Kenning-Glasse for a Christian. The Imitation of Christ.
W: Th: Ludolph de vita Jesus Christi. part: 1.16.
A Kenning-Glasse for a Christian; Speculum vitae Christianae. A warrant of
this inscription I have, first out of Gods own mouth; Exodus 25.9.40. Acts.
7.44. Hebr. 8.5. Matthew: 17.5. Matt: 11.29. John. 13 15. Hebr: 12.1.2.3.
Inspice et fac: See, look, and do according to the mirror I showed thee in
the mount: Behold this is my well-beloved son, in whom I am well pleased, Hunc
audite, hear him. Secondly of Christ himself, Discite a me, look upon me,
learn of me: I have given you (says he) an example. Thirdly the Apostles all
exhort; Aspicite, look, consider Christ, how he endured the Cross: run with
patience the race, which is set before you: Look upon Jesus the author and
finisher of your faith. Art thou then (O man of God) affected zealouslie to be
a Christian indeed? August: de vitae Christiana. Bernard in his Sentences.
no longer to usurp the name of a Christian? Lo here then a Kenning-Glasse
to thy hand; Behold this man; mark well the face of his life; compare, and
compose the countenance of thy conversation accordingly. Art thou then (for
example and instance) art thou ambitious, and proud? pompous? insolent? of
much attendance? Look upon him, and wonder at thy self Rex fieri noluit.
August:
He refused to be a King, or his whole train and retinue was one poor man,
and a weak woman, Joseph and Mary, -- ijdem parentque iubentque. Have thou
with Lucifer said in thine heart? I will ascend into heaven, Isaiah. 14.13.
and exalt my throne above the stars of God: I will enthronize my self upon
the mount of the congregation in the sides of the North: I will be like the
most high. Look upon him and wonder at thy self: Psalm: 88.3.
My soul (says he) draws near unto hell: I am in the midst of you, as the
meanest of you: Psalm: 22.6.
a man and no God: a worm and no man: Psalm: 131.1.2.
mine heart not haughty: mine eyes not lofty: I am in my self as a wayned
child: Lord who is like unto thee? Have thou with Antichrist, and Atheists,
and many false Christ's advanced thy self an adversary against all that is
God? 2 Thessalonians: 2.4.
Have thou sat as God, in the temple of God, vaunting thy self that thou were
God? Philip. 2.6.7.
Look upon him and wonder at thy self: he, when he was in the form of God,
aequall with God, humbled himself in the habit of man unto the death, even
the death, of the Cross: Gave unto Caesar, Matthew: 22.21. On Job. 41. Greg.
moral: 34.21.
that which was Caesar's, and unto God that which was Gods, and this he did, Vt
superbum non esse hominem doceret humilis Deus. Art thou auaritious and
covetous? joining house to house, Isaiah. 5.8.
and land to land? still gaping after Gold, Ecclesiasticus 31.8.
and heaping up money and treasures? Look upon him: Pauper esse voluit, August:
he would needs be a poor man: he neither had, nor would have any such thing:
nor silver, nor gold: nor house, nor land: Math: 8.20
not an hole to hide his head in* Godliness was unto him great riches. Art
thou luxurious, and lecherous? a glutton? a drunkard? feasting and feeding thy
self without fear? overcome by thy body? Iud: 12.
Ecclesiasticus 47.19.
and bowing thy loins unto women? Look upon him: his hunger, Math: 4: his
thirst, John 4: his only meat, and drink, John 4.34.
to do the will of his father which is in heaven: his Father knew no woman:
his Mother was a Virgin: himself abhorred generation of man. Job. 41.10.11.
Art thou as the Leuiathan in Job? thy mouth as fire, thy nostrils as the
smoke? in ire? in envy? revenging thine enemies? repining at thy friends?
still breathing out threatenings, and slaughters? Look upon him, and wonder at
thy self: Isaiah. 53.7
As a Lamb before the shearer, he opened not his mouth; he envied none: Math:
5.22
pitied all he that is angry with his brother (says he) is culpable of
Judgment.

In fine, art thou devoted to delicacie? Amos. 6.4.
set upon sloth? lying upon Beds of Iuorie? and stretching thy self upon thy
bed? Look upon him and wonder at thy self: he walked the world over: from
city to city: from one region to another: he preached: he prayed: he
iourneyed, and was weary in his iourneyes: I will say all at once, W: Th: de
Camp: De Regia via Sancta crucis.
Tota vita Christi crux est; and inconsequent it were, that under Christ our
head of thorns we Christians should pamper so delicate bodies. Thou see now
(good Christian) I am sure, with how many foul and ougly spots of mortal
sin thy soul is stained. The office and end of a Kenning-glasse (thou may
well conceive) consistes not so much in Kenning the deformities of the face, as
in correcting them. He that fansifieth himself cured with hearing a Physician
talk only, is like one of those idle hearers, whom Saint James admonished,
James 1:22.
that they should be Doers also, and not hearers only, deceauing themselves:
and he that imagines he has done away the spiritual spots of his face
with behoulding them in this looking-glass only, is like that man in Saint
James, James 1.23.24.
that beheld his natural face in a Glass, and considered himself, and went
his way, and forgot immediately, Dion: Carth. in Speculo Amatorum mundi.
what one he was: non sic impij, non sic itur ad astra: away, away with such
vain speculations: examine rather the matter aright: James 1:25.
look well in this perfect law of liberty: run from Christ to thy self,
Isaiah. 1.16. Apoc. 7.14.
and again from thy self to Christ: Wash thee: make thee clean: Wash white
thy stole, nay thy soul and body in the blood of the Lamb. Greg:
Speculasu^ (says Gregory) in quibus animae sa^ctae se^per aspiciunt. The face
of Christ is a glass which the Saints of God do view, and reuiew, that when
ought in themselves is amiss, they may reform it. Compare then the pride thou
see in thine own face with Christ's humility: thy covetousness with his
contentednes: thy luxury, and prodigality in meats and drinks with his
parsimony, and chastity: thine anger with his amiablenesse: thine envy with
his innocence: thy laziness, with his labors: thy vices with his virtues:
compare them I say, and conform thee: that in opposition to that veil one
Moses face thou may also say, 2. Cor. 3.18
I see in a glass the glory of God with open face, and am conformed and
transformed into the same image from glory to glory. Chrysostom:
Etenim ad hoc vtile est nobis speculum, et facilem facit transpositionem

All this notwithstanding some other Anthropolatrae there are (as the Emperor
in his Code records of Nestorius) that commit Idolatry with me^, C. de Summa
Trinit: Nos re^dentes. C. de Haeret: and Manich damnato. Qui cunque.
that make mirrours of men: some of themselves, and some of others. Of
themselves; such are they, that Narcissus like are in love with themselves,
Acts. 36.37. Origin in his first book against Celsus. Joseph: (...): 20.2
Eusebius. 2.14
Theudas amongst the Jews, Judas amongst the Galilaeans, Dositheus amongst the
Samarians, each of them professing himself (...), some miraculous man at
least, and the last persuading himself to be Christ: such was Demetrius the
son of Demetrius, 1. Match. 10 72.
go ask (said he to Ionathas) and learn who I am. (...): Quam pulchru^ est
digito monstrari, and dicier hic est? and such a one I suppose he was,
strouting up and down, and gazing on himself; Is not this great Babel, Dan.
4.27.
that I have built for the house of my kingdom, and for the honor of my
majesty? such and such like men are as those glasses of women, Isaiah 3.23
by which the daughters of Sion decked themselves, frail, and fickle. Would
God our Ladies of England, after the example of those ancient matrons of
Israel, could be content to correct their Glasses by Christ our Glass, and to
consecrate them to the making of the Lauer of Gods Tabernacle. Exodus: 38.8
Onkelus. and Kimchi. Matthias Illyricus.
Some others make others Glasses to them selves, they commit (as I said)
Idolatry with men: such a wicked Idolatresse was that wretched woman of
Samaria, John 4.12.
saying unto Christ; art thou greater then our father Jacob? Such were the
Jews; John. 8.53.
art thou greater then our father Abraham? whom make thou thy self? Such
were some of the Pharisees; be thou his disciple, John. 9.28.
the disciple of Christ, if thou will, as for us, we are Moses disciples: And I
am of Paul, 1. Corinthians. 1:12.
I am of Apollos, I am of Cephas: I am of the rule of S. Francis, I am of the
order of S. Dominick, the Canons of their lives must be the rules for mine: --
O i. mitatores stultum pecus. Good Christ what is it not thou that have the
words of aeternall life abiding with thee? John 6.68.
then whither do we run from thee? Is it not thou that art the way? John
14.6.
Then why do we not walk in thee? Is it not thou that art the truth? then why
do we not believe in thee? Is it not thou that art the life? Ambr:
then why do we not live in thee. Omnia habemus in Christo (says Ambrose) and
Christ is all in all unto us. If thou fear death, he is life: if thou fly
darkness, he is light: if thou affect heaven, he is the way: he is the way
inviolable the truth infallible, the life everlasting. And neither yet do I
condemn here any due aestimation, or Imitation of Saints, Nay I commend it
rather, and charge you to; The imatation of Saints. Hebr. 13.7. Chrysostom:
Ludolph: de vita Christi part: 1. c. 66
Imitamini fidem ducum vestroru^, Imitate the Saints of God. Speculum est, and
spirituale, So many Saints (says Chrysostom) so many Seeing-Glasses has a
Christian: Isaiah. 51.2.
consider Abraham your father, and Sarah that bare you: Romans 4.12.
walk in the steps of their faith: James. 5.10.
Take (my brethren) the Prophets for an ensample: 1. Match: 2.51.
Call to remembrance (my sons) what acts our Fathers did in their times, so
shall ye receive great honor, and an everlasting name: you have read the James
5.11.
long patience of Job, and have heard what end the Lord made. The way (some
say) to provoke Elephants to fight, 1. Math: 6.34.
is to show them the blood of Grapes, and Mulberies: The blood of so many
Saints, of Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, co^fessors, Virgins, Men,
Women, children, what recreant would it not whet unto battle? 1. Corinthians: 4.9.
Ecce factisumus spectaculum (says one of the Apostles in the name of all) we
are made as so many spectacles, and gazing stocks unto the world, and to the
Angels, and to men. Th: a Ca^pis de exemplis Sanctorum patrum. Terent: in
Adelph.
Intuere sanctorum, and so forth. See, (says another) the examples of the
Saints: Denique inspicere tanquam in speculum vitas hominum iubeo. And this to
what end? or why were these things then related of them? Romans 4.23. etc. Romans
15.4.
or why do I now repeat the^ to you? Surely not for them but for us, that we
also through patience, Chrysostom: Greg: Collect. Saint Michael, and all Angels
all Saints day.
and consolation of the Scriptures might have hope, and so directing our lives
according to their good ensamples, may finally attain also those Palms, and
crowns of life, for which they combatted unto death. Imitate then on Gods name
the Saints of God, but this must thou do, A limitation of the Imitation of
Saints. Th: Aquinas on the 15. of the Romans. 1. Cor. 11:1 August: in ps: 39.
Hieron.
not at all times, nor in all things: imitate me (says Saint Paul) as I
imitate Christ, so far and no farther. For does he not imitate Christ, he ers
himself, Iste in eclesia ordo est, this (says Saint Augustine) is the
institution of the Church: virtutes imitamur, non vitia. To particularize a
while. Thou may imitate now the obedience of Abraham, thou may not his
sacrifice: that was then commendable in him, that were now damnable in thee.
Thou may imitate the profoundnesse of Moses, the eloquence of Aaron; thou
may not their incredulity: thou may imitate the ardent faith, and zeal
of David, thou may not his adultery, and murder: thou may the
profession of Peter, thou may not his denial with an oath: Thou may the
patience of Paul, thou may not his persecution: thou may the amiable
qualities of the other Apostles, thou may not their ambition: In short the
Saints of God are Seeing-Glasses, I say, and men may see some thing in them but
it is but in part and uncertainly, 1. Cor. 13.12.
as through a Glass obscurely: there are in their several legends and lives
certain beauties (I grant) and splendors of life, but they are but here and
there, and there are spots too.

But this Kenning-Glasse of a Christian that I commend, the one Analysis alone
of Christ his life, In splendoribus Sanctorum ante Luciferum etc. ps: 110.3.
wisd. 7.26 Hebr: 1:3. Coloss 1.15.
is absolutely perfect in it self, pure, clear, spotless, the splendor of
Saints, the luster of the everlasting light, the undefiled mirror of the
majesty of God the influence of the Almighty, and Image of his goodness.
Good Saint Bernard compares this Mirror of Mankind unto that fascicle, or
flower of Myrrh amiddest the breasts of the spouse, Cant. 1.12. Bern: in Cant.
Sermon. 43. Sermon: 47.
and intertexeth his comparison thus: Here is a flower and a Glass, Flos
virginitas, flos martyrium, flos actio bona, A Flower of the Chamber, A Flower
of the Garden, A Flower of the Field: He is a Flower of the Chamber, Speculum
et exemplum, An example and Glass of all bountye, and goodness; he is a
flower of the garden, Virgo virga virgin generatus, even Jesus of Nazereth,
Netzar. Isaiah. 11.1
the flower of Iesse: he is a flower of the field, a Martyr, the crown of
Martyrs, the form of Martyrs. Vtrunque (imo omnia) es mihi domine Jesus, et
speculum patiendi et praemium patientis. Here may thou read at once the
Innocence of Abel, the righteousness of Noah, the obedience of Abraham, the
chastity of Joseph, the mildness of Moses, the feruence of Phinees, the
strength of Sampson, the wisdom of Solomon, the devotion of David, the diet of
Daniel, the patience of Job, the piety of Tobie, the humility of Joseph, and
Mary: he was truly faithful in heart without fayning: humble without
hypocrisy: sober without sowernesse: wife as a Serpent: innocent as a Dove:
stout as a Lion: meek as a Lamb: what shall I more say? Here may thou have
all that which all they have, and here may thou have that, which all they
put them all together, and they had it not. If any man require more in special
to read of this argument, I report him to Ludolphus of the life of Jesus
Christ, to Thomas of Campis of the imitatio^ of Christ, or rather with S.
Augustine to the four Evangelists. August: Ludolph: in prologo.
For that no man (says he) ca^ so thoroughly inform us of the life, and
manners of Christ, as the Gospel of Christ. I for my part must on with my
text, and pass over in a word, which eftsoons I proposed, namely a sobriety
in the imitation of Christ. As we are zealous, so must we be sober: As
therefore in the imitation of Saints, thou may imitate them (I said) but
that nor at all times, nor in all things: so, and much more so, we may, nay we
must, imitate A limitation of the imitation of Christ.
Christ, and that at all times, but not in all things. De consecrat:d st. 2.
Liquido apparet in Glossa.
Non omnis Christi actio nostra est lectio. Every action of Christ is not an
imitation for a Christian. August: S^nt.
Imitatores Christi esse debemus, we must imitate Christ, but we must imitate
him in his mercies, The English Chronicles.
we may not in his miracles: we may not as Bladud a Britain Prince and
founder of the hot Bathes (as they say) make us waxen wings, and fly in the
wind, unless we will break our necks, as he did; yet Christ flies, Ps.
18.10.
and comes flying on the wings of the wind: we may not take upon us to raise
the dead, to turn water into Wine, as profane Necromancers, and iuglers do,
yet Christ said, Exi Lazare, come forth Lazarus, John. 11.43 John. 2.7.8.
and transubstantiated water into Wine in Canah of Galilee: we may not go
about as the God of Norweighe did, John Wier de ietuniis Comment. The Golden
legend.
as Saint Mary the Egyptian, as Pharaoh and his host, to walk on the waves,
to tread the paths of the sea, to do all, that Christ could do, as God. For
most true it is in this, which in another sense, John. 8.21.
whither I go (said Jesus to the Jews) thither you cannot come; and Christ
unto Peter, whither I go, John: 13.36
thou can not follow me. Eccles: 2:12.
Quid est enim homo vt sequi possit regem factore^ suum, August: de verbis
domini: August: in Ps: 90.
as it is in the vulgar Latin translation. He says not (says Augustine) thou
can not be my disciple, thou can not follow me, except thou create a new
world, or walk on the seas, or make the blind to see, the halt to go, the
deaf to hear, the dead to rise again. For these are miracles inimitable for
us, and as it appears in that reply of Christ to Saint John's disciples, Math:
11.4.5. Luc: 7:22.23.
he reserues them as peculiar to himself. Quid ergo est? what it is then that
the eye of thine imitation must aim at in Christ? Christ tells thee himself,
Math: 11.29:
discite a me (says he) quia mitis su^; learn of me for I am humble and meek
be ye, as I am: be ye holy, Leuit: 11.44. 1. John. 2.3.6.
for I am holy: walk as I have walked: keep my commandments: love one
another: hereby shall al men know, John: 13.34.35. August. on the 90. Psalm.
Theodor: de virt: Act.
that ye are my disciples. Quod factus est propter te, hoc in Christo debes
atte^dere, vt imiteris eum: Love and hate that, which Christ loved, and hated,
as he was God, and thou do imitate Christ, as much as a man may imitate
God: do that which Christ did, as he was man, and thou do imitate Christ, as
a Christian ought. Magnus esse vis? August de verbis domini.
a minimo incipe? ambula per hominem, et peruenies ad Deum. To knit up this
point, what blessed Bernards co^ceite was of his fascicle of Myrrh, the same
is mine of this my glass, this was that mirror of man, which the virgin Mary
carried in her womb, the spouse between her breasts, Simeon in his arms,
Zachary in his hand, John in his bosom, Joseph dalied with on his knees. 2.
Cor: 4:10
O that all we, that are Christians, would do the like, Ezeche. 9.6 Galat. 6.17
Bern: in Cant: Sermon: 21.
that we would manifest in our bodies the life of Jesus: that we would mark
our foreheads with the mark of Christ: that we would erect his image in our
hearts aut nasentis, O si Jesus Crucifixus in Cor nostrum veniret. W. Th. a
Camp: De Imit: Christi. L. 1. C. 25.
aut lacte^tis, aut docentis, even from his cradle to the cross: that we would
always contemplate this Kenning-glasse, Christ, and his cross: that we would
carry him in our bosom, and lay him amidst our breasts, Bernard in Cant: Sermon:
43.
and have him always before our eyes, non retro in humeris, sed ante prae
oculis.

Secondly I exhort; The third division of the third general circumstance the
second distinction. Innocent. de sacro Altaris mysterio. Libr. 5. C: 9 Math.
26.28. Marck. 14.33.34.
Behold the man in his death and passion. They that discourse of the passion of
Christ digest it usually into a triple passion: the first they term his
propassion the second, and that most properly, his passion, the third his
compassion: his propassion was in his soul, his passion in his body, his
compassion in his heart. Of his propassion he protests himself; My soul is
very heavy, even unto death: Of his compassion he prays for them that
crucified him, Father forgive them, Luc. 23.24.
they know not what they do: Of his passion he proclaims; O vos omnes, Thron:
1:12. O homo vide, quae pro te patior. Bernard.
Oh all ye that pass by the way, behold and see, if ever any passion were
like this of mine? Of this passion I entreat. And here I shall request all the
sons of Adam to lift up the eyes of their compassion yet a little higher and
to behold the man. Come forth o ye daughters of Sion, Cant. 3:11.
and behold your King, Brethren if we be men (except we be Jews or
Saracens) behold we the man; Which the sun for our sins was ashamed to
behold; the Daughters of Jerusalem wept out their eyes to behold; the dead
corpses in the graves resumed their eyes to behold. Behold I say (O Christian
soul) behold and say Quis ego, et quis tu Domine? Who art thou, and who am I O
Lord? O what heart does not riue and rent in sunder? What hardness is not
mollified? What eyes do not stream with tears beholding such a lamentable
and doleful sight as this is. I see my Jesus all of a gore blood, all his
senses, The expansio^n of Christ one the cross expressed out of scriptures and
holy fathers.
and faculties of body and soul, his parts and whole sorelye smitten; I see
that Angelicke head, at whose presence the very powers of heaven wear wont to
tremble, all to be preaned and pricked through with thorns: I see that Divine
face that was fairer then the children of men, now defaced, and defiled with
the spittle of the Jews; I see those Crystal eyes, once clearer then the
Sun beams, now bloodshed, and cast over with the darkness of death; his
ears once accustomed to the hymns of Angels, must now give ear to the
exclamations of Diuelles; his mouth once full of Butter and Honey to eat, is
now full of Gall and viniger to drink; his feet fastened with Nails to the
Cross, and yet his very soote-stoole, is holy: his hands and arms all
spread, and distreined on the Cross, and yet they framed and fashioned the
Heavens: his whole Man all torn, and wounded with lashes and Whippes: his side
broacht through with a Lance; and his heart blood gushing out on every side.
Et quid plura? From the soale of his foot to the crown of his head he
reserved nothing entire, Ioh. 19.26. The pathos of the blessed Virgin.
save only his tongue therewith to pray for them, that persecuted him, and
commend his Mother unto his disciple; Woman behold thy son. O how may we
conceive? how did the heart of that blessed Mother and Virgin Mary, throb and
beat then within her breast; O how much rather had she, her body should have
gone from her soul, then her son and savior gone out of her sight? O how
willingly would she have eaten the afell gall, which her son did eat, and
drank the sower vinegar, Luc. 24.26.
which her son did drink? and given up the ghost which her son gave up,
save that he must needs die for the sins of the world? Proverb. 31.1.
O my son, and O the son of my womb, and O the son of my desires, O my
son Lemuel, O my son Solomon; finally I cannot express. Then sinful man
that I am, A patheticall exclamation of a paenitent sinner.
who shall deliver me from this body of sin? It is my sin (I see) it is my
sin that slew my Savior upon the cross: my pride the thorns that pricked
him: my gay-garments, and gue-gawes the purple that mocked him: mine hypocrisy
the Ceremonies that blinde-folded him, I was that subtle Scribe, and proud
Pharisee that entrapped him: that covetous Judas that betrayed him: that
enuyous Jew that accused him: that irresolute man-pleasing Pilate that
condemned him: that bloody executioner that hanged him; and yet alas I am even
now ready still, still, to crucify my Christ again.

Out of this triple passion of Christ we Christians are to learn a
three-foulde lesson, a lesson of propassion, A threefold lesson very necesry
for all Christians.
of passion, and of compassion. In our propassion we may meditate in this
manner, and it is in a manner a compassion of Christ; Alack, Alack The son
of God has been crucified for me (miserable sinner as I am) once before, and
why do I thus with sin upon sin daily, Hebr. 6:6.
and hourelye Crucify him again, and make a mock of him? O why should I not
rather Crucify the world unto my self, Galat: 6.14 Rom: 6.6. Ambrose de vnica
poenitent: Dan. 9.4.5.7.9.
and my self unto the world? O why do I thus Luxuriate in the blood of
Christ? O Lord God I have sinned, I have sinned: Righteousness and compassion
is thine (O Christ) and mine is open shame, and confusion: Lament: 1.16.
Lament: 2.11.3:48.
For these things I weep: Mine eyes day and night cast out rivers of tears:
My Bowels swell: my liver is powered upon the earth; Lament. 3.41
And now I lift up mine heart and hands unto thee (O King of Heaven) O Lord
here, Dan: 9.19.
O Lord forgive: O Lord consider, and do it: Have mercy upon me for thine
own sake, even for thy name sake (my God and my Christ) for thy name is called
upon me.

Of our passion we may ponder in this sense with our selves: 1. Pet: 1.21
Quaestionlesse hereunto are we called. For Christ also suffered for us, leaving
us an ensample that we should also suffer for him. Caedi Christianorum est,
(said an holy man) caedere Pilati et Caiphae: Our Savior Christ has drunk
to us already, if we will be Christians we must all pledge him in the same
cup. John. 13.15 Luc: 9.23. Isaiah. 50.6 W: Th: a Campis de Regia via sanctae
crucis.
I have given you (says he) an example: Toll crucem, et sequere me: I have
given my back to the smiters, my cheeks to the nippers, my face as a flint
against spitting, and shame: And the Disciple (you know) is not above his
Master. Math. 10.24.
If therefore you are my Disciples? Take up my Cross and follow me. Luc.
9.2.3. D.D. Carth Amator: Mundi: Speculum.
Dionysius the Carthusian in his treatise entitled a Looking-glass for the
lovers of this world has an excellent saying to this praesent purpose; Nemo
potest venire de festo ad festum.

No man (says he) may have his feast here and his feast there to. If we will
reign there, we must suffer here. 2. Tim. 2.12.3.
Thou therefore suffer affliction as a good Soldier of Christ Jesus.

But as we must suffer, so must we suffer (if the will of God be so) so as he
did; 1. Pet. 3.17
Better it is we suffer for weldoing, then for evil doing. Mori volo (says
Hegesippus) in his 3. book, and 17. Hegesipp: de bello Iudaico. l. 3. c. 17.
Chapt. sed vt Hebraeus: I am content to suffer but as a Martyr, not as a
murderer, or a theife: I am content to be a doore-barred to death, Doroth: de
Prophet: Apost: Septuagint: etc.
but as Amos was: to be sawen in pieces, but as Esaias was: to be stoned, but as
Ieremye was: to be cast to the Lions, but as Daniel: to the Sword, but as
Paul: to the Cross, but as Christ: I would dye, but as an Hebrew, and like a
Christian, and for Christ, and so come when thou will, Salua sancta crux.

Of our compassion we may resolve in like Christian sort, and this we extend
to our crucifiers, Iud. 9:
and exemplyfie thus; The Archangell Michael, when he disputed about the body
of Moses with the Devil himself, durst not entreat him with any cursed
language, but said; The Lord rebuke thee Satan: How is it then that we
against our brethren are so bloudylie bent, to take the staff indeed out of
Gods own hand, Vengeance is mine. Ro^. 12.19. Act: 7.60:
and for every trifle to cry; Revenge? The Protomartyr Saint Stephen, when the
Jews stoned him to death kneeled down, and prayed; Lord lay not this sin
to their charge: how is it then that we cannot learn this lesson of him,
Math: 5.44 Collect on S. Stephens day.
to love our enemies, to pray for our persecutors? The Archangell of all
Angels, and Martyr of Martyrs, our Lord and Master Jesus Christ himself,
when he was reviled, 2. Pet. 2:23
he reviled not again, 2. Pet. the 2 23.
when he suffered, be threatened not again, but committed it to him, Luc. 23.34.
that judges righteously, either praying; father forgive them, they know not
what they do: Zach: 3.2. Iud. 9.
or saying at most; The Lord rebuke thee Satan, even the Lord, that, has
chosen Jerusalem, rebuke thee: How is it then, Coloss: 3.12.13.
that, as the elect of God, holy, and like Christians, we put not on these
bowelles of compassion, of long suffering, of mercies, of kindness, of
meekness, forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, if any man has
a quarrel to another? even as Christ has done, even so do we. The third
division of the third general circumstance the third and last distinction.
O Compass me (sweet Jesus) with this thy compassion.

Thirdly I willed you to behold him in his Session, and intercession, and that
with the eye of affiance and consolation. Numbr. 21.9.
In the one and twe^tith of Numbers, when as the people of Israel were stung to
death for their sins with fiery Serpents, It is written that Moses by the
commandment of God erected a Serpent of Brass for a sign; and when a
Serpent had bitten a man, then he looked up to the Serpent of Brass, and lived.

The signification, or moral of which mystery, Saint John in his Gospel and
third Chapter: does plainly set down. John: 3.14.15.
As Moses lift up the Serpent (says he) in the Wilderness: even so must the
son of man be lift up, that whosoever beholds him and believes on him, do
not perish, but have life everlasting.

Suppose then whole generations of Vipers, all the fierye Serpents of thy
sins enuyron thee on every side: the canker of covetousness frette thee:
the flame of concupiscence burn thee, the prickles of pride stinge thee to
death; straight ways for thy comfort, thou know what thou have to do: make
up by the wing of faith, to that sanctified serpent Christ Jesus, and thou art
saved: the sign of that serpent will easily break this serpents head.

Now I beseech you brethren by the mercifulness of God, attend now unto this
which I shall say unto you, and embrace I pray you this Doctrine of
consolation, A Demonstration of the salvation of Gods Elect.
with a right hand as I entend it you. We read oft-times in the volume of this
book, a certain challenge as it were sent down from that righteous judge
unto all the inhabitants of the earth; If any man durst stand in judgment with
him. Now therefore (O inhabitants of Jerusalem) and men of Judah, Isaiah. 5.3.
judge I pray you (says he) between me and my vineyard; for I will be tried
by your selves. Job. 16.21.
O Lord, Oh if a man might plead with God, O Lord thou art I know a severe, yet
righteous judge, I know, thou know my very heart and reins; yet (if so it
seem good in thine eyes) I, as sinful a man, as I am, even I am content to
enter into judgment with thee; Yea in the name of Christ Jesus I wax confident
and bold, let all the devils in hell accuse me; all their Angels bear true or
false witness against me; mine own conscience condemn me; thine own self,
secundum allegata et probata, proceed in judgment against me; Only let me be
weighed but in a just balance, Job. 31.6.
and I will justify my self before thee, and yet will never appeal from
thee; I will be tried by thine own self. Isay. 50.8. Job. 33.6.
For let me see who will contend in Gods steed with me? Let us stand together:
who is mine adversary? let him come near to me, what can he lay to my charge?
A matter of haughtiness perchance, or an high look? I confess that, and more
toe: But Ecce homo, Behold this man; And so I have recompensed that with the
humility of my Jesus. Some reuelling perchance, or some riot? I grant that too
But Ecce homo: Behold this man: and so I have salued that sore with the
sobriety of my Savior. A murder it may be? or a robbery, or something worse?
be it as bad, as bad may be, my prayer and plea shall always be the same, Domine
Jesus responde pro me, O my Lord Jesus answer for me, and Ecce homo, behold this
man: And why did he die the death but for this: Meshichca. Ps. 84.9.
O look upon the face of thy Christ. Turbatur conscientia, Bernard: in Cant.
Sermon: 61.
non perturbatur, quia vulneru^ domini recordabor; O hide me in the holes of
thy wounds.

I dispute not of the torment and pain of his passion, whether solie in body,
or partly in soul; it is the infinite merit and price of his passion, in
respect of the person or subject that suffered which I speak of; Every drop of
his blood sufficient to had redeemed ten thousand worlds; then whereat shall we
prize the Ocean thereof? Quod libet finitum (they say) Quantumcunque magnum,
Alphons: Thostat: Abulens: paradox: 5.45
in infinitum exceditur ab eo, quod est infinitum: Whatsoever is finite (of
what quantity soever it be) compare it with that which is infinite, and it is
always exceeded infinitely. Collect then all thy sins, whereof thou have, or
may be guilty, from the day of thy birth to the hour of thy death, thy
sins original and actual, thy sins in thought, word, and work: and not
thine own only, but mine, and thine, and the sins of all men upon the face
of the earth: and not of men only but of Angels too: Lucifer I mean and all
his fellow Angels, that fell from heaven: and not of them only, but of
Beelzebub himself and all the damned devils in hell.

Collect (I say) all these three worlds of sin into one head, as they fable
that hellish Dog had three heads on one neck; nay were it possible that
heaven, earth, hell, and all, might be put in the one balance, and the alone
merit of Christ his passion might be poised in the other, they should all
appear in comparison of it, but as a drop of water to the seas, as the earth,
to the heavens, as a very nothing to to the whole world. The sum of all is
this; the mercies of Christ, and merits of his passion are in multitude
innumerable, in magnitude immeasurable, every way invaluable and infinite.

One the other side, the sins of men, though to the understanding of man they
may seem infinite: yet indeed, and in the apprehension of God they are all
finite both in number and measure. Well then Christ has suffered once for all;
1. Pet. 3.18
the just for the unjust: he has paid the price of our sins, Coloss. 2.14
and why should we be sued in the law? He, my surety, has cancelled the hand
writing on the cross, he has made full satisfaction already, and why should
I, the debtor, make restitution again? It is against all law, and reason in
the world, civil, Canon, common law and common sense too, that there should
be two adaequate penalties inflicted for one, F. de Reg: iur: l: bona fides.
Innocent: de sacro Altaris mysterio. 4.41.
and the same fault. Bona fides non patitur, vt bis idem exigatur. There is no
such iniquity with men, and shall we say there is more unrighteousness with
God? God forbid. The conclusion of the whole with Application. Romans 8.1. Romans
8.33.34.35. Jesus adest, totum bonum est. De familiari amicitia Jesus. W. Th: a
campis.
Quia ergo Iustus unjust punitus est, Iniustus just sum liberatus.

My conclusion is then, there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ
Jesus. It is my Jesus that justifies me, and who is he that can condemn me?
It is my Christ that dyed for me, or rather that is risen again, and has his
session at the right hand of God, and makes Intercession for me; and who
shall separate me from the love of Christ? 2. Tim. 2.19.
In a word the foundation of God remains sure and has this seal; The Lord
knows who are his; and (as it is aeternally continued in this indissolluble
chain) Whom once he knows, Romans 8.29.30.31. etc.
he also praedestinateth, and whom he praedestinateth he calls, and whom he
calls he iustifyeth, and whom he justifies he glorifieth.

What shall I then say to these things? If God be on my side, who can be
against me? He has given his own only son for me, and how can he not
give with him all other things unto me?

As I said before, so say I now again. The foundation of God remains sure,
and has this seal: The Lord knows who are his. 2. Tim. 2.19
Yea I know (and I hope to praesume thus of the grace of God is not pride in
me, but faith) I my self know that my redeemer lives, and that Christ is
mine, Job. 19.25.
Vsurpo mihi ex visceri bus Jesus mei: Bern: in Cant: Sermon: 61:
and that the Righteousness of Jesus is my Righteousness, and therefore if
Christ be saved, (which who dares doubt?) I hope I am as sure I shall be saved
with him, as that I am in this place. (...). etc. Rom: 8.38.39.
Yea verily I am persuaded (and it is the spirit of God, that tells me so
within) that neither life, nor death, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor
powers, nor things praesent, nor things to come, nor persecution, nor famine,
nor plague, nor Spaniard, nor Pope, nor Devil, nor any other creature, nor all
the world shall ever separate me from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus
our Lord.

This is my doctrine of consolation, this my demonstration of faith: Against
this the gates of Hell shall never praeuaile, and the gates of Heaven cannot
stand shut.

One little more yet of your patience, and I will only commend this one
history unto your good remembrance, and so recommende you unto God. The story
is of Pilate. It is registered by Matthew of Westminster and others, that when
Pilate was conuented before Tiberius Caesar, The golden legend in the passion
of Christ.
for that he had done to death this innocent man, he put on the coat of
Christ, which was (as you read) without seame; At the sight whereof the
Emperor, who was otherwise much incensed, arose unto him, saluted him, and
every ways kindly entreated him. Anon, when Pilate again with his good
leave was departed, Tiberius again was enraged more then ever before: he
swears if ever he took him again Quod filius mortis esset, there should be
but one way with him, and sends out a fresh his Pursyuantes for him. Pilate
again returns unto him: Tiberius eftsoons instead of what he would do,
falls to embracing of him, and had not the power to speak as much as one hard
word to him. All that were there did wonder at it, and Tiberius himself did
wonder at it; and if it be true, I wonder at it too; and so may all you. But
the legend it self says this is no gospel; yet mark mine Application. We
have all, even the very best of us all, we have all played Pilate, we have
crucified, and crucified again the Lord Jesus; the time will come, when we must
come to account for this; not as Pilate did, before Tiberius Caesar an earthly
Emperor, but before the King of Kings, Apoc. 19.16.
and Lord of Lords, the God of heaven and earth: we shall be able then, as of
our selves, to answer no more for our selves, then Pilate was then, not one
for a thousand. What remains then, but that again we play Pilate? But that
we put on upon us the coat of Christ? It will be that at the sight thereof
that just God, who is angry with us, will be well pleased with him, and for
him with us. If I may but touch his vestture only, nay if I may but touch the
outmost fillet or hem of his vesture, (...), said the woman then sick of our
Now-disease I shall be safe. Matthew. 9.20.21. Then reigned the bloody flux in
England.
But it is given unto us, not to touch his vesture only, but to handle it, and
take hold of the whole cloth to; and not that only, but to put on to, Rom:
13.14 Galat. 3.27. Ephesians. 4.24. etc: Qui amplectitur Iesum, firmabitur in
aeternum. W: Th: a Camp: De Amore Jesus. Isaiah. 43.2
not the coat, but Christ, to be invested in him, in corporate, and infleshed
in him, imbossomed in him, even to dwell in his bosom, as he dwells in the
bosom of his father Gremioque in Iasonis haerens Per freta longa ferar, nihil
illum amplexa verebor. I, my soul, shall paste with thee through the waters of
destruction, and they shall not drown me: through the fire of Gods judgment,
and it shall not burn me: I will fear no evil for thou art with me. Ps.
23.5. Tephillah le Thoren.
Now I pray God give me grace, that when this soul of mine shall return to
God, that gave it, it may couragiouslye mount up out of this earthly
tabernacle, and take hold of this ancker of hope, with the same resolution,
and confidence, as I now preach it unto you. The English letanis.
And I beseech thee (sweet Jesus) even by thine Agony and bloody sweat, by
thy cross and passion, by thy glorious Resurrection and Ascension, and Session
and intercession at the right hand of God, when in that dreadful day of
Judgment, he shall preasse me with this, or this, or this enormitie, that then
thou would praesent thy self unto thine angry father, in such fresh and
bleeding wise, as thou were on the cross, and plead for me, Isaiah. 43.^
and say, Father, Ecce Homo: Behold I am the man: I have redeemed him: I have
answered for him: He is mine, Amen, Apoc. 22.20. Attah Tagnanch. Ps. 38.15.
Luc. 23.46.
Even so come Lord Jesus: It is thou, it is thou that have answered for me O
Lord my Christ. Father into thy hands I commend my spirit. A Christians
expiration. Acts. 7.59. Number. 6.24.25. etc.
Lord Jesus receive my soul.

The Lord bless us, and keep us: the Lord make his face shine upon us, and be
merciful unto us: and lift up his countenance upon us, and send us peace.

^. Corinth: ^3.13.
The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communion of
the holy Ghost, be with us all evermore. Amen.


