THE DEFENSE OF JOB Throkmorton, against the slanders of Master Sutcliffe,
taken out of a Copye of his own hand as it was written to an honorable
Personage.

Proverbs 20.6. The taulke of th'vngodly is how they may lay wait for blood:
But the m^^th of the righteous will deliver them.

Proverbs 29.20. See thou a man that is hasty to speak unadvisedly? There
is more hope of a fool then of him.

Proverbs 30.14. There is a generation whose teeth are as swords, and their
jaws as knives to devour the poor and afflicted from the earth.

1594.

The defense of Job Throkmorton, against the slanders of Master Sutcliffe.
GOOD Madame, I think my self much bound unto your La. that you would
vouchsafe to make some pause, and to suspende your judgment before you passed
any absolute verdicte against me. It is much I confess in this swift
censuring and prejudicial age of ours, wherein men's wills and affections
stand for statutes. Seeing then you are so desirous to know the truth, I will
not (I assure you) hyde any thing from you that I can call to mind. And how
so ever for want of memory (things being passed so long ago) I may happily
fail in some words, time, or circumstance that are not material. I dare
auowe unto your La. that for the substance of the thing it self there is no
untruth in it at all: But even that which I will justify upon mine oath, if
I should be thereunto called before the Parleament, or before the Lords, which
for my better clearing herein (being by this false and slanderous accusation
so much injured as I am) is the thing I do desire: protestinge unto you, that
I was so far from being acquainted with any of the lewd practices of
Hacket and his accomplices, (as Master Sutcliffe and the Pretended Conspiracy
would seem to insinuate) that I do not remember that ever I did so much as
see the man above once in my life.

As for Copinger (though I confess, I had heard of him before by my cousine
Middlemore, that dead is, who had in part discried unto me the humor of the
man, and the sickness of his brain) yet the first time that ever I saw him,
or had any acquaintance with him, was on a Sabbath in Hillarie teaime before
his fall 1590. At which time meeting him at the Black friars in the after
noone, when the Lecture was done, he called me aside, telling me that he would
gladly speak with me, that his name was Copinger. I asked him what kin he was
to Master Ambrose Copinger that served sometime the Earl of Warwike, he said,
his own brother, I told him I loved him the better for that. And so he would
needs draw me on with him to his lodging.

By the way, as we went, he asked me sundry questions concerning my trouble,
and the matter of my endightment, and how I spedde. I told him, I hoped well,
the rather because mine own heart was a witness to me of mine innocence. And
then he fell from that to other matters, wherein he made me remember my cousine
Middlemore his words: for me thought he began to talk something wildly and
strangely of th'ouerthrow of the BB. and th'expelling of dumme ministers all at
one clappe, with sundry other reeling vagaries without sense, whereof I can
not now call to mind every particular. But this among the rest I well
remember, that he told me he was in good hope, ere it were long, to bring my
L. Treasurer about to like of his devise, ^^to which effect he said, he had
written to his Honor of late, and looked for answer shortly, unto all which
(musinge with my self that he would thus boldly rushe upon these matters,
especially to a man that he never saw before) I said little, Only I
wished that in so great and weighty affairs as those, he would be sure of his
ground and warrant before he attempted any thing, and do nothing of his own
head without th'advise of those that were wise and feared God. I warrant you
(says he) I will be sure of my ground: I will look to that.

When he came to his lodging, he told me it was a day of private fast with
him, and therevppon was very importunate with me to have prayed: which when I
refused, because (as I told him) I would be loath to take any such thing in
hand upon a sudden without premeditation, he casting me a cusshen to kneel
on, fell him self to pray after his manner: a thing wherein my Cousine
Middlemore had told me before he took a singular delight, having some
conceit and opinion of his gift that way.

Loath I am (my good Lady) to be an ouerswift and hasty censurer of any man's
prayer, especially in this cold and profane age of ours, wherein men let not
blasphemouslie to scorn and deride, as it were, the very gifts and graces of
Gods spirit. But, if I shall tell you simply and plainly what I think, this
prayer of Master Copingers (though it were full of outward zeal and
fernentnesse, if not too fervent, because he used many of these ohes, loud
sighs and groninges, when as I conceived the matter in weight, did nothing
answer those patheticall outcries) was not, me thought, squared after the rule
of knowledge, neither in method, matter nor manner, nor yet savouring of that
humility and discretion, as were to be wished in so zealous a professor as
he made show of. It was very long and tedious, pestered with many impertinent
discourses and needless repetitions of one and the same thing, stuffed and
enterlarded with sundry bitter imprecations, about which he and I had no small
ado, and some hot bickering within a while after. But the issue was, that
having caught some cold, and being nothing well before, this long kneeling
and late tarying in that snowie and frostie season, did not help any with to
diminishe, but rather to increase my grief, and brought me to a fit of an
ague.

Not long after this, when I had something recovered my self, I went to visit
Master Cart. in the Fleet, unto whom I signified what had passed betwixt
Master Copinger and me, and of the new acquaintance that he would needs
fasten and enforce upon me. But he bade me in any wise beware and take heed of
him, for he feared him greatly that certeinlie all was not well with him, and
that he had That is, some crazing of the brain.
laesum principium, at the least, telling me how feign he would have
propounded and fastened some of his fooleries and fantastical revelations
upon him. But (says he) I have returned him such an answer, as I believe he
will not greatly like of, neither seek to me in haste again for resolution.

After this having been in the country, when I came up again to London,
Master Copinger meeting me in the streets, told me that he had been sundry
times at my lodging to seek me, but now I was come, he would visit me one of
these days, and thereupon would needs know of me when he should be sure to
have me within. I told him I had much business, and therefore could not well
set him down any certain time, but seeing I was a Legier here, there would
be time enough to meet before the Term were done. But he not satisfied
heerewith, did not give over, in a manner day by day, yea and sometimes, as I
understood, three of four times a day, to seek me at my lodging. Now
perceiving belike that I did as much as in me lay, of purpose to shun and
avoid him (as in deed upon the warning of Master Cart. and the former speeces
of my Cousine Middlemore I did) he came one morning betime to my lodging before
I was out of my bed, and there he told me he had diverse things to show me
of importance You shall see (says he) that I have not dallied or slept this
gear, for I have dealt, I tell you, with the highest. And therevppon he
pulles me out of his bosom a bundle of papers, which were, the most of them,
the copies of such letters, as he had either already written, or else had a
purpose to write to several persons for the furtherance of the cause, as he
termed it. Among the which I remember there was one to my L. Treasurer, one to
the Countess of Warwick, and within that, one to her majesty. The Effect of
all which, to my remembrance, was of certain horrible practices, treasons, and
conspiracies intended against the Queen. And all these were only indefinitlie
set down in a kind of generality, without naminge or pointinge at any
particular, either of time, place, person or circumstance. More he had
recorded among those papers of his, th'aunswere that he told me he had
received by word of mouth, both from my L. Treasurer and the Countess to this
effect, as I remember, Let not Copinger build us castles in the air, or feed
us with phansies, fables, or dreams, but let him bring us some grounded matter
whereupon we may work, and he shall well perceive, he shall be backed against
the greatest subject in the land, etc. Withal I remember he told me that
that Letter to her Majesty the Countess kept still in her hands, and would
in no wise deliver it, till she saw some better matter to ground upon.
Sundry other copies of letters he showed me at that time, as namely one as I
think to his sister Randoll, one to May. Egerton, one to Master Cart. one
to Master Fuller, another to Master Lancaster, two to May. Vdall, with some
others that I can not now call to mind. Neither, to speak the truth, did I
give any great ear unto them, having at that instant some special business,
and therefore could the more willingly have spared his company. Yet this I
noted among th(...) rest, that there were few of those letters of his without
some piece of imprecation or other, which sounded strange in mine ears.

Now after he had thus shuffled over his letters and papers unto me, he fell
to discourse with me at large of certain strange revelations and apparitions
that he had of late, as namely, Once in his bed when his brother Master
Ambrose Copinger, and another Gentleman lay by him, He told me him self, that
they that lay by him being awaked with the loud noise and groaning that he
made, as men something amazed at the strangeness thereof, did call on him
aloude, verily thinking him not to be well in his wits, Whereas in truth
(says he) I was inwardly ravished in spirit, did groan in soul, and was
talking with my God, who did most comfortably and gloriously appear unto me:
yet they would by no means believe it, but thought verily I had been beside my
self, etc. And then he fell to use many protestations, yea and imprecations
unto me, to persuade me of the truth hereof: namely, that he for his part was
as sure that the Lord had revealed sundry things unto him, poor worm of
the earth (for those were his words) as he was sure of his death. And even here
it was that I took occasion to deal with him so roundly about those kind of
cursinges and imprecations that were so usual with him, as well in his prayer,
letters and speeches, as, The Lord confound me, Let vengeance consume me,
Let the earth open and swallowe me, etc. Whereof I was so far (I told him)
from seeing any warrant or example in the word, that on the contrary I
thought they could not be used without a grievous sin and offense unto the
Majesty of God. Concerning all which his defense, me thought, was most silie
and pitiful, having nothing in the world to salve it with but only
Extraordinary, Extraordinary.

Whereupon he fell in some earnest manner to question and expostulate with me,
what I thought, whether all extraordinary callings were now ceased, and
whether it w^^^ not possible that a man should have any particular revelations
in this age, as well as in former times, greatly comp^ayning that Master Cart.
and Master Egerton, with all ^he godly preachers about the City, as well
those in prison, as at liberty, should be of that judgment, That we were not
to rest upon any of those extraordinary revelations in this age, but rather
to account of them as deceitful suggestions of Satan, etc.

To which effect I remember, as his custom was to have his bosom full of
papers, copies of letters, and such like, (because he said he loved to keep
his reckonings about him, that he might walk surely) he drew out certain
notes, either of his own hand, or of some of theirs, whereby was manifestly
refuted that fond opinion of his concerning revelations: all which, as he
showed me one by one, so he forgate not to tell me still by the way, how weak
their reasons were, to this end (as it should seem) that he might thereby,
with more ease, fasten this conceit upon me, and draw me, if he could, to be
of his mind.

Wherein, Madame, as in many other things, albeit there be good cause why I
should be reasonably acquainted with mine own weakness, yet finding my self
(upon the conference I had with Master Cart. and others) sufficiently armed,
as I thought, to withstand a greater assault then this, I dealt plainly and
roundly with Master Copinger, and did assure him for a full and flat
resolution, that for mine own part I was altogether of the judgment of those
godly Ministers he spoke of, not that I did therein or in any thing else,
rely my self wholly upon men, were they never so reverend, but that I saw no
warrant for those his dreams and imaginations out of the word. And now that
the Lord had thus at large revealed his will unto us, even sufficient to make
the man of God perfect, if mine own Father were alive and should tell me of
any other revelations then that, I durst not hearken or give ear unto him,
being a thing very dangerous and deceitful for any man to ground upon. And
therefore if I were as you, Master Copinger (for those, I assure you, were my
words unto him) I would rather suspecte this that you speak of to be some
mere illusion of the Devil, then any sound revelation from God, etc. Well,
says he, Master Throk. (striking his hand upon the deske that was by me)
what so ever you and others do think of the strangeness and impossibility
hereof, I am out of doubt of the truth of it, being more then once, or twice,
and that after many conflictes, agonies and trialls, assured thereof, even by
the holy ghost him self from heaven: and that the Lord him self has
appointed me, for some special work of his to his glory: In which speeches of
his me thought I saw some wild and strange cast of his countenance.

Now when he saw that after all these his persuasions, protestations, and
fearful imprecations, he could by no means fasten upon me any liking of these
his extraordinary revelations (though he often alleged Master Knox, and
some others unto me) he grew in the end to this, that there was a work to be
done, for the Church, which the Lord would not have wrought by such men of
great gifts as Master Egerton, Master Cart. and my self were (for so it
pleased him to couple us together.) But this must be effected, forsooth, by men
of base account, of no gifts, and such as are (as it were) the very abiectes
of the earth: For ever, says he, the Lord woorketh the greatest works by
the weakest instruments. And hereupon it was that he began to commend and
extol this Hacket unto me, as a very rare and notable man, and yet such a one
as could not read a letter on the book: One that in deed had been (as he
said) a vile and profane wretch in his days, but was wonderfully altered
and come home. A man that would not stick in all humility to acknowledge the
sin of his former life with detestation, and was now become a convert,
forsooth, and a diligent hearer of the word. To this effect (I assure you) and
with many more words then I can well utter, did he blaze out the praises of
this new prophet of his. And then, seeing some others come up to me about
business, he snatched up his papers, and thrusting them into his bosom, he
took his leave for that time.

But you must understand, Madame, that before this conference of ours, he
wrote unto me, and finding belike that my answer was not to his satisfaction,
he found this means to steal upon me, as I have described. His letter was to
the very same effect as his speeches were, to wit: That he hoped to live to
do some service to the Church of God. That what so ever persuasions men used
unto him to desist and break off his course, yet he had no cause to be
discouraged, because he had his warrant from heaven: Further, that with the
Lord the greatest works were ever brought to pass by the weakest
instruments, etc.

Implying and enforcing still that this Hacket, forsooth (whom all this while I
never saw nor heard of, but by Copingers report) must be the man that must do
the feate, because he was a weak one and unlearned.

Unto this letter of his (purposelie to advise him to beware what he did, and
to look before he leapt) I wrote him that answer which they have now in
their hands, and which Master Copinger kept in his bosom among other papers,
even the same that desperate Master Sutcliffe, and the Pretended conspiracy,
have thus printed and published by patches and pieces, with so many etc. I
muse they would not publishe it altogether, as it was, vnmangled, It had sure
been a great deal fairer play, especially in a cause that concerns (as is
pretended) a man's life, credit and good name. I thank God, Madame, if they
do not add or enlarge, or if they do not curtaile it, clippe it, enterline
it, and transform it, I do not fear the view of that letter to be presented
at any time, before the Lords, and my self to be censured and punished, as
they in their wisdoms shall think my oversight that way to deserve. For
unless I greatly deceive my self, the very shreades of that letter, which
they have thus dismembered, renting one clause from another, yea, and, by their
leave, altering and ouerstrayninge some words too, do notwithstanding (if
they be rightly weighed) sufficienlie clear me in th'eies of all impartial
and indifferent minded men. And yet it may be they know that the whole letter
would have cleared the suspicion much more, Therefore utterly to suppress that
which would clear a Puritan most was for them the wisest though peradventure
not the conscionablest course.

It may be (and it is like enough if they have all his papers) that they have
also another short letter of mine in answer to another of Master Copingers,
who writing unto me thus: Dear brother, I hope, ere it be long, you shall see
an alteration: I answered him even under the same letter, both in one paper
thus: Such an alteration as would breed a reformation and not a confusion, I
would be heartily glad of, and I do daily pray for. Seeing they are so full of
their printing, I would wish they had been so kind-harted to have printed this
too.

Now that your Honor may the better judge, whether I be herein injured or no,
or whether it be upon the spleen (as it were) without cause, that I do thus
complain, It may please you a little to consider with me of these few
particulars ensuing.

First, whereas Master Copinger in his letter seemed to be sorry that I should
be one of those that did condemn his course, and I assured him that as I was
not over hasty to condemn him in a matter that I knew not of, nor had any
acquaintance with, but only heard of at the second hand, as it were, by
certain buzzes and flying reports abroad, etc. All that former part of my
letter, and those words that make so manifestly and apparauntlie for my
clearing, and wherein I do utterly disavowe all knowledge and acquaintance
with those courses of his (because they would so feign have me seem guilty)
is quite left out and suppressed: not a word of that I warrant you.

Then whereas the whole drift and scope of my letter is a mere disswasion of
Master Copinger to go on with any sole or singular course of his own head,
and that he take both his eyes in his hands, and be sure of his ground
before he strive to put any thing in execution: they have labored to invert
all, strayning and stretchinge both my words and meaning quite against the
hair, as may appear by their marginall note strive to put in execution?
whereby they would make the world believe (if they could) that Throk. was no
disswader, but rather an encourager and egger on of Copinger, to put in
execution that which before he had conceived in his brain.

And now to mende the matter, in the neck of this comes Master Su^cliffe
with his vie, offering me full as hard measure as all this comes too, and
thereof I make your La. the judge. For whereas in the feeling and experience of
mine own weakness and wantes, I dare not boast nor take upon me the name of
a sanctified heart, he very kindly, I thank him, settes his brand upon me in
the margin in this manner: A sanctified Puritan. The thing that I do
apparantlie disavowe and renounce as not daring to boast of, it pleases him,
in his girding manner, to vpbraied me with, as if I did arrogantlie assume it
unto my self: so that you see I can escape him no way. Nay it seems he is so
eger and sharp set to snappe and bite at me, that he will not give me leave
to speak sometimes the very language of Chanaan: no not as the holy Ghost him
self speaks in the Scripture, but I shall bear a blow for it. Him self
knows (I doubt not) better then I, that it is th'vsuall phrase with the
Hebrews to say, The first Month: The fifte Moneth-The seventh Month: The
nienth Month. And albeit I hold it not unlawful to name and write the
Months as we usually do, as March, April, May, etc. So yet for a man once
or twice in his life to use the phrase of the holy Scripture, and say, The fifth
Month, should not, me thinks, in equity (if it be rightly weighed) deserve
so great a reproach. And I muse if Master Sutcliffe should comment upon the
tenth chapter of Ezra, where it is said, That the people sat down and
trembled before the Lord the twentieth day of the nienth month. And again,
Th'auncient heads sat down to examine the matter, the first day of the tenth
Month. I muse, I say, if he should comment upon this, whether he would
thereupon make such a marginall gloss, as he has done upon my poor letter,
This is the new absurd Consistorian style.

Wherein yet your La. may see how easelie a wise man may ouerslip him self in
his distemperature. For if it be true that this manner of writing, The fourth
Month, The fifth Month, The eight Month, etc. (which is so ill taken and so
scornefullie disgeasted by Master Sutcliffe) be not only the phrase of poor
Master Calvin, or Beza, or barelie a Geneuian devise (for then, I fear me, he
would go nighe to tread it under his feet, and rent the record with his
teeth,) but also th'usuall phrase of the Bishops them selves, in the
translation of their great Bibles, commanded and enjoined to be read in
Churches. If this, I say, may be proved (as it is manifest and apparaunt to
all that will not wilfully muffle them selves) then must it needs be that he
has herein, in a sort, done him self a piece of injury, and that in
leueling thus greedily at me, he has unadvisedly rushed upon some of his
dearest friends, whom I am sure he would be loath to offend. If he say that
they do but translate so, and I do write so: It will be but a silie and
slender voydance of the matter. For, I hope, he will not say that his Grave
fathers do either in their writing or in their trrnslation use any, New,
absurd, Puritan or Consistorian style, which, he knows, they might easelie
avoied, if there were any such absurdity in the matter as he would bear us
in hand, and translate for The first Month, March. For the second April,
and so of the rest, if it pleased them. Therefore if Master Sutcliffe should
say never so constantly, nay if he should swear unto me, that this manner of
writing were absurd and Consistorianlike, he must pardon me, I could not
believe it, my reason is, because the Bishops them selves do use it. And where
do they use it? Even there, where I presume they would be most afraied to use
any strange, absurd, or unwarrantable speech, to wit, in the holy scriptures
of God, which they know are to be handled with all piety and reverence, as
may most tend to th'edification of the people of God. If then it be in no
sort absurd in them, no more, say I, can it be in me, seeing the very same
phrase that I have used but once only in my Letter, they have used in their
translation above twenty times, and yet it were heard, he knows, to coumpt
them either Precisians or Disciplinarians for all that.

By this, Madame, and the rest, your La. may easily see, that I am both
uncharitably and vnchristianlie dealt with. And yet to speak indifferently, I
ought not in some regard to think much of it, or take it to heart, when so
reverend a man as Master Egerton is, (for whose holy prayers I do not doubt
but her Majesty and the whole State does prosper the better) can by no means
escape the stinge of their envenomed mouths.

It may be your La. has heard how learnedly and roundly Master Sutcliffe
did confute him of late in Pawles, even since the publishing of his last
declamation, and that to his face before D. White, and others. I was not by my
self, but if it be as I have heard, the speeches were so opprobrious, as I am
half ashamed to set down with my pen, remembering the person against whom
they were uttered. They were neither Greek nor Hebrewe, nor yet scarce any
congruitie of good manner, but (saving your reverence, (Madame) plain Scabbe,
and scurvey Jack. In which vein of kitchen rhetorike, if they would give me
leave also to follow the sway of flesh and blood, me thinks I could easily
without any great sweat or pains (if there were no bounds of modesty to
restrain me) learn to confute the honestest man, and the greatest Clarke in
Christendom.

But this is not all: For both he and the Conspiracy do dress him another
way, though in words nothing so groslie, yet in weight and consequent full as
bytingly as this, and that by a certain pretty conveiance or sleight of a
finger called Inversio. For whereas Master Egertons persuasion to Master
Copinger was (as I have heard) to this effect and in this form, to wit, That
albeit he would be loath to quench the Spirit, or kill any zeal in him,
especially in this cold and frosen age of ours, wherein for the most part men
had so little hunger and thirst after the word: yet he was certainly persuaded
that those supposed revelations of his were nothing else but mere illusions of
Satan, whose subtilitie he should in any wise beware of, least he were seduced
and misleade by him, etc. Whereas, I say, his speeces were thus framed, how
does Master Sutcliffe and The pretended Conspiracy handle the matter? Why,
even thus Madame, and I pray you mark it for your learning, because it may
serve your La. for a handsome pattern to measure all the rest by. They play
Hysteron proteron with him, that is, they turn the catte into the pan,
setting the cart before the horse, bringing in that first which should be last,
and that last which should be first, to wit, That he should wisely and
circumspectly take heed he were not mislead by the subtilty of Satan, etc.
But withal (say they) the said Master Egerton concluded, that he would be
loath to quench the spirit of God in him, or hinder his zeal. And why trow
you was this brought in last for a conclusion, which was in deed as the
preamble and first entrance into his speech? Because otherwise, it may be, it
would not have wounded this Renowned Paraphrast deep enough, nor have stuck
by his ribs so long. But now martialled, as it is, in the rereward and so
last in the eye, It is like enough to leave the deeper impression and
remembrance in men's breasts, that certeinlie, this Egerton (though he used a
little fair florishe in the beginning) was yet very unwilling that Copinger
should desist and give over his course, and therefore it was that he would
quench no zeal in him. And how think you, Madame, was not this nimbly and
charitably contrived against so reverend a Minister of the word.

But yet me think that which does exceed all the rest in weight of malice,
and does most lay open the very sting and venime of the heart is this, that
Master Sutcliffe will needs make him a misliker, and, as it were, an envier
of her Majesty's Honorable, Princelike, and Royal appearance in the beginning
of the Parliament: A thing that I dare swear is far from his heart, and
therefore what so ever it shall please Master Sutcliffe to say in this
regard, (yea though he should herein write against him till his eyes were
dim) yet I am persuaded he shall never while he lives, get any man of
conscience and judgment, that knows the man, to believe it: Nay, I durst, me
thinks, pawn my life upon it (and so I doubt not would many of my betters)
that there is no man living under the sun, that does more from his heart
desire the true blessedness of her Majesty, namely, that she might be
beloved of God, and highly honored in th'eies of men, then does Master
Egerton, as may sufficiently appear, both by his daily teaching and prayers,
whereof there are witnesses enough, though I should be silent. Notwithstanding
all which Master Sutcliffe (as a man that cares not what he say, so he may be
biting) will prove it otherwise, you shall see, and that forsooth out of his
own Letter to his brother Fenne, page ^ 9 9. For does he not say there, That
she went thither meta polles phantasias, that is, (as he interpretes it) with
great ostentation and pomp. Which words (says he) Saint Paul uses
condemning the vanity of Agrippa and Beronice. Wherein, Madame, either through
his have, or through the heat and unruliness of his passions. (for I will
never attribute it to his want of judgment) he has made us at the least two
or three foul unavoidable slippes. For first, whereas he will needs have
the words to be Saint Paul's, he must give us leave for once (because he is
a traueler) to answer him with the sauf vostre grace Monsieur, Saint Paul,
we dare warrant, has no such words: The words in deed that he has there
quoted, are Saint Lukes. Who, I take it, was the penner of the story of
th'actes and not Saint Paul. Secondly, to omit (...) slip of Beronice
(who dwelles sure either in Rome or in Portugale, for in Jerusalem or in the
Scripture there is none such to be found I believe) where he says the words
are used by Saint Paul in condemnation of the vanity of Agrippa, by his
favor and under correction we deny that, that, we say, is but his own
comment and conceit, neither are the words, as we think, used to any such
end as he supposes, to wit, to reprove and reproach the king with, but only
as a bare and plain declaration and laying open of the truth of that Royal
pomp and magnificence, which is both usual and allowable in great Princes
and States in their solemn assemblies. And that this is true, (if poor
Master Beza, Iunius, Villerius, Camerarius, and such as they be, were not of
late by strange mishappe flatly excommunicated by Master Sutcliffe for their
ignorance and want of judgment) I could easily put him out of doubt. For
Master Bezaes words upon the place be these: Hic quidem certum est hoc
nomine declarari speciosum regiae magnificentia splendorem in spectantium
oculos incurrentem, etc. that is to say, Here it is manifest, that in this
word phantasias is laid open unto us the beautiful glittering and glorious
excellency of that Royal Magnificence, that does flashe, as it were, into
the eyes of the beholders, etc. Further in the marginall note upon Tremelius,
published, as I think, by allowance of the state, this word phantasias is
thus interpreted, id est Regio apparatu, that is, in Princely preparation and
furniture, which can in no sort be taken in ill sense. All which Master Beza
seems to fortify and confirm by the authority and testimony of sundry
ancient and learned Greek writters, as namely, Aristotel, Hippocrates,
Possidonius. And if this be so, Madame, then judge you, I pray you, who was
more to blame he which simply and barelie lays down the words of the story
(which the very best interpreters do take in good sense) or he that thus
vnconscionablie wreasteth and wringeth them to make a man so well deserving of
Gods Church, seem thrice odious and hateful to the State.

All which considered, it seems more then strange to me, that Sutcliffe
should be so egle-eieda censurer of other men's labors, and in the mean
season, eitheir thorough th'inflamation of the stomach, or through the heat
and unruliness of his affections, lay him self open to so many (...)
palpaple advantages as he does. I confess my self to be no match for him,
neither have I any purpose to buckle with him that way, being as he is, a
great deal to hot and to hard for me, and it may be, much better armed to
maintain an error, then such a one as I to defend a truth. But yet as a
stander-by and not as one that has any skill to handle the weapon my self,
me thinks I could easelie spy a far of, where he might be caught and
crossebiten, if any man of ability and judgment would vouchsafe to take him
in hand. For proof whereof in the very first leaf of that invectiue preface
of his to my L. Anderson, where he so strayneth and strives to make Master
Fenners and Master Cartwrightes divinity no better then herisie, You may
easily discern (if you please Madame) how the master countroller of others,
has manifestly broached us, a piece of strange and new-founde divinity him
self. All religions (says he) teach that the Son is borne of the Father,
which is the Characteristicall difference of that person. Can you tell what to
make of this, Madame? If you can not, no more, I believe, can he that coined
it. I confess I have read in my days (and it is a part of my faith still)
That the Son was begotten of the Father before all worlds: But borne of the
Father (as we in our English tongue understand it) I do not believe is to be
found in any creed in the world, but only in this new Sutclivian Creed
of ours. Further, I can not but muze that (...) being a scholar, as he is
would ever suffer Difference of the Person to pass the print, without some
revocation, razure, or correction, seeinge it was never heard of, I trow,
before now that in the Godhead, there should be any difference of the persons
at all, but only a distinction. Sure if one of these Puritanes had written
thus, we should have had old adoo, I believe. As to that other new refined
and far fette phrase of his of Characteristicall, being so pregnant and
proper for the place where it is set, because I see neither divinity nor
sense in it, nor am able to discern why it should come in rusteling here,
unless it be only for the bare noise and sound of it, I willingly leave it
to those that be of a deeper reach then my self to make somewhat of it. But
one of the special things that I would wish your La. and all others to note
in Master Sutcliffe is this, that among the writers of our age, you shall not
lightly find a more bold, peremptory and resolute man in the world then
he. For proof whereof, mark I pray you, how of one of the worthiest and
most accomplished divines of our age, and of that conference that for
th'exellencie of the work, is thought by the learned to be unmatchable, (as
if his word, or a cast of his countenance were sufficient to change the face
of the heavens, and to turn light into darkness) he gives this slight and
brazen censure, to wit, That it was long forsooth and without effect. What
must such men as I look for at his hands, when such works as that is and
such men as Master Raynolds is, are of no greater account and estimation in
his eyes? But I do not think Madame, that there is any man in the world (if
he be not smitten with the giddiness of the brain) that is of his judgment
concerning that Conference. Neither do I see for mine own part (if the
matters therein handeled with the circumstances be advisedlie looked into) how
he could possibly have bin shorter, but he must withal have been much darker
and intricat. As to the little effect he speaks of, Ma. Sutcliffe must pardon
me, I will never believe, that all that ever he has written or can write while
he lives, will ever work the like effect in the hearts of men for the
confutation of popery, and the confirmation of the Princes true and lawful
Supremacy, as that one work alone has done. But, alas, Madame, how shall we
do now? Master Sutcliffe thinks not so, and where be we then? For what
soever he avoucheth true or false, right or wrong, black or white, It is bound
straight (if you mark it) with All Antiquity, All the Fathers, All Divinity:
If he say it once, there must be no straggering at it, we must receive it
forthwith as an oracle from his mouth, be it never so sottish: As your Honor
may plainly see by this new Characteristicall sentence of his, to wit; That
the Son was borne of the Father: Which is (says he) the Characteristicall
difference of that person. What can be more absurd and senseles then this? And
yet (...) countenanced and guidoned as it is, with Master Sutcliffes colors,
that is, with All Religion says it, All Religion says it, It must, you see,
march on without an encounter, or else there will be no hoe with him.

And yet for his own sake I would this were the worst thing in him, then
should never, I trow, so many innocent and guiltless have been thus vily and
iniurioussie be besprinkled with the gall and vinegar of his pen, as have
been of late to the triumph and rejoicing of th'adversarie, and to the grief
of those that love the truth. And surely, Madame, when I lay before me this
deadly sting and bloody minded drift of Master Sutcliffes (for I can call it
no better) in that he would so feign have Master Cart. and Master Egerton,
with so many worthy men, to be traitors and conspiratours with Hacket, and
Master Vdall (for the pure love he bears him) honored with the gibbet, I
could, me thinks, in (...) regard (if I had any acquaintance with him) find
in my heart to befriende him a little with my poor advise, if I thought he
would take it well at my hands, to wit, That seeing the Revenger of
the innocent and afflicted is mighty, and able, as he knows, to grind their
oppressors and backbitors into powder, he would (for all this huffing and heat
of distemperature) at length yet bethink him self, and beware how he goes on
any further in his unchristianlike vein of bytinge and bitterness,
especially against such men whom their greatest adversaries (if they have not
quite abandoned all modesty and shamefastness) do yet sometimes reverentlie
accoumpt of: as may appear by the late politic treatise of May. Hookers, who
(though he be as much distasted with the Discipline, and, for any thing I
see, as strongly bewitched, and every way as deeply interessed in the case
of the Hierarchy, as Master Sutc.) does yet in words at least (and I hope
from his heart) vouchsafe to honor them and beblesse them with many reverent
and brotherly terms, as Right well affected, and most religiously inclined
minds, and such like: And yet me thinks, to speak indifferently, they
should not be very well affected neither if they should be as Master
Sutcliffe would have them, that is, guilty of any practice or conspiracy
against her Majesty. Whereupon, if I might, I would gladly know for my
learning, what point of Cosmographie Master Sutcliffe holds this to be,
namely, to press men so egerly (as he does) to the defense of the cause,
asking them whether they be quite spent, and have nothing to say, but must be
feign (poor men) to send over to Geneua for help, and in the mean season by
the verdure and venime of his pen to draw, as it were, a kind of
endightment of treason and conspiracy against them, and so to put them to the
iumpe and defense of their lives. A good round ready way to silence and refute
men, I trow: As if it were wisdom or godly policy for a State to suffer
traitors and conspiratours either to write books, or defend any thing by
disputation: Yet me thinks, it were much fairer play and an evener course, a
great deal, to clear them of treason first, and then to tender them the
chalendge and disputation afterward, then thus to throw out the gauntlet and
chartell of defiance with one hand, and to shake the halter and show the
hatchet with the other, or rather in plain terms to do what in him lies to
cut in sunder their windpipe first, and then to ask them why they whoppe not
or lewre not afterward.

For this cause if I thought there were any man to be found in this age, so
sober and well qualified, that might herein be a director to a man of Master
Sutcliffes constitution, I would then entreat him, that when he writes
again, he would make either Master Hooker, or some one discreet man of his
own side, his glass and dial or direction, for the better temperature of his
pen, being enough and enough, even in conscience (if not more then enough)
that he has thus run him self out of breath allreadie: and unless he
should burn a new the temple of Diana, I do not see how he can make him
self more famous then he has done by this new emblasure of his. In which
regard it is sure to somebody, I trow, that Master Hooker writes, when he so
solemnly advises and admonishes men, To lay aside the gall of that
bitterness wherein their minds have hitherto over abounded, and with
meekness to seek the truth, etc. Yea and it seems by the whole course of
his book, that there is no man in the world (if we may believe him) more out
of love with an envenomed pen, which is the discrier of the poison of the
heart, then he. And therefore if in this good counsel of his, he did not
specially and particularly, and as it were, by name level at his brother
Sutcliffe above others, I must needs say he was to hard and partially bound
about th'eies. For though for mine own part I be sufficiently persuaded, and
my heart thoroughlie settled in the truth of the cause, notwithstanding a
whole library of books should be written against it (and the more that is
written in that kind, and the more disgraces that are thus maliciously
disgorged out against the defendours thereof, the more I am confirmed) yet dare
I pass this promise to Master Hooker, or to any man living of his complexion,
that if among all those that have hitherto sued for reformation, he can pick
me out but one that is comparable to Master Sutcliffe, in that sea of
bitterness, and ouerflowing of the gall he speaks of, I will forth with yield
him the bucklers, and pass him my recantation under seal. So (...) shall be
sure to say that which I believe Master Sutcliffe will never be able to say,
(...), that he has won one Disciplinarian to the faith of the Hierarchy.
All which considered, I could wish that Master Sutcliffe would something
recall him self while he has time and space, and in remorse of that which is
past, strike his hand upon his breast, to some blusshinge and repentance (if
it might be) before the day of his visitation, remembering that one of the
special things that the holy ghost marketh out as abhorred of the Lord, is, A
proud heart, a lying tongue, and hands that are swifte to sheade innocent
blood.

I come now again to Master Copinger, who after he had thus written unto
me, and I had thus answered him as before is set down, found means to steal
upon me once more at my lodging, pressing me very earnestly to be acquainted
with that man (meaning Hacket) whom he had before so highly commended unto me,
redoublinge his speeches loading me with a new supply of his praises,
especially of his gift in prayer beyond all that ever he heard. He told me
that he was now in the town, and that he would bring me to him if I would,
his lodginge was not far from Smithfield: I told him I was so troubled, and
in a manner oppressed with business, that I could not be at any leisure, neither
could I appoint him any time, as he would feign have had me. Well yet (says
he) do me that favor as but hear him pray once before you go out of the
town. I can not certeinlie promise you that neither (said I) but if I be at
any leisure, and may convenientlie, I will, and so we parted.

But here by the way, I had like to have forgotten that which of all others is
most worthy the remembrance, namely, his discourse of the first greeting and
meeting betwixt him and this new Saint of his, which, to my remembrance was
thus: That he hearing of th'vnfaigned conversion of the man, with the
simplicity of his heart, and the rare gifts that God had lent him, being a
man unlearned, did write him a letter to come up: Which Hacket accomplished
accordingly. As soon as they met, after some salutations, Copinger
signified unto him what revelations he had had of late, how the Lord had
sundry times appeared unto him from heaven, but he could get no man
hereabouts to believe him, that there was any such thing in truth, but that
all was a mere illusion of Satan. No (says Hacket) will they not believe
it? But I (...) believe it, and will prove it to them, for I my self have had
revelations, and strange revelations too. Whereupon I remember Master
Copinger glaunced a little at Master Egerton and Master Cart. that they would
by no means be persuaded of the truth of these things, whereas this simple
man did at the first both conceive of it, give credit to it, and was ready
by his own experience to justify it. And this verifies (says he) that which
I told you before, that the Lord will not have this work brought to pass by
any other then by the simplest and weakest. And then he told me how that
upon these speeches of Hacket, he burning in desire to know what those
revelations of his were, pressed him very earnestly to tell him. But Hacket,
seeing him so sharp set, to give him, as it were, the keener edge, and the
greater longing, did purposelie (as it should seem) keep him fasting, and
held of telling him, that there was a time for all things, he had not now
long to stay in the town, but he should know more shortly, for the present
let this suffice him, That there were many strange practices and wonderful
treasons a brewing against the Queen.

Heerevpon it was that Copinger, after Hacket was gone down into the Country,
wrote those same letters that I before mentioned, to wit, unto her Majesty,
the Countess of Warwick, and my L. Treasurer, from whom having received that
answer that I have here set down, namely, That he should bring with him
some grounded matter to work upon, he writes me again in all post haste to
his new prophet, willing him to come up, with all possible speed, for he had
broken the ye, forsooth, now was the time or never. Whereupon Haket came up,
and was by his means (as he told me) brought before my Lo. Treasurer. In
whose presence he so behaved him self, falling flat on his face, groueling,
groaning, and foming at the mouth, that my L. seeing him, should say: What has
Copinger brought me, a mad man here? My Lord (said he) thought he had bin
mad, whereas he, no doubt, was inwardly ravished in soul, and rapt up into
the third heaven as Paul was: whereat smiling w^^h my self, I asked him what
became in the mean season of all those great treasons and practices that were
thus extraordinarily revealed unto Hacket, and he upon Hackets word, had thus
ventured to make known to those great personages. I looked (said I) that upon
this appearaunce before my Lo. Treasurer, we should have heard news of them.
He told me, that if they could have obtained that they hoped for, namely a
warrant and commission to search and bolt out the truth of things, we should
have heard more ere this, being persuaded in his soul, that it would have
fallen out, to have been one of the best services that ever was undertaken for
the Land. Whereupon when I told him that it seemed strange unto me, that a man
should take in hand to waken the ears of great Counselors with I know not
what noise of complottes and conspiracies first, and then to sue for a
commission to enquire afterward: He choked me straight with his old common
place of Extraordinary, Extraordinary, telling me that we were not to draw
presidents of those things whereof there was no rule: whereunto I replied, that
though their supposed revelations were (as they said) Extraordinary, yet the
commission to enquire, that they would so feign have had, was Ordinary: and
therefore I mused that such extraordinary men as they, would fly to such
common and ordinary helps. Well (says he) it may be you shall hear more
when the time comes. And so he departed.

After this, having been to seek Master D. Chippingdale, Copinger meets me
by chance in Pawles Chain, and taking me by the arm, whispered me in
the ear, tellinge me that the man he spoke to me of, was now hard by, removed
from his old lodging into Knightrider street. I told him I had much
business, he said I should not stay, but only see the man, and judge of his
gift in prayer, if I would, which he knew I would admire. Upon his
importunacie (I speak it not Madame, in any great praise of my self, because
having such warning as I had, I might have been better advised) yet thinking it
strange that a man, not able to read, should have such an extraordinary gift
as he spoke of (though upon the former taste of Master Copingers poor
judgment, I did partly fear before hand, what I should find) I went, I
confess, with him. And this was the first and the last time that ever I saw
Hacket in my life. And to speak the truth, this very once was enough to
distaste any man of never so mean judgment, I believe, unless he were
bewitched, because the very puffing and sweilinge of his face, the staring and
gogling of his eyes, with his gahstlie countenance, did, me thought,
sufficiently decipher out unto me, what was in the man, at the first sight.
And here also at this time I found Arthington, whom to my remembrance I never
saw above once before in my life. But conference I never had any with him, as
he him self best knows, who is yet living to witness whether I lie or no.
When I was come up to the chamber, Copinger told Hacket that the Gentleman
could not stay, and therefore desired him he might be partaker of his prayer.
Whereupon Hacket clapping to the door, fell without any more ado, to his
prayer, even (for all the world) as a man should have fallen to his sword and
buckler.

But if I shall not lie unto you, Madame, such a piece of prayers did no man
living, I think, ever hear. It was much like the wildegoose chase, neither
head nor foot, rhyme nor reason. In steed of desiring God to be present with
us, he desired him to be absent from us, and so, for any thing I know, he
was, unless it were in his hand of judgment to punish us: for concerning
any blessing to befall us, sure I am, he was not present with us, at that
time. Many strange stoppes and pawses he had in his prayer^, and that a preatie
while together, saying nothing but only groaned and murmured to him self,
and then he would suddenly burst out into some passionate outcrie and
exclamation against those wicked Hamans and Traitors to God and the Queen,
for that was a great word with him. As to his manner and gesture, it was, me
thought, full as strange as the prayer it self, speaking sometimes in a kind
of low and base voice, and sometimes again in so high a voice, that I think
he might easelie have been heard into the streets: yet were the most of his
words uttered with much earnestnes and fervencie, with puffinges and bearinges
in a kind of snatching manner, as if he had been half vvindlesse, and out of
breath. And howsoever other men judge of him, I must confess I have lived to
see him a kind of prophet in deed in the right success and event that his
prayer had. For as execrations and imprecations were usual with him, so I
remember this sweet sentence among the rest, O Lord thou know, thou have
revealed sundry things to me, which thou have kept back from the mighty
enes of the world, and if this be not true, let thy vengeance and visible
confusion fall upon me. This I say, I expreslie noted. And having lived to see
that I have done, namely, such a sensible hand of God upon him, in giving him
over to end his days in that most shameful and desperate manner as he did,
with so many horrible blasphemies without repentance. Who can deny but that
Hacket was a right reader of destinies, and concerning him self a prophet?
While he was in his prayer, Copinger and Arthington did bestow the most of the
time in a strange kind of sighing, humming and groaning, and that many times
very loud. When his prayer was done, which to me was a great deal to long,
unless it had been more savorie (and to tell you the very truth, Madame, I
sat, me thought, upon thorns, and was not quiet in my self, till I was out
of the chamber, fearing, when I heard him thunder and curse in that manner,
least the floor should have fallen on our heads) I told them I had hasty
business, and so took my leave and gladd in my heart that I was gone. I
remember Hackets last words to me at my farewell, were these, I should hear
more shortly, and so in deed I did. For the next news I heard, was, that
they were up in a cart in Cheape-side, and so were apprehended, and their great
Mahomet brought to that end, as all men know, and he best deserved.

Now when I was come my way from hearing this man of the rare gift, Master
Copinger followed me, and bringing me a little a long the street, he iogged me
on th'elbow, and asked me in mine ear, what I thought of the man's gift, and
whether he were not an excellent fellow: I told him, I mused what should move
him to think so, because I saw no order at all in his prayer, but a mere
confused heap of words without sap. And then I began to enter into some
particulars with him, as what should be the reason, or how it might be
justified, that a man should dare to offer up his prayers to God without any
acknowledgement of his sin and unworthiness, as at that time Hacket never
did, neither in general nor in particular. Again, I asked him what warrant
any man had to use any of those imprecations and bitter curssinges of him
self in his prayer, whereof there was neither rule nor warrant in the whole
Scripture of God. Unto all which his answer was still one and the same, not
unlike to the rest of his resolutions: Oh (says he) you must consider it is
extraordinary, extraordinary: And I am verily persuaded, Master Throkmorton,
that as John Baptist was the forerunner of our Savior in the fleashe: So this
man is the very forerunner of our Savior in judgment. At which words of
his, I confess, I was something amazed, and looking upon him (remembering
Master Cartwrightes former speeches unto me) I could not but pity the man,
with this resolution, never to come at him again, nor any of his confederates
(if I could avoid them) while I lived. And thus parted Master Copinger and I,
being the last time that ever I saw him: who, as far as I conjecture,
returned back again at that very instant to Hacket, because I saw him bend
that way.

Not long after this I went to Enfielde to visit my cousin Middlemore, that
then was very ill, unto whom I reported at large the truth of the whole, as I
have here set down, and how at Master Copingers earnest entreaty I heard
Hacket pray, and of the manner of his prayer, etc. And I remember his words,
and shall do while I live, to wit, That he feared he would come to some ill
end, which he gathered by those bitter cursinges and execrations that were
so usual with him.

Now when I came back again to London, I found this short letter at my
lodginge, which Ma. Copinger wrote unto me from Knightrider street, and which
Master Sutcliffe (I thank him) has taken the pains to print and reprint, to
wit, That much has been done since they saw me, which I would rejoice to
hear of, That they desire conference with me, That the business is the Lords
own, That some of the enemies of God began to be hottely pursued by Satan,
etc. For so was it in my letter, though in their printed copy it be pursued by
God, etc. That I received such a letter I deny not, but you must understand,
Madame, that they had been preaching in the cart, and were apprehended before
this letter came to my hands. But what could I do withal, if Master
Copinger did write thus unto me? It is known he did write letters to other
manner of men then I. I confess, he did wonderfully seek me, and labor to
have drawn me to the bent of his bow. And albeit I may truly say that his
insensible persuasions had never any taste or relish in my breast, neither did
I ever feel so much as any inclination to be drawn away by him, yet do I
not, nor dare I not attribute the least part of this resistance to mine own
strength, because the Lord might justly have given me over to a weaker
assault then this, if it had pleased him. But what will Master Sutcliffe make
of this? Copinger wrote unto me twice or thrice. True, I deny it not, and good
leave have he to make his advantage of it, let him hardly press it and
strain it to th'vttermost, it shall not offend me. What then? Why then,
forsooth he concludes, that Throk, is not only an accessarie and a concealer
of their treacherous practices, but also a principal actor in the Pagent, and
deeply guilty of the conspiracy.

This haulting consequent I leave to be refuted by Master Sutcliffe him self,
when he is sober and not all out so distempered as it may be he was when he
wrote the book. He knows well enough it were great pity that all they that
wrote and received letters from Copinger, or had any conference with him, or
any view of Hacket, should forthwith be reputed traitors and conspirators for
that. For the rest I would Master Sutcliffe knew, that I hold it not only
lawful but even my bounden duty to reveal any practice or treason intended
against my Sovereign, and that of conscience, if there were no law to bind me
too it but the law of God. Of which sin, I hope, I may without offense
plead guiltless, not only before men, but (for any thing I know) before
the tribunal seat of Christ.

And if probable collections be in th'eies of indifferent Judges of as great
force for a man's clearing and defense as they are for a man's guiltiness and
condemnation, then mine innocence, I hope (though it be never so much shot
at by the darts of envenomed mouths) shall yet by Gods assistance, escape
untouched and vnbleamished in the end.

If any man should demand (says Arthington) why I did not discover Hackets
intended villainous practices against the Queen and the State, Arth. ^^duct.
and repent. page 21.
seeing he was known to be a sorcerer, and condemned for high treason
against her Majesty truly, as I mean to be saved at the last day, both
these matters were unknown to me so long as he lived, and to Master Copinger
too, as I think. Neither was I ever any farther acquainted with any visions
or speeches touching these matters, then as before in substance is declared,
etc. Therefore as on the one side, I should deeply offend the Majesty of
God, if I should conceal any danger intended against her Majesty (falling
within the compass of my knowledge:) So should I displease the Lord on the
other side, by speaking more then a truth of any: yea were it of the Devil
himself, protesting thus much in the presence of God, that if I were privy to
one evil word spoken against her Majesty, etc.

This book of Arthingtons, Madame, has, we see, th'alowance and approbation
of the State: And if he that was one of the three, naming him self the
prophet of judgment, so many times conversant with Hacket, as well in prayer
as in conference, be thus publikelie cleared by his protestation, and that
taken and accepted of for payement, It goes hard, me thinks, that another
man, that never saw Hacket but once in his life, that wrote and labored to
Master Copinger to desist, as one altogether distasted with his courses,
should not have the same liberty to pawn his protestation for his defense.

If then Master Sutcliffe, or any of his humor do ask of Job Throk. why he
did nor reveal the treasons and practices of Hacket and his accomplices, he
answers in a word (and that with protestation before the Lord of heaven
and earth) Because he knew not of any, neither ever heard so much as the
least noise or sound of any, And that Master Sutcliffe him self (for any
thing he knows) was full as guilty, and every way as accessarie to those
conspiracies as he.

If it be demanded further, why he did not reveal so much as he knew, namely
of their prayers, imprecations, and supposed revelations? He answers, that
the same reason that moved that honorable Countess to deteine still in her
hands May. Copingers letter unto her Majesty, without delivery, namely,
that there was no ground of his information, but only his fancy, moved also
Throk. not to make the Magistrate acquainted with any of those toys and
fooleries, without some better grounde^ thinking them altogether unworthy of
their presence and ears, and fearing (unless he would have foreseen into
the event aforehande) that he had been liker a great deal (for troubling their
Honors with such a headless information) to have bin rather returned home
again as wise as he came, with some check or reproach for his folly, then
with any thank or reward for his pains.

Touching Marten, whatsoever it pleases Ma. Sutcliffe to say, I hope those
that are in Authority, and Ma. Sutcliffes betters, are sufficiently persuaded
of mine innocence that way. And seeing the gentleman has given him self a
commission to speak his pleasure of my betters, there is good reason that so
mean a man as I should allow him a little to speak per Hyperbolen, or licentia
poetica, as he does of Master Cart. when he charge him with the execution of
his brother Stubbes his He is not so much as once named in his will.
will, a thing that I have heard him say he never dealt in in any sort, in
all his life. And I do the rather believe it, in that in one of his books he
brings testimony (as I remember) out of one of th'auncient Fathers, that it
is either unmeet or unlawful for a Minister of the word, to be so much as an
Executor, much less that he should be encombred with any civil office. And
such another like tale is that of the sale of his cotaige, and the purchase of
his three or four manours: which is so apparent a slander, as I doubt not but
he may be convinced by hundreds that are yet alive, and I think few of his
own side so immodest to believe it. As for my self and his charge of
Martinisme, if Master Sutcliffe were the man that had never told untruth in
his life, I could easily in this case (if need were) make some advantage of
him for my clearing and defense. For though in one of his Queres page 202. he
lay all upon me, I thank him, Theses, Protestations, Dialogues, and all (and
so to speak the truth, he may as well all as one) yet in his better mood,
when it may be, he had slept better all night, he frankly clears me again,
disburdeninge me of that charge, and lets not to say, page 78. that the
noble Martin was John Penry, John Vdall, John Field, all John's, says he, as
for me he does but bring me in at the later end as a candle holder: and no
more in deed I am not, in regard of some of those Reverend men.

But because, Madame, I am to render account of my doings before other manner
of men then Master Sutcliffe. Seeing an oath (as The Apostle says) ought to
be the end of all strife, I will for my final clearing herein (when so ever
it shall be thought so good by the State) willingly take this oath, as I have
heretofore offered, to wit, That I am not Martin, I knew not Martin, And
concerning that I stand endighted of, I am as clear as the child unborn.

For the rest, that I live under a most gracious Princess and a merciful
government, I were greatly to blame, if I would not in all humbleness
acknowledge: and if I have not been thankful to God for it, my sin sure has
been the greater. But what Prince and government lives Master Sutcliffe
under, trow you? If it be the same that I live under (and I hope how far so
ever he has traueled, he has none other) then, if I be not deceived,
(unless he have some charter of privilege that I know not of) his band and
recognoisance is full as great as mine, and he as deeply engaged this way as
my self. And if it be true that a reverend Judge in this land did once tell
my Lo. Chancelour, that dead is, That the matter of th'indightment that passed
against Throk. at Warwick, was in truth but a friuelous matter, and a thing
that he would easelie auoied. And if it be also true that the said Lord
Chauncelour (who, if I be not deceived, was able to see as far into a man as
Master Sutcliffe) did say not only privately in his house, but even to her
Majesty (who caused the same to be signified unto me, that I might therein be
thankful unto my Lord) and more then that, if the said Lo. Chauncelour did
openly in Parleament (whereof there are yet living witnesses enough) pronounce,
that he knew the said Job Throkmorton to be an honest man: If all these, I
say, be true, I think I may safely conclude in defense of my self against
Master Sutcliffe, the Pretended Conspiracy, and all others, that this
sparinge course that has been hitherto held with me, has rather (to speak
the truth) been a course of Justice, the^ a course of mercy, And that if all
things be rightly considered, it is a far greater mercy and patience to
suster Ma. Sutcliffe and such as he is, thus shamefully to traduce whole
Churches and to set his colebrand of infamy upon the most reverend men that
ever wrote, then to suffer Job Throkmorton, to go in peace. Who so long as he
has his own innocence and vnguiltinesse for his clearinge, makes no doubt
(notwithstanding all this racking, wreasting and libelling against him) but he
shall have always the laws of God and her Majesty for his sufficient shelter
and defense.

Thus Madame have I endeavored my self in that measure I could, to satisfy
your earnest request, wherein what other defectes so ever there be, I would be
loath, there should be found any untruth: if your Honor think good to make
it known abroad to others, I am not against it: Seeing my defacing has been
public, I hope no man will blame me, if I desire that my clearing might also
be public. The blotte and bleamish of my good name, has been, as you see,
publicly spread and proclaimed, as it were, over the whole land, and my self
no less wounded then in capite, that is in my allegiance to my Prince, and I
by this their wreasting, curtayling, and implying, made little better then a
traitor and conspiratour in th'eies of the world. A thing that, if I remember
my self well, ought, no doubt, to humble me and pull me down (if it were
possible) to the very center of the earth. In which regard when I look back
to the sins of my former life, I must needs acknowledge it to be just with
God, how so ever it be unrighteous with men. I know right well, Madame, what
the Prophet David did in like case, who when he was reviled and railed upon by
Shimei, did neither frette at this nor at that, as commonly men do, nor yet
look upon the person or vileness of the man, with any frowning aspect or
revengefull countenance, but on the contrary did forthwith cast his eyes
(...) to heaven, acknowledging it to be the hand of the great God, and to be
his doing: He curses, says he, even because the Lord has bidden him curse
David, etc. I confess, Madame, I ought to be thus affected too, if I were as I
should be: But fallinge short of this, my only desire (if it might be) for
all the malice I bear to Master Sutcliffe is this, that in this case I might
be credited, and he not. And I think, Madame, I have reason to desire it. In
deed if I came to appeach or accuse, there were some reason for a person of
your place to make a pawse, and not to be ouerswift in lendinge an ear unto
me. But coming as I do, in defense of the innocent, and to save the guiltless
from obloquie and sclaunder, me thinks I may by all laws Heathen and Christian
(and that without offense) challenge as it were a day of favorable hearing and
credence before mine adversary.

I remember the fellons and malefactors standing at the bar, one of the last
things that the Judge does ask of them before he proceed to sentence is
this: What have thou to say for thy self, why thou may not have judgment,
etc. I could wish Madame, and my humble suit unto your Honor, and to all
others that shall read these printed accusations against me, is, that ye would
in this case play still th'vpright Judges with me, and afoord me but that
favor, which is not denied, you see, to very thieves and felons at the bar,
namely, that ye would not pass any resolute sentence of credit or
condemnation against me, before you have made inquiry, What Throkmorton can
say for him self, why he may not be reputed a Traitor and Conspiratour as
well as Hacket. And if I may be but thus charitably dealt with, that is, if
none of these slanders may make any impression against me in the breasts and
conceits of men, before I be duly and patiently heard what I can say for
my self, assure your self, Madame, I will never crave a Psalm of Miserere
for my deliverance while I live. But rather, if I be asked what I have to say
for my self, I will by Gods grace, say, even as I have said, and is here
already laid down to your La. in all plainness, and truth, which I hope
is sufficient to clear me in the face of any righteous Judge under heaven.

The Issue therefore of the whole is this, that when things have been never so
much wrenched and writhed, yea and as it were strangely tenter stretched
against me, to bring me not only in disgrace, but in question of my life: Yet
if ever it be proved, Madame, by any act, witness, or record under the
sun, that Throk. was any ways accessarie, weeting, privy or consenting to
any of those vile practices of Hacket, and his accomplices: Nay more, not
only in this, but in any other action, attempt or consultation whatsoever,
if, I say, it may be proved that ever he had any hand in any ungodly
practice against his dread Souueraigne, from the beginning of the world to
this day, he craves none other favor, then to be made a public spectacle,
and a notable example of justice to all posterity. Nay he says further in
his own clearing and defense, that if his very heart were arraigned in the
presence of God and men, he may safely protest, that he is so far from being
guilty of that wherewith he is thus wrongfullie and injuriously slaundered,
that he is not privy to him self of so much as any felonious or deloiall
thought of her Majesty. If he be, let him not die the death of the righteous.

J. Throkmorton.


